<section>a</section>
Where to purchase FAO publications locally - Points de vente des publications de la FAO - Puntos de venta de publicaciones de la FAO
· ANGOLA
Empresa Nacional do Disco e de Publicações, ENDIPU-U.E.E.
Rua Cirilo da Conceição Silva, N° 7
C.P. N° 1314-C, Luanda
· ARGENTINA
Librería Agropecuaria
Pasteur 743, 1028 Buenos Aires
Oficina del Libro Internacional
Av. Córdoba 1877, 1120 Buenos Aires
E-mail: olilibro@satlink.com
· AUSTRALIA
Hunter Publications
P.O. Box 404, Abbotsford, Vic. 3067
Tel.:(03) 9417 5361
Fax: (03) 914 7154
E-mail: jpdavies@ozemail.com.au
· AUSTRIA
Gerold Buch & Co.
Weihburggasse 26, 1010 Vienna
· BANGLADESH
Association of Development Agencies in Bangladesh
House No. 1/3, Block F,
Lalmatia, Dhaka 1207
· BELGIQUE
M.J. De Lannoy
202, avenue du Roi, 1060 Bruxelles
CCP 000-0808993-13
E-mail: jean.de.lannoy@infoboard.be
· BOLIVIA
Los Amigos del Libro
Av. Heroínas 311, Casilla 450
Cochabamba;
Mercado 1315, La Paz
· BOTSWANA
Botsalo Books (Pty) Ltd
P.O. Box 1532, Gaborone
· BRAZIL
Fundação Getúlio Vargas
Praia do Botafogo 190, C.P. 9052
Rio de Janeiro
E-mail: valeria@sede.fgvrj.br
Núcleo Editora da Universidade Federal Fluminense
Rua Miguel de Frias 9
Icaraí-Niterói 24
220-000 Rio de Janeiro
Fundação da Universidade Federal do Paraná - FUNPAR
Rua Alfredo Bufrem 140, 30° andar
80020-240 Curitiba
· CAMEROON
CADDES
Centre Africain de Diffusion et
Développement Social
B.P. 7317 Douala Bassa
Tel.: (237) 43 37 83
Fax: (237) 42 77 03
· CANADA
Renouf Publishing
5369 chemin Canotek Road, Unit 1
Ottawa, Ontario K1J 9J3
Tel.: (613) 745-2665
Fax: (613) 745 7660
Website: www.renoufbooks.com
E-mail: renouf@fox.nstn.ca
· CHILE
Librería - Oficina Regional FAO
c/o FAO Officina Regional para América
Latina y el Caribe (RLC)
Avda. Dag Hammarskjold, 3241
Vitacura, Santiago
Tel.: 33 72 314
Fax: 696 1121/696 1124
E-mail: german.rojas@field.fao.org
Universitaria Textolibros Ltda.
Avda. L. Bernardo O'Higgins 1050
Santiago
· CHINA
China National Publications Import & Export Corporation
16 Gongti East Road, Beijing 100020
Tel.: 6506 30 70
Fax: 6506 3101
E-mail: cnpiec@public.3.bta.net.cn
· COLOMBIA
Banco Ganadero
Vicepresidencia de Fomento
Carrera 9^a N° 72-21, Piso 5
Bogotá D.E.
Tel.: 217 0100
· CONGO
Office national des librairies populaires
B.P. 577, Brazzaville
· COSTA RICA
Librería Lehmann S.A.
Av. Central, Apartado 10011
1000 San José
CINDE
Coalición Costarricense de Iniciativas de Desarrollo
Apdo 7170, 1000 San José
E-mail: rtacinde@sol.rassa.co.cr
· CÔTE D'IVOIRE
CEDA
04 B.P. 541, Abidjan 04
Tel.: 22 20 55
Fax: 21 72 62
· CUBA
Ediciones Cubanas Empresa de Comercio Exterior de Publicaciones
Obispo 461, Apartado 605, La Habana
· CZECH REPUBLIC
Artia Pegas Press Ltd Import of Periodicals
Palác Metro, P.O. Box 825
Národní 25, 111 21 Praha 1
· DENMARK
Munksgaard, Book and Subscription Service
P.O. Box 2148
DK 1016 Copenhagen K.
Tel.: 4533128570
Fax: 4533129387
Website: www.munksgaard.dk;
E-mail: subscription.service@mail.munksgaard.dk
· DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
CUESTA - Centro del libro
Av. 27 de Febrero, esq. A. Lincoln
Centro Comercial Nacional
Apartado 1241, Santo Domingo
· ECUADOR
Libri Mundi, Librería Internacional
Juan León Mera 851
Apartado Postal 3029, Quito
E-mail: librimul@librimundi.com.ec
Universidad agraria del Ecuador Centro de Información Agraria
Av. 23 de Julio, Apdo 09-01-1248
Guayaquil
Librería Española
Murgeón 364 y Ulloa, Quito
· EGYPT
The Middle East Observer
41 Sherif Street, Cairo
Tel.: 393 97 2
Fax.: 360 68 04
E-mail: fouda@soficom.com.eg
· ESPAÑA
Librería Agrícola
Fernando VI 2, 28004 Madrid
Librería de la Generalitat de Catalunya
Rambla dels Estudis 118 (Palau Moja)
08002 Barcelona
Tel.: (93) 302 6462
Fax: (93) 302 1299
Mundi Prensa Libros S.A.
Castelló 37, 28001 Madrid
Tel.: 914 36 37 00
Fax: 915 75 39 98
Website: www.tsai.es/MPRENSA
E-mail: mundiprensa@tsai.es
Mundi Prensa - Barcelona
Consejo de Ciento 391,
08009 Barcelona
Tel.: 301 8615
Fax: 317 0141
· FINLAND
Aketeeminen Kirjakauppa Subscription Services
P.O. Box 23, FIN-00371 Helsinki
Tel.: (358) 0121 4416
Fax.: (358) 0121 4450
· FRANCE
Editions A. Pedone
13, rue Soufflot, 75005 Paris
Lavoisier Tec & Doc
14, rue de Provigny
94236 Cachan Cedex
Website: www.lavoisier.fr
E-mail: livres@lavoisier.fr
Librairie du Commerce International
10, avenue d'Iéna
75783 Paris Cedex 16
Website: www.cfce.fr
E-mail: pl@net-export.fr
WORLD DATA
10, rue Nicolas Flamand
75004 Paris
Tel.: (01) 4278 0578
Fax: (01) 4278 1472
· GERMANY
Alexander Horn Internationale Buchhandlung
Friedrichstrasse 34
D-65185 Wiesbaden
Tel.: 37 42 12
S. Toeche-Mittler GmbH Versandbuchhandlung
Hindenburgstrasse 33
D-64295 Darmstadt
Tel.: 6151 336 65
Fax: 6151 314 048
Website: www. booksell.com/triops
E-mail: triops@booksell.com
Uno Verlag
Poppelsdorfer Allee 55
D-53115 Bonn 1
Tel.: 49 (0) 228 94 90 20
Fax: 49 (0) 228 21 74 92
Website: www.uno-verlag.de
E-mail: unoverlag@aol.com
· GHANA
SEDCO Publishing Ltd
Sedco House, Tabon Street
Off Ring Road Central, North Ridge
P.O. Box 2051, Accra
· GREECE
Papasotiriou S.A.
35 Stournara Str., 10682 Athens
Tel.: +301 3302 980
Fax: +301 3648254
· GUYANA
Guyana National Trading Corporation Ltd
45-47 Water Street, P.O. Box 308
Georgetown
· HAÏTI
Librairie «A la Caravelle»
26, rue Bonne Foi
B.P. 111, Port-au-Prince
· HONDURAS
Escuela Agrícola Panamericana Librería RTAC
El Zamorano, Apartado 93, Tegucigalpa
Oficina de la Escuela Agrícola Panamericana en Tegucigalpa
Blvd. Morazán, Apts. Glapson
Apartado 93, Tegucigalpa
· HUNGARY
Librotrade Kft.
P.O. Box 126, H-1656 Budapest
Tel.: 256 1672
Fax: 256 8727
· INDIA
EWP Affiliated East-West Press PVT, Ltd
G-I/16, Ansari Road, Darya Gany
New Delhi 110 002
Tel.: 32 64 180
Fax: 32 60 538
Oxford Book and Stationery Co.
Scindia House
New Delhi 110 001
Tel.: 91 11 331 5310
Fax: 91 11 371 3275
Oxford Subscription Agency
Institute for Development Education
1 Anasuya Ave., Kilpauk
Madras 600 010
Periodical Expert Book Agency
D-42, Vivek Vihar, Delhi 110095
Bookwell
Head Office:
2/72, Nirankari Colony, New Delhi - 110009
Tel.: 725 1283
Fax: 91-11-328 13 15
Sales Office:
24/4800, Ansari Road
Darya Ganj, New Delhi - 110002
Tel.: 326 8786, 325 7264
E-mail: bkwell@nde.vsnl.net.in
· IRAN
The FAO Bureau, International and Regional Specialized Organizations Affairs
Ministry of Agriculture of the Islamic Republic of Iran
Keshavarz Bld, M.O.A., 17th floor
Teheran
· IRELAND
Office of Public Work
4-5 Harcourt Road, Dublin 2
· ISRAEL
R.O.Y. International
P.O. Box 13056, Tel Aviv 61130
E-mail: royil@netvision.net.il
· ITALY
FAO Bookshop
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Roma
Tel.: 06 57055688
Fax: 06 57055155
E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org
Librería Commissionaria Sansoni S.p.A. - Licosa
Via Duca di Calabria 1/1
50125 Firenze
Tel.: 055 64 54 15
Fax: 055 64 12 57
E-mail: licosa@ftbcc.it
Libreria Scientifica Dott. Lucio de Biasio "Aeiou"
Via Coronelli 6, 20146 Milano
· JAPAN
Far Eastern Booksellers (Kyokuto Shoten Ltd.)
12 Kanda-Jimbocho 2 chome
Chiyoda-ku - P.O. Box 72
Tokyo 101-91
Tel.: 03 3265 7531
Fax: 03 3265 4656
Maruzen Company Ltd.
P.O. Box 5050
Tokyo International 100-31
Tel.: 81 3 3278 1894
Fax: 81 3 3278 1895
E-mail: h_sugiyama@maruzen.co.jp
· KENYA
Text Book Centre Ltd.
Kijabe Street
P.O. Box 47540, Nairobi
Tel.: 330 342
Fax: 22 57 79
Inter Africa Book Distribution
Kencom House, Moi Avenue
P.O. Box 73580, Nairobi
Tel.: 21 11 84
Fax: 254 2 22 35 70
· LUXEMBOURG
M. J. De Lannoy
202, avenue du Roi
1060 Bruxelles (Belgique)
E-mail: jean.de.lannoy@infoboard.be
· MADAGASCAR
Centre d'information et de Documentation Scientifique et Technique
Ministère de la recherche appliquée au développement
B.P 6224 Tsimbazaza, Antanarivo
· MALAYSIA
Electronic products only:
Southbound Sendirian Berhad Publishers
9 College Square, 01250 Penang
· MALI
Librairie Traore
Rue Soundiata Keita X 115
B.P. 3243, Bamako
· MAROC
La Librairie Internationale
70 Rue T'ssoule
PO. Box 302 (RP), Rabat
Tel./Fax: 212 7 75 01 83
· MEXICO
Librería, Universidad Autónoma de Chapingo
56230 Chapingo
Libros y Editoriales S.A.
Av. Progreso N° 202-1° Piso A
Apdo. Postal 18922
Col. Escandón, 11800 México D.F.
Mundi Prensa Mexico, S.A.
Rió Pánuco, 141 Col. Cuauhtémoc
C.P. 06500, México, DF
Tel.: 533-5658 al 60
Fax: 514-6799
E-mail: 1015452361@compuserve.com
· NETHERLANDS
Roodveldt Import b.v.
Brouwersgracht 288
1013 HG Amsterdam
E-mail: roodboek@euronet.nl
Tel.: 622 8035
Fax: 625 5493
Swets & Zeitlinger b.v.
P.O. Box 830, 2160 Lisse
Heereweg 347 B, 2161 CA Lisse
E-mail: infono@swets.nl
Website: www.swets.nl
· NEW ZEALAND
Legislation Services
P.O. Box 12418
Thorndon, Wellington
E-mail: gppmjxf@gp.co.nz
Oasis Official
P.O. Box 3627, Wellington
Tel.: (+64) 4 499 1551
Fax: (+64) 4 499 1972
E-mail: oasis@clear.net.nz
Website: www.oasisbooks.co.nzl
· NICARAGUA
Librería HISPAMER
Costado Este Univ. Centroamericana
Apdo. Postal A-221, Managua
· NIGERIA
University Bookshop (Nigeria) Ltd.
University of Ibadan, Ibadan
· NORWAY
Swets Norge AS
P.O. Box 6512, Etterstad
N-0606 Oslo
Tel.: (+47) 2297 4500
Fax: (+47) 2297 4545
E-mail: nicagen@swets.nl
· PAKISTAN
Mirza Book Agency
65 Shahrah-e-Quaid-e-Azam
P.O. Box 729, Lahore 3
· PARAGUAY
Librería Intercontinental Editora e Impresora S.R.L.
Caballero 270 c/Mcal Estigarribia
Asunción
· PERU
INDEAR
Jirón Apurimac 375, Casilla 4937
Lima 1
Universidad Nacional "Pedro Ruiz Gallo"
Facultad de Agronomía, A.P. 795
Lambayeque (Chiclayo)
· PHILIPPINES
International Booksource Center, Inc.
Room 720, Cityland 10 Tower 2
H.V. de la Costa, Cor. Valero St
Makati, Metro Manila
Tel.: 817 9676
Fax: 817 1741
· POLAND
Ars Polona
Krakowskie Przedmiescie 7
00-950 Warsaw
· PORTUGAL
Livraria Portugal, Dias e Andrade Ltda.
Rua do Carmo 70-74
Apartado 2681, 1200 Lisboa Codex
· SINGAPORE
Select Books Pte Ltd.
03-15 Tanglin Shopping Centre
19 Tanglin Road, Singapore 1024
Tel.: 732 1515
Fax: 736 0855
· SLOVAK REPUBLIC
Institute of Scientific and Technical Information for Agriculture
Samova 9, 950 10 Nitra
Tel.: +42 87 522 185
Fax: +42 87 525 275
E-mail: uvtip @ nr.sanet.sk
· SOMALIA
Samater
P.O. Box 936, Mogadishu
· SOUTH AFRICA
David Philip Publishers (Pty) Ltd.
P.O. Box 23408, Claremont 7735
Tel.: Cape Town (021) 64-4136
Fax: Cape Town (021) 64-3358
E-mail: dpp@iafrica.com
Website: www.twisted.co.za
· SRI LANKA
M.D. Gunasena & Co. Ltd.
217 Olcott Mawatha, P.O. Box 246
Colombo 11
· SUISSE
Buchhandlung und Antiquariat Heinimann & Co.
Kirchgasse 17, 8001 Zurich
UN Bookshop
Palais des Nations
CH-1211 Genève 1
Website: www.un.org
Van Diermen Editions Techniques ADECO
41 Lacuez, CH-1807 Blonzy
· SURINAME
Vaco n.v. in Suriname
Domineestraat 26, P.O. Box 1841
Paramaribo
· SWEDEN
Wennergren Williams AB
P.O. Box 1305, S-171 25 Solna
Tel.: 46 8 705 9750
Fax: 46 8 27 00 71
E-mail: mail@wwi.se
Bokdistributören
P.O. Box 301 61, S-104 25 Stockholm
Tel.: 46 8 728 2500
Fax: 46 8 31 30 44
E-mail: lis.ledin @ hk.akademibokhandeln.se
· THAILAND
Suksapan Panit
Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue
Bangkok
· TOGO
Librairie du Bon Pasteur
B.P. 1164, Lomé
· TUNISIE
Société tunisienne de diffusion
5, avenue de Carthage, Tunis
· TURKEY
DUNYA INFOTEL
100. Yil Mahallesi
34440 Bagcilar, Istanbul
Tel.: 0212 629 08 08
Fax: 0212 629 46 89
E-mail: dunya@dunya-gazete.com.tr
Website: http://www.dunya.com
· UNITED KINGDOM
The Stationery Office
51 Nine Elms Lane
London SW8 5DR
Tel.: (0171) 873 9090 (orders)
(0171) 873 0011 (inquiries)
Fax: (0171) 873 8463
and through The Stationery Office Bookshops
E-mail: postmaster@theso.co.uk
Website: www.the-stationery-office.co.uk
Electronic products only:
Microinfo Ltd.
P.O. Box 3, Omega Road
Alton, Hampshire GU34 2PG
Tel.: (01420) 86848
Fax: (01420) 89889
Website: www.microinfo.co.uk
E-mail: emedia@microinfo.co.uk
· UNITED STATES
Publications:
BERNAN Associates (ex UNIPUB)
4611/F Assembly Drive
Lanham, MD 20706-4391
Toll-free 1-800-274-4447
Fax: 301-459-0056
Website: www.bernan.com
E-mail: info@bernan.com
UN Bookshop
The United Nations Bookshop
General Assembly Building Room 32
New York, N.Y. 10017
Tel.: 212 963 7680
Fax: 212 963 4910
Website: www.un.org
E-mail: bookshop@un.org
Periodicals:
Ebsco Subscription Services
P.O. Box 1943
Birmingham, AL 35201 -1943
Tel.: (205) 991-6600
Telex: 78-2661
Fax: (205) 991-1449
The Faxon Company Inc.
15 Southwest Park
Westwood, MA 02090
Tel.: 6117-329-3350
Telex: 95-1980
Cable: FW Faxon Wood
· URUGUAY
Librería Agropecuaria S.R.L.
Buenos Aires 335, Casilla 1755
Montevideo C.P. 11000
· VENEZUELA
Fundación La Era Agrícola
Calle 31 Junin Qta Coromoto 5-49
Apartado 456, Mérida
Fundación para la Investigación Agrícola
San Javier
Estado Yaracuy, A.P. 182, San Felipe
Fax: 054 44210
E-mail: damac@diero.conicit.ve
Fudeco, Librería
Avenida Libertador-Este
Ed. Fudeco, Apartado 254
Barquisimeto C.P. 3002, Ed. Lara
Tel.: (051) 538 022
Fax: (051) 544 394
Telex: (051) 513 14 FUDEC VC
Librería FAGRO
Universidad Central de Venezuela (UCV)
Maracay
Librería Universitaria, C.A.
Av. 3, entre 29 y 30
N° 29-25 Edif. EVA, Mérida
Fax: 074 52 09 56
Tamanaco Libros Técnicos S.R.L.
Centro Comercial Ciudad Tamanaco
Nivel C-2, Caracas
Tel.: 261 3344/261 3335/959 0016
Tecni-Ciencia Libros S.A.
Torre Phelps-Mezzanina
Plaza Venezuela
A.P. 20.315, 1020 Caracas
Tel.: 782 8697/781 9945/781 9954
E-mail: tchlibros@ibm.net
Tecni-Ciencia Libros, S.A.
Centro Comercial
Av. Andrés Eloy, Urb. El Prebo
Valencia, Ed. Carabobo
Tel.: 222 724
· ZIMBABWE
Grassroots Books
The Book Café
Fife Avenue, Harare;
61 a Fort Street, Bulawayo
Tel.: 79 31 82
Fax: 70 21 29
· Other countries/Autres pays/Otros países
Sales and Marketing Group
Information Division, FAO
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy
Tel.: (39) 06 57051
Fax: (39) 06 57053360
Telex: 625852/625853/610181 FAO I
E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org
<title>Unasylva - No. 71. Non-thematic issue</title>
<section>1</section>
FAO's work in forestry and forest products
EVERY TWO years representatives of all the Member States of FAO meet together in conference to review the world situation and what the Organization is doing about-it, and in the light of this review, to agree on a program of work and budget for the two years ahead. The Twelfth Session of the Conference of FAO was held in November and December 1963.
On these occasions the initial survey of FAO's current and proposed activities is made by specialized committees covering the major fields of responsibility of the Organization. One of these committees deals with forestry and forest products, and this time the members of that committee came from a greater number of countries than ever before, 68 representatives from 49 countries. These countries represent, however, less than half the total membership of FAO which now stands at 111 states. At this session of the Conference, Algeria, Burundi, Rwanda, Trinidad and Tobago, and Uganda were elected members, and Kenya, Malta and Zanzibar associate members. South Africa has since given notice of withdrawal as a member of FAO.
The background theme for the discussions of the Conference was given by President Julius Nyerere of Tanganyika who delivered the McDougall Memorial Lecture with which the Conference customarily opens. "A continuation of the present chaos in which the rich get richer and the poor stay poor is unacceptable to those of us who are conscious of our poverty," he said. He called for a planned world attack on poverty, otherwise the poorer countries must retreat into deliberate economic isolation for the time being.
During the course of the Conference, N. A. Osara, Director of the Forestry and Forest Products Division, developed further the idea that one form of such an attack might be an expansion of trade in forest products; this is likely to become an important aspect of the United Nations' Conference on Trade and Development due to be held in 1964. "The magnitude of our activities is well justified against the fact that forest industries constitute one of the world's major industries, the gross value of the annual output being around $35,000 million and the labor force numbering well over 5 million."
Later, after paying tribute to his precedessor in the post of Director, Egon Glesinger, he said: "Although I have participated in FAO activities ever since the early years of this Organization, this is my first attendance at the FAO Conference and its Committee on Forestry and Forest Products. I have been very impressed by the level and work of this committee. Discussions have been of a really high professional standard. We in FAO certainly feel that such a committee is a strong support for the Division and its activities, not only for the coming biennium but also for the longer future... It is my sincere hope that we all have been able to win your confidence, so essential for our future work."
He welcomed especially J. B. Nicholson, Minister of Forestry, who headed the Canadian delegation to the Conference. "There are only a few countries in the world which have a cabinet minister whose duties concentrate entirely on forestry and forest industries. It would certainly be desirable for other countries to follow this example because matters concerning forestry and forest industries do not easily get the attention they should unless they are presented and defended by top people at the top level."
The Director went on to note: "This is the first time that there have been delegates exclusively representing the most prominent forest industries. This must be considered a very important development. It is a sign of the growing interest in our activities in the industrial field."
"We are also proud," he continued, "to have had with us Edward P. Cliff, chief of the largest forest service among the member countries of FAO. We have been further honored by the presence of Professor Eino Saari, the acknowledged doyen of world forestry, and it is of the highest value to us to have had as a delegate a former staff member of the Division, Sir Henry Beresford-Peirse, whose judgment and advice are based on first-hand knowledge and understanding."
So the Organization's work in forestry and forest products has been charted for another two years. The importance which Member Governments are attaching to the development of forestry and forest industries as an integral part of their general economic development is clearly evidenced by the growing number of field projects for which FAO is being given responsibility.
With the tragic death of President John F. Kennedy, forestry and forest conservation lost a powerful advocate. Here the President delivers the dedicatory address at the Pinchot Institute for Conservation Studies, Milford, Pennsylvania, 24 September 1963. On Mr. Kennedy's right is Edward P. Cliff, Chief of the U.S. Forest Service.
<section>2</section>
Conference of FAO: Twelfth Session
LESLIE J. VERNELL
Report of the Technical Committee on Forestry and Forest Products
THE Conference of FAO, the governing body of the Organization, comprises representatives of 111 Member end associate Member States. The Twelfth session of the Conference was recently held in Rome to review the status of agriculture, forestry and fisheries in the world, and approve a program and budget for FAO for the period 1964-65.
The Technical Committee on Forestry and Forest Products held ten meetings between the period 6 to 15 November 1963. Sixty-eight delegates and representatives participated from 49 Member States, and also from the International Labour Organisation (ILO) and the International Union of Forestry Research Organizations (IUFRO).
The following committee officers were elected: Chairman, L. Z. ROUSSEAU (Canada); vice-chairmen, N. ALTUVE GONZALEZ (Venezuela) and A. BERRADA (Morocco); rapporteur, A. POLYCARPOU (Cyprus). A subcommittee was nominated to formulate the Committee's draft report, comprising Lt. Col. MYO MYINT (Burma), Ph. PRUVOST (France), H. ORTEGA CATTANEO (Mexico), G.A.E. OGBE (Nigeria), and Henry E. CLEPPER (United States).
Extracts from the report, as finally approved, are given below.
Program of work, 1964-65
The background to his proposed Program of Work and Budget for 1964-65 was set out by the Director-General in the following terms:
The work carried out over several years on the evaluation of forestry resources in relation to long-term needs (timber trends studies) has borne valuable fruit and now provides for the first time a thoroughly studied quantitative basis for developing FAO's program of work in this field and guiding its advice and assistance to member countries. The results have implications for planning and general economic development which go well beyond the sphere of forestry itself and indicate the desirability of channeling additional resources into assisting underdeveloped countries to embark on long-term programs for expansion of their forest industries. These timber trends studies show that the years ahead represent a time of opportunity for those underdeveloped countries well endowed with forest resources or enjoying favorable conditions for growing timber. New and significant trends in the world forest and forest products economy promise in due course substantial improvements in the
balance of payments of underdeveloped regions, one of the key problems facing nonindustrialized countries that now have insufficient outlets for their products.
The first and most important trend revealed by FAO studies already completed or presently in progress concerns current and prospective changes in regional resource/ requirements balances. It appears, for instance, that Latin America's needs for industrial wood will almost treble by 1975. In Asia and the Pacific, in spite of the radical revision of forest policies undertaken by some governments of the region in recent years (in response to the policy conclusions drawn from the regional timber trends study), there is expected to be a deficit of 12 million cubic meters of industrial wood by 1975, rising to many times that figure in subsequent decades. Preliminary findings in the Africa study point also to a sharply rising need for processed forest products as literacy and educational campaigns, housing programs and industrialization get under way.
Present plans, both for forest development and for forest industry expansion, are quite inadequate to provide for future needs in the developing regions. Unless there i& a substantial upward revision of these plans, the existing anomaly of an adverse trade balance in forest products, alongside undeveloped forest resources will intensify. It i& therefore a matter of urgency to encourage and assist the expansion of forestry development and of forest industries in these regions, aiming first at halting the rise in the adverse trade balance, and later at eliminating it.
An additional incentive lies in the fact that investment in these sectors can in the longer run make a decisive contribution to the general economic growth process through export earnings. FAO studies nearing completion, including a study, supported by industry, of pulp and paper prospects in Europe, &how that by the end of this decade Europe i& likely to face a deficit in wood supplies that will continue to grow in subsequent decades. The indications are that it will not be possible to meet this deficit either from Europe's own resources or from traditional supplying countries. New sources will have to be found. Thus a geographical redistribution of forest industry on a global basis will gradually take shape, with associated changes in the pattern of world trade in forest products. A number of underdeveloped countries will be able to take advantage of this opportunity, provided that they succeed in stepping up their rate of expansion and at the same time producing at
competitive costs.
The situation is, however, not without its dangers. At the present time there exists in Europe and North America a sizable surplus of production capacity. The recent wave of expansion in these regions has now slowed down and it may be several years before the trend in demand has caught up with production possibilities. There will inevitably be an intervening period during which international markets will be sensitive and vulnerable. It is therefore imperative that any export-oriented forest industry expansion in the underdeveloped countries during this period should take account of this special situation. Price instability and exaggerated market fluctuations would be fatal to new industries.
It is also necessary to avoid the risk of misinvestment arising from uncoordinated expansion. In particular, there are &bong arguments in favor of harmonizing national plans at the regional and subregional level since many national markets are small, and since in many respects the resources of neighboring countries are complementary. Furthermore, in forest industry "economies of scale" are almost decisive, requiring large-scale plants if production is to be economic and therefore competitive.
A major problem now confronting the underdeveloped countries therefore, i& how to plan the development of their forest resources and expansion of their forest industries &0 that they are (a) properly integrated with the development of other sectors of the economy, and (b) take full account of both immediate and longer term regional and world trends. So that FAO will be in a position to help countries to take advantage of these opportunities while avoiding the dangers, I consider it necessary to place more emphasis on encouraging expansion of plantation forestry and forest industries in underdeveloped countries. This will largely be done by readjustments within the divisional structure but will entail some strengthening of staff and provision of additional ancillary expenditure.
Report of the committee
On being informed of the factors that had shaped the formulation of the Division's proposed regular program of work for 1964-65, the Committee approved this program and concurred with the object of the program which is the expansion of forestry and forest industries in those developing countries where, from FAO'S studies on trends in the forest and forest products economy, special opportunities become evident.
Delegates commended the paper "The role of forest industries in the attack on economic underdevelopment" which gives orientation for the future work of FAO in forestry and forest products. ^2 The Committee considered that the expansion of effort - that is, greater expenditure - proposed consequentially under the regular program for 1964-65 was modest for a Division of such wide responsibilities.
^2Unasylva, Volume 16 (4), Number 67.
A consensus of opinion emerged that, owing to rapidly changing technical, economic and social circumstances, fresh attention must be paid to forest policy as one aspect of the rational use and conservation of all renewable natural resources, including wildlife and water. A new look at forest management was also called for. Special stress was laid by delegates on the need for the simultaneous planning of forest management and industries, including transportation planning. With the possibilities afforded by the use of quick-growing species and short rotations, forestry development can no longer be regarded as a slow process. Moreover, as many delegates pointed out, governments are more ready to accord priority to forestry in their investment policies if there is promise of revenue and income from the development of forest industries.
It was also the consensus of the Committee that more attention should be given to cost-benefit studies and investigation of the patterns of the cost structure, especially of marginal costs. The importance of cost-benefit analyses in shaping forest management decisions and forest industry expansion plans was emphasized, and it was considered that the Division could provide a valuable service to Member States by investigating in co-operation with IUFRO suitable methodology and criteria for assessing direct and indirect forest benefits.
During discussions on the program of divisional publications, unanimous support emerged for the continued publication by the Organization of Unasylva, regarded as the outstanding international periodical devoted to forestry; it was widely read all over the world by practicing foresters and forest utilization specialists.
The Committee welcomed the FAO Council's choice of Spain as the host country for the Sixth World Forestry Congress, and expressed great appreciation to the Spanish Government for assuming the heavy obligations entailed. Delegates heard with interest from the delegate of Spain the preliminary proposals of the Organizing Committee in regard to study tours and discussion themes. Since forest policy is now approaching a turning point, it would be timely for the main theme of the Congress to be the role of forestry in the changing world economy. A variety of individual topics was suggested for inclusion in the program but the consensus of the Committee was that the Congress discussions should be confined to a limited number of subjects, one of which should be the human factor in forestry, especially the health and safety of forest workers.
Forest economics
Of the work undertaken during 1962 and 1963 in forest economics, the Committee singled out for special mention the national and regional studies of wood resources and requirements which are of value to all bodies, government and private, concerned with the planning and development of forestry and forest industries. Delegates cited many examples of the application of the findings of these studies to policy and investment decisions. In connection with preparing these studies, satisfaction was expressed at the widening scope of the Division's collaboration with the regional economic commissions of the United Nations. The Committee endorsed the proposal to give first priority during the coming biennium to completing the present cycle of regional studies, and to combining these into an integrated analysis of the present situation and future prospects for the world forest and forest products economy, for presentation to the Sixth World Forestry Congress.
The Committee recommended that studies of the trends of forest products consumption, supply and trade should remain a continuing feature of the long-term program of the Division. The studies gave justification for and direction not only to the work of the Division, but also to the policies and plans of Member States. Accordingly, a reassessment of the present. regional studies should be started in the 1966-67 biennium. The studies have so far provided new information on the demand side of the situation; they have focused attention on the need for further work on the economics of supply.
Members of the Committee attached great significance to the improvement of forestry and forest products statistics at the national level, and expressed disappointment that so few member countries were taking advantage of the opportunities for obtaining help in these problems under FAO'S field programs. The Committee drew the attention of governments to the fact that efforts to plan resource development could be misdirected unless the plans rested on a reasonably reliable statistical. Several delegates pointed out how desirable it was to have better statistical information on the extent and location of man-made forests.
The Committee noted with satisfaction the assistance rendered to member countries, through the Expanded Program of Technical Assistance (EPTA) and United Nations Special Fund projects, in the inventorying of forest resources for development programs. Modern techniques of aerial forest inventory have made it possible to acquire more quickly and cheaply the resource data necessary for development. The help given in training staff in the application of modern techniques for applying aerial photography and up-to-date sampling methods to forest inventory, an example of which was the training center in the U.S.S.R. in 1963, was appreciated. This aspect of the Division's work could be expected to grow, and the Committee urged the Director-General to give high priority to training seminars in forest inventory in FAO'S field programs.
The Committee considered that there was a growing need within member countries for integrating resource surveys, cost-benefit appraisals, feasibility studies, requirements estimates and market outlook surveys, into comprehensive development plans for forestry and forest industries. As a consequence there were likely to be an increasing number of requests to FAO for the training of personnel capable of undertaking those tasks, and for the provision of suitable manuals and guides, as well as for additional assistance within field programs. The Committee therefore welcomed the establishment of a new section on forestry development planning within the Forest Economics Branch. This would strengthen the Division's capacity to promote the optimum contribution of forest resources in the overall development and growth of national and regional economies.
Forest production
The creation of "man-made forests" with selected fast-yielding species often constitutes, especially in timber-deficit countries, the most rapid and efficient way of providing the raw material needed by expanding economies. For this reason the Committee fully supported the work of the Division on plantation forestry and on quick-growing species, and welcomed the establishment of a new afforestation section.
Many delegates stressed that the emphasis on manmade forests in the Division's program was a matter of priorities determined by limitations of staff and funds. It must on no account be interpreted as a widespread advocacy of artificial forests as a panacea for the forestry development of the future. The bulk of forest production still comes from natural forests, and vast areas of these forests continue to present complex management problems. Many of these forests are economically inaccessible and others, because of their heterogeneous composition, pose stubborn problems for development, but the Committee considered that governments should still encourage the study of techniques and the application of measures to raise the production of natural forests to the maximum extent possible.
Many delegates emphasized the relevance of quick-growing species and man-made forests to FAO's Freedom from Hunger Campaign. The Committee was firmly of the belief that forestry had an important and often vital part to play in the Campaign, and delegates were asked to stress this to their governments.
The Committee welcomed the probability of a formal invitation from Australia to be host to a symposium on man-made forests in 1966 or 1967; a proper scheduling of dates with the Sixth World Forestry Congress, the next Commonwealth Forestry Conference and the next Congress of IUFRO, should be kept in mind.
The FAO/IUFRO World Consultation on Forest Genetics and Tree Improvement held in Sweden in 1963 had been a worthwhile undertaking. The proceedings should be published. In connection with the use of the most suitable provenances, strains and clones in man-made forests, several delegates drew attention to the necessity of designed provenance trials, proper siting, soil preparation, and nursery and tending techniques. The high investment required in modern plantation forestry, sometimes involving the use of agricultural or other highly productive soils, demanded that no phase of planning and establishment be neglected.
Delegates also stressed the importance of establishing more easily accessible sources of certified seed and seed banks. The Committee heard with appreciation of the work being undertaken in this direction in countries like Australia and Mexico. It considered further that the efforts being made with regard to genetically suitable planting stock and to evaluation of climatic data must be complemented by soil and fertilization studies.
The importance of the Division's work relating to savanna forestry was stressed by many speakers who noted with satisfaction the training center on afforestation techniques being held in Sudan late in 1963. The Committee urged the organization of other similar centers and the convening of the Working Party on Savanna Forestry of the African Forestry Commission in the coming biennium. The prospect of a savanna forestry research institute in Nigeria being approved as a Special Fund project was welcomed.
After hearing that Spain, because of its obligations for the next World Forestry Congress, would forego acting as host to the first session of the joint working party on techniques of forest extension and restoration if an alternative venue were possible, the Committee expressed the wish that the meeting might take place in France. Silvicultural study tours, for which a continuing program is in- operation in Europe and for which the delegates were pleased to hear a new invitation extended by Switzerland, should also be arranged in other regions. Several delegates voiced regret that a study tour on the silviculture and management of lowland tropical rain forests for the Asia-Pacific region, as recommended by the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission, had not yet qualified for regional EPTA funds. The Committee noted that the Teak Subcommission, now a joint body of the Asia-Pacific and the African forestry commissions, would hold a session in the coming biennium.
Members of the Committee emphasized that research is one of the fundamentals for development. There was clear need for forest research programs to be adapted to national development policies. The Committee expressed its appreciation of the increasing co-operation developed between FAO and IUFRO. This co-operation should be further extended. Co-ordination of forest research on a regional basis was desirable, and the activities of the Research Committee of the Mediterranean Forestry Subcommission through which research was pursued by FAO in collaboration with IUFRO were cited as an excellent example of international co-operation. The opinion was expressed that the work of the Latin-American Advisory Group on education and research (GACIFAL) might perhaps best be extended as an adjunct to the activities of the Latin-American forest research and training institute (IFLA) at Mérida, Venezuela.
The Committee heard with satisfaction that the FAO/IUFRO symposium on internationally dangerous forest insects and diseases, approved by the Eleventh Session of the Conference, would be held in July 1964. The Committee was also glad to be informed that preparations were well in hand for a forest fire control study tour and seminar to be held in the United States of America and Canada in 1964.
The Committee welcomed the information that collaboration between FAO and ILO would be strengthened by the appointment of a forestry adviser by mot It was hoped that this would enable periodic studies to be undertaken on the effect on forestry of the exodus of rural populations, and more attention could be given to workers' living and working conditions, vocational training and accident prevention. Such subjects were considered by the Committee to fall within the field of ILO, while the technical and economic problems should continue to be covered by FAO. The Committee expressed satisfaction with the activities of the FAO/ECE Committee on Forest Working Techniques and Training of Forest Workers, in which ILO collaborated. Delegates also commended the FAO/ILO training centers for supervisors of forest workers held in Africa and the Far East in 1962 and 1963 and noted that further such centers were planned. The Committee recognized that transportation constitutes an important
technical and economic aspect of forestry and forest industry development, and was of the opinion that projects such as the symposium on forest road networks held in Europe in 1963 should be repeated in other regions, as well as other training projects aiming at the extension of improved techniques and increased efficiency in all phases of forest operations.
Forest industries and utilization
The Committee was of the opinion that primary responsibility for furthering the sound development of industries based on renewable natural resources rested with FAO, and therefore welcomed the understanding reached by the Director-General with the United Nations Commissioner for Industrial Development in regard to FAO's responsibility for forest industries and the arrangements made for collaboration with the United Nations Industrial Development Center.
Fundamental changes are now taking place in the world forest and timber economy which will give rise to increasing deficits of forest products in some of the advanced countries of the world. These trends will provide important opportunities for many developing countries to expand their forest industries and diversify their exports, so stimulating their economic development and helping to solve their pressing trade problems.
The trend in the forest products economy is toward a reversal of the present relative volumes of forest production going to fuelwood for which the ratio is falling and wood for industrial use which is rising. At the same time, the relative portion of industrial round-wood which is used for the manufacture of sawnwood is declining while that used for pulp production and the manufacture of wood based panels is increasing.
In view of this trend the Committee appreciated the establishment of a new pulp and paper section in the Division and acknowledged the assistance rendered to the Organization by its Advisory Committee on Pulp and Paper. The Committee learned with interest of the completion of a special study, about to be published, on pulp and paper prospects in western Europe, financed by industry as the result of the initiative of this advisory committee, and considered that the possibilities should now be explored for similar studies covering other regions of the world, as recommended by the World Pulp and Paper Consultation held in 1959. It noted that, at its last session, the advisory committee had also reviewed the first results of a study carried out by the Stockholm Institute for International Economic Studies, in co-operation with FAO and Unesco, on the place of paper in development and foreign aid, and that the investigation would be continued in relation to paper requirements for
mass communication; also that a seminar on pulp and paper research and technology for north African and Near East countries had been conducted in Beirut in 1962 under the joint auspices of FAO and Unesco.
The Committee approved the scheduled Latin-American pulp and paper review consultation in 1964 as a follow-up to the 1954 Buenos Aires consultation, and supported the first conference on pulp and paper development for Africa and the Near East, due to be organized in 1965 in collaboration with the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa. The Committee also supported the expansion under EPTA of the Latin-American pulp and paper advisory group (FAO/ECLA) to cover all forest industries, and requested the Director-General to establish on funds from the same source further forest industries advisory groups for Africa and the Near East, and for Asia and the Far East. This expansion would clearly be in keeping with the objectives of the 1964-65 program in forestry and forest products.
The Committee expressed satisfaction with the success of the International Consultation on Plywood and other Wood-Based Panel Products which took place in Rome in July 1963, and with the forthcoming publication of the report. The consultation had recommended the establishment by FAO of an advisory group on wood-based panels. Some delegates strongly supported this idea, others expressed equally strong reservations. The Committee appreciated the growing importance of the wood-based panel industries and their potential contribution toward raising living standards in the developing countries, and agreed that the Director-General should be able to call on expert advice. But, after hearing the arguments advanced on both sides, the Committee reached no firm conclusion as to whether a new advisory committee was the most appropriate means for securing this expert advice, and referred the matter to the FAO Council.
Center, J. R. Nicholson, Minister of Forestry, who was the leader of the Canadian delegation to the Twelfth Session of the FAO Conference. Right, L. Z. Rousseau, Deputy Minister of Forestry, Ottawa, nominated as Chairman of the Technical Committee on Forestry and Forest Products. Left, Lt. Col. Myo Myint, representative of Burma on the Technical Committee.
Delegates were informed of the outcome of discussions at the Fifth FAO Conference on Wood Technology held at the United States Forest Products Laboratory, Madison, Wisconsin, in 1963. The Committee concurred with the Conference's proposal that certain sectors of work formerly carried out by FAO and by working parties of the Technical Panel on Wood Technology could now be taken over by the strengthened International Union of Forestry Research Organizations. It further approved the proposition that joint FAO/IUFRO meetings might be organized in the future, on an ad hoc basis, on matters where the interests of the two organizations complement each other, and requested the Division to explore this possibility further with IUFRO. On this basis, the Committee agreed that the FAO panels on wood chemistry and mechanical wood technology could be dissolved. The Committee also was pleased to learn that the International Wood Research Society, established under the auspices of FAO, was
now emerging as a society for fundamental science in wood technology, and that FAO would not for the future be requested to provide secretariat services.
The Committee stressed the importance of FAO becoming more active in the field of low-cost housing. The need for improvement in housing standards, particularly in developing countries, provides a logical integration with the Division's activities in sawmilling, seasoning, wood preservation as well as the production of wood-based panels. The development of wood-based packaging materials, despite the expansion of packaging derived from pulp products, was another field of activity which deserved increased attention.
Clearly the Division's program for 1964-65 did not permit expansion in these fields, and so the Committee requested the divisional Director, in formulating his program and budget for the next biennium, to give due weight to the contributions that forest products can make toward improving substandard housing conditions, and to the way in which domestically manufactured products can stimulate trade export of agricultural produce, particularly fruit and vegetables. In the meantime, the Committee urged closer collaboration with the United Nations secretariat and its housing centers in furthering the use of forest products in the construction of low-cost housing.
Other areas of activity which might well be given greater attention in 1966/67 were the improvement of small-scale sawmills, wood preservation and charcoal manufacture.
Forest policy
National forest policy is determined from time to time after reviewing a wide range of relevant factors, including political considerations. Establishing a forest policy is of course a function of government - undertaken on the advice of the forest authority, but also of other authorities. The Committee earlier expressed the view that a new look needs to be taken at forest policy, and also at forest management. Forest management covers the plans and action taken by the forest service or competent authority to implement policy. Just as policy is determined in the light of many factors, so management is undertaken after weighing up and balancing many differing and even perhaps contradictory views, forecasts and experiences. For instance, silviculture - its possibilities and its latest techniques; forecasts of wood requirements, import and export possibilities; status of wood-based industries and future development; indirect benefits of forests - shelter, erosion control,
wildlife, recreation; social considerations, provision of work, labor conditions; education and research; land-use planning and co-operation with other government organizations and with farming developments in particular; forest taxation and co-operatives. This list is not comprehensive but enough to show how wide are the considerations that must be brought to bear.
The Committee was pleased to note that the Division was continuing to participate in activities undertaken as a follow-up of the FAO Mediterranean Development Report and of the FAO Africa Survey. The Division already has operational responsibility for two Special Fund projects resulting from the Mediterranean report and participates in another five projects; it will be assisting in a second meeting on Mediterranean regional development planned to take place in 1964. The Committee noted that, although Mediterranean development activities stemmed from an initiative of the Forestry and Forest Products Division, the main responsibility now lay with the Economic Analysis Division.
The Committee expressed appreciation of the emphasis given to regular program and technical assistance activities designed to help developing countries in improving educational and training facilities in forestry, particularly in Africa and Latin America. Appreciating that the FAO Technical Panel on Education in Forestry had proved valuable to Member States by assisting in the programing, establishment and strengthening of facilities for new forestry faculties and schools, and in view of the expected development of further projects under the Special Fund and EPTA, the Committee concurred with a proposal to convert the present panel into an Advisory Committee on Forestry Education. The Committee approved holding a meeting of the panel (or advisory committee as it should become) on forestry education in Latin America in February 1964; it welcomed an invitation extended by the delegate of Venezuela for the meeting to be held in his country. It agreed that a further meeting in
1965 in the Far East was advisable since there would be no opportunity, as had at one time been expected, to hold another meeting in that year in connection with the Sixth World Forestry Congress which would not take place until 1966.
Several delegates claimed that more attention should be paid to the strengthening of forestry education at the intermediate level, as had been done in the case of the Near East forest rangers school in Syria. But governments must take adequate measures for the full employment of trained manpower in forestry at both the professional and subprofessional levels.
The Committee considered that co-ordination and cooperation must be strengthened between the Forestry and Forest Products Division and the Land and Water Development Division on matters connected with land use, and with Unesco and the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) on matters connected with the conservation and utilization of natural resources generally. The idea of organizing a world conference on watershed management in the 1966-67 biennium was welcomed. The Committee hoped it would also prove possible with regional EPTA funds to organize a training center on watershed management in Latin America in 1965. It noted with interest that a Far East seminar on land-use planning is to be organized in 1964 in collaboration with other Divisions of FAO.
As regards wildlife surveys, conservation and management, the Committee supported the proposed program to be carried out in collaboration with the Animal Production and Health Division. This program provides for an extension under EPTA of the work already carried out in Africa to Latin America and the Far East. In southeast Asia the work should be co-ordinated with investigations to be carried out by IUCN and agencies of the United States of America under the World Wildlife Fund.
The Committee noted with appreciation the comparative studies on forest legislation conducted by the Division in co-operation with the Legislation Research Branch, notably the proposed analyses of legislation related to the conservation and use of renewable natural resource.
The Committee commended the reports of sessions of the region forestry commissions held in 1962-63 to the attention of Member States. It concurred with the decision of the Latin-America Forestry Commission to establish three subsiditary committees, on the understanding that these bodies would meet concurrently with the Commission itself and involve no additional expenditure to the Organization. Delegates welcomed the New Zealand Government's agreement to invite representatives from interested countries outside its region to the 1964 session of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission to be held in New Zealand. The Committee regretted that a session of the African Forestry Commission had not been held in 1962-63 and urged that means be found to convene a session in the 1964-65 period.
List of participants
Algeria
A. KAOUAN Ingénieur des eaux et forêts, Ambassade d'Algérie, Rome
A. MONJAUZE Ingénieur général des eaux et forêts, Bois-de-Boulogne, Algers
Australia
D.A.N. CROMER Director, Forest Research Institute, Canberra
Austria
R. ENDER Chief, Forestry Section, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Vienna
Belgium
A. CASIN Ingénieur en Chef, Directeur à l'Administration des eaux et forêts , Ministère de l 'agriculture, Brussels
Brazil
J. F. RANGEL Agricultural engineer, Ministry of Agriculture, Rio de Janeiro
Mrs. Y. M. PANTOJA Second Secretary, Embassy of Brazil, Rome
Burma
Lt. Col. MYO MYINT Additional Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture and Forests, Rangoon
Cambodia
CHUON SAODI Inspecteur général, Ministère de l'agriculture, Phnom-Penh
Canada
L. Z. ROUSSEAU Deputy Minister of Forestry, Ottawa
A. L. BEST Director, International Forestry Relations, Department of Forestry, Ottawa
Cyprus
A. POLYCARPOU Director, Department of Forests, Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Nicosia
Denmark
H. FRØLUND Director of State Forests, Copenhagen
Ethiopia
W. M. KELECHA Director-General, Forestry and Wildlife Department, Addis Ababa
Finland
E. SAARI Chairman, National FAO Committee, Helsinki
L. K. KIRVES Managing Director, Central Association of Finnish Woodworking Industries, Helsinki
France
J. DE VAISSIÈRE Inspecteur général de l'agriculture, Ministère de l'agriculture, Paris
Ph. PRUVOST Chef de la Division du plan à la Direction générale des eaux et forêts, Ministère de l'agriculture, Paris
Germany, Federal Republic
D. VON HEGEL Senior Forester, Department of Forestry and Forest Products, Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry, Bonn
Ghana
E. A. QUIST-ARCTON Principal Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Accra
Iran
A. A. AGAH Director, Plant Pests and Diseases Research Institute, Ministry of Agriculture, Teheran
A. BINA Chief, International Relationship Office, Ministry of Agriculture, Teheran
Israel
M. KOLAR Deputy Director, Forest Department, Haifa
Italy
V. PIZZIGALLO Directeur général pour l'économie montagnarde et les forêts, Ministère de l'agriculture, Rome
Y. BENVENUTI Chef de la Division des relations internationales, Direction générale pour l'économie montagnarde et les forêts, Ministère de l'agriculture, Rome
A. FRONCILLO Directeur de Division en matière d'agriculture, - Ministère de l'agriculture, Rome
D. CAMANDONA Chef de la Sectien des forêts, Institut central de la statistique, Rome
F. SARCHIAPONE Chef du Bureau des statistiques forestières, Rome
Ivory Coast
E. T. OKA Ingénieur des eaux et forêts
Jordan
Salah JUMA Director, Department of Forests, Amman
Korea
SHIM CHONG SUPP Director, Bureau of Forestry, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Seoul
Libya
F. GIBRIL Director of Forests Department, Ministry of Agriculture, Benghazi, Cyrenaica
Mali
H. DIALLO Député, Assemblée rationale, Ségou
Mexico
H. ORTEGA CATTANEO Director General de Supervisión y Vigilancia Técnica Forestal de la Secretaría de Agricultura y Ganadería, Mexico, D.F.
Morocco
A. BERRADA Ingénieur des eaux et forêts, Chef de la circonscription forestière de Meknès
Netherlands
P. J. D. VERSTEEGH Director, State Forest Service, Paramaribo, Surinam
A. J. GRANDJEAN Inspector, State Forest Service, Utrecht
Nigeria
A. E. OGBE Chief Conservator of Forests, Ministry of Agriculture, Benin City
Norway
A. E. LANGSAETER Director-General of Forestry, Ministry of Agriculture, Oslo
Pakistan
T. HUSSAIN Inspector-General of Forests, Ministry of Food and Agriculture, Rawalpindi
Philippines
M. R. MONSALUD Director, Forest Products Research Institute, College, Laguna
J. UTLEG Assistant Director of Forestry, Bureau of Forestry, Manila
Poland
Z. KULCZYCKI Director, Wood Economics and Wood Utilization Planning Department, Ministry of Forestry and Woodworking Industries, Warsaw
S. KOZAKIEWICZ Deputy Director, Central Office, Ministry of Forestry and Wood-working Industries, Warsaw
Romania
I. MILESCU Chef de la section forestière auprès du Conseil des Ministres, Bucarest
Saudi Arabia
A. M. TUJOMAN Director-General, Plant Production, Ministry of Agriculture, Riyadh
South Africa
P. C. de VILLIERS Chief, Forest Management, Department of Forestry, Pretoria
Spain
F. ORTUNO Subdirector, Patrimonio Forestal, Madrid
C. PERAZA Instituto Forestal de Investigaciones y Experiencias, Madrid
Sudan
K. E. K. OMER Deputy Director, Forests Department, Khartoum
Sweden
F. JOHANSSON Director-General, Board of Woods and Forests, Stockholm
L. SJUNNESON Director, Swedish Cellulose Association, Stockholm
Switzerland
J. KELLER Inspecteur fédéral des forêts, Berne
Thailand
P. UNHANAND Chief, Division of Silviculture, Royal Forest Department, Ministry of Agriculture, Bangkok
Togo
V. DAGADOU Chef du Service des eaux et forêts, Lomé
Trinidad and Tobago
C. H. MURRAY Acting Conservator of Forests, Forest Department, St. James
Tunisia
H. HAFSIA Ingénieur principal des forêts, Ministère de l'agriculture, Tunis
Turkey
C. AKALIN Assistant Director-General of Forestry, Ministry of Agriculture, Ankara
E. SOYSAL Assistant Director of Research and Foreign Relations Division, Department of Forestry, Ankara
Uganda
E. E. SERWANGA Assistant Conservator of Forests, Forest Office, Entebbe
United Kingdom
Sir Henry
BERESFORD-PEIRSE Director-General, Forestry Commission, London
United States
Edward P. CLIFF Chief, Forest Service, Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.
Robert K. WINTERS Director, Foreign Forestry Services, Forest Service, Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.
Henry E. CLEPPER Executive Secretary, Society of American Foresters, Washington, D.C.
Upper Volta
S. SIE Directeur du paysannat, Ministère de l'économie nationale, Ouagadougou,
G. SANAGOH Directeur de la statistique et des études économiques, Ministère de l'économie nationale. Ouagadougou
Venezuela
N. ALTUVE GONZALES Director de Recursos Naturales Renovables, Ministerio de Agricultura y Cría, Caracas
Yugoslavia
D. KLEPAC Professor of Forestry, Zagreb University (Maksimir)
International Labour Organisation
P. SARTORIUS Forestry adviser
International Union of Forestry Research Organizations
A. de PHILIPPIS Member of the Permanent Committee.
Former FAO staff
S. B. SHOW. We regret to record the death in California on 9- November 1963 of S. B. SHOW, aged 77. Appointed Chief of the Forestry Branch of the Forestry and Forest Products Division in 1946, Bevier Show retired before FAO headquarters was moved from Washington to Rome. He had formerly been Regional Forester, Californian Region, United States Forest Service, and contributed much to American forestry, both in administration and research. During the difficult formative years of FAO, he greatly endeared himself to all his colleagues of that time, of whom now only four remain with the Division.
M. A. HUBERMAN, FAO Regional Forestry Officer for the northern region of Latin America and liaison officer with the North American Forestry Commission, has transferred to the headquarters of the United Nations Special Fund for Economic Development in New York, where another staff member of the Forestry and Forest Products Division, P. COCHIN, is already serving. Former chief of the silviculture section of the Division, Morrie Huberman had before that been a regional forestry officer in the Asia-Pacific region. He joined FAO from the United States Forest Service in 1946.
<section>3</section>
Trends in FAO Technical Co-operation Programs
J. C. WESTOBY
Statement by the Deputy Director to the Technical Committee on Forestry and Forest Products of the FAO Conference
I want to tell you something about current trends in our field operations. These have now reached such a volume that it is impossible to give you a detailed account of the work which we are now carrying out in different parts of the world. This report will therefore not be comprehensive; I shall rather try to illustrate different aspects of our programs by quoting examples, and I shall address myself to three points in particular.
First, I want to bring out the changing pattern, as well as the rising volume, of our field programs, to draw your attention to their impact on our work, and to indicate their implications for our future activities.
Secondly, I want to indicate to representatives of those countries which stand in need of assistance the various ways in which we can either render help ourselves or arrange for help to be given.
Thirdly, I want to suggest to representatives of the more advanced countries the responsibilities- I would even say obligations - that lie upon them, and in particular on their forest services, if the various programs to which their governments have pledged full support are to achieve their declared objectives.
Let me first clear away some misunderstandings. Two years ago this committee, and the Conference in general, expressed serious concern at the curtailment of our regular program in consequence of our rising field programs. This concern was legitimate; our regular program was in fact suffering badly. Today the situation has somewhat improved. This for two reasons. In the first place, we have succeeded in obtaining several additional posts out of headquarters allocations provided to FAO by the Special Fund of the United Nations. Quite recently, two additional posts were authorized, bringing the total number of headquarters staff financed by the Special Fund to nine. Once these have all been filled, we shall be in fairly good shape to handle our present commitments - certainly in much better shape than we have been for the last four years. Secondly, our position two years ago was serious because we were undertaking a good deal of preparatory work (which has since led to many new
approved projects) and for this heavy preparatory work, when the Special Fund program was in its initial phase, we were receiving a recompense that was quite inadequate.
I will not pretend that we are yet satisfied. Far from it. There is sufficient evidence of how serious the position is, not merely for this Division, but for FAO as a whole. Nevertheless, our position is a good deal less desperate than it was two years ago, and I think delegates to this committee will be glad to know that there has been improvement.
I would also like to emphasize that since this committee last met our regular program has not been standing still. It is perfectly true that we have failed to carry out several projects that we would have liked to carry out. Nevertheless, in spite of this, the last two years have been years of considerable achievement. Indeed, I doubt whether any previous biennium has witnessed so rich and varied a regular program.
One further general point I would like to make. We tend to fall into the habit of speaking of the regular program and the field programs as if they were separate entities, each in its own watertight compartment. Nothing could be further from the truth. They are indissolubly wedded, both in their conception and their implementation. There is not a single field project but has its roots in one or other aspect of our regular program activities. And every single field project reacts in turn on our regular program. So far as we are concerned, we welcome this rapid expansion of our field programs. We rejoice in the fact that more and more countries are coming to recognize the significant contribution that a sound program of forest and forest industry development can make to their overall economic growth, and are turning to us for help and advice. We rejoice that we are finding wider opportunities for giving concrete expression to the forestry principle which we have endeavored to
promote since the first days of FAO In the early years of FAO, lacking means, we tended often to strive for better forestry practices through exhortation. The records of our several regional forestry commissions, of various conferences we have held, of this committee itself, are littered with noble resolutions, many of which have remained dead letters. They have remained dead letters because the countries lacked the means to give effect to them, and because we lacked the means to help. The situation is now changing, and changing rapidly. The time for exhortation is past. Action programs, encompassing specific field projects, with clear unequivocal objectives, point the way forward, both through their direct impact and through their demonstration effects.
Thus, we in no wise look upon our field programs as an incubus, an unwanted intrusion on the even tenor of our regular program development. Rather we see our field programs as conferring meaning and validity to our regular program. It is for this reason that we continually re-examine our regular program in the light of the needs revealed by our field programs.
United nations development decade
You will have noted that our regular program is becoming increasingly oriented toward supporting our field programs. This trend will continue. It represents the most effective contribution we can make toward solving the greatest problem of our day: how first to check, then to halt, and finally to reverse, the widening gap between the advanced, industrialized nations and those countries still in the early stages of development. It represents our response to the challenge presented by the United Nations Development Decade.
I would like to say a few words on this, singe it is highly relevant to the theme of our discussion today. Moreover, what I have to say may help to provide a framework, a context, for your discussions.
When the Secretary-General of the United Nations proposed that this present decade be designated the United Nations Development Decade, he received the unanimous support of all members of the United Nations. This Organization, too, along with other specialized agencies of the United Nations family, pledged full support. The target set for the Development Decade is modest indeed: to achieve by 1970 an aggregate rate of self-sustained economic growth in the developing countries of 5 percent annually. Modest because, taking into account the expected rate of population growth, this signifies an annual growth per caput of between 2 and 3 percent. Yet even this would signify a considerable step forward. Over the last decade gross income in the underdeveloped part of the world rose on average by 3 percent annually. Because of population growth, the increase in income per person was only about 1 percent per year - that is, about $1 per head per year. By way of contrast - to show how
rapidly the gap is still widening - average incomes in some of the advanced areas, in the United States of America and in the European Economic Community for example, rose over the same period by $20 per head per year.
Progress in the developing countries over the last decade has been disappointingly slow, particularly in the light of the hopes engendered during the immediate postwar years. In recent years there has come about a better understanding of the reasons for this relatively slow progress. This is not the time and place to enter into a general discourse on the problem of accelerating economic growth in low-income countries. But some of the elements in this problem are directly relevant to our present and future work.
For example, many of the development plans formulated in the past have ignored the intimate interrelationship which exists between the sectors of agriculture and of industry, have ignored the need for industry to provide the tools for the required breakthrough in agriculture, and have ignored the role of agriculture as a base for industrialization. In this connection, I would direct your attention to a conference paper, Agriculture in economic development, to the preparation of which this Division made an important contribution.
Another point of some importance: the current flow of capital and technical assistance from the advanced to the developing countries is still well under 1 percent of the combined national income of the wealthier countries. Not only is this still too low to make the required impact. Much of it is even less effective than it might be. Thus, while more funds are steadily becoming available for preinvestment purposes, there is still a great lack of financial resources - in the form of either grants or long-term low- or noninterest loans, for such purposes as land improvement, general infrastructural investment or, in particular, major schemes of afforestation and forest improvement, whether for productive or protective purposes. This problem is coming more to the fore, as country after country realizes the weight of the millstone round its neck represented by repayment obligations on earlier development loans. Similarly, as was revealed by the United Nations Conference on the
Application of Science and Technology held early in 1963 in Geneva, there is still insufficient effort devoted to adapting technology and research to the specific needs of the developing countries. A large part of the work of this Division is concerned with the adaptation and dissemination of science and technology in the interest of the developing countries.
If the widening gap is to be checked, then the flow of capital and technical assistance from the privileged to the developing countries must be stepped up and made more effective. We are confident that this will happen. Our confidence does not rest only on the fact that the conscience of the world is now awake. We believe there are good hopes that the recent signing of the nuclear test ban treaty may be followed by further steps toward controlled disarmament. This would release immense resources, part of which will be channeled to meet the needs of the developing countries. In the coming years we in this Division may be able to give some thought to the ways in which the specific resources that will be released could be constructively directed into promoting forest and forest industry development in the emerging countries.
A further point of considerable relevance for the work of this Division. From the experience of the last decade, it has become evident that, so long as the developing countries remain heavily dependent on the export of primary products to, and the importation of processed goods from, the more advanced countries, they are running the race for progress with their legs tied. It is common knowledge that the deterioration in the terms of trade of the developing countries over past years has far more than canceled out every penny they have received in financial and technical assistance. The existing pattern of international economic relationships is such that there is a built-in tendency for their terms of trade to deteriorate. This tendency can only be countered by the diversification of their economies and exports, and by the provision of markets for their industrial products in the more advanced countries. These problems will form the central theme of the forthcoming United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to which this Division will contribute a special paper. We believe that the rapidly changing pattern of the world forest and forest products economy presents important opportunities for many of the developing countries. We are also satisfied that in every country forest and forest industry development, apart from being desirable for its own sake in the flow of benefits and needed products it confers, is capable of making a very significant contribution to the overall growth of the economy. Our viewpoint on this is set out in the special article published in Unasylva - "The Role of Forest Industries in the Attack on Economic Underdevelopment."
I have strayed somewhat from my original theme, but I hope that what I had to say will not be considered irrelevant.
FAO technical assistance programs
In his opening speech, the Director mentioned that this Division is now operating field programs involving some $5 million annually, alongside a regular program of about $1 million a year. The main part of the field programs today consists of United Nations Special Fund projects. By January 1964 the Division will be responsible for 28 or 29 major projects, all of which are designed to remove bottlenecks to development. Thus, some of these projects are essentially preinvestment surveys, aimed at appraising the forest resource and studying the feasibility of developing industries based thereon. Examples are our projects in Mexico, Honduras, Greece, Ecuador, Venezuela, Thailand and Ceylon. Others are concerned with research and development, as for example our projects in Pakistan, Chile, Turkey and Sudan. Still others aim at creating required professional and subprofessional cadres; this is the purpose of projects in Argentina, Brazil, Peru, Liberia, Nigeria and Iran.
We are responsible for more than a quarter of all the projects handled by the FAO Technical Department, standing second among the technical divisions. These projects will require, as they progress, about 250 experts.
Meanwhile the Expanded Program of Technical Assistance (EPTA) continues, and at the present time we have about 80 field officers in some 25 countries. Preliminary indications which have reached us concerning the 1965-66 Expanded Program of Technical Assistance suggest that there may be expansions in many countries but a falling off in some country requests. In some cases the initiation of a Special Fund project has led to the total suppression of the Expanded Program of Technical Assistance in forestry. This may be reasonable where the new Special Fund project takes over and carries forward work previously started under the Expanded Program of Technical Assistance. It is less obvious, however, that the establishment of a forestry faculty, or the conduct of preinvestment surveys in a specific locality, abolishes the need for continued progress in such fields as utilization, management and administration. However, you know full well that the program is made in the countries,
not here in FAO. It is in the countries that the forest depart. meets have to establish their claims alongside the claims of other departments. I am simply concerned to remind you that the case for assistance in the forestry and forest industry fields, if assistance is required, should not go by default.
Apart from the dispatch of individual experts to particular countries, the Expanded Program of Technical Assistance also enables us to provide regional advisors, support some regional projects, and organize a certain number of seminars and training centers. Here, unfortunately, we are up against a severe limitation. The proportion of EPTA funds which can be devoted to regional projects is strictly limited, though that proportion has recently been raised from 12 to 15 percent. However, this does not enable us to comply with all the requests we receive for organizing training centers and seminars. We are painfully aware of repeated recommendations from the regional forestry commissions still not satisfied, solely for lack of regional EPTA funds. You will already have noted, in our Program of Work and Budget for the forthcoming biennium, that the ominous phrase " subject to availability of funds " occurs all too frequently. Such training centers and seminars have a vital role
to play in the transfer of technology, in the dissemination of new ideas. We know what the most urgent needs are, and if any of those responsible for the direction of bilateral assistance programs in forestry are interested to help by organizing seminars and training centers, we will gladly cooperate.
Before leaving this question of EPTA programs, there is one likely new development to which I should draw your attention. Normally our field experts act as advisors only. Yet in certain developing countries there is need for assistance that goes beyond expert advice. There is need for trained personnel who can occupy posts in the local forestry administration, serving to all intents and purposes as a national civil servant though bearing, of course, a special responsibility for training cadres. Such assignments have in the past been handled by the United Nations Technical Assistance Administration, and we have collaborated in submitting the names of appropriate candidates. In the future this type of assignment (known as an OPEX-type assignment) will also be available under FAO's own Expanded Program of Technical Assistance.
The Special Fund and EPTA, while they form the bulk of our field operations, do not exhaust them. The last Conference approved a special program of education and training in Africa, and under this program we have been able to arrange for a survey of Africa's educational and training needs in the field of forestry, and also for a special training center in savanna problems. This is now being held in Sudan, with the collaboration of the Sudanese Government.
There are two other major field programs in relation to which this Division has assumed important responsibilities in the last biennium. The World Food Program started its operations on 1 January 1963. This new organization, jointly responsible to the United Nations and to FAO, has been established, following the Director General's report, Development through food, at the 1961 Conference, to carry out a three-year experimental program. Three types of aid are envisaged: emergency food aid; school nutrition; assistance in the form of food to development projects. It is this third category which concerns us.
We act as technical advisors for these projects, frequently assisting countries to prepare projects suitable for the Program. So far only two forestry projects are operational, in Syria and in Morocco. The latter, which concerns reforestation and soil conservation, is interesting since it is planned within the framework of the Mediterranean Development Project. Others on the point of being signed or likely to be approved shortly are located in Turkey, Sudan, Korea, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, China (Taiwan) and Jamaica. At the present time projects concerning this Division add up to just over $7 million or rather more than 12 percent of the aggregate of World Food Program projects under active consideration. This gives some idea of the amount of work in which the Division is involved in under the World Food Program.
The Forestry and Forest Products Division also plays an important technical role in Freedom from Hunger Campaign projects. Here the procedure is somewhat more complicated since, once the technical soundness of a project has been established, FAO, acting as a broker so to speak, has to place it with a suitable donor organization. It is not always easy to design a project so that it meets the real needs of the recipient country and at the same time has the sort of appeal which prompts a donor organization to lend its support. In the past year or so we have carefully scrutinized some 30 projects from the technical standpoint. As yet, however, only two minor projects are operational, though we hope that a few others will become operational shortly. Here a situation has arisen which is somewhat discouraging. Although there is no lack of requests for assistance and of sound projects from the countries in the broad forestry field, it is proving extremely difficult to find donor
organizations for projects in this sector. There is a lack of understanding on the part of those supporting the Freedom from Hunger Campaign that this is essentially a campaign to eliminate freedom from want, and that fuelwood plantations, shelterbelts, community forest development, sand fixation, and so forth, are valid contributions to this Campaign. We do hope the delegates here, on returning to their countries, will do all in their power to persuade the organizations which are supporting the Freedom from Hunger Campaign that these types of projects also make a real contribution to realizing the objectives of the Campaign. Unless the donor organizations are willing to broaden their views, we shall find it necessary to discourage requests from countries in these sectors.
The important thing to note is that both these programs do afford additional possibilities of securing needed assistance for development purposes,
Responsibilities of the advanced countries
I have spoken of the changing pattern of our field programs, and of the many forms of help now available to assist countries in the early stages of development. I would like to say a word or two about the obligations that lie on the more advanced countries.
For many decades to come, the developing world will have need of the assistance of foreign experts. Depending on the stage of development reached, this need will express itself in different forms. Some countries need only very specialized advice on particular problems, often for short periods, by high level consultants. Others need longer-term assistance to strengthen particular aspects of their work; they have a reasonably developed service, but certain facets have been neglected. Still others have a fair complement of staff, but nearly all of them lacking in experience. Here a general bracing and strengthening by experienced and qualified staff are required - not necessarily all at the top echelons. Finally, there are some countries where a forest service requires to be built up almost from scratch.
So far as advanced countries are concerned expressions of willingness to help are meaningless unless they are accompanied by a readiness to make experts available. Steps should therefore be taken to arouse the interest of the younger generation of foresters in the forestry problems of the developing countries. Still too few forestry faculties in the advanced countries provide courses on world forestry problems. Finally, a greater proportion of the research effort now being made in the government, university and independent research institutions should be devoted to finding solutions to the specific problems which confront the developing countries.
Much has already been accomplished, but much more remains to be done before the situation can be regarded as satisfactory. Whenever this committee meets we sense the strength of the international bond that links foresters the world over. We speak of our own problems but we are fascinated by the problems confronting our colleagues in other parts of the world. If you can succeed in transmitting to your colleagues in your own forest services this international aspect of forestry, this sense of being co-workers engaged in a common task, we need have no fear that there will be any lack of dedicated men willing to lend their expertise to forward forestry work in those countries which are late starters in the race for a better life.
We would like to pay particular tribute to those countries which have adopted "associate expert" schemes, of which this Division has been assiduous in taking advantage. More than a third of all the associate experts working with FAO field officers are with the Forestry and Forest Products Division. A number of these associate experts have proved their worth to the point where they are now employed as senior experts in their own right. We have noticed in some instances a reluctance on the part of the sponsoring country to allow these associates to serve at headquarters or in our regional offices. We believe this is a mistake. The orientation which an associate gets here at headquarters, the familiarity he gains with all aspects of our work and every type of forestry problem, can be of immense service to him in his future career and of great value to the country in which he eventually serves. In a certain sense it can even be claimed that the Forestry and Forest Products
Division of FAO represents the best postgraduate school in world forestry extant. We would therefore like to see developed a "sandwich type" career for some of these associate experts: an initiation period at headquarters, followed by service with an expert in the field, with a short final spell at headquarters before moving on to his new assignment. The associate expert schemes are an excellent means of forming a cadre of competent, internationally minded experts.
One final point. We are apt to stress the scale and variety of FAO field operations and the help they can give in overcoming problems of backwardness. Apart from FAO programs, there are of course many important and bigger bilateral programs pursuing the same aims - and there is an increasing disposition on the part of those countries rendering bilateral assistance to coordinate their efforts with FAO's. But we must never overlook the fact that the main effort comes from, and the main responsibilities lie with, the developing countries themselves. FAO's contribution must be designed to complement and complete such efforts. It is not for FAO to prescribe what their aims should be, nor the means they should employ to achieve those aims. FAO's contribution is a marginal one, and it can seldom be decisive. All the more important, therefore, that we should approach our task with a proper sense of humility as well as of responsibility.
Aerial Photographs in Forest Inventories: Applications and Research . Studies (1963).
Initiates a series of publications to be issued by the International Union of Forestry Research Organizations. Compiled by an advisory group of Section 25 of IUFRO, the English, German and French texts appear in one volume published in the Federal Republic of Germany, while a Spanish text has been published in Mexico.
Obtainable through IUFRO, Amalienstrasse 52, 8 München 13, Federal Republic of Germany.
<section>4</section>
Work of FAO
European forestry commission
Fifth FAO conference on wood technology
World consultation on forest genetics and tree improvement
FAO technical assistance reports on forestry and forest products
European forestry commission
Main items on the agenda of the twelfth session of the European Forestry Commission, held at Geneva from 30 September to 5 October 1963, were, first, consideration of the conclusions of the draft of the FAO/ECE study European timber trends and prospects: a new appraisal, 1950-75 (summarized in Unasylva, Volume 17 [3], Number 70), and, secondly, a review of national forest policies in Europe in the light of the Commission's views on these conclusions.
In order to broaden the discussion on these subjects, a separate meeting to consider them was called during the session of the commission to which were invited, in addition to the commission members, countries of Europe which are members of the United Nations but not of FAO - that is the U.S.S.R. and some countries of eastern Europe. In the event 24 European countries attended this meeting ^1 while the U.S.S.R. was represented at the subsequent session of the ECE Timber Committee which also had the draft study under consideration.
^1Austria, Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Federal Republic of Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom, Yugoslavia. Representatives were also present of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (ECE), International Labour Organisation (ILO), Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), European Economic Community (EEC - Common Market), and the International Union of Forestry Research Organizations (IUFRO).
The commission session, under the chairmanship of W. PLYM FORSHELL (Sweden), was opened by P. LAMARTINE YATES, FAO Regional Representative for Europe, and was attended by the Director and Deputy Director of FAO's Forestry and Forest Products Division, and by R. G. FONTAINE, Chief of the Forest Policy Branch. L. GIMENEZ-QUINTANA served as secretary. EGON GLESINGER Assistant Director-General of FAO's Department of Public Relations and Legal Affairs, also attended the ad hoc meeting.
Besides the main items already mentioned, a considerable number of other important topics were dealt with by the commission, including the activities of its various subsidiary bodies, and these are fully covered in the commission's report. For the coming biennium the commission elected OTTO ECKMÜLLER of Austria as chairman, and as vice-chairmen H. FRØLUND (Denmark), A. STOFFELS (Netherlands), and D. KLEPAC (Yugoslavia). An invitation was received for a study tour to be held in Austria on the occasion of the commission's thirteenth session in 1965.
European timber trends and prospects
The broad findings of the commission in regard to the new study of European timber trends and prospects have been interpreted in a preface which will appear in the printed final version of the study now in course of preparation: extracts appear below.
This study, like its predecessor, has been undertaken by the secretariats of the Economic Commission for Europe and of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in response to a request of European governments originally formulated in the Timber Committee of ECE and the European Forestry Commission of FAO. The request for this reappraisal of timber trends and prospects in Europe in itself constituted a recognition that the earlier study had proved helpful to those concerned with the European forest and timber economy, enabling them to carefully evaluate, and where necessary revise, their plans and policies. In an appendix to this present study, the earlier study is reexamined in the light of the actual course of events over the decade 1950-60. There it is noted that the main trends were correctly delineated, although the study failed to foresee how far these trends would go in the decade, and hence the extent to which consumption patterns would change. This
was because the authors underestimated the rate at which the European economy would grow in the 1950 s.
The present study attempts to determine what the next chapter in the evolution of the European forest and timber economy may hold in store. It might be thought that this time the task of the authors would be easier. The statistical framework on which a study such as this must rest is undoubtedly much better than that which was available to the authors of the earlier study, even though it is still far from satisfactory. And there is a decade of additional experience to draw on, a decade during which the Timber Committee of ECE has carefully followed and documented developments in the European timber market, while the European Forestry Commission has reviewed the problems of European forestry at regular intervals.
Yet the attentive reader who is familiar with the earlier study will not fail to observe that in looking forward to 1975 the authors of the present study have been considerably less bold, less precise, less dogmatic, than were their predecessors when they sought to look forward to 1960. He may wonder why this is so. Is it because a longer time-span is involved? Is it because the present authors are less courageous, or perhaps merely less naive, than their predecessors?
No. The real explanation is more fundamental than any of these. It lies in the fact that the area of choice open to those responsible for the future of Europe's forest and timber economy is very much greater than it was a decade ago. And those who have the responsibility for taking the final decisions, which will be far reaching in their effects, will have to take into account a number of considerations, both economic and political, which scarcely entered into the picture a decade ago. The nature of these considerations will become clearer if we recall what has happened over the last decade and what the main *ends are likely to be in the next.
Between 1950 and 1960 Europe's consumption of forest products rose much more rapidly than the most sanguine prophets had foreseen. Over the same period there was a rise in the output of industrial wood from Europe's forests unparalleled in any previous decade. It will be remembered that in the late 1940s and early 1950s there were not lacking voices to aver that wood was a declining commodity in Europe, and forestry a declining sector. History has proved those Cassandras hopelessly wrong.
Yet this unprecedented expansion in forest output was not sufficient to keep pace with Europe's rising wood needs. Whereas in 1950 Europe was roughly in balance on its forest products account, in 1960 imports exceeded exports by about 20 million cubic meters, measured roundwood equivalent. Europe has become a significant net importer of wood, and in the course of the decade a new and different mesh of trade links with other regions of the world has been forged in this sector.
This present study shows that Europe's wood needs will continue to rise, though at a pace somewhat slower than in the recent past. Europe's forests, today more accurately known and more dynamically managed than ever, will continue to provide a rising flow of industrial wood to meet the needs of the region's present and future forest industries. Nevertheless, the gap is growing, and by 1975 it could reach anywhere between 40 and 70 million cubic meters, depending upon the rate at which the European economy expands.
How will this gap be bridged? This is the central question arising from the present study. And the answer, if it is to be a satisfactory one, must take into account the fact that history does not end in 1975, that there is every indication that the gap will continue to grow in the closing decades of this century.
Is it physically possible for Europe's forests to be so transformed and, where necessary, extended so as to furnish the volumes of industrial wood which the region will require by the end of the century? The answer the study gives to this question is an unequivocal affirmative. In terms of sheer volume the required amounts could be provided, though for several special categories and qualities Europe would of course have to continue to look beyond its boundaries. In the coming years the technical revolution in European agriculture will make further substantial areas of land available for treegrowing. At the same time there are opportunities for greatly extending foresters' new techniques for growing industrial wood on short rotations. Moreover, the study points out that much of the improvement over the last decade has come about as the result of more rational utilization. There is still considerable scope in Europe for reducing forest and transport losses, better use of
residues, and the further transfer of fuelwood to industrial use.
Is it economically feasible for Europe's forests to provide these additional quantities of industrial wood? The present study fails to answer this question. It points out that at least part of the supplementary supplies already envisaged under present plans and policies can be evoked only at rising unit cost. It draws attention to the growing scarcity of forest labor over most of Europe. On the other hand, it points to the opportunities that still exist for cost reduction through the rationalization and mechanization of forest work. Above all, it highlights the dearth of systematic cost studies in Europe's forests and forest industries to date. In fact, the data for sound judgment are sadly lacking.
A reasoned answer to this question is all the more difficult since it is known that there are many countries in other regions, including some of the developing countries, which are capable of producing the forest products that Europe will need. Some of these countries are much more favored by land availability, soil and climate for the economic growing of timber than is Europe. Several already have thriving forest industries; others undoubtedly possess the potential for establishing them. And it is this which leads directly to the third question. Is it politically desirable for Europe to aim at containing her dependence on overseas supplies of forest products?
It may come as a surprise to some readers that decisions regarding the development of the European forest and forest products economy involve choices that are fundamentally political. That this is so, however, may be clearly seen if we relate the findings of this study to a wider context.
There can be no one today who is not familiar with the problem of the widening gap between nations: the difficulty of the low-income, developing countries in attaining a rate of economic growth comparable with that of the advanced, industrialized countries. Member Governments of the United Nations have acclaimed the initiative of the Secretary-General in declaring this present decade the United Nations Development Decade, accepting the aim for developing countries of achieving an annual rate of self-sustained economic growth of 5 percent by 1970. European governments, along with others, have unanimously pledged their support and assistance in reaching these targets.
Today it is widely recognized that the efforts of the developing countries to accelerate their economic growth will be grievously hampered, even frustrated, unless and until they are able to diversify their production and exports, and to find export markets for a widening range of manufactured goods. The advanced, industrialized nations have a responsibility, even a moral obligation, to provide such markets. This indeed will be one of the principal themes to be discussed at the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development which takes place this year.
Against this background it is legitimate to pose the question: should not Europe, in considering how best to cover its rising timber needs, look to some of the less developed countries for at least a share of its growing requirements, a share that may well increase in the later decades of this century?
This is perhaps the most important question arising from the study that European governments will be called upon to answer. Should the answer be in the affirmative, as would seem reasonable and logical, then two important considerations must be borne in mind.
First, an affirmative answer by no means implies that a determined effort to improve and expand European forestry and to raise the region's own output of industrial wood can be renounced. There is little prospect that the whole of the additional supplies which Europe will require can be forthcoming from other regions by 1975. A sustained and determined effort to increase wood supplies in Europe will also be required.
Secondly, a steadily rising flow of processed wood products from the developing countries to Europe will not come about automatically. It will require assistance, in the form of machinery and equipment, technical know-how, managerial skills, finance and credit. Many European countries are able to render such assistance, whether in the form of development aid or of joint undertakings.
National forest policies
The need to make full use of existing forest resources to meet future timber requirements was stressed by the commission. There seems to be ample scope for a further increase in the production of European forests before the ceiling is reached. This increase in production will, however, require intensive forest management, with all the silvicultural and other measures involved in order to improve the quality of forest products. It will involve the development, and in some cases the revision, of existing management plans and possibly their simplification to reduce costs; the adoption of a more flexible concept of the optimum growing stock; and the rationalization of logging and transport operations, especially by improving accessibility and by mechanization.
It is obvious that forest management plans at the level of the working unit do not allow for the desirable adjustment of production to the demands of the consumer industries, and forest management plans on a regional basis (which are already in use in some countries and being considered in others) were advocated. The definition of the "regions" to be covered by these regional management schemes may pose problems, but the plans could be drawn up with the object of serving the needs of integrated industries in the region. Such integrated units make it possible to increase the final yield from the raw material and to improve the quality of the products manufactured from a given raw material.
Forest land-tenure systems are no obstacle to the establishment of these large forest units. One example was reported where working plans for private forests were to be drawn up within the regional framework. Further research is, however, necessary to examine how the plans for small woodlands can be worked into the overall national plan.
Mention was also made of forms of go-operation which allow the application of intensive silviculture to small woodlands. The granting of technical and financial aid for the development of these small woodlands was suggested for those oases where the owners could not be held responsible for the low productivity of their forests.
As a consequence of the increasing rural exodus in European countries, marginal lands are being abandoned to an increasing extent. This opens up new possibilities for afforestation, although such afforestation measures must be integrated into an overall plan aimed at ensuring more rational land use. On the other hand, in view of the need to ensure reasonable returns for the producers while keeping the price of timber at a competitive level, afforestation and planting activities must preferably be concentrated on better quality land and must not be unduly scattered.
It was feared that extensive land-use patterns such as free range grazing might replace intensive cropping; on the one hand this would affect soil and water conservation and, on the other, would make future corrective measures more difficult. Immediate action was therefore necessary. It was stressed that even though forestry itself might not provide the employment hoped for, it might create other opportunities for employment, particularly in tourism.
Finally, stress was laid on the importance of specialized tree farming, such as poplar plantations, to insure future timber supplies. Such plantations, which in some countries are already common, can easily be integrated with farming units and can help promote full employment of the manpower and capital involved. In view of the high cost of the necessary investments, highly productive plantations can only be established on soils having all the qualities required for intensive cultivation.
The commission recommended that each European country should undertake a searching review of its forest policy, including the forest management systems currently in use and current forest production goals. The results of these reappraisals should be sent to FAO for collation and analysis, and for examination by the next session of the commission.
Fifth FAO conference on wood technology
Two international conferences of forest products specialists were held at the United States Forest Products Laboratory, Madison, Wisconsin, from 11 to 27 September 1963.
A three-day meeting of the expanded Section 41 (Forest products) of the International Union of Forestry Research Organizations (IUFRO) was followed by the two-week Fifth FAO Conference on Wood Technology, with participants from 32 countries.
EDWARD G. LOCKE director of the United States Forest Products Laboratory, was elected chairman of the conference, for which J. M. YAVORSKY served as FAO secretary. (Dr. Locke had also served as chairman of the IUFRO meeting, as leader of section 41.) Vice chairmen of the conference were JEAN COLLARDET, director of the French Technical Center for Wood at Paris, and EUGENIO DE LA CRUZ, recently retired director of the Philippine Forest Products Research Institute. L. J. MARKWARDT, retired assistant director of the host laboratory at Madison and long active in FAO forest products work, was elected honorary chairman of the conference.
Eight working parties, which had been established by the fourth conference held in Madrid in 1958, met to review the progress made in relation to research on fire test methods; wood preservation; structural grading; the mechanical properties of timber, veneer and plywood, fibreboard and particle board; sawing and machining; and the physical problems of timber. The following are the main recommendations that emerged from the discussions of the various working parties:
1. New types of fire tests, using room-size structures, should be developed in order to get adequate data on various effects of burning and smoke and gas production.
2. Test methods should be devised for determining the strength and other engineering properties of wood poles as used in pole-frame buildings.
3. A program should be initiated to collect worldwide data on seasoning, moisture content conditions, and instrumentation needed for the drying of lumber and other materials of wood origin.
4. Encouragement should be given to the development of machines for automatic grading of lumber at the sawmill, based on nondestructive methods of testing.
5. Both exporting and importing countries should be urged to set up much stricter quarantine regulations against wood infested with insects, to prevent spread of species to countries now free of them.
6. Action should be taken to break down prejudice against wood as a structural material, from the standpoint of its fire safety.
The proposal for new types of fire tests came from FRANZ F. KOLLMANN of the Federal Republic of Germany. Professor Kollmann had pointed out that turbulence created by heat and gases produced in a room size fire does not develop in conventional small-scale tests designed to measure flame spread, ignition time, temperature rise, and other characteristics of burning. "Dimensionless parameters" for evaluating turbulence effects and other full-scale fire conditions will have to be developed. Dr. Collardet, France, considered that, in general, currently approved testing methods are "prejudicial to wood" and its use in building construction. Certain treatments and construction methods have proved highly effective in providing fire safety. It was proposed, therefore, that the list of recommended fire test methods published in the report of the Third FAO Conference on Wood Technology, held in Paris in 1954, should be revised. FAO recommendations of this type are widely followed by
member countries.
The increasing use of wood poles for framing farm buildings, warehouses, and other large structures demands new methods for testing poles for the kinds of loads imposed on them; these stresses differ from those imposed on utility poles.
The conference considered that "machine grading of structural lumber is quite promising" after learning about two machines under development in the United States and one being developed in the United Kingdom.
Rapid expansion in both volume and variety of uses for fibreboard and particle board highlighted conference discussion of these materials. Four standard test methods were adopted for evaluating the properties of structural fibreboards and particle boards.
Recommendations in regard to sawing and machining included one that a standard technological terminology be worked out in English, German, French and Spanish.
The call for more rigorous quarantine regulations for lumber came from H. E. DADSWELL of Australia who said that inspection and eradication in his country was very costly, and that insects can be hidden in anything from raw lumber to shipping crates, furniture, prefabricated houses, and musical instruments.
The task of simplifying plywood strength-testing procedures was undertaken by the working party on plywood properties, headed by F. H. ARMSTRONG (United Kingdom). Two hardness tests were selected for inclusion in FAO-recommended testing procedures for plywood and other composite materials to replace a single test on the present list. A method for evaluating rolling shear strength of plywood is needed and research will be undertaken with a view to developing an acceptable test. It was also decided to encourage studies of the problems of testing plywood sheets in large sizes.
During private discussions and in the open technical meetings of the conference, much attention was given to the form of future international collaboration in wood technology research and development. The Conference welcomed the strengthening of IUFRO Section 41 (Forest products) and suggested that certain sectors of work formerly carried out by some FAO working parties should now go over to IUFRO; other sectors might be handled by organizing joint FAO/IUFRO meetings on specific technical problems.
The conference's views were subsequently remitted to the full Conference of FAO, the conclusions of which are recorded earlier in this issue. Exact procedures and arrangements await final determination, and special consideration will have to be given to FAO's expanding interest in housing and construction. In the meantime a standing committee which the Fifth Conference on Wood Technology decided to establish, with H. E. DADSWELL (Australia) named as chairman and ALAN D. FREAS (United States) as vice-chairman, will continue with the collaboration of the FAO secretariat to exercise surveillance and coordination of the various fields of research activity that have been sponsored by FAO over the past 15 years.
World consultation on forest genetics and tree improvement
A recommendation of the Fifth World Forestry Congress led to a World Consultation on Forest Genetics and Tree Improvement at Stockholm from 23 to 30 August 1963. Some 180 specialists representing 38 countries from all over the world attended the meeting which was organized at the kind invitation of the Government of Sweden and with the support of the International Union of Forestry Research Organizations (IUFRO).
The purpose of this consultation, for which the FAO secretariat comprised A. MÉTRO, O. FUGALLI and G. SIRÉN, was to promote and endeavor to co-ordinate the development of tree-improvement techniques, the mass production of improved germ material, and the economic adaptation of new breeding techniques and improved materials to large-scale regeneration and afforestation programs.
The technical meetings were preceded by three-day study tours in southern, central and northern Sweden. The consultation proper was opened by W. PLYM FORSHELL chairman of the Swedish Organizing Committee; ERIK LUNDH of Sweden was elected chairman with J. DE AMARAL GURGEL (Brazil) vice-chairman. The Minister of Agriculture of Sweden, ERIC HOLMQUIST, welcomed the participants and N. A. OSARA, Director of FAO's Forestry and Forest Products Division, described the potential value to the work of FAO of finding practical application in forestry operations for all the research now going on in the whole field of genetics and tree improvement. "Most of the remarkable improvements in farming have resulted from the scientific breeding and tending of animals and plants: the same spectacular changes can be brought about in forestry."
The discussions had been planned around the contents of draft chapters, intended eventually to constitute together the complete report of the consultation in one publication. Each chapter, prepared by a rapporteur designated prior to the meeting as a world authority in his field, was subjected to intensive study and discussion by sections set up for this purpose, and individual participants were given the opportunity of presenting their own papers of which 110 were submitted in addition to the secretariat papers.
The sections and their officers were as follows:
I. FOREST GENETICS AND CYTOLOGY
Chairman:
K. Sax
United States
Rapporteur:
Å. Gustafsson
Sweden
Secretary:
F. Mergen
United States
II. TREE BREEDING METHODS
A. Population genetics, heritability, ability and progeny testing
Chairman:
A. de Philippis
Italy
Rapporteur:
K. Stern
Germany
Secretary:
L. Strand
Biometrics Society
B. Hybridization
Chairman:
C.C. Heimburger
Canada
Rapporteur:
J. Wright
United States
Secretary:
E. W. Jones
United Kingdom
III. PROVENANCE RESEARCH
Chairman:
P. Bouvarel
France
Rapporteur:
R. Z. Callaham
United States
Secretary:
J. F. Lacaze
France
IV. GENETICS AND IMPROVEMENT OF EXOTIC TREES
Chairman:
J. M. Fielding
Australia
Rapporteur:
R. Morandini
Italy
Secretary:
R. Faulkner
United Kingdom
V. TREE PHYSIOLOGY IN RELATION TO GENETICS AND BREEDING
Chairman:
H. A. Fowells
United States
Rapporteur:
P. F. Wareing
United Kingdom
Secretary:
T. Ingestad
Sweden
VI. BREEDING FOR RESISTANCE
A. Diseases
Chairman:
E. J. Schreiner
United States
Rapporteur:
E. Björkman
Sweden
Secretary:
R. T. Bingham
United States
B. Insect attacks
Chairman:
E. J. Schreiner
United States
Rapporteur:
B. Søegaard
Denmark
Secretary:
H. D. Gerhold
United States
VII. BREEDING FOR WOOD PROPERTIES
Chairman:
E.W.J. Phillips
United Kingdom
Rapporteur:
B.J. Zobel
United States
Secretary:
P. R. Larson
United States
VIII. SEED PRODUCTION AND SEED CERTIFICATION
Chairman:
H. B. Kriebel
United States
Rapporteur:
J. D. Matthews
United Kingdom
Secretary:
H. Barner
Denmark
IX. GENETICS IN FOREST
Chairman:
C. Syrach Larsen
Denmark
Rapporteur:
W. Plym Forshell
Sweden
Secretary:
T. Arnborg
Sweden
The summing up at the final plenary meeting was made by the rapporteur-general, J. D. MATTHEWS (United Kingdom), leader of IUFRO, section 22.
The members of the consultation expressed the view that another such meeting should be organized before the end of the decade, and a tentative invitation was issued for the host country to be the United States of America.
FAO technical assistance reports on forestry and forest products
Addenda to the list published in Unasylva, Volume 15, Number 4, 1961
Africa
Ref. No
Bechuanaland
FAO/IUCN special project.^1 Interim report on Bechuanaland - 1963
T. Riney and P. Hill
Chad
Projet spécial africain FAO/UICN. Rapport préliminaire sur le Tchad - 1962
T. Riney and P. Hill
Congo (Leopoldville)
La réorganisation du service forestier et la formation des cadres - 1962
A. Ricciardi
Dahomey
Projet spécial africain FAO/UICN. Rapport préliminaire sur le Dahomey - 1963
T. Riney and P. Hill
Ethiopia
FAO/IUCN African special project. Interim report on Ethiopia - 1963
T. Riney and P. Hill
Kenya
Present wood consumption and future requirements in Kenya - 1962
J. E. M. Arnold
M. F. E. de Backer
S. L. Pringle
FAO/IUCN African special project. Interim report on Kenya - 1963
T. Riney and P. Hill
Mali
Projet spécial africain FAO/UICN. Rapport préliminaire des consultants sur le Mali - 1962
T. Riney and P. Hill
Nigeria
FAO/IUCN African special project. Interim report on Nigeria - 1963
T. Riney and P. Hill
Northern Rhodesia
FAO/IUCN African special project. Interim report on Northern Rhodesia - 1963
T. Riney and P. Hill
Senegal
Projet spécial africain FAO/UICN. Rapport préliminaire des consultants sur le Senegal - 1962
T. Riney and P. Hill
Somalia
FAO/IUCN African special project. Interim, report on Somalia - 1963
T. Riney and P. Hill
Tanganyika
Present wood consumption and future requirements in Tanganyika - 1962
M. F. E. de Backer,
J. M. Arnold and S. L. Pringle
Forest diseases - 1963
Lake S. Gill
FAO/IUCN African special project. Interim report on Tanganyika - 1963
T. Riney and P. Hill
Tunisia
Les aménagements forestiers - 1963
P. Cochet
Uganda
FAO/IUCN African special project. Interim report on Uganda - 1963
T. Riney and P. Hill
Upper Volta
Projet spécial africain FAO/UICN. Rapport préliminaire sur la Haute-Volta - 1963
T. Riney and P. Hill
^1 Wildlife management and conservation.
Asia and Pacific
Ref. No
Burma
Wood anatomy and biology - 1962. Second summary report
P. J. H. Gottwald
Cambodia
Inventaire forestier de l'est Mekong - 1962
B. Rollet
India
Termite investigations - 1962
G. Becker
Indonesia
Hardwood marketing - 1963
C. G. Merton
Philippines
Timber engineering: research, training and practice - 1962 L. W. Crandall
Pulp and paper research 1962
E. R. Schafer
Thailand
A working plan for the Mae Ngao forest - 1962
Sir Harry Champion
Forest inventory of the north-eastern region - 1963
E. J. G. Gärtner and G. K. Beuschel
Regional project
Far East training center on forest inventory 1960-1962
F. Loetsch
Europe
Ref. No
Malta
Progress of afforestation of waste lands on the Maltese islands - 1963
H. G. Keith
Turkey
Forestry development - 1962
H. Etter
Sawmilling in northern Turkey - 1963
F. F. P. Kollmann
Near East
Ref. No
United Arab Republic
Prospects for the development of timber utilization 1963
M. Pachelski
Regional project
Near East watershed management training center - 1962
R. G. Fontaine
Latin America
Ref. No
Brazil
Forestry inventory in the Amazon valley (Part VII) -1962
B. Glerum
Combined forestry/soil survey along road BR-14 from São Miguel to Imperatriz - 1962
B. Glerum and G. Smit
Pilot survey of the mahogany region of the states of Goiás and Pará - 1962
B. Glerum
British Guiana
Marketing of wood and wood products with particular reference to the export of timber - 1963
C. O. Flemmich
Chile
La industria de la madera en las Provincias de Chile y Aysen - 1962
V. C. Hasek
Investigaciones acerca la clasificación, medición y normalización de la madera - 1961
Theo Erfurth
Política, Legislación y Administración forestales - 1962
T. François
Creación de una Administración forestal nacional - 1962
H. Gripenberg
El Salvador
Situación actual y desarrollo posible de la silvicultura en El País - 1962
Th. F. Burgers
Situación actual y desarrollo posible de la silvicultura - 1963
Th. F. Burgers
Mexico
Proyectos de explotación forestal y aserrado - 1962
F. Zurbrugg
Peru
La Política forestal - 1961
Ph. Cochin
<section>5</section>
Equipment section
Debarking machine.
Debarking machine. - Can debark logs from 1 ¼ - 10 in. (3-25 cm) in diameter even if they are twisted. Available in two models: portable or on 2 wheels. Debarking by means of chains mounted on a shaft, power provided by a 3 ½ hp gasoline engine. Weight: 375 lb (170 kg) for the portable model, and 440 lb (200 kg) for the 2-wheel model.
Manufacturer: Etablissements Le Débroussailleur, Reilhaguet (Lot), France.
Reciprocating log saw.
Reciprocating log saw. - With single unit chassis, and equipped with a self-lubrification system. Blade support is of welded iron. Carriage is in standard elements of 2 m (80 in.) and can be delivered in any length. Automatic feeding can be regulated while running and three blades can be used at the same time. No foundation is required for the installation of the saw. Manufactured in three models. Model 1 - for logs up to 1.35 m (53 in.) in diam.; max. speed 480 rpm; weight 3,200 kg (7,056 lb). Model 2 - for logs up to 2 m (80 in.) in diam.; max. speed 320 rpm; weight 3,600 kg (7,938 lb). Model 3 vertical - for logs up to 60 cm (24 in.) in diam.; max. speed 390 rpm; weight 2,800 kg (6,174 lb).
Manufacturer: Very et Cie., 7 rue Lachelier, Paris 13^e.
Napco crab log skidder.
Napco crab log skidder. - Engine: Model 44 PDL Ford "X" 70 hp diesel; or Model 44 PGL Continental F226 73 hp gasoline engine. Turning radius minimum, outside tires: 12 ft 6 in. (380 cm). Speeds forward and reverse: 1st, 2.8; 2nd, 5.9; 3rd, 10.9; 4th, 18.6 mph (4.5; 9.5; 17.5; 30 km/h). Blade 84 in. (213 cm) wide hydraulically controlled. Winch: hydraulically driven; max. pull 11,000 lb (5,000 kg). Overall measurements: wheel base 76 ^1/[8] in. (193 cm); tire track 69 in. (175 cm); width 85 in. (216 cm); height 98 in. (250 cm); ground clearance 15 in. (38 cm). Total weight: 10,570 lb (4,795 kg).
Manufacturer: Napco Industries Inc., Minneapolis 40, Minnesota, U.S.A.
Balderson BD9 Dig'r-dozer.
Balderson BD9 Dig'r-dozer. - For greater output than a regular butlldozer its 13 ft 9 in. (419 cm) wide × 68 in. (173 cm) high straight blade is fitted with 4 toothed shanks. These teeth penetrate ahead, loosening the material so that the blade can pick up a load quickly and easily, by all-hydraulic control of tilt. Dig'r-dozers are now available for Cat D9G, D8H, D7E and D7D tractors. Specifications: Extreme width, 13 ft 9 in. (419 cm); height, 68-62 in. (173-157 cm) at ends; cutting edge, 1 × 12 in. (2.5 × 30.5 cm); raise above ground, 59 in. (150 cm); drop below ground, 21 in. (53 cm); teeth ahead of edge, 27 in. (69 cm).
Manufacturer: Balderson Inc., Wamego, Kansas, U.S.A.
Circular ridge shaper "Duck nester."
Circular ridge shaper "Duck nester." - Speeds up and mechanizes shaping of irrigation ditches. Can be used either before or after such shaping. The before-method is accomplished by cutting close to the circular border with a conventional ditch plow so as to cut off approximately ^1/[3]. After opening the valve hydrant, the water, while raising its level in the circle, is pushed into the lateral ditch.
Any 2- or- 3-plow tractor with 3-point hitch or hydraulic toolbar carrier attachment provides ample power for any soil condition from light to heavy soils, wet or dry, hard or soft.
Manufacturer: Ed's Equipment Co., 550 E. Lerdo Highway, Shafter, California, U.S.A.
Tulsa winch.
Tulsa winch. - Manufactured in three models of 2,000, 1,600 and 1,000 lb (906, 725 and 453 kg) line pull. It is equipped with an electric motor of approximately ½ hp and weighs 30 lb (13.5 kg). Available for 115-volt AC, or 12-volt battery. Cast aluminum base and steel drum barrel.
Manufacturer: Tulsa Products Division, Vickers Incorporated, Tulsa, Oklahoma, U.S.A.
Brushcutter "Husqvarna companion."
Brushcutter "Husqvarna companion." - Specifications: Blade diameter: 10 in. (250 mm). Working radius: 5 ft (150 em); engine: 1 cylinder, 2-stroke; 3.5 hp and 4,000 rpm. Automatic centrifuge clutch. Weight while operating, 25.5 lb (11.6 kg). Fuel: 7 % fuel-oil mixture SAE 40 or 50.
Manufacturer: Husqvarna Vampenfabriks, Husqvarna, Sweden.
SD freightlifter.
SD freightlifter. - This fork lift can be rapidly converted to a mobile crane by means of jib attachments to handle heavy loads which must be lifted by slings or grabs. Hook mounted directly to jib by means of ball-bearing-mounted roller carriage which can be readily moved by hand and locked in the appropriate position. Maximum capacity, 6 tons.
Manufacturer: Shelvoke and Drewry Ltd., Letchworth, England.
Onan electric plant series 3DSL.
Onan electric plant series 3DSL. - A compact diesel-driven generating set with AC output rated for continuous service at 3,000 watts, 120 volts, 60 cycles. Weight, 465 lb (210 kg); length, 33 in. (84 cm); width, 22 in. (56 cm); height, 26 ½ in. (67 cm).
Manufacturer: Onan Division, Studebaker-Packard Corporation, Minneapolis 14, Minnesota, U.S.A.
Tilting arbor circular saw bench KE.
Tilting arbor circular saw bench KE. - Saw is adjustable for height and cants to 45º, having heavy-duty ball bearings and parallel fence with rapid movement and micrometer adjustment, optional with sliding table. Maximum saw blade diameter, 14 in. (35.5 cm); maximum depth of cut, 4 in. (10.2 cm); maximum distance between saw sad fence, 27 in (68.6 cm). Speed of saw spindle, 3,000/4,000 rpm; power of the driving motor, 5.5. Weight, 1,370 lb (620 kg); boxed for export, 1,630 lb (738 kg), and 53 cu. ft. (1.5 m^3).
Manufacturer: Adolf Aldinger, 7 Stuttgart-Obertürkheim, Federal Republic of Germany.
Sku-par cutter grinding attachment.
Sku-par cutter grinding attachment. Designed to solve most cutter grinding problems. It is supplied complete with cup grinding wheel and accessories to grind, slitting saws and straight-sided cutters up to ¾ in. (1.8 cm) thick and 2 ½ in. (6.3-15.2 cm) diam., angle cutters, both right and left hand, up to ½ in. (1.2 cm) thick and 2 ¾-4 in. (6.6- 10 cm) diam. with angles up to 45º to bore; and spiral cutters, both right and left hand, up to 3 in. (7.5 cm) dime. 2 ½ in. (6.3 cm) long.
Manufacturer: Walter R. Skuse and Partners Ltd., Sandwich, England.
Electromatic band resaw type MEG.
Electromatic band resaw type MEG. Exclusive features are: blade tensioning by sensitive spring action; large dial graduated in widths of the blade which accurately registers the tension needed to suit the widths of the blades; powerful electronically controlled feed provides variable feed speed adjustable by fingertip control from 0-150 ft/min. (0-45 m/min.).
Manufacturer: Guilliet Sons and Co. Ltd., Rivington St., London, E.C.2.
Cutter-crusher type D.B.R.
Cutter-crusher type D.B.R. - Cuts chips 5-25 mm in length. Small chips are used for furnace heating, larger ones for fibreboard and cellulose factories. Depending on chip size and wood species, chipper will work in upward or downward position. Upward position necessary for wood of long dimension, such as sawmill woodwaste chips of 15-25 mm; downward position for smallsize wood-waste, when screen makes it possible to obtain chips of equal dimension.
Specifications: 2 or 4 cutters mounted on a cylinder of 500 mm (20 in.) diem.; speed, 900 rpm; cutting angle, approx. 40º; feeding channel, 250 cm × 70 cm (100 in. × 27 in.); power required, 15 to 30 hp. Weight without engine, 1 metric ton.
Manufacturer: Gustin Fils, Charleville (Ardennes), France.
Tape-boy tape attachment
Tape-boy tape attachment. Measurements can be taken without the help of an assistant. The special serrated edge grips on wood or brickwork when the tape is held taut. The brass tape attachment is easily fitted to all woven and plastic coated measuring tapes of approximately ^5/[8] in. (1.5 cm) width and with endloop of 1 in. (2.5 cm). Tape boy is itself exactly 1 in. (2.5 cm) long, ensuring accuracy of measurement. Can be attached by removing usual metal loop and fitting Tape boy by its eyelet holes to loop which can then be replaced.
Tapeboy is available direct from the manufacturers.
Manufacturer: Lewis G. Smith and Sons, 118-120 Portland Road, Worthing, England.
Pumpak.
Pumpak. - Portable fiber glass tank for forest fire fighting or spraying insecticides 40 percent lighter than comparable metal containers. Capacity, 5 gal. (23 liters). Flow changes from wide-angle to a long range stream with ^1/[3] turn of the nozzle tip. Self-lubricating plastic elide pump produces a 35-ft (10.7-m) stream of water with a single stroke and a continuous abeam with short, ^1/[3] strokes. Pump is self-priming. A closure check valve prevents leakage if pack is in side position or is tipped over. Fiber glass materials corrosion-resistant even when antifreeze solutions of calcium chloride are used.
Manufacturer: Ansul Chemical Co., Marinette, Wisconsin, U.S.A.
The 500 series Lancer sideloader.
The 500 series Lancer sideloader. - This loader covers four models of 6,720-12,000 lb (3,044-5,436 kg) capacity. Built to operate in confined spaces as well as over roads, surfaced and unsurfaced stockyards, storage areas, etc., will operate in a straight line loading, transporting and stacking It is 15 ft (457 cm) long, 7 ft 3 in. (221 cm) wide; wheel base, 9 ft (274 cm). Height of mast: lowered, from 8 ft 8 in. -12 ft 8 in. (264-385 cm); raised from 13 ft 8 in.- 21 ft 8 in. (416-660 cm). Clearance under chassis is 15 in. (38 cm); load center, 30 in. (76 cm); and deck width, 60 in. (152 cm). Lift height: standard 10 ft (305 cm); optional 12, 14 and 18 ft (360, 427 and 548 cm). Travel speed: forward 0-27 mph (43.5 km/h); reverse 0-4 mph (6.5 km/h). Turning radius 16 ft (488 cm) nominal; it turns from 9 ft (274 cm) into 14 ft 6 in. (442 cm) aisles.
Manufacturer: Lancers Machinery Ltd., 41 Knightbridge, London S.W.1.
<section>6</section>
News of the world
Australia
Brazil
Burma
Germany, federal republic
Mexico
Union of soviet socialist republics
United Kingdom
United States of America
Venezuela
Australia
· The Forestry and Timber Bureau has recently issued a publication Pinus radiata - a bibliography to 1963, which covers references to papers on Pinus radiata published to 31 December 1962, classified under 11 subject headings taken from the Oxford system of decimal classification for forestry, and includes an author index to the classified references serially numbered for this purpose.
The publication is priced at 15 / - (Australian currency) which includes cost of postage per ordinary mail. Orders accompanied by remittances should be addressed to the Director General, Forestry and Timber Bureau, Canberra.
Brazil
· A still from a colored documentary film "Between life and death" prepared by Jean Manzon Films S.A. at the request of the Companhia Melhoramentos de São Paulo, Indústrias de Papel, is shown in Figure 1. Screened originally in Sao Paulo during the "Week of the Tree" in September 1863, the film has subsequently been shown all over Brazil to draw the attention of government authorities and to arouse public opinion to the danger of the devastation of the natural forests, and the urgent need for reforestation programs. This cause was given international prominence by the disastrous fires in 1963 in the Paraná pine region of Brazil.
Burma
· A standard nomenclature of forest plants, Burma (1962), which includes nomenclature of commercial timbers is available from the Forest Department, Rangoon.
Germany, federal republic
· From 2 to 28 September 1963, a seminar on the development of tropical forestry, third in the series arranged by the German Foundation for Developing Countries in Berlin-Tegel in co-operation with FAO, was attended by 27 foresters from 15 French-speaking countries of Africa and Asia: Burundi, Cameroon, Dahomey, Gabon, Guinea, Ivory Coast, Laos, Madagascar, Mali, Rwanda, Senegal, Togo, Tunisia, Upper Volta and Viet-Nam. Five of the participants were the forest chiefs in their respective countries.
The four-week seminar consisted of 17 days of lectures and 11 days of field trips to various areas of forestry interest. The 16 lecturers, of whom six were drawn from FAO, all had practical experience in tropical countries. Themes ranged from problems of afforestation, administration, education and research, to the utilization of tropical woods and other wood products, and industrial planning.
The field trip led first to Hamburg where the participants visited the Federal Research Institute for Forestry and Timber Industries in Reinbek, the leading center in Germany on world forestry.
FIGURE 1. - BRAZIL. The film "Between life and death," of which a still is show here. was made to urge the necessity for reforestation programs.
Mexico
· The proposed development of the forest zone of Durango, covered by the Mexican national forest inventory (United Nations/FAO Special Fund project), consists of two parts: forest management . and exploitation; and forest industrial development.
To organize forest management and exploitation in the zone, a nonprofit-making society (asociación civil) has been formed by all the forest owners, both private and public. The zone comprises about 2 million hectares of which about one half is commercial or potentially commercial forest. This society undertakes the management of the forest including the building of roads, etc., as well as the exploitation and transport of the produce, which is sold to the forest industries. An annual investment of rather more than US $2 million per year is envisaged for the first 10 years, the major part of this amount being derived from sale of forest produce. The owners lease their land in perpetuity to the society and in return get a fixed annual income per hectare, irrespective of where timber is cut.
The state authorities have half the seats on the governing board, the owners the other half.
For industrial development a group of local business men have planned an integrated industry including a pulp and paper mill and sawmills. Although organizationally separate from the development of forest management and of exploitation, a close link between the two is provided because some of the industrialists are also major forest owners. The pulp and paper mill will use 350,000 to 400,000 cubic meters per year and will cost about US $22 million. New sawmills and plywood plants, as well as expansion of existing plants, will absorb 500,000 cubic meters of higher-grade timber, and will cost about US $10 million.
FIGURES 2. - MADAGASCAR. These posters issued as part of the national Freedom from Hunger Campaign vividly relate forestry in the objectives of the Campaign. (FIGURE A)
FIGURES 3. - MADAGASCAR. These posters issued as part of the national Freedom from Hunger Campaign vividly relate forestry in the objectives of the Campaign. (FIGURE B)
· An announcement of a new forest policy for the State of Durango including new forest industrial developments was made by the President of Mexico at the opening of the 1963 celebrations to commemorate the 400th anniversary of the founding of the city of Durango. In honor of the occasion, the staff of the United Nations Special Fund project (Mexican national forest inventory, FAO project manager F. C. Hummel) were asked to stage an exhibit (part of which can be seen in Figure 4). This was visited by the President who showed great interest as did the Minister of Agriculture who ordered the exhibit to be kept on view in Durango till December 1963 instead of the two weeks originally planned.
Union of soviet socialist republics
· A new book, Economics of the use and conservation of forest resources by Professor P. V. VASSILIEV (U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, Moscow, 1963, 485 p.), discusses today's problems of the multiple use of forest resources and their conservation.
The first chapters are devoted to an analysis of changes in the pattern of world wood consumption and to the prospects for the development of commercial processing of wood in the U.S.S.R. Data on the present location of forest industries, on the prospects the regional development of industrial processing of wood, and on measures for maintaining the forest resources form a special chapter.
FIGURE 4. - MEXICO. Part of the Durango forestry exhibit consisted of an album of the 1:50,000 maps and photographs of the inventory of the state's forests .
Many pages are devoted to inventory problems and to the appraisal and evaluation of the industry potential. The author presents a number of valuable suggestions and theories. Comparisons are made between the systems of forest resource inventory carried out according to the FAO scheme and the scheme adopted in the U.S.S.R. The author puts forward his own proposals.
Problems of cost evaluation, determination and analysis of production costs, and forest taxes are fully treated. A new problem of establishing the value of the standing timber is also dealt with. The author also discusses the views and suggestions of a number of other home and foreign economists.
The last chapters in the book consider in detail the results of recent original investigations carried out by the author and his colleagues on problems of analysis and forecasting of increase in forest productivity. A methodology for calculating and analyzing measures to increase forest productivity (worked out by a candidate of agricultural sciences, T. A. Koulikova) and evaluation of the effect of these measures are specially treated.
The book is intended for research workers and specialists in different branches of forestry as well as for students of forestry and economics in higher educational establishments. The bibliography lists 66 Russian and 19 foreign publications. The volume was edited by the corresponding member of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, N. N. Nekrassov.
United Kingdom
· "A Summary of Information on the Uses of Helicopters in Forestry" by D. K. BROOKS, which appeared in Volume 24, Number 2, of Forestry abstracts published by the Commonwealth Agricultural Bureaux, Farnham Royal, England, is available as a reprint (price 4s.). It discusses the wide diversity of uses to which the modern helicopter has been put with increasing success; there is a bibliography of all recent literature on the subject.
Helicopters are now widely used in forest firefighting, aerial photography and forest surveys, forest regeneration operations (sowing and transport of planting stock and fertilizers), forest protection (pest and disease control, brush control and suppression of low-grade grade timber or weed species). For the extraction of timber the helicopter is still very much at the trial stage, though its eventual use for this purpose is now widely held to be no more than a natural and inevitable extension of some of its present commercial and industrial uses. The article gives news of recent experience in timber exaction with the help of helicopters in Canada, the United Kingdom, the U.S.S.R., and the United States of America.
· Practical forestry for the agent and surveyor, by Cyril E. Hart (The Estates Gazette Limited, 28 Denmark Street, London W.C. 2, 1962, 438 pp., illustrated) is a valuable handbook for the woodland owner or his agent now faced with a difficult variety of technical advice on forestry, a mass of legislation, a vast literature on everything from soil science to timber conversion, and the increasing cost of forest labor.
United States of America
· Careers in conservation, opportunities in natural resources (The Ronald Press Company, 15 East 26th Street, New York 10, 1963 v + 141 p.) provides a practical guide to the career opportunities that await young persons interested in conservation. The book is edited for the Natural Resources Council of America by Henry Clepper, Executive Secretary of the Society of American Foresters and long-time protagonist of the cause of international forestry.
· Economics of the American lumber industry, by Joseph Zaremba (Robert Speller and Sons, publishers, New York 36, 1962, 231 p., illustrated) sets out to show why the industry has developed as a strong private sector resistant to public participation in credit facilities, research extension, and other activities likely to promote the welfare of the industry and the benefit of the public. It makes recommendations for improvement which deserve serious attention.
· Producing, harvesting, and marketing high quality southern timber, edited by William C. Hopkins (Louisiana State University Press, Baton Rouge, La, 107 p.) is the record of the 11th Annual Forestry Symposium organized by the School of Forestry and Wildlife Management and the General Extension Division of the Louisiana State University. The talks stress the importance of timber quality for the practicing silviculturist, reducing harvesting costs and marketing problems.
Venezuela
· The new building (shown in Figure 5) on the campus of the University of Los Andes, Mérida, houses the Latin-American Forest Research Institute. The formal opening ceremonies were conducted by the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Victor Gimenez-Landinez, the Rector of the University of Los Andes, Prof. Pedro Rincón, and the President of the Institute, Mr. Rafael E. Viloria Diaz. Mr. N. Altuve Gonzales, Director of the Department of Natural Resources, Dr. N. A. Osara, Director of FAO's Forestry and Forest Products Division, and Mr. Lucas Tortorelli, Chief, FAO Advisory Group on Research and Education, participated. The Latin-American Forest Research Institute was begun under FAO's technical assistance program and is now an autonomous institution, supported by contributions from 11 governments of the region.
FIGURE 5. - VENEZUELA. The new building of the Latin-American Forest Research Institute at the University of Los Andes, Mérida.
<section>7</section>
Charcoal from portable kilns and fixed installations
by FRED C. SIMMONS, FAO Forestry Officer
FRED C. SIMMONS is now serving on a United Nations Special Fund project in Chile.
Recent improvements in charcoal production facilities and methods
IN 1956 THE Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations issued a 116-page bulletin under the same title, prepared by Professor J. Savard and Mr. J. Condreau of the Centre technique forestier tropical at Nogent-sur-Marne (France). This discussed in detail charcoal production methods in use at that time, particularly in Europe and North America. It also covered the theory of carbonization of wood and recovery of by-products, and yields obtainable by different methods from a variety of species.
Since 1956 there have been a number of improvements in charcoal production facilities and methods. These have occurred especially in North America where there has been a spectacular increase in the markets for charcoal. Consequently there has also been a considerable increase in interest in methods of producing this commodity more efficiently.
The new techniques discussed here include the development of:
1. several new types of kilns, constructed of masonry (cast concrete, cinder block, and brick);
2. a simple inexpensive method of determining temperatures in various parts of these kilns during carbonization, as a means of controlling the carbonization process more efficiently;
3. several highly efficient new types of vertical retorts designed to obtain maximum yields of uniform and high-quality charcoal, particularly from sawmill residues (slabs, edgings and trim) with a minimum use of man power;
4. new methods of carbonizing fine wood residues (sawdust and shavings) and briquetting the resultant carbon.
Practically all these recent innovations deal with the production of charcoal from hardwood species, since dense nonfriable hardwood charcoal is preferred in the markets. All the new installations in the United States and Canada are designed to recover charcoal only, without any effort to make by-products such as methanol, acetic acid, or wood oils. These former byproducts of the carbonization process can now be made synthetically at a much lower cost, and in a much purer state than the natural products can be produced. Only six of the wood distillation plants in the United States are now trying to recover any by-products, and these companies have limited special markets such as the production of wood methanol as a denaturant for ethyl alcohol. These special markets are currently oversupplied. Other wood distillation plants, and a number of the newer types of installations, use the wood tar and volatile gases produced in carbonization as a supplementary source of fuel for
charcoal production.
At many universities and other research institutions, however, attempts continue to be made to discover some special values in the by-products of wood carbonization, or some more efficient methods of producing these byproducts that will once again make some of them marketable commodities.
Owing to exploitation and transport facilities existing in the United States and because of the high cost of man power and the rather low price, masonry kilns are now popular and are used on a very large scale. Among the existing models in operation it is interesting to note cinder block kilns, brick beehive kilns, and poured concrete kilns.
Cinder block kilns
The most popular masonry kilns in the United States, in terms of numbers at least, are the rectangular cinder brook kilns (Figure 1). These were first devised as an emergency measure during the steel shortage in the second world war by Hickock and Olsen at the (Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station, New Haven, Connecticut. The original plans and specifications^1 were for very small kilos of this type, holding from 1 to 2 cords.^2
^1 Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin 519.
^2 1 cord = 28 cubic feet = 3.65 cubic meters of firewood.
FIGURE 1. - Battery of 9-cord cinder block kilns near Warrensburg, N.Y., U.S.A.
The kilns were so successful that the basic design has recently been enlarged, so that most of the kilns of this type how erected have a capacity of from 7 to 20 cords, with a consequent increase in efficiency and yield.
The most trouble-free, economical, and efficient masonry kilns are still those with a 20-centimeter (8-inch) thick single wall, of high-quality, water-cured, cinder-concrete block, as in the original design. The walls are laid up with lime mortar. Attempts to make self-sealing kilns of this type, with double walls and a layer of sand or dirt between the walls, have not been successful. This is primarily because of the practical impossibility of patching cracks when they occur on the inside wall, and the steady settling of the between-the-walls sealer. With the single wall kiln such cracks are easy to locate because of the leakage of steam or gas, and easy to patch with an application of clay or additional mortar.
Several changes have been made in the design of these kilns when they are built in larger sizes. The door at the front, for charging and discharging, is now frequently closed with one or two steel plates, held in place by bolts or C-clamps, rather than with a wall of additional cinder block as originally prescribed (Figure 2). These door openings call for a sturdy lintel overhead particularly when they are built wide enough to allow a lift truck to enter the kiln. U-shaped lintel blocks, which can be tied together with a filling of concrete and steel reinforcing rod, are available but better still is a specially cast lintel, with steel rod or cable reinforcement, cast from the cinder-cement mixture. Steel beam lintels have also been successfully used. The doors themselves are usually built from 14-gauge hot-rolled sheet steel suspended from an overhead monorail. When in use the edges are sealed to the kiln walls by mineral wool and mortar.
Also commonly used on these larger kilns is a roof of 18-gauge corrugated steel sheets supported by a framework of iron pipe (Figure 3) which in turn is suspended from steel beams or wooden rafters overhead. Steel rods from this overhead framework extend down-ward through holes in the roof plate and around the pipes that support it from underneath. The holes in the plate through which the rods pass are sealed airtight with glass wool and then the entire roof is covered with 5 to 10 centimeters (2 to 4 inches) of sand to seal it airtight. Two holes 20 to 25 centimeters (8 to 10 inches) in diameter are cut in the roof directly behind the door, and two more at the rear in front of the chimney. These holes are covered with steel plates 5 centimeters (2 inches) larger in diameter which are also sealed in place with a sand covering. Attempts have been made with these kilns to use multiple chimneys but their superiority over a single large diameter chimney, built above an
underground box at the rear of the kiln (Figure 4), has not been established.
FIGURE 2. - Cinder block kiln with steel-plate doors.
Almost every successful operator has his own variations on the design, and in the method of operation, of these kilns, but all of them seem to be useful. Most variations follow pretty much the method first worked out by Charles Grothe, owner-manager of Heartwood Products, Warrensburg, New York. Grothe built his 9-cord kilns as described above, on a sturdy foundation of native rock.
For operation the kiln is tightly packed with hardwood sawmill slabs, laid on a grid of round material about 10 centimeters (4 inches) thick to about 45 centimeters (18 inches) back from the door. In the remaining space the kindling for igniting the charge is piled. This consists of dry wood, "brands" or "bones" ^3 from previous charges, paper, and oil-soaked rags. Then the doors are closed leaving an opening underneath for igniting the kindling, and the four holes in the roof are left open. The kindling is allowed to burn freely for about 30 minutes, and then the holes overhead are covered, first those at the front and, a little later, those at the back. In this way the smoke and fire are forced to find an outlet through the charge and down into the base of the chimney at the back. All the draft inlets at the sides of the kiln are closed with dirt except the first two nearest the door end. When red coals appear at these holes they are closed off, and the next two toward the
rear of the kiln opened. Carbonization thus proceeds in a fanwise direction from the front to the back of the kiln, with the draft inlets being successively opened and closed until finally the last two at the sides of the kiln toward the rear glow red. At this point carbonization is complete, and the kiln is completely sealed off for cooling. The chimney is left open for about an hour after the last two air inlets are closed to let the hot gases escape, and then it, too, is completely sealed. Carbonization in a 9-cord kiln normally takes about 48 hours.
^3Partially carbonized wood.
FIGURE 3. - Underside of steel-plate roof showing pipe supports.
FIGURE 4. - Cinder block kiln showing side air inlets and single chimney at rear.
FIGURE 5. - Installation of 5 thermocouples to guide control of "burn" in 9-cord kiln.
There are, of course, many variations on this basic procedure depending on the idiosyncrasies of the individual kiln, the dryness of the charge, the direction and velocity of the wind, the outside temperature and humidity. In some cases, it is necessary to block an inlet on the windward side to keep the charge from burning, or to block it partially with a baffle. In other cases, downdrafts in the chimney cause trouble and it is necessary to provide a baffle there. When a crack opens in the walls or around the roof of the kiln it is necessary to patch it immediately to forestall the inflow of an excess amount of air which may burn up part of the charge or even cause an explosion.
One of the most worthwhile aids to successful kiln operation is the simple inexpensive pyrometer and thermocouple installation developed by Ralph Peter of the United States Forest Service, at its Southeastern Forest Experiment Station branch at Athens, Georgia.^4
^4U.S. Forest Service, Southeastern Forest Experiment Station Paper 73.
The pyrometer is made from a D.C. microameter, range 0 - 25, with 2,200 ohms internal resistance, and in the United States costs about $20.00. The thermocouples are made from iron-paired constantan wire with an asbestos insulation and a stainless steel over-braid. This 16- or 18-gauge paired wire is priced in the United States at 28 to 30 cents a running foot and is used only for installations inside the kiln, as shown in Figure 5.^5 Outside the kiln a cheaper paired iron-constantan extension 24-gauge wire, with a weatherproof polyvinyl insulation, can be used, costing only about 3 US cents per running foot.
^5Note that in the figures that follow measurements are in feet and inches. 1 foot = 0.3 meter; 1 inch = 2.5 centimeters.
The method of installation is as follows. A new scale, as shown in Figure 6, is made for the microameter, reading in either degrees Fahrenheit or degrees Centigrade. This is carefully cemented to the back of the scale plate, removed from the microameter, and the plate replaced in reverse. Then the instrument is installed in a box (Figure 7). A short piece of constantan wire is attached to the positive terminal of the meter, and connected to a piece of iron wire forming an exposed reference (cold) junction as shown. A longer piece of constantan wire is attached to the negative terminal of the meter. Both leads from the meter are attached to binding posts at the back of the box. Then the extension cord from any of the thermocouples inside the kiln can be attached to these binding posts, taking care that each type of wire is attached to the proper terminal. The extension cord leads to the top of the kiln, where each side is soldered to the proper side of the thermocouple wire
coming through the roof. The extreme end of the thermocouple wire, at the point where the temperature is to be read, has its insulation stripped 5 centimeters (2 inches) back from the tip, and the two wires are twisted together and welded at the tip.
FIGURE 6. - New scale for conversion of microameter to pyrometer.
FIGURE 7. -Reference junction wiring.
It has been found that five thermocouples are adequate to guide the control of a "burn" in a 9-cord kiln. Three are placed crossways at the center of the kiln close to the roof, as shown in Figure 5, and the other two are placed lengthways at the center of the kiln just above the chimney outlet near the back. The one at the center of the kiln is about halfway from the roof to the Boor, and the one above the chimney outlet is about 60 centimeters (2 feet) from the floor. During the firing period, after the initial flare-up, temperatures at thermocouple 1 may reach about 650 to 750º C (1,200 to 1,400º F). Such high temperature should not be permitted to continue, however, for more than 10 to 15 minutes, and then only if the kiln has a steel roof. After the roof vents and the firing port are closed, temperatures are regulated by manipulation and partial closure of the air inlet ports along the bottom sides of the kiln. The temperature at thermocouple 1 should be brought down to
about 500º C (950º F) at this time. The same temperature will be obtained, in a relatively short period, at thermocouples 2 and 3, and a little later on, at thermocouple 4. When the temperature at thermocouple 5 reaches about 450º C (850º F), carbonization is nearly complete. This temperature should be held for about an hour, and then the entire kiln, including the smokestack, sealed off for cooling.
Some success has been attained by a few operators in the use of a heat exchanger (Figure 8), to accelerate the cooling period. The heat exchanger consists of two or three 55-gallon steel oil drums welded together. The joint* in the pipe connecting this heat exchanger with the smokestack, and in the pipe connecting it with the interior of the kiln through the roof at the front, are also sealed tightly so that there will be no leakage of air into the system. A high-temperature-resistant blower (such as is used in hot air heating systems) should be installed in the pipe, and also closely sealed.
FIGURE: 8. - Details of the heat exchanger used to speed the cooling-off process in a 9-cord cinder block kiln.
FIGURE 9. - Brick and tile baking kilns, converted to charcoal production.
The inert gases left in the kiln at the end of the burn are circulated through the heat exchanger during the cooling period. Some operators report that they have succeeded in reducing this cooling period for a 9-cord kiln from six down to three days, by the installation and use of such a device.
In the United States these small kilns, even though they are run in multiple batteries of from three to ten units, cannot compete economically in the same market with units of larger size. Their labor requirements, maintenance, and other costs are so high, per ton of charcoal produced, that they must sell their product locally, often directly to consumers, at relatively high prices. Fortunately, because lump charcoal is a bulky product and somewhat difficult to handle, small operators can compete in local markets with those who can produce charcoal at a lower cost but who are located at a considerable distance from market.
Brick beehive kilns
A number of commercial operations, therefore, use larger size kilns.
Many very large brick beehive type kilns, originally erected for baking brick and tile products, have been converted to charcoal manufacture (Figure 9). These generally hold from 30 to 90 cords of wood. When slabs and edgings from a sawmill provide the raw material supply, they produce from 10 to 30 tons of charcoal per charge. When charged with dense hardwood roundwood, yields are increased about 20 percent. The entire production cycle, including loading, carbonization, cooling and unloading, generally takes from 20 days to a month. A typical schedule for operation of 90-cord capacity kilns, for example, would comprise about four days for loading, seven days for carbonization, twelve days for cooling, and six days for unloading (Figure 10). A crew of five men, including the chief burner, is adequate to operate a battery of five such kilns, operating on a staggered schedule, if the product is packaged in 10- to 15-kilogram (20- to 30-pound) bags. The chief burner, of course,
must be a skilled and experienced man.
FIGURE 10. - 90-cord beehive kilns.
FIGURE 11. - Loading wood into conveyer with lift truck scoop.
Some of these beehive kiln operations have been mechanized to reduce manpower requirements, improve the uniformity and quality of the charcoal produced, and cut down on the overall length of the cycle schedule.
It is possible, for example, to cut the wood into short, 30- to 40-centimeter (12- to 16-inch) lengths, and stack it as tightly by rough and tumble methods as it is to stack longer lengths piled carefully by hand. This has been done by placing a sloping powered chain conveyor from the ground to a point above an opening in the top of the kiln. At the foot of this chain the short lengths of wood are dropped in a trough from a scoop mounted on the front of a lift truck (Figure 11). The conveyor carries this wood to the top of the kiln, where it is dropped through the hole and arranges itself in the interior. By this means it is possible to reduce loading time from four days to one day, and the size of the loading crew from five men to two.
Similarly, carbonizing time is reduced by igniting the charge by a gas burner or torch flame piped to the bottom center of the kiln, and by an exhaust blower at the base of the chimney alongside the kiln. This gathers the gases from outlet ports around the inside base of the kiln. A pyrometer, connected to thermocouples placed around in different positions inside the kiln aids the burner to gauge advancement of the "burn" and tells him when to close either partially or fully the air inlet ports around the sides of the kiln.
So far as is known, no completely successful method of reducing the time of the cooling period has as yet been devised, although it has been attempted by circulating cool inert gases through the hot charcoal charge, or by introducing a fog or water vapor spray into the kiln. Both of these methods, however, are apt to cause explosions, and the second may easily result in water-logging part of the charcoal yield and thus degrading it.
Unloading has been successfully mechanized in a number of cases. A successful method is to remove the charcoal with the same scoop on the front of a lift truck mentioned above, which then conveys the product to the infeed trough of a screening system, or in the case of a briquetting plant, of the grinding equipment.
When all of these methods are in use total cycle time for a 90-cord kiln is reduced from about a month to 20 days, more than half of which are utilized for the cooling period. More important, the crew needed to operate a battery of five such kilns is reduced from five workers to two, and yields are somewhat increased. (The blower sharply reduces the amount of partially carbonized "brands" or "bones" remaining in the bottom of the charge.) The end result is that these two men produce about 7.5 tons of charcoal per day.
In the Province of Quebec, Canada, much smaller beehive type kilns are commonly operated. These are of 12- to 15-cord capacity. The production cycle is generally from 10 to 15 days, and yields per cord are comparable to those from larger brick kilns. Construction and operation of these smaller brick beehives has been well described in a series of bulletins by Professor Joseph Risi of Laval University, Quebec.
Poured concrete kilns
Most of the newer masonry kilns of larger size are built of poured concrete since this is usually a cheaper and quicker type of construction than brickwork, and fewer skilled men are required to accomplish it. One of the more popular and successful types of poured concrete kilns is the Missouri type ^6. This is a Quonset Hut type of structure (similar to the wartime Nissen hut), with big steel doors in the front and back, large enough to allow the entry of a fork lift or motor truck for loading and unloading. Overall dimensions 10.6 × 6.8 meters (34 feet 8 inches × 22 feet 4 inches), with walls 2.6 meters (8 feet 6 inches) high and a domed roof rising 1.5 meters (5 feet) above them (Figure 12). It is said that, according to prices prevailing in Missouri in 1960, this kiln can be constructed for from US $2,000 to $4,000. (A brick beehive kiln of the same capacity would probably cost twice that much.)
^6 University of Missouri Engineering Experiment Station, Engineering Series Bulletin 48. The wood charcoal industry in the State of Missouri. Columbia, Missouri. May 1960. &fives detailed description, plane and specifications for 40-cord kiln.
FIGURE 12. - Missouri-type charcoal kiln.
The complete schedule for a "burn" in one of these kilns also stretches over about a month, with two days for loading, four to six days for carbonization, 10 to 14 days for cooling, and something like four days for unloading. Yields with round hardwood, such as oak or hickory, are reported to be excellent, ranging from about 30 to 450 kilograms (800 to 1,000 pounds) per cord. With slabwood, of course, yields are somewhat lower, due to the greater percentage of bark and the lesser volume of wood in a stacked cord.
Newer types of retorts
Several new types of vertical, insulated steel retorts have been developed in the northeastern United States. These give higher yields, shorter operation cycles, make more uniform and higher quality charcoal, and use less man power per ton of charcoal produced than do any of the kilns. These retorts are the results of a considerable period of research by a number of workers, notably Donald Warner of Speculator, Alvin Keil of Rochester, and Fenimore Thomas of Oswego - all in New York State.
Modern retorts consist of upright steel cylinders, adequately insulated on the outside, in which carbonization takes place. When carbonization is completed, in a matter of hours rather than days, the charcoal is allowed to cool down to about 200º C (400º F), and then it is dumped into empty 210-liter (55-gallon) steel drums, which are sealed with a tight cover. In these the charcoal is allowed to cool, generally for from two days to a week with the cover in place, and then for several more days with the cover removed. Then the charcoal is dumped out for use or for packaging.
Thomas' retort
The simplest and cheapest of the current models of these retorts is the one designed by Fenimore Thomas (Figures 13 and 14). Two commercial manufacturers now offer this retort for sale. The smaller size, made by Vega Industries of Syracuse, New York, has a steel carbonizing unit 3.6 meters (12 feet) high by 1.2 meters (4 feet) in diameter, and sells for about $1,000. A larger one, with a steel chamber 4.5 meters (15 feet) high and 1.7 meters (5 feet 6 inches) in diameter, is sold by the Charcoal Retort and Equipment Company, Spruce Pine, North Carolina for about $2,400. This retort has several added features, including two thermometers, but basically the two retorts and their operation are the same.
FIGURE 13. - Thomas' vertical charcoal retort.
The method of operation is as follows. First, a fire is started at the bottom of the retort by dropping dry kindling and papers down the stack, opening all the knockout ports near the bottom of the shell, and igniting the charge through one of them by means of a torch of oil-soaked rags. When the fire is burning well, green wood is dropped down the stack and allowed to ignite; then the ports are closed. One of the air control valves (generally the one on the side away from the wind) is opened, and the stack is partially closed. Green wood is fed to the charge from time to time until the shell is full and a condition develops as shown on the right of Figure 14. Thereafter the door in the concrete block compartment at the bottom of the retort is opened at intervals of about two or three hours when an empty oil drum is placed under the gate, the gate is then opened and about 90 to 135 kilograms (200 to 300 pounds) of hot charcoal is poked down into the drum by means of a steel
rod inserted through the knockout openings. When full, the drums are covered and removed from the compartment for cooling. New green wood is loaded through the chimney after each batch of charcoal is removed, so that this retort can be continuously operated day and night. About 1.5 tons of charcoal are obtained from green slabs and edgings in the smaller of these retorts; the larger one produces nearly 3 tons from green material, and with air-dry wood the yield of both is practically doubled.
A considerable number of these retorts are being operated in the eastern United States. Some, as adjuncts to small sawmills, make charcoal from their slabs and edgings; others are operated as part of forest management projects. In the latter case the retorts may be used as semiportable units, set up at temporary locations in the woodlots, as illustrated in Figure 13. The Vega Company offers a completely portable unit, with a prefabricated all-steel compartment welded to the retort base. This eliminates the need for job site construction of the concrete block base compartment. The retort with integral base housing may be moved easily from place to place, and set up ready for immediate operation.
Cornell retort
The Cornell retort, developed by Donald Warner, and manufactured and sold by the Cornell Manufacturing Company of Laceyville, Pennsylvania, is also being operated successfully. This is a true retort, as illustrated in Figures 15 and 16, in that it has an outside source of heat, usually an oil burner, a blower and thermostatic controls. Thus carbonization is closely and completely controlled, very high yields are obtained in comparison to the amount of wood used, and the quality of the charcoal produced is uniform and of any specific quality desired.
FIGURE 14. - Diagrammatic sketch of Thomas' retort. Left, plan; right, method of operation.
FIGURE 15. - Cornell retort.
FIGURE 16. - Diagrammatic sketch of Cornell retort.
The Cornell retort is sold complete for less than $5,000. Both installation and operation are very simple. At many small sawmills, where batteries of these retorts have been installed, the slabwood is automatically cut into 30- to 40-centimeter (12- to 16-inch) lengths, carried outside by means of a conveyor belt and dropped into the top of the retorts throughout the day. Yield of slabs at most hardwood mills is from 0.5 to 0.75 cord per 1,000 board feet^7 of lumber produced. Consequently, one of these retorts can contain the coarse residues produced in the manufacture of about 3,000 board feet of lumber. Generally the practice is to fill all the retorts during the course of the working day, and then start the "burn" in the evening, when the mill proper closes down. The night watchman can easily give what little attention the retorts require, as the "burn" is completed, normally in six to eight hours, depending on the moisture content in the wood. Then the retorts
automatically shut down and are allowed to cool until the mill crew reports the next morning. Two or three men can unload the charcoal into drums in less than an hour and then go to their regular jobs or to packaging charcoal made some time previously and which is now completely cool. In this way a mill cutting 10,000 board feet of lumber per day can keep three of these retorts operating, obtaining upward of 2 tons of charcoal from its coarse mill residues, which may be salable at from $50 to $100 per ton.
^7 1,000 board feet = 83.3 cubic feet = 2.36 cubic meters.
At one operation in New York State, kiln-dried edgings and trim blocks from a furniture plant are being carbonized in a battery of four of these retorts and, instead of taking overnight, a "burn" is completed in about five hours (two hours for carbonization and three hours for cooling).
As is apparent in Figure 16, one of the unique features of the Cornell retort is that the gases are circulated in a reverse direction, down through the charge, by means of blowers. This means that there is a very short distance for these gases to travel between the bottom of the retort and the combustion chamber, and consequently little or no chance for cooling and condensation to take place. The volatile gases and tare burn almost completely in the combustion chamber, and thus little or no odor is produced by this retort during the combustion period. The hot gases circulated through the charge, moreover, are almost completely inert, and there is no deposition of tars on the wood or charcoal.
Operation of the oil burner is thermostatically controlled, and consumption of fuel oil is surprisingly low, particularly with dry wood and relatively high outside temperatures. Even with less favorable conditions, the cost of fuel oil at 20 cents a gallon rarely exceeds $2 per charge. This cost is more than counterbalanced by a yield of charcoal approximately 180 kilograms (400 pounds) greater than the same wood would yield in a kiln; at the equivalent of 2 cents a pound this results in an extra income of about $8.
When this increased yield per day is considered, the investment costs of these retorts are not excessively high. One of these retorts running on green slabwood at the rate of two charges per day, will produce about 1,450 kilograms (3,200 pounds) of high grade charcoal each 24 hours. With a retort cost of $4,500, this calls for an investment of about $140 for each 45 kilograms (100 pounds) daily yield of charcoal. A 9-cord cinder block kiln costing $1,000 will produce about 2,540 kilograms (5,600 pounds) of charcoal from slabwood each ten days. This works out at an approximate investment of $180 for each 45 kilograms (100 pounds) of charcoal produced daily.
Keil-Pfaudler retort
The third and largest of these new types of retorts is the Keil-Pfaudler, made by the Pfaudler-Permutit Company of Rochester, N. Y. This is illustrated in Figures 17 and 18. It has a 4.5 cord capacity, and costs in the neighborhood of $15,000, complete and ready to run. Yields are comparable to those in the Cornell retort, about 450 to 550 kilograms (1,000 to 1,200 pounds) of charcoal per cord of dense hardwood. Fuel consumption is also comparable, being about $5 per charge under relatively unfavorable conditions. Investment costs per 45 kilograms (100 pounds) of daily yield, therefore, work out to about $300, but this may be counterbalanced by low labor and maintenance costs. Stainless steel is used in the Keil-Pfaudler retort in places that might be subject to corrosion, and the whole structure, of course, is heavier and sturdier than that of the Cornell retort. Experience over a period of years will be required to give true comparative costs of producing charcoal in these
two competitive devices.
FIGURE 17. - Diagrammatic sketch of Keil-Pfaudler retort.
FIGURE 18. - Keil-Pfaudler retort in operation.
Retorts for sawdust, shavings and wood chips
Many attempts have been made to develop devices for the commercial production of charcoal from sawdust, shavings, and wood chips. Until recently the vertical Badger Stafford retorts^8 were the most successful of these devices, although their use was usually restricted to dry wood chips. Attempts to carbonize in this type of retort more finely divided material, or chips with a higher moisture content were not commercially successful.
^8 See FAO Forestry Occasional Paper 2 - Charcoal.
FIGURE 19. - Flow chart, fine wood residue carbonizer.
Recently, however, several carbonizing units have been developed using horizontal tubes fitted with screw propellers to feed the material to be carbonized through them. Some are now operating commercially with considerable success.
An outstanding example is the Thompsen retort developed by Svend Thompsen of Ontario, Canada. The initial stages of adaptation of this retort to commercial operation were reported in an article by Dargan and Smith.^9 A sketch of this retort is given here (Figure 19). In its commercial form the retort is constructed of brick and concrete, 9.4 meters long, 4.5 meters wide and 3.6 meters high (31.4 × 15 × 12 feet). A single metal tube with screw conveyor carries the finely divided wood residue to the entrance hopper, where it is distributed evenly to 13 parallel tubes that carry the material through the combustion chamber. These tubes drip the carbonized residue into a single exit tube in which steam is applied to cool the charcoal and partially activate it. This exit tube carries the charcoal to storage vats, or directly to a briquetting machine. The heat passes through ducts in the top of the Dutch oven to the upper heating chamber where the tubes are located.
^9DARGAN, E. E. and SMITH, W. H. in Forest Products Journal of Forest Products Research Society, Madison 5, Wisconsin. November 1958.
A wood fire started in the Dutch oven several hours prior to carbonization time raises the temperature in the upper chamber to 510º C (950º F), for carbonization of the wood. The volatile gases produced by the carbonization process are fed back into the Dutch oven to sustain this temperature, so that the whole operation becomes automatic without any supplementary source of heat.
Sawdust, bark, shavings, and pecan shells have been successfully carbonized. The material carbonized varied from approximately 5 to 150 percent moisture content.
The more humid the material, the longer is the period required for carbonization. For this reason the feed screws can be driven at varying speeds, to permit the successful carbonization of whatever type of material is being processed.
For most uses the finely divided carbonaceous material produced by this and similar processes must be briquetted to be readily salable. The output of the Thompsen unit, which is between 6 and 10 tons per eight-hour shift, is in close correspondence with a minimum size briquetting plant having a capacity of about one ton per hour.
Development and sales rights to this process, outside the State of North Carolina, have now been taken over by the Larus Brothers Tobacco Company of Richmond, Virginia, U.S.A., which is now operating a sizable unit of this type on a commercial scale on the outskirts of that city.
Briquetting charcoal
Since much charcoal is sold as briquettes, some prospective producers may be interested in the briquetting process. Charcoal briquettes are generally made by combining about 73 percent of crushed charcoal, 4 percent starch, and 23 percent water, by weight. This mixture is formed in a special machine into briquettes which are then dried in a heated chamber. Other binding agents have been used - such as bituminous material, waste pulpmill liquor, and even waste from a citrus cannery - but none have proved so satisfactory as starch.
Probably the minimum economic size of a briquetting plant is one producing 1 ton per hour, which is the capacity of one modern briquette-forming machine costing about $10,000. This, however, is only part of the equipment needed. Below is a list of the major items needed for such a plant together with their current (1963) prices as provided by a leading manufacturer in the United States.
The necessary site, buildings, and other expenses connected with the establishment of such a plant would undoubtedly bring the total cost to more than $150,000.
Cost of briquetting in such a minimum size plant is usually about $25 a ton. Briquettes usually sell for a price only a little higher than lump charcoal, but they are cheaper to handle, transport and store than lump charcoal, and there is less deterioration from handling.
In consequence, manufacturers whose plants are located a long distance from their markets generally briquette their charcoal, both to take advantage of these economies and also because buyers often prefer briquettes to lump charcoal.
Item:
US $
1. Paddle mixer
2. Two-shaft vertical fluxer
3. Charcoal mixture conveyor
4. Briquette press and feeder
5. Discharge conveyor
6. Briquette dryer
7. Hammermill
8. Syntron starch feeder
Price of items 1 through 8
Price of motors for items 1 through 8
In addition: charcoal-handling equipment, a surge bin, dry briquette handling equipment, and a dry briquette storage bin and a steel boiler, rated at 30 hp and 15 psig^10 will be needed, which will cost approximately
TOTAL COST OF EQUIPMENT
^10 psig = pounds per square inch gauge.
<section>8</section>
International work in forest economics
The Twelfth Congress of the International Union of Forestry Research Organizations (IUFRO) held at Oxford, U. K., in 1956, was handicapped in its discussion of international problems in forest economics by the difficulty of translating various terms into different languages. Section 31 of IUFRO therefore constituted an expert group to work out a uniform terminology and to develop a classification of accounts. Members of this group were K. ABETZ, Chairman (Federal Republic of Germany), J. BECKING (Netherlands), W. CORMACK (United Kingdom), E. MELZER (Federal Republic of Germany), E. SAARI (Finland), H. TROMP (Switzerland), R. VINEY (France), H. BRABÄNDER (Federal Republic of Germany) and J. LAMMI (FAO).
This group first dealt with basic terminology and drew up definitions of several important terms of accountancy in English, French and German. It then made a classification of costs according to object accounts and produced a trilingual classification of values of production in a forestry enterprise. A third undertaking was a classification of accounts for forestry enterprises: two proposals in German by H. Brabänder were approved.
In 1961, the expert group presented its results to the IUFRO Congress in Vienna, which approved them and recommended their wide distribution.
In March 1963 a FAO/ECE Working Party on Forest and Forest Products Statistics held a fourth meeting at Geneva. It considered the IUFRO work on the accounting structure for individual enterprises and made suggestions for further statistical work on capital formation at the national level. It recommended that more detailed consideration should be given to
(a) the definition of fixed capital formation in forestry, in the context of the European Program for Statistics of Fixed Capital Formation of the Conference of European Statisticians;
(b) the concept or concepts of fixed capital formation required for the needs of the forestry sector;
(c) the suitability of the IUFRO accounting system as a basis for estimating capital formation according to the concepts;
(d) the possibility of compiling comparable data on fixed capital formation in forestry on the basis of the accounting systems used by countries at present.
Among its other tasks, the FAO/ECE working party undertook to advise FAO on the structure of its next (1964) world forest inventory inquiry and on its present system of converting national forestry and forest products statistics to standard international units.
<section>9</section>
Pulp and paper prospects in Western Europe
This publication of 450 pages has been prepared by an FAO team headed by Arne Sundelin through a trust fund financed by trade associations and individual firms in Europe (Austria, Finland, France, Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and the United Kingdom) and other regions (Argentina, Canada, Chile and the United States of America).
PULP AND PAPER PROSPECTS IN WESTERN EUROPE
Western Europe, the study says, will have a potential export surplus of almost 2.8 million tons of paper and paperboard by 1965, this amount being the difference between normal manufacturing output and estimated requirements in western Europe. This figure is made up of 900,000 tons of newsprint, 70,000 tons of kraft (sulphate pulp) paper and paperboard, and 1.8 million tons of other paper and board grades.
Total needs for paper and paperboard in western Europe might rise from some 18.5 million tons in 1960 to 24 million in 1965, 30 million in 1970 and to almost 37 million tons in 1975: that is, an approximate doubling in the course of 15 years.
By 1975 there might be a regional shortage of raw materials to supply growing needs. The study concludes: "Western Europe is likely to become a net importer of fairly large and increasing quantities of pulp/paper and paperboard from other regions of the world."
Pulp and paper prospects in western Europe is available from Bayerischer Landwirtschaftsverlag G.m.b.H., 8 München 13, Lothstrasse 29, Germany, Fed. Rep., price US $9. A French edition will be available later in 1964 in mimeographed form from the Forestry and Forest Products Division, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Via delle Terme di Caracalla, Rome, Italy.
1963 YEARBOOK OF FOREST PRODUCTS STATISTICS
Contains, in addition to production, trade and trade flow statistics, figures on land and forest areas of the world and monetary exchange rates. In the introduction the highlights of the world production and trade in forest products are summarized, and in a short review the removals and the utilization of roundwood over the last decade have been analyzed. The appendixes contain definitions of terms and a set of conversion factors. Comparisons of removals, production, industrial roundwood utilization and trade balances are illustrated in four two-color charts.
Yearbook of forest products statistics, 1963 (Rome, December 1963), available in a trilingual edition from the Distribution and Sales Section, Food and Agriculture Organization, Via delle Terme di Caracalla, Rome, Italy, or from FAO sales agents in various countries.
Price: US $2.50.
