<title>Report of the Conference of FAO Thirteenth Session Rome, 20 November - 9 December 1965</title>
<section>1</section>
I. Corrigendum
Page 129 - Heading, instead of "GAMBIA - GAMBIE", please read:
GERMANY, FED. REP. - ALLEMAGNE, REP. FED. - ALEMANIA, REP. FED.
Page 161 - Insert in left hand margin the word "Advisers", above "Merrill M. BLEVINS" (fourth name from bottom of page).
Page 162 - Instead of "Congressional Advisers", read: "Advisers"; delete second "Advisers".
RAPPORT DE LA 136ème SESSION DE LA CONFERENCE
20 Novembre - 9 Décembre 1965
Rectificatif
Page 137 - Titre, au lieu de "GAMBIA - GAMBIE". lire:
GERMANY, FED. REP. - ALLEMAGNE, REP. FED. - ALEMANIA, REP. FED.
Page 169 - Insérer dans la marge de gauche la mention "Advisers", au-dessus de "Merrill M.
BLEVINS" (quatrième nom à compter du bas de la page).
Page 170 - Au lieu de "Congressional Advisers", lire: "Advisers"; supprimer le deuxième
"Advisers".
INFORME DEL 130 PERIODO DE SESIONES DE LA CONFERENCIA
20 noviembre - 9 diciembre 1965
Corrigendum
Página 137 - Titulo, en vez de "GAMBIA - GAMBIE", léase:
GERMANY, FED. REP. - ALLEMAGNE, REP. FED. - ALEMANIA, REP. FED.
Página 169 - Insertar en el margen izquierdo la palabra "Advisers", sobre "Merrill M. BLEVINS"
(cuarto nombre desde el final de la página).
Página 170 - En vez de "Congressional Advisers", léase: "Advisers"; omitir el segundo "Advisers".
<section>2</section>
II. Report thirteenth session of the conference, 20 November - 9 December 1965
A. The late Amir of Kuwait
B. The late dr. Philip V. Cardon
C. The late John F. Kennedy
D. In memoriam
E. McDougall memorial lecture
F. Twentieth, anniversary of FAO commemorative statements by heads of delegations
A. The late Amir of Kuwait
1. The Conference observed a minute of silence in memory of His Highness the Amir of Kuwait.
B. The late dr. Philip V. Cardon
2. The Conference paid tribute to the late Dr. Philip V. Cardon, who had served as the Director-General of FAO from February 1954 to April 1956. The Conference asked the United States Delegation to convey to Mrs. Cardon the condolences of the representatives of the Member Nations and Associate Members attending the Thirteenth Session who all wished to associate themselves with the tribute paid to Dr. Cardon.
C. The late John F. Kennedy
3. The Conference observed a minute of silence in memory of the second anniversary of the death of President Kennedy.
D. In memoriam
4. The Conference paid tribute to the staff members named below who died in the service of the Organization since the Twelfth Session of the Conference.
NAME
TITLE
DUTY STATION
Gin VERSO (Italy) Accounting Clerk Rome, Italy
Mrs. Elsa ALLARD-CLAESSON (Sweden) Research Assistant Rome, Italy
Abbas BAHADORI (Iran) Nutrition Officer Rome, Italy
Nolan BURNEY (USA) Driver Washington, USA
Willis ELLINGTON (USA) Economist Rome, Italy
Jacob M. FOGH (Denmark) Animal Health Officer Phnom Pen, Cambodia
Luciano GENTILE (Italy) Research Assistant Rome, Italy
Robert JEANNIN (France) Rural Institutions Officer Leopoldville, Congo
Mrs. Margherita JORDAN (USA.) Accounting and Purchasing Assistant Washington, U.S.A.
Norman G. LANSER (U.K.) Project Officer (WFP) Taipeh, Taiwan
Lorenzo LAPPONI (Italy) Chief, Office of Health and Medical Services Rome, Italy
Otis T. OSGOOD (U.S.A.) Technical Officer (Farm Management) Cairo, U.A.R.
Mrs. Minnie ROUSSIS-ROSSI (Greece) Clerk/Typist Rome, Italy
Dale L. SIMPSON (U.S.A.) Personnel Officer Rome, Italy
Edward WILLIAMS (U.K.) Field Service Officer Rome, Italy
Norman HOLMES (UK) Food Technologist Rome, Italy
John Albert REID (Chile) Clerk Santiago, Chile
E. McDougall memorial lecture
5. The fourth in the series of lectures given at regular Conference sessions in memory of Frank Lidgett McDougall, a father-founder of the Organization, was delivered by Professor Gunnar Myrdal of Sweden.
F. Twentieth, anniversary of FAO commemorative statements by heads of delegations
6. Mr. Ferrari Aggradi (Italy), Mr. Maiden (Australia), Mr. Pinto Santa Cruz (Chile) Mr. Cépède (France), Mr. Subramaniam (India), Mr. Preciado (Mexico), Mr. El Ghorfi (Morocco), Prince Alade Lamuye (Nigeria), Mr. Khurshid (Pakistan), Mr. Adeva (Philippine Republic), Mr. El Khishen (UAR), Mrs. Castle (United Kingdom), Mrs. Jacobson (United States of America) and Mr. Ingolic (Yugoslavia) addressed the opening meeting of the Conference on the occasion of the Twentieth Anniversary of the Organization.
<section>3</section>
III. Procedural matters
A. Appointment of chairman, vice-chairmen, general committeé and credentials committee
B. Agenda of the session
C. Arrangements for the session
D. Appointment of chairmen and vice-chairmen of commissions
E. Verification of credentials
F. Admission of observers
A. Appointment of chairman, vice-chairmen, general committeé and credentials committee
7. The Council and the Nominations Committee recommended, and the Conference approved the following appointments:
Chairman of the Conference
Maurice Sauvé (Canada)
Vice-Chairmen of the Conference
Juan Gil Preciado (Mexico)
Mohammed Khurshid (Pakistan)
J.K. Babiiha (Uganda)
Members of the General Committee
Chile
France
India
Malt
United Arab Republic
United Kingdom
United States of America
Members of the Credentials Committee
Burma
Finland
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Venezuela
Nigeria
Peru
Syria
Thailand
B. Agenda of the session
8. The Conference adopted the provisional agenda circulated by the Director-General on 10 July 1965 (C 65/1 -First Draft), as amended by the Council at its Forty-Fifth Session. The agenda as adopted is set out in Appendix A to this Report.
C. Arrangements for the session
9. The Conference adopted the Council's proposals in document C 6 5/2 - Rev. 1, Arrangements for the Thirteenth Session of the Conference. It established:
(a) A Commission on Program Trends and Policy Questions in Food and Agriculture (Commission I), to consider and report upon the Items contained in Part I of the agenda;
(b) A Commission on the Activities and Programs of the Organization (Commission II), to consider and report upon the items in Part II of the agenda; and
(c) A Commission on Constitutional and Administrative Matters, (Coin mission III), to take up all the constitutional, legal, financial and administrative matters listed in Part III of the agenda.
D. Appointment of chairmen and vice-chairmen of commissions
10. The Conference considered the nominations put forward by the Council in conformity with Rule VII of the General Rules of the Organization and appointed:
Maurice Gemayel (Lebanon), Chairman of Commission I
Antonio Correa do Lago (Brazil), Chairman of Commission II
Akalework Habtewold (Ethiopia), Chairman of Commission III
The Conference appointed C. F. Pennison (United Kingdom), Rapporteur on the work of the Technical Committees of the Conference, as proposed by the Council.
11. The Conference further took into consideration the proposals of the General Committee in accordance with Rule XIII of the General Rules of the Organization, and appointed:
A. C. B. Maiden (Australia) and N. Stefan (Romania)
Vice-Chairmen of Commission I
B. Mahadeva (Ceylon) and Wadie Habashi (Sudan)
Vice-Chairmen of Commission II
N. El Ghorfi (Morocco) and R. Gibb (United States of America)
Vice-Chairmen of Commission III
E. Verification of credentials
12. The credentials of delegations of 105 Member Nations and 4 Associate Members, including those of newly-admitted Member Nations and Associate Members, were found in order.
13. The credentials of the Delegation of the Holy See, Permanent Observer to FAO, were found satisfactory.
14. The names of the representatives of the international organizations attending the Conference, including the United Nations and Specialized Agencies, were duly deposited as prescribed by Rule III. 2 of the General Rules of the Organization.
15. A number of delegations had not however been furnished with valid credentials until late in the Session. The Conference accordingly urged Member Governments in future to comply with para. 2 of Rule III of the General Rules of the Organization, which requests that insofar as Possible credentials be dispatched to the Director-General not less than fifteen days before the opening of the Conference session.
F. Admission of observers
16. The Conference approved the attendance of Bulgaria in an observer capacity.
17. The Conference approved the list of international organizations to which the Director-General had extended a provisional invitation to send observers to this Session, and invited the representatives of such organizations to participate in the activities of the Conference in the capacity of observers.
<section>4</section>
IV. Major trends and policy questions in food and agriculture
A. World situation and outlook
B. Indicative world plan for agricultural development
C. World food program
D. Freedom from hunger campaign
E. Article XI reports.
A. World situation and outlook
Salient features in the world situation
Commodity problems
Relations between CCP and UNCTAD
1970 world census of agriculture and agricultural census fund
Salient features in the world situation
a) Twenty years of FAO
b) Agricultural production
c) International trade in agricultural products
d) Agriculture development in developing countries
e) Agricultural problems of developed countries
18. The Conference discussed the world food and agriculture situation in the light of the Director General's report on The State of Food and Agriculture 1965; Review of the Second Postwar Decade (C 65/4), together with the supplementary document Regent Developments in the World Food and Agriculture Situation (C 65 Sup. 1).
a) Twenty years of FAO
19. In reviewing the first twenty years of FAO's existence, the Conference was concerned at the slow progress of world agriculture toward achieving the objectives of the Organization. Some 10 to 15 percent of the world's population were still undernourished, and up to half suffered from undernourishment or malnutrition or both.
20. While the slow pace of progress was disappointing, the Conference noted that the immense task of conquering world hunger and malnutrition had been made still more difficult by the initial need to repair the devastation of war, and by the unprecedented and largely unforeseen population explosion in the developing countries that had dominated FAO's second decade. In these circumstances it was a real achievement that widespread famine had been largely eliminated with the help of surplus food from the more developed countries and that there had been some small improvement in the dietary levels of most developing countries, though mainly as a result of larger food imports or reduced exports.
21. For some time to come, population growth in the developing countries was likely to accelerate further, making the provision of a satisfactory diet for all mankind still more difficult. At the same time, however, the Conference considered that a number of factors gave grounds for hope. There had been an explosion in scientific knowledge as well as in population. Some rethinking of attitudes to population control was in process. Virtually all developing countries were adopting a measure of planning in a sustained effort toward faster economic development. Moreover, largely because of FAO's efforts, the world's conscience had been awakened to the gravity of the problems of food and agriculture, and to mankind's collective responsibility for achieving freedom from hunger.
22. The emphasis of FAO's work had changed in response to the evolution of the problems that had to be faced. From being primarily concerned with studies and advisory work, the Organization had become increasingly involved in operational activities in agriculture in the developing countries. It had Increasingly emphasized that technical measures alone were not enough to improve the agriculture of the developing countries, but must be supplemented by the provision of investment funds and credit to facilitate their adoption, and by the establishment of an agrarian structure which would give farmers the will and the incentives as well as the financial means and the technical knowledge to embark on more productive forms of agriculture. The Conference stressed that these trends in the Organization's work would need to be Intensified in the critical decade that was just beginning.
23. In commending the work of FAO during the first two decades, the Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution no. 1/65 - Twenty years of FAO
THE CONFERENCE
Considering the efforts deployed by all countries of the world, and in particular by the developing countries, for their own economic and social development and the need to pursue and intensify such efforts,
Recognizing that FAO has, over me past twenty years, made an important contribution supporting international co-operation and the efforts of the countries themselves in the field of food and agriculture,
Pays tribute to the Organization for its work, during these past twenty years, in the field of food and agriculture,
Expresses the conviction that it will continue to support the efforts of the countries engaged in the process of economic and social development and to strengthen international co-operation in the field of food and agriculture, and
Requests the Director-General to examine the possibility of formally recording this stage of progress by undertaking at a suitable time and in an appropriate manner, subject to the availability of funds, a comprehensive review of FAO's contribution in the past twenty years and of the tasks still ahead of it, and to give the review adequate circulation.
(Adopted 9. 12. 65)
b) Agricultural production
24. The rapid increase in production during the period of postwar recovery continued until 1958/59, when there was a large rise in world per caput production. Since then, however, per caput production both of food and of agricultural products as a whole had shown little change, and in the developing regions had receded slightly to about the prewar level. The Conference expressed its concern at the continued lag in per caput production in the developing countries
25. The limited data so far available on the current 1965/66 season suggested no Immediate improvement over the long years of relative stagnation in per caput production. Although there had been a substantial increase in production in North America, production had been affected by drought and other adverse weather in many places, including parts of Europe, the U.S.S.R., Australia, Argentina, India, and large areas of East and Southern Africa
26. In the developed regions per caput production had continued to increase during the last decade, and there were unsold stocks of many agricultural products in these regions, although their overall level, especially of wheat, had been slowly declining since 1961.
27. While appreciating the weaknesses of the statistics of some developing countries, the Conference noted that during the last decade the developing regions as a whole had succeeded in Increasing both their food and total agricultural production at an estimated rate of almost 3 percent a year, a rate comparable with that in the developed regions. Thus, the comparative stagnation of per caput production in the developing regions reflected the faster growth of their population as compared to that of the developed regions, more than the slower expansion of their agricultural production.
28. The Conference noted further that there had been wide differences in the performance of developing countries, and that in a number the rate of growth of agricultural production had significantly exceeded the low regional and world averages. This in itself was an encouraging sign, and the Conference noted that further studies on this matter were in progress.
29. It was clear that there was no fixed pattern for success in agricultural development. A good many of the countries showing the fastest rates of growth were however either countries of intermediate economic development, already approaching the take-off stage, or countries whose exports had rapidly increased. This suggested that a rapid growth of production was possible when there was a rapid growth of demand, whether on domestic or export markets. But although this was as essential prerequisite, It did not automatically lead to a rapid increase in production. Experience suggested that this was largely because deficiencies in the institutional structure tended to insulate farmers from the growth of demand, especially in towns. All too often the increased demand had had to be met by larger imports, including food aid. It was pointed out that if the demand for grain imports into the developing countries continued to grow at the rate of recent years, it would be likely to
exceed any foreseeable supplies. Rapidly increased production within the developing countries was therefore imperative.
c) International trade in agricultural products
30. The Conference noted that just as the developing countries' gains in agricultural production had been all but obliterated by population growth, their efforts to increase agricultural exports had, because of lower prices, brought them very little more in foreign exchange earnings. According to the comparisons in the 1965 State of food and agriculture of the averages for 1952-54 and 1962-64, these countries increased the volume of their agricultural exports by about 38 percent, but their total earnings from these exports rose by only 13 percent. In terms of their purchasing power for manufactures, the "real" earnings of the developing countries increased by only 5 percent, while their "real" earnings per head of their population actually declined by about 16 percent during the decade.
31. The developed countries taken as a group had done much better. Their earnings from commercial agricultural exports (excluding shipments under special terms) increased by 41 percent, three times as much as those of the developing countries, between 1952-54 and 1962-64. This was both because of a greater rise in volume, and of a much smaller fall in the prices of their agricultural exports compared with those of developing countries, since the fall in prices had been steepest for beverages and agricultural raw materials, commodities chiefly exported by the developing countries.
32. The Conference noted that while agricultural export prices had fallen almost continuously during the earlier part of the decade, there had been a temporary recovery between late 1962 and early 1964 which had taken average prices of agricultural products as a whole in 1964 to fully 10 percent above the 1962 level. The Index of prices of agricultural exports as a whole had been falling slowly since the beginning of 1964, but in the third quarter of 1935 they were still somewhat above the low levels of 1961 and 1962. For beverages and agricultural raw materials, however, the decline in prices had once again been steeper than for agricultural products as a whole, and the countries exporting these products had suffered a sharp drop in their agricultural export earnings. In 1965 prices of sugar and cocoa had reached their lowest postwar levels. Failing some radical change in world markets, before long almost all of the rise in prices registered in late 1962 and 1963 would have
been lost.
33. It was noted that any signs of a stronger market situation were for products exported chiefly by the developed countries, such as beef and grains. For wheat there had been large U. S. S. R. imports so far in 1965/66, and these had now been followed by further large Chinese purchases. World wheat stocks would be lower at the end of the 1965/66 season, and it was suggested by some delegates that the time might not be far distant when the "surplus" element in these stocks might largely have disappeared.
34. The Conference reiterated the need to reduce the instability and to halt the decline in world prices of agricultural commodities, both of which had serious effects on the economies of countries heavily dependent upon agricultural exports. For developing countries in particular the decline in world prices had meant that their earnings of foreign exchange were not rising at a rate commensurate with their development efforts.
35. Many delegates noted that agricultural exports continued to be hampered by tariff and nontariff barriers (including high tariffs on products in processed or semimanufactured form) in many industrialized countries, which remained the main import markets. Competition from synthetics and other substitutes was increasing and extending to new commodities. Export markets for many agricultural products tended to be oversupplied, in contrast to the situation of shortage in the domestic markets of many developing countries.
36. The Conference believed that better international co-ordination of production plans would help to bring greater stability in export markets. There was need for greater co-ordination between the policies of the developed and the developing countries, and also among the developing countries themselves, without which efforts at diversification might intensify the pressure of supplies and depress prices further. One of the contributions of the Indicative World Plan for Agricultural Development now in preparation in FAO, would be to provide a. basis for such co-ordination. The information on national development plans assembled annually in The State of Food and Agriculture was also useful in keeping countries informed of the policies and plans of other countries. Some delegations suggested that FAO should consider using, perhaps in a regional context and on the basis of the Article XI reports, the review and confrontation techniques employed by GATT and OECD.
37. The Conference stressed the important role that international commodity arrangements could play in improving conditions of world trade in agricultural commodities, and noted that the possibility of linking them with production policies and with food aid was being further explored.
38. The Conference proposed that further information should be gathered and studies made, in co-operation ion with other international agencies to avoid duplication, on the possibilities of Increasing trade among the developing countries themselves, on the degree of dependence of developing countries on food imports, on the policies of regional economic groupings, on the production and prices of synthetics, on national support policies and subsidies, and on customs duties for raw and processed products. It noted that work to these ends was already under way, and requested that Information on these subjects should be included in The State of Food and Agriculture
d) Agriculture development in developing countries
39. The Conference reaffirmed that, although food aid had proved invaluable in emergencies and would continue to be essential for many years to come, it could not provide a permanent solution to the problems of hunger and malnutrition in the developing countries. The only final solution lay in increasing production in the developing countries themselves. This was both because of the sheer magnitude of the Increased supplies needed and because until agricultural productivity could be increased their farm populations would be condemned to continued poverty.
40. Agriculture should play a much more dynamic role in the economic development of the developing countries. Its potential contribution to economic development, including Industrial development, was considerable. So far, however, It was in the agricultural sector that the United
Nations Development Decade had failed most signally.
41. In some countries the first development plans had put their main emphasis on industrialization, but most were now seeking a better balance between industry and agriculture, Including the production of food for domestic consumption. The experience of the last decade, suggested that the poor performance of agriculture stemmed largely from the economic and Institutional barriers that in many developing countries tended to segregate the farmer from the growth of demand in other sectors.
42. The Conference felt that there was an acute shortage in the developing countries of the agricultural inputs such as fertilizers, pesticides and farm implements needed to increase agriculture production.
43. The Conference stressed that, if more of the existing agricultural knowledge could be effectively applied, the production situation in developing countries would be greatly Improved. It was still necessary to expand practical research into tropical and subtropical agriculture, together with a greater exchange of research results between developing countries.
44. The application of modern techniques largely depended on efficient extension services, which should be concentrated at the farm level and closely linked with general rural education. It was important to change the mental attitudes of producers and to develop a new class of progressive farmers ready to depart from traditional practices. To this end, education in rural areas should be oriented toward the Improvement of agricultural production. Stress should be laid on the education of women in home economics and also on a wider basis in countries, including many in Africa, where they played a large part in agricultural production or marketing. (See also paras. 221 and 284.)
45. The Conference considered, however, that the lack of incentives was the main factor deterring primarily subsistence producers from increasing their production for the market. Price instability, and especially the sharp fall in prices Immediately after the harvest, unorganized markets, inequitable and outmoded systems of land tenure, no less than lack of credit or know-how, could take away most of the Incentive for farmers to increase their marketable surplus.
46. The Conference laid special stress on the key role of land reform in creating a favorable climate for increased production, and welcomed the forthcoming World Land Reform Conference now being organized by FAO and the United Nations. Effective measures of land reform involved many problems, notably Improved extension services, and facilities for farm credit, marketing and the supply of production requisites. For this purpose it was necessary to promote the rapid growth of farmers' organizations, especially co-operatives. It was also necessary to provide special training for the natural leaders who would emerge in these organizations. The newly Independent farmers should be given a high sense of personal responsibility, so that they did not come to depend on government officials in the same way as they had on the landlord.
47. Measures for the better use of underemployed rural manpower were of great importance in maximizing agriculture's contribution to economic development, and the Conference requested that the Director-General should organize a session for an exchange of views on suitable techniques. New labor-intensive technologies should be developed, so as to make better use of the underemployed manpower that was the only resource not in short supply.
48. The Conference drew attention to agriculture's role in industrialization. Not only was the processing of agricultural products a starting point for Industrialization, but a prosperous agriculture also provided an expanding market both for consumer goods and for a wide range of agricultural requisites, including fertilizers, pesticides, machinery and implements. In this connection the Conference welcomed the preparation of a study of agriculture and Industrialization for inclusion in the 1966 issue of The State of Food and Agriculture.
49. Among other measures, the Conference emphasized the need for marketing improvements, the prevention of waste through improved storage, and the provision of transport and other basic services, including general administration.
50. An important lesson of the past decade was the close interdependence of measures in such fields as price policy, marketing, credit, extension, and land reform. Because of shortages of finance and trained manpower, however, it was rarely possible for developing countries to apply all of these measures at once on a large enough scale. This pointed to the value of concentrating such measures in selected areas of high potential, as had been done in a number of countries.
51. Foreign financial and technical assistance, from both bilateral and multilateral sources, had a crucial role to play in the agricultural development of developing countries. Such aid could be more effective if there was a better co-ordination among the different sources supplying it. Some delegates suggested that more Information should be provided on bilateral aid to agriculture, e. g. in future issues of The State of Food and Agriculture.
52. The Conference expressed its concern at the growing burden of debt services of developing countries, which offset an increasingly large share of the foreign aid received. It welcomed the increased emphasis of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) on investment in the agricultural sector, and in particular the establishment of the FAO/IBRD Co-operative Programm. This program was already bearing fruit in the channeling of increased funds to agriculture. The provision of grants and of interest free loans by some countries was another step in the right direction.
53. The Conference considered that attention should be paid to new ways of transferring resources from developed to developing countries. For instance, once farmers in the developing countries began to adopt improved techniques there was a rapid increase in the demand for fertilizers and other inputs, and many countries had to expend substantial amounts of scarce foreign exchange to meet the increasing needs of farmers for these requisites. The Conference considered that the proposal for some form of international fund for fertilizers and other inputs merited careful study by the Director-General. It also called for more information on the trend of prices of fertilizers on world markets in relation to those of agricultural products. (See also para. 205.)
e) Agricultural problems of developed countries
54. The Conference recognized that the agricultural problems of developed countries were in many instances quite different from those of the developing countries. There were problems of market Instability; the basic dilemma of most industrialized countries remained however the inherent conflict between their efforts on the one hand to maintain farm Incomes in relation to these in other occupations, and on the other hand to keep production from outrunning the growth of demand as a result of Improved techniques aimed primarily at increasing efficiency. In the long run it was probable that the agricultural problems of the developed countries could be solved only by structural improvements and increased efficiency; these would entail further reductions in their farm populations, which, in contrast to those of the developing countries, had declined rapidly in absolute terms as well as relative to the total population during the past decade.
55. The Conference noted the flexibility of the new farm legislation in the United States of America, now on a four-year basis, which, while aiming at a further reduction in surplus stocks, made it possible for highly productive acres to be brought rapidly into production again if the need arose.
Commodity problems
a) The world commodity situation
b) Work of-the committee on commodity problems
c) Food aid and surplus utilization
d) Individual commodity matters
a) The world commodity situation
56. In reviewing the world commodity situation during 1964 and 1965, the Conference found that in general developments had been unfavorable. The price rise of 1963/64 had been short lived. For many commodities there had also been unsatisfactory growth in the volume of exports in 1964, particularly from developing countries, and the seriousness of this had been compounded by the renewed decline in their prices during 1965. Certain basic factors, which had been a source of concern for a number of years, appeared to have reasserted themselves and, as a result, many developing countries had been experiencing shortfalls in their export earnings from agricultural commodities relative to their expectations and economic development needs. Since the outlook showed little immediate prospect of a significant improvement in world commodity markets, the Conference viewed the situation with particular concern.
57. The Conference recognized that 1964-65 had been a period of particularly intense activity in the commodity field. International consultations both on general and specific commodity matters in the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and the commodity councils, as well as in FAO, had gone forward on a broad front. Much new thinking had been developed regarding approaches to commodity problems, including the consideration of broader types of commodity arrangements and agreements. The Conference noted in particular the discussions currently under way in UNCTAD on possibilities for introducing some international organization of commodity trade at remunerative prices, and the studies already undertaken or in course of preparation on possible financial measures alternative or supplementary to commodity stabilization schemes. The biennium had seen a wide recognition of the need for International commodity
arrangements not only to achieve agreement on prices and trade but to cover, in addition, national production policies, stockholding and utilization of surpluses. At the same time, an attempt was being made in GATT to bring concessions on national agricultural price and production policies into wider negotiations covering the whole field of trade. It had been generally agreed that in these negotiations reciprocal concessions from developing countries would not be required. Some delegates stressed the need to study the structural problems of agricultural production.
58. The Conference regretted that the international consultations on cocoa and sugar, commodities facing critical situations during 1964-65, had not so far reached the stage of concrete action, but noted that negotiations were to be further developed in 1966. It recognized that the incorporation of new ideas, for example, on the development role of commodity agreements as distinct from stabilization alone, required time to gain acceptance, while detailed study of their actual implications was also necessary. A step-by-step approach toward the attainment of the new objectives might prove successful.
59. Many delegations held the view that Member Governments of developed countries should discontinue differential tariffs and remove other barriers that protect their industries processing raw materials from the competition of manufactured and semimanufactured products of developing countries. Other delegates, while not denying the importance of this proposal, considered that action on this matter was outside the competence of FAO or that it was more appropriate to leave it to GATT or to UNCTAD.
b) Work of-the committee on commodity problems
60. The Conference reviewed the activities of the Committee on Commodity Problems (CCP) and its subsidiary bodies, and expressed its satisfaction at the work which had been accomplished. It felt the Committee had responded to the changing needs of governments and that, in general, Its activities were proceeding on the right lines and in accordance with its role as the Organization's main Instrument for consideration of problems and possible solutions in the agricultural commodity field.
61. CCP's annual review of the agricultural commodity situation and outlook was agreed to be an essential part of its activities, enabling commodity Issues and problems requiring the consideration of the Committee. Its subsidiary bodies and governments to be regularly identified and reviewed. CCP Is analysis of critical commodity situations as they arose was also a key task, and the further development of such analyses with more timely attention to deteriorating commodity situations was of great importance.
62. The Conference noted the analytical review of experience with international commodity arrangements in the postwar years which was being undertaken as a special study in the commodity field. It was felt by many delegates that this work would contribute to the development of more effective methods of international action on commodity problems; at the same time a search for new methods was needed.
63. CCP had continued to evaluate developments in national agricultural price stabilization and support policies, and to review thair Impact in terms of the FAO Guiding Principles on National Agricultural Price Stabilization and Support Policies. The Conference, while recognizing the complex nature of some of the questions connected with national stabilization and support policies, noted that they remained a key question in any examination problems of international trade in agricultural products. The factual analyses of such policies by CCP were of great value as a basis for International consultations on such matters.
64. On other broad aspects of CCP's work, the Conference made a number of suggestions as to particular lines of work which might be pursued, bearing other priorities to mind. The Conference felt that the new concepts and approaches that were being put forward with regard to commodity problems could usefully be taken into account by CCP in the development of its own work. Such new Ideas, after examination by CCP, might be valuable in any contribution which it might be able to make in due course to the international discussion of general principles of commodity arrangements. Some delegates felt that attempts should be Made in FAO commodity reviews, in the Indicative World Plan or in separate studies, to give factual information on the development of commodity trade relations between developed and developing countries. In this connection, attention should be given to current studies under way in GATT on the effects, particularly on less developed countries, of current obstacles
to trade; to the setting up of a permanent committee in UNCTAD on competition from synthetics and substitutes; and to the role of FAO in these areas. Some delegates felt that consideration might also be given to updating existing descriptive papers on the nature and scope of the work of CCP. It was also suggested that CCP might wish to review the frequency of its sessions, in view of the growing concern of Member Governments to find solutions for International commodity problems and of the need for more timely action.
c) Food aid and surplus utilization
65. Matters relating to food aid and to the utilization of agricultural surpluses had continued to be kept under review by CCP and its Consultative Subcommittee on Surplus Disposal in Washington. The Subcommittee had continued to supervise the observance of the FAO Principles on Surplus Disposal, and remained the basic intergovernmental forum for multilateral consultations on food aid and surplus problems.
66. The Subcommittee was continuing its work on "gray area" transactions, i.e., transactions which were neither fully commercial nor completely concessional, along the lines laid down by CCP. The Conference endorsed this field of study, noting the continuing concern of certain agricultural exporting countries that harmful interference to commercial trade patterns could result from transactions of this type. It stressed that an adequate analysis of the problems in the "gray area" could not be carried out without the full support of governments, especially with regard to the provision of detailed information requested by the Subcommittee.
67. The Conference also endorsed the work done by the Subcommittee in extending its operations to World Food Program projects. The Conference noted that attention had been given to the consultation period allowed to Interested third countries in given types of surplus disposal operations. While some problems concerning the brevity of the consultation period remained, the Conference anticipated that, given goodwill and a continuance of the readiness to co-operate shown by the main donor country, a satisfactory solution could be found.
68. The Conference took note of the Argentine Government's proposals for a World Food Fund. This matter had been dealt with by the Intergovernmental Committee of the World Food Program, which had referred it to its parent bodies. The Conference endorsed the action of the Council which had pointed out that a number of the Issues involved were of major Interest to FAO, and had requested the Director-General to examine the beat way in which a comprehensive study of them could be Initiated. The Conference stressed the importance of close co-operation in this work on the part of other bodies, such as the United Nations, GATT, IBRD and the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
d) Individual commodity matters
69. The Conference welcomed the decisions taken during the biennium 1964-65 to establish a new Study Group on Bananas and to widen the terms of reference of the former Study Group on Coconut and Coconut Products to include all oilseeds, oils and fats. With regard to the latter, the Conference noted that the new Group would concentrate Its attention on commodities exported mainly by developing countries, Le. copra and coconut oil, groundnuts and their oil, and palm and palm kernel oils.
70. The Conference also endorsed the activities of the other five CCP study groups - those on cocoa, citrus fruit, rice, grains, and jute, kenaf and allied fibers. All the groups continued to provide opportunities for the analysis of the economic problems affecting the commodities covered and the consideration of possible solutions. Reference was made to the role which study groups, particularly with regard to citrus and rice, could play as a multilateral forum for reviewing the impact on world trade of the trade policies of regional economic groups of countries. The initiative of the Study Group on Jute, Kenaf and Allied Fibers in developing Informal consultative arrangements on a multilateral basis was felt to be especially interesting as being a possible form of international co-operation which could be extended to other products. International consultations on tea had been initiated by CCP and resumed on hard fibers in the form of ad hoe intergovernmental conferences.
71. On other specific commodity matters, the Conference welcomed the continuing reviews of national policies being carried out e.g. for grains, rice and dairy products, and felt that similar reviews might be initiated for other groups of commodities, such as meat. On both meat and tobacco, the Conference felt that additional work should be carried out by FAO, both commodities being of particular importance to a number of agricultural exporting countries. In view of the wide range of agricultural commodities affected by the competition of synthetics and other substitutes, the Conference was pleased to note that this question would receive more attention in FAO. The Conference welcomed the role which FAO was playing, along with the International Coffee Organization and IBRD, in the tripartite study of diversification problems affecting coffee producers, and recommended that FAO continue this co-operation.
<section>5</section>
Relations between CCP and UNCTAD
72. The Conference took note of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development held in Geneva in 1964. It welcomed the subsequent establishment of UNCTAD as a new institution in which the functions of the United Nations in the field of trade and development had been strengthened and concentrated. With the setting up by UNCTAD of a Board with a wide structure of subsidiary bodies, including a Committee on Commodities, the Conference recognized that a new force was now being brought to bear on international commodity problems. The Conference commended the Director-General for the action he had taken in pursuance of Resolution No. 1/63 of its Twelfth Session, in assisting in the preparation and servicing of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and for the co-operation extended in the follow-up action on the recommendations of that Conference.
73. The Conference noted the discussions which had taken place in the Committee on Commodity Problems and the Council on the future work of CCP and on the co-operation on commodity matters between FAO and UNCTAD. It generally concurred with the conclusions reached by CCP and the Council, and expressed satisfaction with the manner in which working relations had developed.
74. The Conference reaffirmed that FAO was the competent agency for agriculture within the United Nations family, and that work on agricultural commodity problems was an essential element in Its overall responsibilities. This work also constituted a foundation for other activities in the commodity field within the United Nations family, and in other international bodies, and for preparatory work on International commodity agreements. The well established lines of work of CCP should therefore be continued. The Conference agreed that the functions and work of CCP and UNCTAD bodies were complementary and that CCP and its subsidiary bodies could contribute effectively to the policy-making tasks of UNCTAD and its Committee on Commodities, by making available Its specialized knowledge and experience on agricultural matters. The Conference expressed the hope that this co-operation would be continued and strengthened further, with a view to avoiding duplication of effort and
ensuring the best use of the resources available to the two organizations.
75. The Conference noted that the Committee on Commodities had expressed in its guidelines its intention to rely as far as possible on the assistance of other international bodies competent in the commodity field in carrying out its program of work. Thus, the pattern of fruitful co-operation between FAO and UNCTAD which had been developed at the secretariat level was being extended and confirmed at the intergovernmental level. The Conference stressed that CCP and its Secretariat should respond as fully as possible to the UNCTAD requests for co operation, re-orienting its work where necessary to take account of the requirements of UNCTAD and of the new concepts that were emerging, aimed at linking trade expansion with economic development.
76. The Conference noted that the UNCTAD Committee on Commodities had already Indicated certain specific areas in which it sought the co-operation of FAO. These Included, for instance, work for the UNCTAD commodity survey, including the Identification of the commodities requiring urgent attention by governments; on the study of problems raised by the competition of synthetics and other substitutes; and on the studies on the International organization of commodity trade.
77. The preliminary work being undertaken in UNCTAD toward the drafting of a General Agreement on Commodity Arrangements was a field of great interest for CCP in view of the experience it had acquired in the course of years of work on commodity arrangements. Some delegates felt that the views of CCP might be of assistance in the preparation of a General Agreement. The possible usefulness of a joint session between CCP and the UNCTAD Committee on Commodities at the final stage of this work might be considered.
78. The Conference agreed with the Council that It would be useful If arrangements could be made for the Chairman of CCP and the Chairman of the FAO Study Groups to participate on occasion in the relevant deliberations of UNCTAD on agricultural commodity questions.
79. The Conference agreed with CCP's request to the Director-General to draw the attention of the Secretary- General of UNCTAD to Its view that, given FAO's primary responsibility for agriculture, It was desirable that proposals for the establishment of new study groups on agricultural commodities should be referred to CCP. Some delegates suggested that CCP might re-examine Its criteria for the establishment of commodity study groups in the light of the new development approach to international commodity arrangements.
80. The Conference noted the work being carried out by UNCTAD on the international organization of commodity trade, and adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 2/65
Organization of World Agricultural Commodity Markets
THE CONFERENCE
Recognizing that even the considerable aid given to developing countries by those more advanced is in Its present form not adequate to reverse the trend that is reducing part of the world to in ever more tragic condition of undernourishment,
Recognizing that past and present economic circumstances stimulate production in developed countries whereas It should be stimulated chiefly in the developing countries where the shortages lie,
Convinced that freedom of trade between unequally developed countries would augment the existing inequality because the emerging countries are handicapped by high production costs resulting mainly from their low levels of productivity, by competition from synthetics and by the support given to agricultural production in many developed countries
Knowing that the developing countries will not be able to supply the ever growing food requirements of their peoples or provide the financing for their own economic and social development except by Increasing their production and by a reversal of the present terms of trade,
Feeling, moreover, that the effort to diversify production, which is essential for bringing world production into harmony, should not be demanded solely from developing countries,
Invites the Director-General, taking into consideration the respective responsibilities of FAO and UNCTAD as well as the co-operative relationship between the two bodies to:
(a) give more attention to studies of the structure of production costs of agricultural commodities Important in International trade;
(b) give more attention to studies relevant to the formulation of a policy for the worldwide organization of markets, which would provide developing countries with outlets for their products in such volume and at such prices as will give them Incentives for increasing production, and export earnings commensurate with their needs, and also give producers remunerative returns;
(c) explore with the governments of developed countries whose national economies are not dependent upon a restricted range of products that enter into competition with the products of the developing countries, the possibility of their undertaking a study to seek ways of reconverting those sectors of their economy that compete with the vital production activities of developing countries taking into account the various constraints Involved, as appraised by them.
(Adopted 9. 12. 65)
1970 world census of agriculture and agricultural census fund
81. The Conference noted that the Program for the 1970 World Census of Agriculture had been advanced by two years in comparison with the 1960 Program, in accordance with the directives of the Eleventh and Twelfth Sessions. The Conference approved the distribution of the Program to Member and Non-Member Governments and considered that in further programming work particular attention should be given to the co-ordination of Sections 4 and 5 of the FAO Census Program with the preparatory work for the 1970 World Population Census.
82. The Conference noted that more than thirty Member Nations did not participate in the 1960 World Census of Agriculture, and felt that special efforts would be required to achieve full participation in the 1970 Census. The Conference further stressed the great importance of adequate publicity for the Census, so as to avoid any misunderstanding of the purpose. It endorsed the preparation of publications on the importance of the Census and on the methodology of census-taking, and suggested that an additional publication be issued advising governments on procedures for checking the validity of the census results. It also endorsed the other measures for census promotion, including the appointment of regional census advisers, training of census -staff, both at high and intermediate levels, as well as the provision of census experts to countries requesting such assistance.
83. The Conference felt that, in addition to the training centre for senior technicians, there should be five regional training centers for professional census staff, in view of the differing conditions in the regions and that, notwithstanding the negative response from the Special Fund in the past, special efforts should be made to obtain its approval to finance the centers in view of the over-riding Importance of training for censuses.
84. The Conference noted that the African region faced special difficulties due to shortage of trained staff, peculiar field conditions and paucity of transport, processing and other equipment, and therefore requested the Director-General to prepare a special program for promoting the Census in the countries of the region.
85. The Twelfth Session of the Conference, by Resolution No. 20/63, had requested the Director-General to explore, in consultation with Member Nations, the possibility of creating an Agricultural Census Fund by means of which It would be possible to give financial aid to such countries as required it, in order to carry out agricultural censuses and to report to the Thirteenth Session of the Conference. A Working Party appointed by the Council had made various recommendations on the subject which were approved by the Forty-Fourth Session of the Council for submission to the Conference. The Conference considered the major recommendations from the Working Party as summarized in document C 65/16.
86. The Conference felt that the assistance available from the Expanded Program of Technical Assistance, the Special Fund, and from bilateral sources, was not sufficient to ensure participation of all Member Nations in the 1970 World Census of Agriculture.
87. The Preliminary Report on the Needs of Developing Countries in Relation to the 1970 World Census of Agriculture, which the Director-General had brought to the attention of the Member Governments, had supplied ample evidence that the lack of material resources, particularly those requiring foreign currency, was a major obstacle to the carrying out of the Census in many developing countries. The Conference was deeply concerned about this situation and considered various measures to overcome the difficulties.
88. Most delegates felt that the creation of an Agricultural Census Fund would contribute substantially to channeling more material aid for census-taking to developing countries, especially now that no grant such as that from the Ford Foundation received in 1960, was yet forthcoming. The Conference noted with appreciation that some delegations had already pledged contributions to the Fund, particularly concerning transport, equipment training of personnel and services of census experts. At the same time some delegates bad some reservations with regard to the creation of the Fund, and Indicated that their principal assistance to the Census would be through their present bilateral arrangements. The United States of America proposed the use of counterpart funds available under Its Public Law 480 Program for census activities in the recipient countries.
89. The Conference also noted that food aid, whether from bilateral or multilateral sources, could, if used with some flexibility, be a means of helping countries in paying, partially, the salaries of the enumerators. Some delegates suggested that food aid could also be used to purchase some of the needed equipment. The Conference requested the Director-General to explore the matter further.
90. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 3/65
1970 World Census of Agriculture
THE CONFERENCE
Recalling the recommendation of the Eleventh Session of the FAO Conference that preparations for the 1.970 World Census of Agriculture should be promptly started, and Resolution No. 20/63 of the Twelfth Session regarding the creation of an Agricultural Census Fund,
Recalling, also, that the Director-General consulted the FAO Council on the basis of the Report of the Working Party on the Census Fund,
Noting the Program for the 1970 World Census of Agriculture, as finally completed by the Statistics Advisory Committee;
Approves the distribution of that Program among both Member Nations of the Organization and Non-Members;
Emphasizes the role and the importance of agricultural censuses in development planning and in Improving current agricultural statistics; that many of the developing countries will be unable to conduct an agricultural census in 1970 without appropriate material aid and technical assistance;
Requests the Director-General to use all possible resources to:
(a) establish, in accordance with Regulation 6.7 of the Financial Regulations, a Voluntary Agricultural Census Fund;
(b) set up, in accordance with para. 2 of Article VI of Vie Constitution, a committee of selected Member Nations and Associate Members designated by the Director-General to advise him on the operation and administration of the Fund;
(c) make every effort to achieve the closest possible co-operation between bilateral and multilateral assistance for the agricultural census, in accordance with the principles laid down in paras. 378 to 381 of this Report (Co-operation between Multilateral and Bilateral Aid Programs);
(d) organize training centers for senior and other professional census staff;
(e) arrange for the processing of the census data by computer- equipped international centers;
Further request the Director-General to include within the Program of Work and Budget for 1968-69 the establishment of a Special Program for Promoting the 1970 Census in Africa;
Recommends that Member Nations promptly start their plans for participating in the 1970 World Census of Agriculture;
Urges governments of developing countries to:
(a) give high priority to needs arising in connection with the World Census of Agriculture when formulating their requests for technical assistance;
(b) utilize all available assistance in order to conduct the Census, including both the Voluntary Agricultural Census Fund, once established, and food aid;
Suggests that all governments, and especially governments of developed countries, make their pledges for contributions in cash or in kind to this Fund;
Invites the governing body of the United Nations Development Programme to provide assistance to countries in their planning and conduct of the Census and processing of the data, as a matter of immediate concern.
(Adopted 9.12.65)
B. Indicative world plan for agricultural development
91. The Conference considered document C 65/17 and the introductory statement of the Director General on the Indicative World Plan for Agricultural Development. The Conference endorsed the concept and objectives of the Plan. The elaboration of such a Plan was timely in the light of the situation facing developing and developed countries alike.
92. The Indicative Plan should provide:
(a) A focus for the activities of FAO.
(b) An international frame of reference which would help governments to formulate and implement their agricultural policies.
(c) A useful basis for attempting to reconcile the conflicts of production and trade policies between countries.
(d) Guidance to both recipient and donor countries and organizations with respect to international aid.
93. The Conference endorsed the broad approach proposed by the Director-General for elaborating the Indicative World Plan, but stressed that it was a tremendous and extremely complex undertaking which would make heavy demands upon the staff of the Organization. It emphasized therefore that the work which could be achieved during the next two years should be regarded only as a first stage in a long term task. The Plan, like all other plans, even after it had been completed would be subject to periodic revision in the light of developments, and as more information became available.
94. The Conference placed special emphasis on the following broad aspects of the Plan:
(a) The preparation of the Plan must be closely interwoven with the activities of the entire Organization, bringing into play the accumulated knowledge and expertise to be found in all sectors of FAO both at Headquarters and in the field, At the same time, there was need to ensure that there was a strong central team and adequate staff to integrate effectively the contributions from the many spheres of competence involved into the regional studies and the overall World Plan.
(b) An Indicative Plan for agriculture must be elaborated within the framework of overall economic development. It was therefore necessary to collaborate closely with a large number of other international, regional and also national bodies working in various aspects of the field of development planning. The Conference noted that some progress had already been made in this respect.
(c) The success of the Plan will depend upon the positive support of Member Governments. For this purpose, it was essential that all Member Governments be associated as far as possible in the preparation of the Plan. The Conference proposed that some mechanism for consultation, practicable and flexible, should be established for this purpose. It noted the offers of a number of governments to make available the results of special studies and/or to place at the disposal of the Organization the services of national planning bodies, including the possibility of temporary secondment of staff. It also noted with satisfaction the intention of the Director-General to organize consultations with the countries concerned at an appropriate stage in the preparation of indicative studies for the various subregions. To ensure the confidence of governments and in order that the fullest use be made of the Plan, it was essential for full details of the basis on which estimates were made
to be available to Member Countries as soon as practicable,
(d) While the Plan must propose specific targets for production, consumption and trade of agricultural products, which would be consistent with general economic targets, the most important aspect of the Plan when It was finally prepared would consist in the indicative policies and measures required in the technical, economic, institutional and structural fields to achieve these targets. The main value of targets will be to provide a frame of reference within which adequate and appropriate trade and development policies and measures can be spelled out and their inter-relationships studied.
(e) Targets, and where appropriate also policies, should be presented in the Plan in terms of alternatives, in such a way as to bring out the significance of the choices that confront governments.
(f) The Plan should be realistic and practical. It should resist the temptation to set over-idealistic targets. On the other hand, it should not be merely a projection of present trends and policies, but should indicate objectives which would put the economies of developing countries and the world as a whole on a satisfactory course of development, including the achievement of satisfactory nutritional levels, provided that countries took the necessary measures to achieve these objectives.
(g) Where the specification of targets was to be based on assumptions with respect to the policies of governments, or where it is proposed to present policy alternatives, such judgements or policy proposals would be made by FAO in consultation with the governments concerned.
95. Many delegates emphasized that the Plan should concentrate on measures requiring international action and agreement among governments, as well as on measures which can be taken purely at the national level. in this *connection it should bring out clearly any inconsistencies between the policies of various governments, including those between developing and developed countries. Particular stress was laid by these delegates on the need for seeking policy solutions, even though they might be quite drastic, with regard to the basic difficulties facing developing countries in increasing their foreign exchange earnings from the export of food and agricultural raw materials, particularly in the processed form. Many delegates however, stressed that caution was needed in an exercise of this kind in order to avoid misunderstandings which could lead to frustration and disappointment.
96. The Conference noted that statistical and other information, particularly in developing countries, was very inadequate and in some cases almost completely lacking. This would inevitably place limitations on the Plan, and in some respects would influence the methodology. In particular, the inadequacy of the data would place limitations on the possibilities of using more refined techniques of analysis, and would indicate the need for care in interpreting the results. However, some problems and policy alternatives could be brought into focus even in the absence of accurate statistics. In any case, neither planning nor action by governments could wait upon the improvement of statistics which was necessarily a slow process. The Conference highlighted, however, the need for the Statistics Division, in collaboration with the user divisions, to clarify and ensure consistency in concepts and definitions, to co-ordinate requests for statistical data to governments and to provide
the best statistics available for the purposes of the Plan. It was recognized that the Indicative Plan would in itself constitute a powerful lever for the improvement of statistics, both at the international and the national level, since it would put the spotlight on the deficiencies and indicate the most urgent priorities. The same would apply to data needed in other fields for purposes of economic development such as information on natural resources and their response to technological improvements.
97. Attention was drawn by some delegations to uncertainties regarding such matters as rates of population and income growth, the existence of non-quantifiable factors particularly in the field of Institutions, and to the limitations of the methodology itself. No doubt this should be taken into account in interpreting the conclusions.
98. Attention was drawn to the problems involved in achieving a reconciliation between the geographical and the commodity approaches, and the problem of dealing adequately with competition between regions and countries when working at the subregional. and regional level in the early stages of the Plan. The Conference noted however, that simultaneously with the approach by geographical areas, the broad relations and the world picture would be developed in two ways: (a) through the long-term commodity projections to 1975 and 1985 which would be available by May 1966, and (b) the preparation of a world consistency model covering the main aggregates and relationships in economic growth, and referring to the key periods 1965, 1975, 1985. These would help to throw light on inter-regional relationships; in any case subregional and regional studies would need to be revised in 1967 in the light of the problems involved in putting together the world picture.
99. Many delegations raised the question of relationship between the Plan and the targets set in national plans. FAO should take due account of the objectives and targets of governments. It was also recognized that plans which might be appropriate from a purely national point of view could sometimes be inconsistent in relation to the plans of other governments. It was furthermore noted that very few governments had even perspective plans looking as far ahead as 1975, and especially 1985, and that the target dates in the Indicative World Plan would not therefore for the most part coincide with those in national plans.
100. The Conference agreed that full use should be made, for consultation, of the existing FAO machinery and in particular the Council, CCP and its subsidiary bodies as well as the regional conferences. It was suggested that both the subregional and commodity studies be circulated among Member Governments for their consideration and comments. It would be desirable that such comments be received prior to the following session of CCP or the Council, whichever came first.
101. Many delegations expressed concern at the short time available for the elaboration of the first draft of the Plan by the end of 1967. Some delegations were concerned that this might have an adverse impact on some of the other activities of the Organization. Some were also concerned that the Plan itself might suffer through an attempt to adhere rigidly to the proposed timetable. The Conference took due note, however, of the Director-General's assurance that the preparation of the Indicative Plan will not mean sacrificing other aspects of the Program of Work. It also noted the Director-General's view that the new sense of purpose given to these manifold activities, in answering the inter-related problems which the Indicative Plan will raise, will heighten their effectiveness.
102. Note was taken of the Director-General Is question as to whether Member Governments would consider providing extra-budgetary ad hoc financial contributions, up to an amount of $1. 5 million, to strengthen and accelerate the pace of the work. Assurance was given that within the present limits of funds available, work would be carried out in such a way as to have a coherent presentation of the Indicative World Plan for Agricultural Development in time for the Second World Food Congress. It would certainly be possible, however, to go more deeply into many aspects, and perhaps treat some aspects that would otherwise need to be neglected, if voluntary contributions were received under the Freedom from Hunger Campaign, which provided for such contributions to the Trust Fund for special purposes. Assistance in kind, as already offered by a number of governments, would of course make an important contribution, as well as voluntary contributions in cash which might be available
from non-governmental sources. Such contributions might be used for contracting out specific aspects of the work, for undertaking special studies in particular countries or for employing additional consultants. The Conference recognized that it would be most useful if additional funds from voluntary sources, Member Governments and foundations, could be available to the Director-General in 1966 and 1967 to undertake under the Indicative Plan tasks which would not otherwise be possible. It was assured that any additional financial resources that might be available would not be used in such a way as to create permanent appointments or to incur any liabilities on the budget for future biennia.
103. The Conference recognized that the proposal for an Indicative World Plan for Agricultural Development had first come from the World Food Congress, and that this body had requested that the Director-General place such an analysis before the Second World Food Congress, which was nag due to be held in 1968. The Twelfth Session of the Conference had endorsed this request. While concurring with this procedure, the Conference drew attention to the fact that the World Food Congress would not constitute a body competent to pass judgement upon the Indicative Plan, nor would it be proper that the World Food Congress should place the seal of approval on the Plan in any sense that could be considered as binding on FAO. Nevertheless it was recognized that the Indicative World Plan would provide a most valuable practical focus for the discussions of the World Food Congress.
104. The Conference was in full agreement with the Director-General that "it will be for the Conference, with such amendments and modifications as it may wish to make, to give the Plan its status and authority." It requested the Director-General to present a progress report on the provisional conclusions of the Plan to the Fourteenth Session of the Conference. It noted that later information would be available to the mid-1968 Session of the Council, and that a full discussion on the Plan by the Conference would be possible only in 1969.
<section>6</section>
C. World food program
105. The Conference considered the future of the World Food Program (WFP) on the basis of reports submitted by the Council (C 65/29 and C 65/LIM/32), the Intergovernmental Committee of the Program (C 65/29), the Secretary- General of the United Nations and the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization jointly (C 65/10 and C 65/10 Corr, 1) and the Executive Director of the Program (C 65/10, Appendix). The Conference also had before it the text of Resolution 1080 (XXXIX) on the continuation of the World Food Program, adopted by the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations (ECOSOC). Copies of an amendment to the draft resolution recommended by the Economic and Social Council to the General Assembly of the United Nations, which had been submitted by Argentina to the General Assembly for approval, were circulated at the request of the Argentine Delegation for the information of the Conference.
106. The Conference considered that the experimental World Food Program had proved to be a success. Multilateral food aid should become part of the regular activities of the United Nations family, complementing the other types of assistance already provided by established agencies and programs.
107. While the World Food Program had its origins both in the need for food aid and in various initiatives to find constructive uses for agricultural commodity surpluses, the Program now involved much more than the mere utilization of surplus foods. While it was possible to discern a trend toward the reduction of world surpluses, the need for food aid on the contrary was increasing. The Program had revealed new ways of using food as development capital, and had enabled governments to start undertakings which might not otherwise have been feasible.
108. Some delegates suggested that food aid needs might be considered by the governments of donor countries when they were setting their national production targets; this should not, however, encourage uneconomic production. It was suggested by several delegates that the effectiveness of WFP food aid could be enhanced by linking it with projects in the national development plans of recipient countries.
109. The Conference appreciated that the commodity composition so far available to the World Food Program, while it included Items not among the traditional surplus products, nevertheless was still less than Ideal for meeting the basic needs of many developing countries. Certain commodities, notably high protein foods and rice, were not available in sufficient quantities to satisfy requirements. This was clearly a question which should receive increasing attention in the years ahead. One solution suggested by some delegations was the partial exchange of WFP commodities for other items needed by project beneficiaries.
110. The Conference noted that, insofar as the Program in future had resources available for the purchase of foodstuff a to provide a more balanced diet, such purchases would be made, as far as was possible and economic, from those developing countries which were exporters of food and were seeking to expand food exports. The Program would thus benefit both food deficient developing countries and food-exporting developing countries as envisaged by Recommendation A. II.6 of the Final Act of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development.
111. The Conference also recognized that one of the effects of the Program's operations had been, and should continue to be, to increase consumption of food commodities in low-income countries.
112. Food aid was only an Interim solution to the food problems of the developing areas; the basic answer to these problems lay in an increase in local food production. The Conference therefore emphasized the particular importance of WFP projects aimed at increasing agricultural productivity. In all projects, of whatever type, due safeguards - as provided by the FAO Principles of Surplus Disposal - must be applied to ensure that WFP aid did not discourage local producers in recipient countries or disrupt international trade. The Conference also laid stress on the need for adequate attention to the physical arrangements for the handling, storage.. transport and distribution of WFP commodities in recipient areas.
113. A number of delegates described the role of WFP emergency operations or development projects in their countries, and expressed the gratitude of their governments to donor nations and to the World Food Program. In some cases, WFP aid had led to the introduction of new ideas for integrating related schemes designed to increase food production.
114. The Conference recognized that most WFP projects had become operational only in the second half of the experimental period, so that evaluation in depth of the impact and effectiveness even of selected projects bad not yet been possible; great importance was, however, attached by many delegations to such an appraisal being made at the earliest possible stage.
115. The Conference accepted the proposed targets of $275 million for voluntary contributions for the period 1966-1968, and 33 percent for the proportion in cash and services. Many delegations stated that their governments would announce contributions at the forthcoming Pledging Conference, and in some cases gave advance indications of the level at which they would contribute. The Executive Director reported that the flow of requests for WFP assistance had already reached such proportions that, if the target were fully met, it was likely that all resources available for projects could be committed.
116. Many delegations referred to the Argentine proposal for amending the draft resolution on the continuation of the World Food Program submitted by ECOSOC to the General Assembly of the United Nations. While sympathy was expressed by a number of delegations for the substance of the Argentine proposals, the Conference felt that the basic character of the Program should be maintained, and that, therefore it was of fundamental importance for the satisfactory conduct of the Program that the same decisions be reached by its two parent organizations, the United Nations and FAO, which meant that the introduction of substantive changes at this point by either body should be avoided. The resolutions as recommended by ECOSOC and the FAO Council to the General Assembly and the FAO Conference respectively had the same operative provisions, and it was highly desirable that this harmony should be maintained. The Argentine proposals had raised new issues which, although admittedly
Important, went beyond the scope of the World Food Program. These Issues should form the subject matter of a separate study, for which indeed action had already been recommended by the Committee on Commodity Problems and requested of the Director-General by the FAO Council; these matters were being considered by the Conference under item 6 of its agenda (see para. 68).
117. The Conference felt that, although the experimental period in a formal sense was now coming to an end, further experimentation by the World Food Program was still desirable. As an example, sets of linked projects, or projects covering an entire economic sector or region of a country, were suggested. Reference was made by many delegations to the "program approach" for the provision. of food aid under overall development plans. Most delegates felt that the present emphasis in the World Food Program on using commodities to support projects should be maintained, and that any decision by the Intergovernmental Committee (IGC) on a program approach should not be taken until a thorough study had been made of its implications. In this connection, the Conference noted that the IGC had requested the Executive Director to carry out a detailed factual study on the basis of full co-operation with a specific country, and that this study had already been initiated in Jamaica.
118. The Conference was gratified to learn of the support given to the Program by other agencies as well as by nongovernmental organizations, and expressed the hope that this co-operation would be strengthened still further.
119. The Conference Adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 4/65
Continuation of the World Food Program
THE CONFERENCE
Conscious of the vast and growing needs of the peoples of the developing countries, of the pressing requirement for assistance in their economic and social development, and of the suffering caused by hunger and malnutrition;
Recalling General Assembly Resolutions 1496 (XV) of 27 October 1960 and 1714 (XVI) of 19 December 1961 and FAO Conference Resolution No. 1/61 of 24 November 1961 concerning the establishment of an experimental World Food Program,
Having considered the report of the Intergovernmental Committee on the future of the World Food Program as transmitted by the Council,
Having studied the report of the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization on the future development of the Program (document C 65/10) as well as the report of the Executive Director of the World Food Program (document C 65/10, Appendix),
Having considered the results obtained by the Program during Its initial phase and the contribution which it Is making toward achieving the goals of the United Nations Development Decade and of the FAO Freedom from Hunger Campaign,
Taking note with satisfaction of the contributions of foodstuffs, money and services already made by Member States of the United Nations and Member Nations and Associate Members of FAO, as well as the co-operation of recipient countries in the elaboration and implementation of development projects, in which for the first time food aid is being utilized for development in a multilateral framework,
Recognizing the potentialities of this Program, in which the United Nations and FAO have co-operated through the joint UN/FAO Administrative Unit,
Appreciating the co-operation and assistance extended to the Program by the interested Specialized Agencies and operating programs of the United Nations, and by a number of other intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations, and
Having considered Resolution 1080 (XXXIX) of the Economic and Social Council and Resolution No. 3/44 of the FAO Council:
1. Decides to extend the UN/FAO World Food Program, established in virtue of General Assembly Resolution 1714 (XVI) and FAO Conference Resolution No. 1/61, on a continuing basis for as long as multilateral food aid is found feasible and desirable, on the understanding that the Program will be regularly reviewed before each pledging conference and that if circumstances so require it may be enlarged, curtailed or terminated at the end of any period for which resources have been pledged;
2. Established for the three years 1966, 1967 and 1968 a target for voluntary contributions of $275 million, of which not less than 33 percent should be in cash and services, and urges Member States of the United Nations and Member Nations and Associate Members of the Food and Agriculture Organization to make every effort to ensure the early attainment of the target
3. Requests the Secretary -General in co-operation with the Director-General of FAO to convene a pledging conference at United Nations Headquarters as soon as feasible,
4. Decides that the next following pledging conference, subject to the review provided for in paragraph 1 above, should be convened in 1967, at which time governments would be Invited to pledge contributions for 1969 and 1970, with a view to reaching such target as may be recommended by the General Assembly and the FAO Conference;
5. Reaffirms its previous decision to the effect that the UN/FAO Intergovernmental Committee of the World Food Program shall comprise 24 Nations Members of FAO or the United Nations, 12 of these Members to be elected by the Economic and Social Council and 12 Members by the FAO Council, It being understood that outgoing Members shall be eligible for re-election.
6. Requests the Economic and Social Council and the FAO Council as soon as possible after the adoption of this resolution by the General Assembly and the FAO Conference to elect twelve Members each, four Members each for a term of one year, four Members each for a term of two years, four Members each for a term of three years;
7. Decide that thereafter all the members of the Intergovernmental Committee shall be elected for a term of three years and requests the Economic and Social Council and the FAO Council to make such provisions as will ensure that the terms of office of four members elected by the two Councils respectively shall expire in each calendar year;
8. Further requests the Economic and Social Council and the FAO Council when electing members of the Intergovernmental Committee to take into account the need for balanced representation of economically developed and developing countries and other relevant factors such as the representation of potential participating countries, both contributing and recipient, equitable geographical distribution and the representation of both developed and developing countries having commercial Interests in international trade in foodstuff 8, especially those highly dependent on such trade
9. Requests a review of the General Regulations of the Program in the light of the present resolution and calls upon the Economic and Social Council and the FAO Council to take appropriate action thereon.
(Adopted 6.12. 65)
D. Freedom from hunger campaign
Report on results achieved and future orientation of the campaign
Plans for the second world food congress
International rice year
Report on results achieved and future orientation of the campaign
a) National FFHC committees
b) Information
c) Action program
d) Young world mobilization appeal
e) Industry co-operation
120. The Conference considered the progress of the Freedom from Hunger Campaign (FFHC) as outlined in documents C 65/18, C 65/18 Add. 1, C 65/LIM,/1, and C 65/36. It also noted the Report and Recommendations of the Second Freedom from Hunger Campaign Conference, held at FAO Headquarters on 17 - 20 November 1965 (document C 65/LIM,/42). It also had before it the Director-General's preliminary plans for the Second World Food Congress, C 65/19.
121. The Conference welcomed the Director-General's report and introductory statement, including both their presentation of the progress of the Campaign to date and the suggestions on the future orientation of the Campaign. Many delegations commented on the Second FFHC Conference which was generally agreed as having been an important gathering and an Improvement on the First FFHC Conference. General support was expressed for the holding of regional FFHC conferences to enable National FFHC Committees within the region to discuss problems of mutual concern and to exchange information and experiences. It was on the other hand suggested that regional co-operation may be achieved by including in delegations to FAO regional conferences members of the FFHC Committees. The Conference grave general support to the Director-General's proposal to appoint three additional regional liaison officers as it was felt that they would be of value to assist National Committees and strengthen
regional co-operation.
a) National FFHC committees
122. It was pointed out that one quarter of FAO Member Nations still had not established National FFHC Committees, and the Conference asked that action should be taken to correct this situation. While the value of effective National Committees was fully endorsed it was stressed that the approach to the development of effective National Committees must be on a country-by-country basis, and that each must be helped to adapt its structure according to local needs, and based on local situations. The Conference agreed that regional liaison officers would be most valuable in this field of activity, provided that their work was concentrated, in the first instance, on those countries which were making concerted efforts to develop the work of their Committees.
123. Most delegations paid tribute to the value of National Committees in both developed and developing countries in Informing their people about the problems of hunger and malnutrition, thus leading to constructive action. One delegation explained that a national foundation had been established and with government support had been given tax exemption both for donations received and for local private investment in agricultural development projects. Considerable emphasis was laid on the ability of local populations to develop effective action, provided they had the leadership of a National Committee. Some delegates suggested that Committee activities should be particularly directed toward training schemes and educational programs designed to stimulate action among their own people. The Conference agreed that the Inter-relationship between National Committees and FAO in the International Campaign was of the greatest Importance, as It served- to demonstrate that local actions
were also part of a world-wide activity.
b) Information
124. The Conference laid stress on the Importance of continuing to provide information about the problems of hunger in order to promote public action, but at the same time emphasized the importance of Including in the information program case histories of successful programs designed to promote further action. The Conference agreed that the Campaign had succeeded to a considerable extent in arousing world opinion and expressed its gratitude to the Director-General for his efforts in focusing attention on these problems, inter alia through his speeches at the United Nations Population Commission and at the World Population Conference held in Belgrade in August 1965.
125. Many delegates stressed the importance of providing more material specifically designed for the use of developing countries, even if this should mean that FAO could produce less material for general use. The Conference noted with approval the activities of FAO in promoting seminars on farm broadcasting. While the value of such seminars was not questioned it was suggested that it would be important to evaluate the orientation and the impact of farm broadcasting in order that FAO's work might be developed along most effective lines. (See also para. 153.)
c) Action program
126. The Conference noted the substantial role played in the Campaign by action projects, and welcomed the increasing emphasis of the Campaign on action. The Conference agreed that FAO could play a still larger role in developing such programs and it was pointed out that finances to support FFHC action projects, while primarily still the concern of nongovernmental organizations, could also be supported by government funds earmarked for this specific purpose. It was suggested that FFHC could be extremely useful as a clearing house for all types of action undertaken for the objectives of the Campaign. A proposal made to the Freedom from Hunger Campaign Conference by the Indian Delegation for the establishment of a central fund to ensure the more rapid implementation of approved projects was mentioned by some delegations, and one reported that a small national fund of this kind had already been established. The Conference hoped that the Director-General would consider further
the implications of this proposal.
127. Several delegations gave examples of action projects undertaken to enlist underemployed manpower which were regarded as particularly important because they helped to involve local people in the development of their own areas and contributed to national development plans. The Conference noted with approval the Director-General's proposals for a further expansion of FAO's role in the process of utilizing underemployed manpower for rural development, and the announcement that a number of missions were shortly to begin the study of such projects in three different regions. It agreed however that before this process was developed on a wider scale the results of the forthcoming missions should be carefully evaluated, and also the results of experiencies of the World Food Program.
128. The Conference agreed that while the action projects undertaken through FFHC might usually be small in comparison to governmental activities, such projects should nevertheless be given great importance by National FFHC Committees as small actions of this kind were invaluable in preparing the ground for larger, regular national schemes. It was also generally agreed that project action programs should be kept under constant review.
d) Young world mobilization appeal
129. The Conference warmly welcomed the launching of the Young World Mobilization Appeal, and agreed that it could be of great value for the pursuit of the objectives of FFHC. Several delegations gave examples of the mobilization of young people for local action such as the construction of schools, training centers, small Irrigation schemes and roads. One de legation explained that the work being done by young people had proved to be extremely valuable in helping the country toward self - sufficiency in its staple crop. Strong stress was laid on the importance of ensuring that programs under the Young World Mobilization Appeal should be designed to provide opportunities of constructive action for young people, and not merely to enlarge youth organizations.
130. The recommendation of the Second FFHC Conference that a Director-General's Promotion Group for the. Young World Appeal should be established within the framework of FFHC was welcomed by the Conference, and it was stressed that there was an urgent need for a planned program to follow up the initiatives already undertaken both by the Director-General as well as by countries and organizations.
e) Industry co-operation
131. The Conference noted with approval the initiatives which the Director-General had taken to establish closer relations between FAO and industries related to agriculture, and recognized the potential value of this action which extended FFHC activities:; into an entirely new area. The detailed review and recommendations of the Second FFHC Conference were noted in this regard. A majority of delegations gave details of the ways in which they felt industrial co-operation could be of most value, particularly in assisting to provide necessary equipment, supplies and training facilities needed for agricultural development programs. The Conference acknowledged the importance of a multilateral approach in this area. It was also agreed that much might be done by the establishment of bilateral contacts between developing countries and industries related to agricultural production and food conservation and processing. Some delegations pointed out that this type of co-operation had a
real value for all three partners, namely FAO, industry and the developing countries. It was also pointed out that it would be important for the Director-General to keep governments and National FFHC Committees Informed of his negotiations within Member Countries.
132. The Conference gave consideration to a proposal for the establishment of an Agricultural Inputs Pool to which industry in developed countries would be asked to subscribe such items as agricultural machinery, fertilizers, seeds and insecticides. The proposal also included a suggestion that the Director-General should be asked to initiate an approach to industry to seek the mobilization of surplus industrial capacity in these fields. Many delegations welcomed the Initiative while some expressed reservations in view of the complexity of the issues involved. The Director-General pointed out the importance of the attitude of developing countries toward attracting private Investment, and the need for flexibility in approach in encouraging co-operation from private industry. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No 5/65
Industry Co-operation
THE CONFERENCE
Appreciating the role that the FAO Freedom from Hunger Campaign (FFHC) has played in focusing world attention on hunger as the most urgent problem facing mankind, in setting up a machinery to enlist human and physical resources to the solution of this problem, and in generating the flow of supplementary aid on a people-to-people basis,
Welcoming the initiative taken recently by the Director-General to establish close relations between FAO and industry within the framework of FFHC so as to reinforce humanitarian appeals by realization of the importance of participation in the program in mutual interest,
Noting with concern the dilemma that faces a large number of developing and food-deficient countries as a result of the nonavailability of fresh land for cultivation, and at the same time of the unforeseen and unprecedented pressure of growing population,
Recognizing that in this situation one of the few means of averting the catastrophe of mass hunger and malnutrition in the next few years can be the organization in these countries of Intensive cultivation of foodstuffs so as to step up the farm output in the shortest time practicable,
Realizing that such a Production drive of immediate importance would not be possible without the availability in required quantities of the essential farm production requisites, such as chemical fertilizers, pesticides and agricultural machinery,
Noting that for the domestic manufacture of farm requisites, these countries have yet to build up the necessary industrial capacity, while worldwide supply of "these Inputs to getting increasingly beyond their reach due to deterioration in the terms of trade as between agricultural and industrial products and lack of foreign exchange,
Recommends that the Director-General, in continuing his negotiations with industry, encourage increased investment in developing countries for the manufacture of Industrial inputs for agricultural production; seek the co-operation of development funding institutions and bilateral aid agencies for more adequate credit to finance necessary agricultural inputs such as fertilizers farm equipment and pesticides; and study additional measures that may be required to assure Increased production and availability of such inputs.
(Adopted 9. 12. 6 5)
Plans for the second world food congress
133. Subject to the views expressed by the Conference in paragraphs 103 and 104 of its Report, the Conference noted with approval the Director-General's proposal to summon a Second World Food Congress in 1968 and his intention to make the Indicative World Plan for Agricultural Development the central theme of that Congress. Two delegations however expressed a reservation concerning the potential cost of the Congress. The Conference also noted the Director-General's proposal for the preparation of a new series of Basic Studies, and agreed that these would serve a dual purpose of documentation for the Congress and also as a means of education for the Campaign in general.
134. The Conference unanimously approved the recommendation of the Council that the Campaign should be extended until the end of the United Nations Development Decade in 1970, and adopted the following resolution on the Campaign as a whole:
Resolution No. 6/65
Freedom from Hunger Campaign (FFHC)
THE CONFERENCE
Recalling its Resolution No. 13/59 establishing the Freedom from Hunger Campaign for the period 1960-65, and its Resolution No. 4/63 continuing Freedom from Hunger Campaign activities beyond 1965,
Haying noted the recommendations of the Forty-Third Session of the Council on the Campaign, and having received the Report of the Director-General (C 65/18)p
Decides that the Freedom from Hunger Campaign shall be continued until the end of the United Nations Development Decade in 1970, under the terms and conditions of Conference Resolution No. 13/59.
Authorizes the Director-General to make preparations for a Second World Food Congress to be held in 1968; and
Requests the Council to make suitable arrangements, in accordance with the procedures laid down at the Tenth and Twelfth Sessions of the Conference to review the plans and recommendations of the Director-General on the future of the Campaign for consideration at the Fifteenth Session of the Conference.
(Adopted 9.12.65)
International rice year
135. The Conference reviewed preparations for the International Rice Year (1966), which had been declared by the Director-General following the decision taken at the Twelfth Session and further discussions at the FAO Council. The Council had agreed that the Organization should play a positive role in guiding and stimulating national action, but It emphasized that the degree of success of the scheme would mainly depend on the efforts of individual interested countries. The Council requested the Director-General to give all possible assistance and support to national programs.. within the limitations of the budget. Following the Director-General' a formal declaration of the International Rice Year on 1 July 1965, all the related activities were placed within the general framework of the Freedom from Hunger Campaign.
136. To date, thirty Member Governments had communicated their intention to participate in the International Rice Year. The special programs which were being organized in all regions covered a wide field including direct and indirect measures to aid production, and action to improve marketing, milling, utilization and nutrition. Stress was being laid by Governments on the farm demonstration and extension aspects, for which modern forms of communication including television and film were being employed. Among the international activities planned, several developed countries and one developing country had offered to contribute additional fellowships on rice subjects and other governments had offered to exchange Information on experimental research. To underline the basic importance of scientific and economic research, the Organization was organizing an International Rice Research Competition in 1966, with a prize fund opened with a generous donation made by the Government of
Thailand. A series of now FAO publications on various aspects of rice, as well as reprints of selected bulletins on rice which were now out of print, would be issued, and special emphasis would be placed on rice in appropriate FAO sessions in 1966.
137. The Conference reaffirmed Its support for the objectives of the International Rice Year, and it welcomed the constructive activities which were planned. It noted that although there was no provision in the FAO Budget for special rice projects in 1966, the Secretariat stood ready to assist in the technical formulation of such projects which, in certain cases, might obtain support from donors within the framework of the Freedom from Hunger Campaign, the United Nations Special Fund, or other resources. The Conference pointed cat the need to pay particular attention to areas where rice was a relatively new crop, and where farmers had little experience in methods of rice growing.
E. Article XI reports.
138. In accordance wit the suggestion of the Program Committee, the Council has decided to place the suggestion of Article XI reports on the provisional agenda of the Conference, and requested the Director-General to submit to the Conference a report on the subject.
139. The first three paragraphs of the Article XI of the Constitution of FAO read as follows:
"1. Each Member Nation, small communicate periodically to the Organization reports on the progress made toward achieving the purpose of the Organization set forth in the Preamble and on the action taken on the basic of recommendations made conventions submitted by the Conference.
2. These reports shall be made at such times and in such form and shall contain such particulars as the Conference may request
3. The Director-General shall submit these reports, together with analyses thereof, to the Conference and small publish such reports and analyses as may be approved for publications by the Conference together with any reports relating thereto adopted by the Conference."
140. The Conference had before it document C 65/21r which contained a brief analysis by the Director-General of past experience in regard to Article XI reports.
141. The Conference noted that relatively few member countries submitted Article XI reports as prescribed by the Council within the time limit laid down. The reports were to cover three-year periods and the most recent covered the period 1961 - 1963. Under the present arrangement fifteen copies of the report were to he forwarded to the Director-General in one of the official languages of the Organization, and governments were also required to communicate copies directly to all other Member Government.
142. The Conference recognized that much of the material required to the Organizations has submitted in other forms, such as replies to questionnaires and reports on specific topics, and in documentation collected regularly by other international organizations.
143. The Conference therefore, decided to request that the Council:
(a) Investigate the value and utility of these national reports to the work of FAO and to other Member Nations.
(b) Consider the most appropriate subject matter and format of these reports.
(c) Give considerations to the most useful method of preparing, circulating and using these reports.
(d) Make recommendations thereon to the fourteenth Session of the Conference (1967)
144. In this connection several delegates drew attentions to the possible as to which these Article XI reports could be put as the regional conference hold every second year and suggested that their periodicity might their before be changed from three-years intervals to two year of four intervals.
<section>7</section>
V. Activities and programs of the organization
A. Introduction
B. Department of public relations and legal affairs
C. Technical department
D. Department of fisheries
E. Department of economic and social affairs
F. Other activities
G. Interagency relations and consultations on matters of common interest
H. Technical co-operation programs
I. Program of work and budget 1966-67
J. Review of the organization's general structure
A. Introduction
145. The Conference approved in general the draft Program of Work for 1966-67 prepared by the Director-General. It had a number of recommendations and suggestions for changes of emphasis which could be accomplished within the proposed budget level, and these are listed below under the appropriate divisional or departmental headings. Similarly, the view of the Conference about the lines of development of the work in the future beyond 1967 are listed under Divisions and Departments.
B. Department of public relations and legal affairs
Public information
Publications
Legislation research
Library
Other matters
Public information
Recommendations and Suggestions on Points Affecting the program of Work within the Approved.
Budget for the Biennium 1966-67
146. The Conference recommended that more emphasis should be given to meet the demand for information in the developing countries, taking Into consideration the worthiness of the message, plainness of language and receptiveness of the audience. It ended that the difference that existed between the problems and the information needs of developing and developed nations be clearly recognized by the Information Services of FAO, and that the material produced by them be adapted to these different needs. It further recommended that stories about field projects and development of natural resources be given prominence.
147. The Conference recommended that special care should be taken to avoid producing Information material which could be Interpreted as propaganda or self advertisement. It felt that the Organization should inform the public of both achievements and failures in FAO's field work.
148. The Conference recommended that more attention be paid to ascertaining the exact nature of the demand for Information material, advisory and training services which could be provided by FAO. In this connection, It noted that an analysis of press clippings from selected countries to be undertaken in 1966 -67 would give a more accurate assessment of the response to FAO's Information output.
149. The Conference stressed that the Council, in its forthcoming review of the Organization's information activities, should endeavor to assess their effectiveness by a review of the results achieved.
150. The Conference welcomed the proposal to decentralize the greater part of the distribution of public information material to the appropriate regional information officers. It feared, however, that a lack of adequate distribution facilities in these Regional Offices might present a severe problem, and expressed the hope that ways and means could be found to overcome this.
151. The Conference agreed to the Director-General's proposal for the publication of an FAO Magazine on the lines of the dummy submitted, and taking into account the modifications proposed in the course of the discussion in the Technical Committee on Information and Publications. It recommended that the Director-General continue and conclude negotiations with publishers and/or advertising and sales agents to reach the most favorable solution for producing regularly within the limits of the 1956-67 budget such a magazine, which should be of a high standard aimed at an opinion-forming audience both in the developing and developed countries. It further recommended that the terms of any agreement to be entered into should be considered by the Finance Committee with a view to making appropriate recommendations to the Director-General before final acceptance. It further suggested that the Magazine avoid the appearance of being engaged in self advertisement for FAO, and should be
more concerned with the mobilization of effective support for the Organization's objectives and alms. The Magazine would replace the present Freedom from Hunger, and Its further development would be financed through additional revenue from advertising and subscription sales, with a limited free distribution. The Conference recommended that FAO should maintain control over the contents of the Magazine, including advertising.
Recommendations and Suggestions on Future Trends beyond the Biennium 1966-67
152. The Conference, noting the Increasing possibilities of reaching a wider public especially in the developing countries through radio and eventually television, recommended that this trend be reflected in future information programs.
153. The Conference discussed the role of agricultural information services in agricultural development, which had been specifically referred by the Council to the Technical Committee on Information and Publications. The Conference regarded these services as the most important aspect of the Organization's information work, and considered in particular the program of farm broadcasting as an integral part of a fuller program of assistance for the development of national information services in developing countries. It hoped that agricultural information work could be augmented, through all available means at the earliest possible date. It pointed out that the transistor set was rapidly expanding the use of radio as a means of mass communication in rural areas and remote areas where electric power was not available.
154. In considering specific ways and means of strengthening agricultural information services in developing countries, the Conference recommended that more fellowships should be provided to workers in such services, that more consultant assistance be given in the establishment of national agricultural services in these countries, that assistance should be increased to the same countries in the production of extension aids, and that consideration should be given to audiovisual aids
Including farm television in organizing broadcasting seminars.
Publications
Recommendations and Suggestions on Points Affecting the Program of Work within the Approved Budget for the Biennium 1906-67
155. The Conference noted with approval that during the 1966-67 biennium efforts would be continued to keep down the cost of Internal translation. It recommended that the experiment begun in 1964 of increasing the amount of translation performed by external translators be continued, and that the Conference should examine the whole question in 1967 in the light of a report to be prepared by the Director-General on the results of the experiment Including the questions of finance, the quality of translation and experience of other bodies with similar language problems.
156. The Conference recommended the immediate establishment within the Department of a Documentation Center. It further recommended that this Center be located in the Publications Division as it would, at first, be dealing mainly with material, produced within the Organization. At a later stage the Center should collect the results of original agricultural research in Member Countries and make those available to other Member Countries. It agreed that Us location should be reviewed after experience in Its operation had been obtained. The Conference welcomed assistance from the Special Fund in the financing of the Center, and expressed the hope that this contribution would be a continuing one.
Recommendations and Suggestions on Future Trends beyond the Biennium 1966-67
157. The Conference noted that It was often necessary for Governments, particularly in countries which did not use any of the official languages, to adapt FAO publications for republication in the local language, and recommended that Governments should be asked to report on the use which they had made of the publications. Such comments should then be taken into account in preparing future publications.
158. The Conference noted that developing countries might have need of a greater quantity of free publications than was provided under the quota system, and drew attention to the desirability of examining methods of meeting this need. The Conference agreed that the quota system should be maintained, but it was suggested that consideration be given to providing additional copies chargeable to technical assistance programs outside the FAO Regular Budget.
Legislation research
Recommendation and Suggestions on Points affecting the Program of Work within the Approved Budget for the Biennium 1966-67
159. The Conference approved the emphasis put by the Legislation Research Branch on assistance to the developing countries particularly with respect to land reform and rational utilization of natural resources, including fisheries. It recommended that the Branch should ensure that all available research work carried out by other international organizations dealing with similar problems be taken advantage of.
Recommendations and Suggestions on Future Trends beyond the Biennium 1966-67
160. The Conference felt that studies of land use planning, water supply, pollution and utilization, and on the establishment of recreation and nature protection areas, would benefit industrialized countries and also, with suitable adjustments, developing countries. It considered that the publication' Current Food Additives Legislation would render greater service if It could be expanded to contain all recent relevant legislation, and if the comulative index were Issued more frequently.
161. The Conference recommended that the advisory functions of the Branch be made more effective by enabling its officers to have more direct contact in the field, with EPTA and UNSF experts in particular. It requested the Director-General to consider the strengthening of the Branch to cope with Increased responsibilities in relation to the gowing importance of legislation and institutional structures as an essential part of development.
Library
Recommendations and Suggestions on Future Trends beyond the Biennium 1966-67
162. The Conference recommended that the Library be given higher priority both within the Department and the Organization, and that the Library collection should reflect FAO's interests and needs and Include an adequate proportion of material of an economic and social interest, while continuing to give due attention to technical material.
163. The Conference also recommended that the implementation of the findings of the technical comparison of professional Library gradings within the United Nations family be completed.
164. It further recommended that the Department adopt as generous a policy as possible in granting depository library status to libraries in Member Countries, and that the question of providing the regional offices with libraries be examined.
Other matters
165. The Conference requested that in future the Director-General's Program of Work and Budget should provide a clearer breakdown of expenditure between the Office of the Legal Counsel Liaison and the Off Ice of Liaison and Protocol.
C. Technical department
Office of the assistant director-general
Animal production and health
Forestry and forests products
Land and water development
Nutrition
Plant production and protection
Atomic energy in agriculture
Office of the assistant director-general
166. The Conference took note of and approved the activities of the Office of the Assistant Director-General, Technical Department as presented in Chapter VI A (I) of the Program of Work and Budget (document C 65/3).
Animal production and health
Recommendation and Suggestions on Points affecting the Program of Work within the Approved Budget for the Biennium 1966 -67
167. The Conference recommended that higher priority be accorded to education at all levels, and greater emphasis be placed on animal production education, as a separate discipline in higher agricultural curricula, in order to parallel work already being done in the veterinary and dairy sectors. It also recommended that possibilities of strengthening farmer education be further explored.
168. The Conference recommended that closer integration he established with other Divisions of the Organization in work on range management and on marketing.
169. The Conference stressed the importance of the preservation of germ plasm in living collections, and recommended that a conference be arranged to consider the selection and evaluation of stocks to be preserved, and means for their preservation and effective use.
170. The Conference noted that the failure of some dairy plants jointly assisted by FAO and UNICEF to achieve their objectives was attributed to lack of capital for dairy herd Improvement and expansion. It therefore recommended that multilateral and bilateral agencies be encouraged to assist in well-balanced and properly integrated programs of dairy development. In this regard, the CCP study Economic Impact of Dairy Development in Developing Countries was noted. The Conference recommended that the establishment of new milk plants should be preceded by an investigation of the availability of supplies of skimmed milk powder when such supplies were required during the initial period of development. (See also para. 338.)
171. The Conference considered that for areas with nomadic populations mobile cheese making plants needed more emphasis.
172. The Conference recommended that Immediate steps should be taken to implement the last paragraph of Resolution No. 6/63 of the Twelfth Session of the Conference relating to the control of rinderpest and contagious bovine pleuropneumonia.
173. The Conference Up approved the draft resolution proposed by the Forty-Fourth Session of the Council on an Emergency Fund for the Control of Livestock Diseases (See para. 506, Resolution No. 35/65.)
174. The Conference requested that increased attention should be given to disease survey and control work, especially through regional and intercountry programs, particularly with regard to blue tongue, anaplasmosis and other tick-borne diseases, paralytic rabies in Latin America, fly control in Africa, the production of low cost polyvalent vaccines for foot-and-mouth disease, and to the development of a regional reference laboratory in India for rinderpest and rinderpest-like diseases in Asia and the Far East.
175. The Conference considered the prevention of the entry and spread of exotic diseases of vital
Importance, and therefore stressed the urgency of the work required to rationalize and harmonize sanitary regulations relating to the international movement of animals and animal products. The Conference requested the Director-General to convene the proposed session on this subject with a minimum of delay.
176. The Conference requested that the closest possible co-operation and co-ordination should be maintained with other International organizations, in particular with the International Office of Epizootics, so that duplication of effort be avoided.
177. The Conference considered that the role of wildlife in the spread of animal diseases deserved more intensive investigation. Doubts were expressed as to the practicability of commercial ranching of wildlife.
178. The Conference suggested that:
(a) Better balance in the use of cattle, sheep and goats should be encouraged in order to utilize fully forage production potentials.
(b) In poultry and pig production, emphasis should be placed on the efficient utilization of by-products of industrial and food crops of agricultural industries where they are produced. Small scale poultry units to meet home consumption needs in appropriate rural areas should be encouraged.
(c) Goat and milk sheep management should be further investigated owing to the ability of these animals to utilize marginal land for meat and milk production.
(d) In view of the possibility for exotic breeds to improve indigenous stock, FAO should provide assistance to countries where satisfactory conditions exist in finding sources of appropriate animals and financial support for their introduction.
(e) Many countries would benefit from the integration of animal and forage production and health protection with land and water development projects, and long-term feasibility studies should be inaugurated.
(f) Production and marketing of livestock should be linked more closely to encourage the proper preparation of animals to meet consumer demand and the better use of slaughter by-products for both livestock and human consumption.
(g) Problems of nomadic peoples, and means for improvement of their livestock should be studied.
(h) Countries should be encouraged to carry out more comparative studies on animal nutrition, with particular reference to protein balances and the use of nonprotein nitrogenous material as substitutes for protein, and to exchange information among themselves and with FAO on the results obtained.
(i) More attention should be given by FAO to the design of livestock buildings,
(j) A worldwide list of veterinary research institutions should be prepared by FAO.
179. The Conference noted the success of the Code of Principles for Milk and Milk Products, but recognized that the standards were designed for Items entering International trade, and not necessarily for those Intended for national consumption. It was suggested that the erroneous interpretations of the Code encountered by the Organization be drawn to the attention of Member Countries.
Recommendations and Suggestions on Future Trends beyond the Biennium 1966-67
180. The Conference recommended that assignments of field experts be of sufficient duration to ensure adequate Impact on livestock development programs and training of national personnel. The
Conference requested the Director-General to study the possibility of establishing an additional post for a regional animal production officer in the eastern zone of Latin America.
Forestry and forests products
181. The Conference decided that the titles of two existing working parties of the Near East Forestry Commission should become (a) Working Party on Forest Education and Research and, (b) Working Party on Watershed and Forest Range Management.
182. In order that FAO should have advice on action necessary to Increase productivity and usefulness of the tropical forests of the world, the Conference decided to establish, within the level of the 1966-67 budget, under Article VI of the Constitution, a Committee on Forest Development in the Tropics. The Conference accordingly adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 7/65
Committee on Forest Development in the Tropics
THE CONFERENCE
Recognizing the Impact which the development of forestry could have on the economic and social development of many nations in tropical areas,
Noting that, due to numerous and complex obstacles, development has so far been only a fraction of the existing potential,
Considering that development could be encouraged by concerted efforts of the countries interested in promoting the productivity and usefulness of tropical forests-,
Authorizes the Director-General to:
(a) establish under Article VI para. 2, of the Constitution, a Committee of selected Member Nations and Associate Members to be known as the FAO Committee on Forest Development in the Tropics, whose terms of reference shall be to study technical economic and social problems relating to the development of tropical forests, particularly in developing countries, having regard to production utilization and conversion aspects as well as to the marketing of forest products, and to report thereon to the Director General;
(b) select Member Nations and Associate Members, Inviting them to appoint representatives for this Committee on the basis of their technical competence, such selection by the Director-General of Member Nations and Associate Members being effected in the light of the desirability that the Committee membership should be not less than 15 and not more than 30 members, and that Its composition should be representative of the different regions of the world, and reflect both the interests of foresters and forest industries in relation to the major types of tropical forest and forest products;
(c) make appropriate arrangements for co-operation with interested Member Nations and Associate Members that are not members of the Committee and with other governmental and nongovernmental. agencies and organizations whose activities and programs are concerned wholly or in part with tropical forest development;
(d) convene sessions of the Committee and of any subsidiary bodies that may be established by the Committee, on the understanding that:
(i) expenses arising out of the participation of representatives on the Committee in the activities of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies, including attendance at sessions, shall be borne by the Member Nations and Associate Members having appointed them;
(ii) the Director-General shall make the necessary secretariat services and facilities available to the Committee and Its subsidiary bodies.
(Adopted 6.12.65)
183. The Conference suggested to the Director-General that, before deciding on the selection of countries which should be invited to be represented on this Committee in accordance with the terms of the above resolution, he should consult with Member Nations and Associate Members.
184. In this connection, the Conference recommended that the Director-General should review existing committees and working parties in this field with a view to reducing their number and avoid duplication.
Recommendations and Suggestions on Points Affecting the program of Work within the Approved Budget for the Biennium 1966-67
185. While great efforts would be required if the developing countries were to expand their forest industries to match their rising needs of forest products, the Conference drew the attention of Governments to the fact that care would be needed to ensure that any expert-oriented industries established corresponded to the evolving market possibilities.
186. Hitherto, sufficient attention could not be paid by FAO to the need for market research, market intelligence and the development of suitable marketing institutions. The Conference approved the proposal to establish a new Trade and Development Section to fill this gap. It was of little use for countries to increase forest production unless outlets at fair prices were available for the produce.
187. The Conference, having approve the establishment of a new technical Branch for Logging and
Transport, further recommended the extension to other regions of the kind of successful work conducted by the European Committee on Forest Working Techniques and Training of Forest Workers (the joint body of FAO, ILO and ECE). It felt in this connection that attention should be specially given to problems of small forest holdings and small-sized timber and, in co-operation with ILO, to the training of forest workers. Due consideration should be given to the possibilities of using co-operatives as a means of service to small forestry units both in management, logging, transportation and marketing, and when measures of reforestation were required.
188. The Conference emphasize that the possibilities of man-made forests must not blind foresters to the need for improved silviculture and management of natural forests. Each country had to decide for Itself the appropriate balance between natural forests and plantations.
189. The Conference, having endorsed the proposed expansion of effort toward the establishment of an International forest tree Introduction program, considered that Its long-term aim should be to strengthen or create regional seed units to Identify, preserve, and make readily available superior germ plasm of forest trees of economic importance.
190. The Conference agreed that the Third World Eucalyptus Conference planned for 1967 should be replaced by a Symposium on Man-made Forests and a Eucalyptus Study Tour which It was hoped would be held in Australia. Member Governments were urged to send representatives to these sessions.
191. The Conference invited the Director-General to continue his efforts to interest the fertilizer Industry in forestry potentialities.
192. The Conference careful attention to phytosanitary control measures in handling the distribution of seed and other propagating material (see also para. 232(f)).
193. The Conference recommended to the attention of the Inter-American Committee for Agricultural Development (CIDA) that its current investigation on agricultural training facilities and needs in Latin America Include intermediate -level forestry schools. The Conference invited the Director - General to arrange, through EPTA, a study tour on shelter -belts and windbreaks for the Near East region, and to continue to assist the Forest Rangers School, Lattakia, through EPTA.
Recommendations and on Future Trends beyond the Biennium 1966--67
194. The Conference suggested that continued attention be given to the special problems of small forest holdings, and to the role which co-operatives could play in solving them.
195. The Conference noted the, it had not been possible within the 1966-67 Program of Work and
Budget to provide for an expansion of Headquarters staff and new status for the divisional segments concerned with work on forestry education and training, and on wildlife management and outdoor recreation. It regretted also the failure to provide outposed forestry officers for the Caribbean and Eastern Latin America subregions respectively. staff for a regional advisory group on forest industries for the Asia -Pacific region with ECAFE, and substantially larger funds for the travel of outposted regional forestry officers. The Conference hoped these matters could be corrected in future programs of work.
196. The Conference considered that the early attention of the Director-General and of Member Governments was required for an adequate framing of FAO's Regular Program activities in forestry and forest industries. It recommended that within this program, and taking into account the considerations recorded in para. 23 of document C 65/FO/5 (Report of the Technical Committee on Forestry and Forest Products), priority should be accorded to the following (not listed by order of priority):
(a) An expanded worldwide program for the development of tropical forests, which should encompass not only production but also extraction, utilization and marketing; the program should also emphasize the services other than timber production performed by forests in the tropics.
(b) Forestry education and training, including the training of forest workers.
(c) Forest fire control, the combating of pernicious forest Insects and diseases; and control of the now widespread man-caused destruction of wood resources, forest soil, and sources of water.
(d) Wildlife management, recreation and national parks.
(e) A substantial further expansion of work on tree seed service and germ plasm centers, on which a modest beginning was already planned for 1966-67.
(f) A substantial strengthening of FAO's capacity to assist developing countries through forest industry survey missions and forest industry development planning services.
(g) The place of forestry in long-term land-use planning.
(h) Low -cost housing.
(i) Arresting desert encroachment; systematically collecting and disseminating information on this subject.
197. The Conference considered that all these elements were essential if FAO were to give effective help to Member Countries in adapting their national policies and programs to the rapidly changing world forest and forest products economy. The Conference further considered that this would require not only the allocation of substantial additional funds to the Organization's activities in forestry and forest industries, but also a review of the organizational structure within which these activities were conducted.
198. The Conference invited the Director-General to take into account the foregoing considerations in preparing his Program of Work and Budget proposals for the biennium 1968-69 and biennia beyond.
Land and water development
Recommendations and Suggestions on Points Affecting the program of Work within the Approved Budget for the Biennium 1966-67
199. The Conference recommended that:
(a) High priority be accorded to education and training at all levels in all aspects of land and water development, with greater emphasis on the operational farm level and middle level technicians, Including pilot schemes for training and demonstration.
(b) The Director-General should consider the possibility of arranging under EPTA for the establishment of a post for a regional soil fertility specialist in the East African subregion.
(c) Rural household water supplies and livestock watering, including the importance of small surface water storages, should be given high priority.
(d) In addition to the emphasis being placed on the engineering aspects of losses of food crops between harvesting and consumption, priority should be given to the development of rural industries for the processing of agricultural products and by-products (See also para 218(b)).
200. The Conference invited the Director-General to consider the establishment of a Near East Land and Water Use Commission, as proposed by the Seventh FAO Regional Conference for the Near East. As an interim measure, It recommended that there be established a Near East Working Party on Land and Water Use. The Conference also recommended that an attempt be made to arrange for a regional session financed from EPTA funds or other sources.
201. The Conference requested that:
(a) Increased attention should be given to the study of reclamation of saline and sodic soils, drainage, and irrigated land preparation; and to rice irrigation through the International Rice Commission,
(b) The Director-General should consider ways of expanding technical assistance to Member Countries in the fields of land-use planning and farm management.
(c) Immediate consideration should be given to expansion of the work on problems of fertilization and reconstitution of the soil fertility potential, particularly in connection with the FFHC Fertilizer Program, especially in regions where fertilizer use was in Its infancy or nonexistent. It suggested that emphasis should be placed on the need to combine the use of fertilizers with other improvements to be made in farming techniques. In addition, it suggested that further support should be sought from the fertilizer industry.
202. The Conference noted the plans for the Organization's participation in the International Hydrological Decade, and requested that FAO should provide the technical secretariat for the lines of action falling within its competence.
203. The Conference considered that the proposed inventory of world water resources and their degree of development for agricultural purposes should be given special emphasis since the results would constitute a positive contribution both to the International Hydrological Decade and the Indicative World Plan.
204. The Conference considered that in the field of use of water resources high priority should be given to simple and inexpensive techniques, giving due consideration to the many problems posed by the use of modern hydraulic equipment.
205. The Conference noted the problems encountered in many countries in the production, procurement and distribution of fertilizers because of high prices and lack of credit, raw materials and plant equipment, and in this connection the Conference recommended that the Director-General further consider establishing a fertilizer fund or otherwise assisting in the problem. (See also para. 53.)
Recommendations and Suggestions on Future Trends 1966-67
206. The Conference recommended that the Director-General, in developing future programs, should consider placing more emphasis on water pollution and use of sewage effluent for irrigation, taking Into account WHO's interest in these fields.
207. The Conference noted a proposal for establishing regional centers for research on hand equipment and on small equipment, both power and animal activated, suitable for tropical and sub tropical areas, possibly with United Nations Special Fund or other support, and recommended that when established these centers should take due account of existing structures.
208. The Conference, recognizing the problems of harvesting, handling and processing of olives, recommended that the Director-General should consider the possibility of arranging for the establishment of an additional post for a specialist in these fields (See also para.234 (d)).
209. The Conference requested the Director-General to consider the possibility of expanding activities in the field of fuller utilization of plant and animal by-products for stock feed.
210. The Conference recognized the problems of tillage in irrigated land use and dry-land farming, and requested the Director-General to consider collating and disseminating information in this field.
Some delegates requested that consideration be given to establishing an agricultural engineering post in the Near East region.
211. The Conference noted the special difficulties of operating power machinery in developing countries, and requested that further study be made of problems of spare parts, adequate servicing facilities, training of skilled technicians and standardization of equipment. The Conference further requested the Director-General to see what could be done to encourage industry to develop and supply machinery adapted to conditions in arid and tropical zones. The Conference invited the Director-General to assist developing countries to obtain advice on production and procurement problems.
212. The Conference recognized the basic value of soil surveys in agricultural development, and requested the Director-General to consider ways and means of assisting Member Governments of developing countries to establish such surveys.
213. The Conference emphasized the importance of further work on the standardization of soil terminology and the correlation of soil classification of the world.
214. The Conference stressed the importance of the co-ordinated development of large hydrographic catchments and international river basins, and suggested that river training and flood control should be integral parts of such projects, whenever necessary, taking into account the responsibilities of the United Nations and other organizations.
215. The Conference considered that, in addition to activities currently planned, increased attention should be given to problems of land tenure and its influence on land management and use, and to problems connected with changes of agrarian to nonagrarian land use (See also paras. 46, 294, 333, and 383,)
216. The Conference suggested that increased attention be given to economic aspects of soil conservation and watershed management in pilot projects, taking into account that input-output relations and feasibility studies in such projects were important preliminaries to obtaining maximum results from development investment.
<section>8</section>
Nutrition
Recommendations and Suggestions on Points Affecting the program of Work within the Approved
Budget for the Biennium 1966-67
217. The Conference recommended that adequate emphasis should be given by Governments to the formation of nutrition councils and to the integration of nutritional programs in the planning of agricultural development, particularly in the Indicative World Plan. In this connection it was recognized that studies in the developing regions on food consumption, requirements for calories and nutrients, and the composition of foods and their nutritive values needed to be extended and improved in order to provide a better basis for such planning.
218. The Conference:
(a) Considered the important contribution which preserved and processed foods could make in providing a varied diet, and the role of industrial and home preservation and processing, and recommended an intensification of the Nutrition Division's work for the prevention of food wastage in order to Increase the food available for human consumption,
(b) Recognized the important role of United Nations Special Fund -supported food technology institutes development of the food processing industries, but also the need for sm.-III and medium-sized plants during the initial phases of industrial development. Incentives should be given by Member Governments for the establishment of food industries to make better use of food products. The Conference also noted that co-operatives could play an important role in the initiation of such undertakings.
(c) Agreed that training at all levels of skills was an essential phase of food industries development and recommended that such training be done on a regional or subregional. basis, wherever possible. It was noted that the United Nations Special Fund-supported food technology institutes might usefully serve as bases for such training centers.
(d) Suggested that care should be exercised in the preparation and use of foods preserved by irradiation. This process should be used only after Its safety was clearly established and where it provided advantages over foods preserved by more conventional means.
(e) Recommended that continued stress should be placed in the Nutrition Division's work on research and development, preparation and promotion of protein-rich foods within the economic means of needy population sectors. It noted with approval the increasing joint efforts of the Division with the World Food Program for the large-scale production of such foods for infants and young children.
219. In the field of applied nutrition, the Conference recommended that:
(a) Governments should make applied nutrition programs an integral part of their development plans
(b) Objectives should be defined with greater precision, taking Into account actual needs; and programs should be framed in harmony with the priorities laid down by the Governments of Member Nations. Continued attention should be given to the practical activities carried out through applied nutrition programs, and their planning within the framework of social and economic development
(c) The joint approach already embarked upon by international agencies for improving the planning of applied nutrition programs and their systematic evaluation should be continued and further strengthened.
(d) Importance should be placed both on the socioanthropological aspects of food and nutrition, and on the economic factors, all essential elements in planning applied nutrition programs, and more emphasis should be given to the teaching of food economics in the training of professional workers in nutrition and related fields.
(e) The importance of nutrition education as a major component of applied nutrition programs should be emphasized.
(f) Nutrition teaching should be included in the training of school teachers and other professional educators.
220. The Importance of studying the food and nutrition problems resulting from rapid urbanization in developing countries should be given urgent consideration, and the work which was planned in this field, as well as in the closely associated field of industrial feeding (group feeding, canteen management and catering) should be further developed.
221. In the field of home economics in the developing and other regions, the Conference recommended that:
(a) The activities currently geared to the establishment of permanent centers of education and training at regional and subregional levels should be emphasized;
(b) In view of the special need for home economics education and training in African countries, activities should be directed especially toward those where the need was most urgent-.
(c) Preparation of teaching materials, including audiovisual aids, in all aspects of home economics for the purpose of disseminating information to all social groups and especially in rural areas should be continued.
(d) Because of the importance of applying research findings to action programs, the need for joint development and co-ordination of home economics research, surveys, services and training programs should be given particular attention.
(e) The importance of women in the production, preservation and storage of foods in developing countries, and the role of home economists in applied nutrition and other education programs should be recognized, and the Nutrition Division should give increased attention to those questions in training and extension programs for women. (See also para. 44.)
222. The Conference reaffirmed:
(a) That the implementation of programs in the areas of child care and education at family level was clearly within the competence of home economists.
(b) Its support for the long term program for home economics in Europe and other regions, established by the Nutrition Division.
223. The Conference stressed the need for training at all levels (elementary, intermediate and professional) for personnel working in the fields of nutrition, food science and technology and home economics as the case may be.
Recommendations and Suggestions on Future Trends beyond the Biennium 1966-67
224. The Conference noted and endorsed the Director-General's proposal that future work would continue along previous lines, and recommended that particular attention be given to:
(a) Increased participation in the Indicative World Plan.
(b) Reinforcement of regional and national structures for nutrition, food technology and home economics,
(c) The dissemination of information through increasing the numbers of technical papers and handbooks to be published.
(d) Such Important subjects as food processing, preservation and storage, the development of food Industries, and co-operation with private Industry.
(e) FAO/WHO Food Standards Program (Codex Alimentarius)
(f) Strengthening home economics training and extension activities.
225. In view of the need in developing countries for training and research in nutrition, food science and technology and home economics, the Conference recommended that FAO review with Governments, on a regional or subregional basis, the needs for and means whereby, training and research institutes could be established.
226. The Conference, recognizing the importance of improving and extending food consumption data, especially in developing countries, hoped that funds would be available, from EPTA or other sources, to organize training centers for food consumption survey personnel, regional seminars on the use of survey data in development planning, and recommended the appointment of regional advisers in food consumption and planning. (See also para. 306.)
227. The Conference suggested that in future food composition tables should be prepared on a regional and subregional basis, and should include data for both raw and processed foods, and that these be used in revising the present International tables.
FAO/WHO Food Standards Program
228. The Conference was informed of the substantial progress made by the subsidiary bodies of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in the elaboration of international food standards. This progress was placing an Increasing workload not only upon the Joint Office of the FAO/WHO Food Standards Program, but also on the Nutrition Division. The Conference therefore questioned whether the present staffing of the Joint Office and of the Nutrition Division would be sufficient in the coming years. It was advised that during the next biennium an appraisal would be made of the workload, staffing and financial implications, and that appropriate action would be taken. (See also paras. 314, 341 to 343 and 455 to 457.)
Plant production and protection
Recommendations and Suggestions on Points Affecting the program of Work within the Approved Budget for the Biennium 1966-67
229. The Conference recommended that:
(a) Work on agro-ecology, which provides information essential for the most effective use of environmental resources in agriculture, should be expanded, in this connection, the need for utilizing information available in Member Countries was emphasized.
(b) Plant exploration and introduction, and the conservation of germ plasm should receive high priority on a continuing basis.
(c) The Director-General should consider the possibility of arranging under EPTA for the establishment of a post for a regional olive expert to assist the Mediterranean and Near East countries in the Improvement of olive production,
(d) To accelerate needed work on pesticides, on tolerances-and on resistance of pests to pesticides, high priority should be given within the level of the budget to the establishment of an additional post at Headquarters for a pesticides officer and facilities for his work, and to annual sessions of the Committee on Pesticides in Agriculture and Us three Working Parties.
230. The Conference recognized that the Organization should play a leading role in the development of Integrated pest control programs, and recommended that a panel of experts should be established on the recommendations of the FAO Symposium on Integrated Pest Control held in 1965. It was noted that the work of the panel would be largely conducted through correspondence.
231. The Conference noted a proposal for the establishment of a Caribbean Plant Protection Commission, but considered that further preparatory work was necessary before formal action could be taken. It was therefore recommended that the Director-General should take steps, in consultation with the Interested Member Countries, to determine how a commission might be beat established to perform the functions specified in the report of the First Caribbean Plant Protection Conference held in 1965.
232. The Conference requested that:
(a) Continuing emphasis should be placed on long-term training programs at all levels and in all aspects of plant production and protection, particularly with regard to the training of plant breeders, seed propagation technicians and irrigation agronomists, including refresher courses as appropriate; the possibility of establishing permanent training centers in Africa should also be considered
(b) Special consideration should be given in plant breeding programs to improvement in quality, pest and disease resistance, drought resistance, response to fertilizers and soils conditioners, and requirements for other environmental factors.
(c) Collaboration with the International Biological Program should be strengthened, where appropriate, as well as with bilateral and with other multilateral programs.
(d) Economic features, marketing and processing aspects should be taken into full consideration, in consultation with other Divisions.
(e) The seed exchange program should be further expanded and co-ordinated closely with similar services in Member Countries.
(f) Attention should continue to be given to the danger of disseminating pests and diseases in plant introduction and seed exchange activities. (See also para. 192.)
(g) Assistance to research programs on problems of crop production and protection in tropical and subtropical areas should be strengthened.
(h) Everything possible should be done by Member Countries and FAO to strengthen quarantine regulations and facilities, including the provision of training in this matter.
(i) Attention should be given to the need for additional assistance on problems of storage of food grains and tuber crops, particularly in tropical areas. It was also suggested that studies be encouraged for the assessment and elimination of mycotoxin in stored products.
233. The Conference considered that in regard to field food crops:
(a) FAO should encourage national initiatives aimed at the development of seed Industries, including the establishment of efficient schemes for the distribution of seed. to farmers. Close collaboration with other International bodies in this field should be maintained.
(b) With regard to plant Introduction programs, due consideration should be given to the adaptability of new crops and varieties to local ecological conditions and to existing dietary habits and customs.
(c) The possibility of establishing an international millet commission should be explored.
(d) Programs similar to that in the Near East far wheat and barley Improvement, should be considered for maize and sorghum.
(e) Grain legume crops should receive increased attention because of their Importance as food, feed and green manure.
(f) Within the framework of a necessary increase in rice production, particular attention should be given to the Improvement of upland rice production in tropical Africa.
234. The Conference felt that in regard to fruit and vegetable crops:
(a) Increased fruit and vegetable production should be encouraged particularly in Africa, the Far and Near East, and Latin America; however, intensive production of these crops should only be encouraged after due consideration of technical and economic factors.
(b) Mare attention should be given by FAO to hydroponic and other soilless vegetable production techniques, taking full account of their economic feasibility.
(c) Production of flowers, spices and out-of -season vegetables should receive Increased attention.
(d) Work should be conducted in collaboration with other Divisions on the mechanization of olive harvesting (see para. 208),
(e) FAO should assist Member Countries in finding means for the establishment of a vegetable improvement and seed production center in West Africa, possibly with the support of the United Nations Special Fund.
(f) Attention should be given to the improvement of tropical and subtropical fruits such as avocado, mango, bananas, citrus, dates and others.
(g) International symposia on fruit and vegetable production should receive Increased attention under EPTA.
(h) School and community gardens should continue to receive support.
235. The Conference felt that in regard to industrial crops:
(a) In view of the declining prices of many cash crops, increased attention should be given to agricultural diversification programs.
(b) Exploration and introduction of wild types of cocoa and other cash crops should be expanded, and assistance in the exchange of existing planting and breeding material of cultivars should be Increased, taking Into consideration similar activities at the national level.
(c) The genetic improvement of coconuts, the establishment of an International pollen bank, and work on coconut diseases of unknown etiology should receive continuing attention
(d) Additional crops of economic importance, such as oil seed crops (including castor beans) and sugar beets in arid and semiarid areas under irrigated and nonirrigated conditions should be given increased attention, particularly with regard to the development of high yielding varieties suitable for mechanical harvesting.
(e) A regional seminar on rubber plantation management should be considered.
(f) The economic aspects of cash crops should be borne in mind, and the approach to technical problems should be carried out in close co-operation with the Divisions of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs.
236. The Conference felt that with regard to pasture and fodder crops:
(a) Joint FAO/WHO/Unesco agroclimatological projects should be expanded within the availability of funds.
(b) FAO should collect Information on forage adaptation and feeding value of tropical forages, and encourage research institutions to accelerate work on these subjects.
(c) Research in the tropics and subtropics should be encouraged, especially on fodder conservation, irrigation during the dry season, bush control, use and influence of fire, stocking rate and pasture production.
(d) Training, including extension, should be initiated as soon as possible on pasture range management and fodder crops in Africa, the Far East and the Near East.
237. With regard to crop protection, the Conference, while recognizing that the desert locust was at present in recession, felt that complacency was not justified. It therefore emphasized the need for continuing work in reconnaissance and control at both national and regional levels.
238. The Conference, having reviewed the proposal submitted by the Director-General for the establishment of an Emergency Fund for the Control of Plant Pests and Diseases, agreed in principle to the need for such a Fund, possibly to be financed within the Regular Program or the Working Capital Fund. The Conference felt, however, that further study was required on Its financial, operational, technical and administrative aspects, and therefore suggested that this matter be considered in consultation with experts as appropriate, and resubmitted to a future session of the Council at an appropriate time for further consideration.
Recommendations and Suggestions on Future Trends beyond the Biennium 1966-67
239. The Conference recommended that the Director General should consider:
(a) The possibility of arranging under EPTA for the establishment of a post for a regional seed specialist in the Near East, to assist governments in the development or improvement of their national seed industries.
(b) Giving priority to the addition of a vegetable improvement specialist to the Headquarters staff.
(c) Establishing an advisory group as proposed by the ninth International Grassland Congress, to promote activities and co-operation on tropical pasture research and development
(d) Strengthening as soon as possible the crop protection activities at Headquarters and in the regions through the provision of additional staff. In this connection, the provision of a nematologist as had been recommended by earlier Conferences should be given high priority; if possible the Director-General should consider implementing this recommendation in the 1966-67 biennium.
(e) The possibility of arranging for the establishment of an additional post for a pasture and fodder crops specialist in the Near Eastregion.
240. The Conference requested that:
(a) Increased technical assistance on olive production, similar to that sought by Mediterranean and Near East countries, be explored for Latin America.
(b) The Director-General should consider the possibility of arranging for the establishment of a regional research and training center for cotton production in the Near East.
241. The Conference suggested that:
(a) Further publications such as that on the grass cover of Latin America might be prepared.
(b) Consideration be given to holding a technical conference on pasture and fodder crops in Africa.
(c) A study be made of the possibility of obtaining United Nations Special Fund or other assistance the establishment of a plant introduction quarantine center in West Africa, and in the development of national plant protection organizations.
(d) Consideration be given to the preparation of publications on nematodes, on equipment for the application of pesticides and their specifications, and on safe handling, use and storage of pesticides.
(e) A study be made of the assessment and elimination of mycotoxins in stored products.
242. The Conference noted the need expressed by some countries for increased technical assistance to Member Countries in the control of nematodes, noxius weeds and rodents particularly in tropical areas.
Atomic energy in agriculture
Recommendations and Suggestions on Points Affecting the Program of Work within the Approved Budget for the Biennium 1966-67
243. The Conference noted the inherent difficulties in co-ordination due to the physical distance separating the FAO/IAEA Joint Division of Atomic Energy in Agriculture from other FAO Technical
Divisions, and recognized that exceptional measures entailing considerable expenditure on travel and supporting service were required to ensure this co-ordination.
244. The Conference recommended that applied research in this field should receive priority over fundamental research; it expressed the hope that the areas in the Program of Work chosen for emphasis would, in the long run, result in the enhancement of production levels.
Recommendations and Suggestions on Future Trends beyond the Biennium 1966-67
245. The-Conference recommended that priority be given to training at all technical levels, to the collection of research results and to the exchange of information through seminars, symposia and panels. It was also recommended that emphasis be given to soil/plant/water relationships, irradiation in food conservation, entomology and protection of crops, and to studies on protection against radiation in food and agriculture.
246. The Conference considered that in future emphasis should be given to programs which concentrated on applications of immediate practical benefit to agriculture, and which were likely to make an impact on increased food supplies. It was also felt that assistance rendered should be related to the stage of development of recipient countries and their available resources.
247. The Conference noted the need for maintaining close contact with the Codex Alimentarius and its Committee on Food Additives with respect to the legislative aspects of food irradiation, and with the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation (UNSCEAR) with respect to publication of the World Summary of Dietary Levels of Radionuclides.
D. Department of fisheries
248. The Conference, having established a Committee on Fisheries recommended that it should so conduct its work as to supplement rather than supplant other organizations working effectively in the field of fisheries. In order to avoid duplication of work and to ensure effective, collaboration, the Committee when giving consideration to the development, both of its subsidiary structure and of co-operative arrangements with other bodies concerned, should take into account the work of Regional Fishery Councils and Commissions. The Conference noted that although the Committee on Fisheries would consist of no more than 30 Member Nations selected by the Council, all interested Member Nations would be entitled to attend and participate in the discussions as observers.
Recommendations and Suggestions on Points Affecting the Program of Work within the Approved Budget for the Biennium 1966-67
249. The Conference approved the plane for reorganizing the Fisheries Division and upgrading it to the status of a Department, as proposed in Chapter VI. B of the Director-General' is Program of Work and Budget for 1966-67, subject to the following considerations:
(a) That the proposed organization be recognized as a first step in a planned expansion over three biennia, and that the growth of the Department during 1966-67 would be phased according to the actual workload,
(b) That the Director-General, in executing the 1966-67 Program and drawing up the programs for the next two biennia, should-.
(i) dive greater attention to world food supplies and to the promotion of the consumption of fisheries products.
(ii) Give greater attention to fish culture and inland fisheries generally, including the attendant engineering problems and the prevention and abatement of water pollution
(iii) Scrutinize afresh the more urgent needs of discovering new sources of food with a view both to helping the further improvement of well -established fisheries of advanced nations and also to giving more emphasis in the interests of all Member Nations to applying with full effect modern scientific knowledge and experience to the finding of new resources.
(iv) Recognize the importance to developing countries of the program related to fishing vessel design and improvement and harbor development, and, the value for increasing production of the effort devoted to gear research especially in relation to fish behavior.
(v)Give greater emphasis to studies which would highlight the economics, investment and returns in fisheries to help the flow of capital to fisheries development, which is an urgent need of developing countries, while recognizing that some economic questions were more appropriate to study at national level than at international level, and
(VI) Recognize the long-term necessity for management at International level of the renewable resources of the seas If a regular harvest Is to be maintained; recognize the importance of extending the concept of farming into the coastal regions; and encourage management in inland fisheries in order to reach the highest sustainable yields.
250. The Conference endorsed the major lines of activity proposed by the Regional Fisheries
Councils and Commissions, and noted with satisfaction that provision had been made in the Budget for more frequent meetings of officers and experts in connection with these bodies.
251. The Conference invited the Director-General to examine whether there was any possible overlap between the functions of the General Fisheries Council for the Mediterranean and the European Inland Fisheries Advisory Commission in relation to fish culture, and if necessary to make proposals for revision of their terms of reference.
252. The Conference authorized the Director-General within the approved budget, to convene a technical conference on fisheries of West African countries to discuss problems of research and conservation which concern the fisheries of Western Africa, and what measures might be taken by Member Nations and FAO to provide effective means of co-operation and co-ordination in this field.
253. The Conference, recalling Conference Resolution No. 9/63 and having regard to Recommendation 14/64 adopted at the Seventh FAO Regional Conference for the Near East, authorized the Director-General, subject to funds being available, to convene a technical conference or sessions of fishery representatives of the Near East countries as soon an possible, to exchange views and make recommendations regarding the fishery resources and their exploitation through appropriate national and intergovernmental action. The conference or sessions might be convened either in conjunction with the Eighth FAO Regional Conference for the Near East, or at some other convenient time and place if a Member Government was able to make available the necessary facilities and services; it should have on its agenda consideration of further action that might be taken in order to implement Conference Resolution No. 9/63 in regard to:
(a) Oceanographic and biological survey, and exploration of fishery resources.
(b) Economic and marketing surveys of fish and fish products.
(c) The development and improvement of boats, gear, and nets for use in fishing operations, and
(d) The designing and location of fish harbors, jetties, cold storage and processing plants.
254. Special emphasis should be given to the need for such action in the Arabian Set, the Persian Gulf and other waters adjoining the coasts of Iran, Pakistan, Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Somalia mad other countries concerned; the problems of the area of the Red Sea and adjoining waters; and the question of development of the Inland fishery resources of the Near Eastern countries.
255. The Conference suggested that, with reference to Recommendation 5/64 of the Seventh FAO Regional Conference for the Near East the proposed session should consider and co-ordinate requests to be made by Member Nations in the region for assistance by the United Nations Special Fund, in the hope that these could be submitted in time for approval by the governing body of the Special Fund at the end of 1966.
256. The Conference took note of the urgent need to secure effective implementation of fishery development schemes in developing countries, and of the fact that many schemes were delayed by lack of trained local personnel. The Conference particularly emphasized that realistic planning for fishery development should provide for concerted, progressive and cumulative training of operators, managers, administrators and scientists, over the whole range of a country's fisheries with due regard to ton, to the extent desirable and in co-operation with ILO and other international organizations concerned.
257. The Conference called attention to the need for developing and introducing acceptable fish protein concentrates, and requested the Director-General to advance the Organization's work in this connection at an rapid a rate as possible.
258. The Conference requested the Director-General, in carrying out his Program of Work in the field of fishery education and training, to consider how Member Nations may be assisted in establishing suitable training institutions on a national, regional or international basis, and explore the question of financial assistance to these institutions with the appropriate agencies Including the United Nations Special Fund and the Expanded Program of Technical Assistance or their successor body.
259. The Conference referred to the recommendation made at the Third FAO Regional Conference for Africa in September 1964 in Addis Ababa, for regional fisheries educational institutes to train personnel at all levels and disciplines in that region, and noted that a survey on fisheries education and training had been made by an FAO consultant in some countries in Africa in 1965. This report would shortly be available and should form the starting point for further action.
260. The Conference noted that in Africa vocational training of fishermen was carried out primarily by national training centers in most of the countries and that education at university level to train senior administrators and research workers was available abroad through fellowships. The Conference agreed that facilities to train personnel at intermediate or technical level were lacking, in spite of the fact that these types of personnel were most urgently required for fishery development.
261. The Conference therefore recommended that the Director-General assist the African countries:
(a) In arranging a mission to both English-and French-speaking countries in Africa to survey their needs with special attention to the possibility of strengthening existing national training Institutions, and of establishing regional training institutes to meet such needs with assistance from UNSF or IBRD, and to assist in the preparation of the necessary requests, and
(b) By assigning regional fisheries educational advisers to help the Governments in planning and Implementing training programs (including fellowships) under the Special Program for Agricultural Education and Training in Africa of the Regular Program, or under EPTA.
262. The Conference considered document C 6 5/53 Rev. 1, centering on the report of the Working Party for Rational Utilization of Tuna Resources in the Atlantic Ocean. It endorsed the report in principle and, considering that a commission for the conservation of tuna and tuna-like fishes in the Atlantic Ocean was desirable, authorized the Director-General to call a conference of plenipotentiaries for the purpose of establishing such a commission, to invite all FAO Member Nations and Associate Members, and all nations non-Members of FAO that are Members of the United Nations or a Specialized Agency of the United Nations to send duly authorized representatives, and to enter Into an agreement with the commission, if and when established, along the lines set out in document C 65/53 Rev. 1.
263. The Conference requested the Director-General to call to the attention of the Committee on Fisheries, when formed, the question of the rational utilization of the pelagic fishery resources in the Indian Ocean, and Invited the Committee to give priority to this matter.
264. Some delegates stressed the economic and nutritional importance of the exploitation of marine resources in the international waters adjacent to the territorial waters of many developing countries, and urged that the developed countries should assist and co-operate with the developing countries in the exploitation of such resources.
Recommendations and Suggestions on Future Trends beyond the Biennium 1966-67
265. The Conference recognized that the Director-General's proposals for 1966-67 constituted the initial stage of a planned expansion extending over six years. Whilst the Director-General's proposals for this initial phase were endorsed subject only to certain suggestions, the Conference was not able at this time to offer any specific observations or to suggest modifications to the Director-General's plans, otherwise than as expressed in para. 249 above, regarding further stages since much would depend on the experience gained in the first biennium, and on further developments in world fisheries during this period. The Department of Fisheries would also take due account of comments made in para. 25 of the Report of the -Technical Committee on Fisheries (document C 65/Fl/5).
E. Department of economic and social affairs
Office of the assistant director-general
Director for special studies
Commodities
Economic analysis
Rural institutions and services
Statistics
Office of the assistant director-general
266. The Conference noted the activities of the Office of the Assistant Director-General, and approved the proposed program of work for 1966-67.
Director for special studies
267. The Conference, noting with approval the proposed studies for the ensuing biennium, emphasized the need of flexibility in the working arrangements for the Director for Special Studies.
Commodities
Recommendations and Suggestions on Points Affecting the Program of Work within the Approved Budget for the Biennium 1966-67
268. The Conference noted that the Commodities Division's basic role would continue substantially unchanged, and agreed that Its range of activities should be extended as proposed in line with the growing interest of Governments in commodity problems in the context of development.
269. The Conference took note of the guiding lines for the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), recently adopted by the UNCTAD Committee on Commodities, which indicated that the UNCTAD bodies would continue to look to FAO for substantial assistance on agricultural commodity questions. (See paras. 57 and 72 to 80.)
270. The Conference emphasized the importance of work on Individual commodities, and recommended that further attention be given to timely analysis of deteriorating commodity situations. The Conference endorsed the proposals to carry forward the Division's work in the two important fields of processed products and competition from synthetics.
Recommendations and Suggestions cm Future Trends beyond the Biennium 1966-67
271. The Conference felt that the capacity of the Division to render specialized commodity advice and to contribute to international discussion and action in the fields of trade and food aid rested upon its program of commodity studies, commodity policy reviews and projections. The Conference recommended that the work in these, fields be further developed.
272. The Conference noted that more Intensive work would have to be undertaken on the linking of commodity policy with economic and agricultural planning. The Division should be ready to assist developing countries in the strengthening of their own commodity analysis work and in the formulation of their commodity policies in the light of world and regional commodity trends and prospects. Such work would involve more contacts with developing countries and increasing participation in field programs. It would also can for more study of the commodity aspects of regional integration arrangements and possibilities.
<section>9</section>
Economic analysis
Recommendations and Suggestions on Points Affecting the Program of Work within the Approved Budget for the Biennium 1966-61
273. The Conference recognized that FAO was called upon to provide a worldwide analysis of agricultural development, and that trends and policies in the developed regions were of great importance in themselves and because of their influence on the export and import situation of the developing regions. The Conference supported the increasing attention being given to the significance for development of agricultural industries, including both industries processing agricultural products and the auxiliary industries manufacturing agricultural requisites, and noted that a special chapter on this question would appear in the 1966 State of Food and Agriculture and that papers on the same subject were in preparation for presentation to other forums.
274. The Conference took note of the Division's plan to prepare for the FAO regional conferences. in 1966, Jointly with the FAQ/IBRD Co-operative Program, a study on sources of finance for agricultural development, and suggested that consideration might be given later to expanding this study Into a handbook.
275. The Conference stressed the importance of a continuing close relation between the FAO work on marketing and on agricultural co-operatives.
276. The Conference endorsed the recommendations of technical conferences and training centers held in the Near East and Africa to establish marketing commissions or working parties for those regions to facilitate the improvement of marketing methods and organization and the development of intraregional trade, provided this could be done within the limits of the approved divisional budget. (See para. 280.)
277. The Conference, noting the close working relations between the Organization and the United Nations Regional Development and Planning Institutes in the field of training for agricultural development planning, recommended that:
(a) This co-operation should be further strengthened and intensified, and that
(b) The Director-General should give high priority to the holding of regional and subregional courses and seminars in agricultural development planning, particularly in Africa, Asia and Latin America.
278. The Conference recommended that the Director-General should incorporate the Regular Program Technical Assistance into the continuing program of the Organization in 1966-67, since the work had proved of value and since this would facilitate the recruitment of qualified staff.
Recommendations and Suggestions on Future Trends beyond the Biennium 1966-67
279. The Conference noted the value of the growing technical assistance and operational programs of the Division, but considered that, to be fully effective, these programs had to continue to be based on the regular program of analysis and basic studies. In order to ensure that there were adequate resources available for the essential analytical work, the Conference recommended that the Director-General consider strengthening the Division in the work program for 1968-69.
280. The Conference recommended that, if funds were not available in 1966-67 for the setting up of marketing commissions or working parties in the Near East and Africa, mentioned in para. 276 above, the Director-General should give consideration to the provision of finance for this purpose in the 1968-69 Program of Work and Budget.
281. The Conference noted that the applications for participation in the 1965 Training Course on
Agricultural Development Planning had far exceeded the number of fellowships available, and recommended that the Course be made annual as from the 1968-69 biennium.
Rural institutions and services
Recommendations and Suggestions on Points affecting the Program of Work within the Approved Budget for the Biennium 1906-67
282. The Conference noted that comprehensive plans for technical education and training, embracing all levels and areas of specialization in food and agriculture, were essential for effective and economical use of resources in preparing farmers, foresters, fishermen, and the technicians, scientists and administrators who serve them, for an active role in agricultural development.
283. The Conference having endorsed the proposed strengthening of youth activities, emphasized that the most urgent need of many developing countries was for practical agricultural education and training programs with particular emphasis on intermediate levels, i. e. the training of technicians in the wide range of skills needed to implement development projects and to train farmers, their wives and youth in new methods and improved techniques. The Conference therefore recommended that bath the Organization and Member Governments place more emphasis on training of this kind.
284. The Conference noted that agricultural extension had assumed great importance in the light of the rapidly proceeding change from a subsistence to a market economy in most developing countries. This required a readiness to abandon traditional attitudes and to accept now concepts of agricultural production and farm management (see also para. 44).
285. The Conference recognized that a sound organizational structure for the proper administration of all services essential to agricultural development should stress the need for an integrated approach involving all principal aspects of agricultural Improvement, research, education and training, extension, land tenure reform, credit, marketing and farm supplies.
286. The Conference further noted that farming progress and the full mobilization of human resources were greatly dependent upon the improvement of general education in rural areas including literacy pro,-,rams, and that general education subjects Including the basic sciences were the indispensable basis for technical education and training in agriculture. In many developing countries the quality of general education in rural areas was such that Intelligent young people who could render valuable service in farming progress and agricultural development through further vocational, technical, and professional training were denied the opportunity to do so, and in a considerable number of developing countries it was primarily the urban youth who had the educational qualifications to enter agricultural training institutions at the middle and higher levels. Agricultural services were thus often staffed with persons lacking knowledge of farmers and the rural environment, and the
practical skills necessary to translate the findings of research Into improved farm practice.
287. The Conference considered that the activities of international agencies supporting national programs were essentially complementary, each making Its specific contribution to the achievement of a common goal, and that their efforts should be co-ordinated so that international support would have the maximum effect at the national level. It stressed that technical education and training in food and agriculture at the higher and intermediate levels, as well as agricultural extension and farmer training, were matters for which FAO, within the United Nations system, must continue to assume leadership and major responsibility.
288. The Conference noted with concern in this connection that the Organization had not always been able to fulfil Its complete responsibilities for agricultural education, as, despite the existing Agreement with Unesco the desired co-ordination of programs had not been achieved. This had, in some cases, deprived governments of valuable complementary experience accumulated in the two agencies and had led to duplication and contradictory practices in the rendering of assistance in this important field.
289. The Conference requested the Director-General to discuss this question with the Director-General of Unesco, with a view to finding ways for developing more effective co-ordinating arrangements which, through effective co-operation at all levels, would enable FAO fully to discharge its responsibilities in the field of agricultural education within the framework of the FAO/ Unesco Agreement relating to this area of work. In this connection, the Conference noted that the Agreement provided for co-ordination between the two Organizations in relation to both agricultural and general education. Furthermore, the Conference noted the need for full co-ordination within countries among ministries concerned with agricultural and general education, thus ensuring that governments take the same positions in the governing bodies of both FAO and Unesco.
290. The Conference therefore requested the Director-General to strengthen assistance to Member
Governments in developing agricultural education, training and extension programs, organizations and institutions.
291. The Conference recommended that the length of FAO training courses and seminars be adjusted so that participants would be able to assimilate the practical skills and training in methodology that constituted the subject matter of the courses. The Conference further suggested that seminars on land policy and settlement should be held at more frequent intervals than in the past.
292. The Conference recommended that Member Governments should prepare comprehensive plans for technical education and training at all levels, and in all areas of specialization in food and agriculture, and should ensure that such plans were Included in, or appropriately related to, agricultural development plans so as to ensure productive employment for those educated and trained.
293. The Conference recognized the urgent need for a sustained effort in the field of co-operatives and in complementary services, to ensure an integrated approach. It recommended that the Director General consider the possibilities of even, further increase in the professional staff assigned to the field of co-operatives, should savings prove possible elsewhere in the program of the Rural Institutions and Services Division during the next biennium. The Conference considered that the selection and design of studies in fields such as co-operatives, land tenure and land settlement be properly related to the requirements of action programs.
294. The Conference took note of the considerable experience gained in land reform and land administration in various countries, and recommended that in studying these subjects, special attention should be paid to administrative organization, to the problems of financing land reform and to advisory, legal and social measures. The Conference welcomed the forthcoming World Land Reform Conference and requested the Director-General to consider taking the necessary steps to establish commissions on land tenure and reform in the developing regions to collect and disseminate, in co-operation with the Member Governments of the regions, appropriate information and findings in this field. (See also paras. 46, 215 and 383.)
295. The Conference considered that in the application of resources for agricultural research in the developing countries greater emphasis should be laid on applied research specifically related to the problems of development, and that FAO should continue to encourage regional co-operation and coordination in the conduct of such studies and in the utilization of the results therefrom by neighboring countries with similar agro-ecological conditions. In this connection, the Conference noted the importance of achieving close co-ordination between FAO and Unesco on matters relating to agricultural research along the lines envisioned in agricultural education, as outlined in para. 289 above.
296. The Conference recognized the need to consider agricultural education and training in Africa relation to general education, and urged the Organization and Member Governments to make every effort to ensure the fullest co-ordination of programs in these fields.
297. The Conference felt that the particular nature of the Special Program for Agricultural Education and Training in Africa made It difficult to carry It out adequately on a temporary basis. It therefore recommended that it be integrated within the continuing Program of Work and Budget at the earliest possible opportunity within the ensuing biennium.
298. The Conference invite the Director-General to consider the possibility of carrying out a comparative study of the programs, certificates, degrees, etc., of international and national agricultural educational institutions, with a view to avoiding any misunderstanding through the use of similar designations for widely differing academic degrees. The Conference suggested that Unesco and the International Association of Universities be approached in order that they complete and bring up to date the Information compiled by the Association some years ago in answer to a request by FAO.
Recommendations and Suggestions on Future Trends beyond the Biennium 1966-67
299. The Conference noted that greater demands for assistance in the improvement of human resources and social institutions and in the organization of administrative services and research programs were likely to be made in the future. It therefore recommended that the Director-General give consideration to the further strengthening of these aspects of the Rural Institutions and Services Division's work, and in particular the fields of intermediate agricultural education, the training of farmers and their families and the establishment and strengthening of co-operatives and land reform. Should it not prove possible to strengthen the professional staff assigned to work on co-operatives during the 1966-67 biennium, this should then be given primary consideration in future programs.
300. The Conference endorsed Recommendation 4/64 of the Seventh FAO Regional Conference for the Near East and urged the Director-General to establish a Commission on Food and Agricultural
Education and Extension in the Near East region at the earliest possible time, on the understanding that the Member Governments concerned would be responsible for the expenditures incurred through attendance at such a Commission.
301. The Conference further endorse Recommendation 5/64 of the Seventh FAO Regional Conference for the Near East, and requested the Director-General to take the necessary steps to provide the essential specialized services to evaluate the present and future situation with regard to the supply and demand of qualified personnel at all levels in the fields of food and agriculture.
Statistics
Recommendations and Suggestions on Points Affecting the Program of Work within the Approved Budget for the Biennium 1966-67
302. The Conference stressed the need of many developing countries for technical and material assistance for participating in the 1970 World Census of Agriculture. Attention was drawn to the need for training personnel at higher levels which should serve as a means of further training, and the possibility of establishing regional institutes for research and training in agricultural statistics. This should not be limited to agricultural census methods but cover the entire field of agricultural statistics. Particular attention should be given to organizing such training courses for Africa.
303. The Conference invited the Director-General to discuss with the United Nations Special Fund the Possibility of the Fund helping to finance such institutes.
304. The Conference also recommended that the Director-General Investigate the possibility of appointing regional census advisers, as was done for promoting the 1960 World Census of Agriculture in Asia and the Far East, under a grant from the Ford Foundation.
305. The Conference considered that in further programing work for the Census, particular attention should be given to the co-ordination of the sections Employment in Agriculture and on Farm Population in the FAO Census Program with the relevant sections of the 1970 United Nations World Population Census. The Conference recommended further regional consultation on the classification of agricultural holdings in Europe in the programing work for the 1970 World Census of Agriculture.
306. The Conference recommended that efforts to promote food consumption surveys, which were a basic necessity of the Indicative World Plan and the only means of obtaining information on certain aspects of the world food problem, be Intensified, in co-operation with the Nutrition Division. The Conference recommended that work on consumption statistics should as soon as practical be expanded to include data on end uses of nonfood agricultural commodities, both through the preparation of general commodity balance sheets as well as through the inclusion of such commodities in special consumption surveys.
307. The Conference recommended that the Production Yearbook be split into two yearbooks, which might later be expanded, one dealing with production statistics and the other with economic and social statistics, provided that this could be done within the budget provisions approved for the 1966-67 biennium.
308. The Conference welcomed the plan to revise the base period of FAO index numbers of agricultural production, and recommended that the selection of the new base periods should take into consideration the need to have comparability with other types of Index numbers in agriculture and in other sectors of the economy.
309. The Conference noted the working arrangements being made with the United Nations Trade Center for the development of commodity trade statistics by trading partners, and drew attention to the need for avoiding duplication in the requests for the same type of trade statistics from countries.
Recommendations and Suggestions on Future Trends beyond the Biennium 1966-67
310. The Conference emphasized that sound development planning depended on reliable statistical data, which were frequently unavailable. The Conference was of the view that the work of promoting the development of national statistics should be the main theme of the Organization's long-term program of work on statistics. In this respect the Director-General was requested to (a) prepare in the immediate future a special program of development and improvement of agricultural statistics, and (b) accommodate in the 1968-69 program of work the implementation of basic steps and measures of this program, in connection with the preparations for the 1970 Census.
311. The Conference noted the importance of work on statistics of output, inputs and Income of agriculture, and recommended that such work should be included in the Statistics Division's program of work as soon as possible. In this connection the Conference recommended that more emphasis should be placed on the work on standardization of concepts, definitions and agricultural sector accounts methods.
312. The Conference stressed the usefulness of the manuals that had been published in the past, and recommended that the manuals on Methods of Collecting Current Agricultural Statistics and on the Preparation of Food Balance Sheets be revised and others, Including manuals on the Methodology Food Consumption Surveys and on Use of Aerial Photography in Agricultural Statistic be prepared.
F. Other activities
Conference council and other sessions
Office of the director-general
Department of administration and finance
Common services
Fellowships
Area liaison service (regional offices)
Freedom from hunger campaign
Miscellaneous expedition and contingencies
Reserve to cover possible future mandatory increases
Miscellaneous income
Conference council and other sessions
313. The Director-General's proposals with respect to Chapter I of the draft Program of Work and Budget for 1966,67 were approved, as set out in document C 65/3. Some questions were raised however on the manner in which the regional conferences might most effectively be organized. Several delegates stressed that these conferences should put emphasis on the main problems of their regions, that the use of outside consultants should be limited and that they should be carefully selected. Some delegates also suggested that it was desirable to limit the number of FAO officials attending these Conferences to the necessary minimum. It was suggested that one of the major topics for discussion at the 1966 regional conferences should be the Indicative World Plan. The Conference also noted the steps which had been taken to strengthen co-ordination of schedules of all conferences and sessions in order to render participation of governments and FAO staff as effective as possible at a
minimum cost. (See also paras. 291 and 384).
Office of the director-general
314. The Conference approved the proposed program of work, Including the transfer of the Joint FAO/WHO Program on Food Standards (Codex Alimentarius Program) in the Regular Program as recommended at its Twelfth Session; and the appointment of an officer to deal with the growing volume of liaison work in respect of volunteers.
Department of administration and finance
315. The Conference noted that the increase of expenditure in the Department of Administration and Finance covered mainly the cost of strengthening the staff in the Division of Personnel and Management and the Division of Finance. It also took note of the establishment of a new Office of Social Security in the Assistant Director-General's office to deal with all Pension Fund, Staff Compensation Plan, and social security matters including health plans. In this connection note was taken that a study had been initiated with a view to introducing in 1966 a worldwide health plan which would afford uniform health protection for all staff members and their eligible dependents.
316. The Conference further took note of the proposal to explore the computer needs and problems of the Organization.
Common services
317. The Conference noted that the estimates for "Premises Expenses", show in paragraph 4(a) of document C 65/3, related only to current arrangements. In light of increases in Headquarters staff now foreseen under various programs, the need for additional office premises in the near future was becoming apparent. The Conference was informed that the costs of any such premises would be met from budgetary savings and from Income from extra-budgetary programs.
Fellowships
318. The Conference was informed that, as requested at the Twelfth Session of the Conference, the Program Committee had reviewed the André Meyer Fellowship Program, and that the Committee's proposals had been endorsed by the Council at its Forty-Fourth Session.
319. The Conference approved the division of the awards into two types, "André Mayer Research Fellowships" and "André Mayer Research Training Fellowships", the first type being open to candidates from all Member Nations of FAO and the second type being restricted to candidates from developing countries. It endorsed the proposal that a list should be prepared of research subjects of priority interest to FAO, which would accompany the next announcement of André Mayer Fellowships to Member Governments but emphasized that this list should not be restrictive, candidates from Member Nations being free to put forward research projects not appearing in the list. Such projects should be given full consideration by the Director-General if they were judged to be within the field of interest of FAO.
320. The Conference reviewed the statement of the Director-General in the Program of Work and Budget, and approved the continuation of the budget at the level of $150, 000 for the biennium 1966-67. It noted however that in spite of the increased budget approved by the Twelfth Session of the Conference, the expected growth in the number of fellowships awarded yearly had unfortunately not materialized, this being due to rising fellowship costs and also to the fact that a longer-than-average period of study was needed under the second type of award to obtain a good training in research. Several delegates indicated that the Director-General should give consideration to the need for increasing funds for the André Mayer Program in future biennia.
Area liaison service (regional offices)
321. The Conference noted that FAO's regional structure was under review, and that as a result the Director-General had not proposed any extensive strengthening of the regional structure for 1966-67. It endorsed the Director-General's proposals for the 1966-67 biennium, including the establishment of a subregional office for the east south zone of Africa, and a Liaison Officer for the Caribbean area.
Freedom from hunger campaign
322. The Conference approved the proposed program of work for the FFHC as set out in Chapter VIII of the draft Program of Work and Budget for 1966-67, including the integration of Central Campaign Costs into the Regular Program budget.
323. It was explained that the Director-General's proposal for three regional liaison officers had been made to enable FAO to take advantage of the impetus given to its work by FFHC, and to assist in the strengthening and development of the necessary Campaign structures which would enable the work to be expanded still further. The need for such officers had been strongly supported by the FAO regional conferences concerned.
324. The Conference noted that two of the three professional posts for Information duties now included in the budget had previously been financed from the FFHC Trust Fund. The third professional post of this type was required to strengthen the staff for the proposed FAO Magazine-
325. The Conference supported the Director-General's proposal to appoint three additional regional liaison officers for specific Campaign duties in Africa, Asia and Latin America and the proposal for the inclusion of three professional posts for information duties. Some delegates felt however that the increase in the number of General Service posts was disproportionately high.
326. In connection with the Second World Food Congress, some delegates questioned whether such a congress could make effective use of the Basic Studies which it was proposed should be made by consultants. It was suggested that such studies could be as effectively carried out by the FAO staff. The Conference was Informed that consultants were used by FAO only where very highly specialized knowledge was required, that the amount included for this purpose was quite small and that in fact most of the Basic Studies would be based upon existing material and information.
Miscellaneous expedition and contingencies
327. The Conference approved these items (See Chapters IX and X of C 65/3).
Reserve to cover possible future mandatory increases
328. The Conference noted that in Chapter XI of the Program of Work and Budget, provision had been made for a reserve of $1, 350, 000 to cover possible future mandatory increases, which, it had appeared last January, would have been realized by the time of the Thirteenth Session of the Conference. In addition, the Finance Committee and the Council had also recommended another $1, 740, 000 to cover the ICSAB salary recommendations for the Professional staff; an additional $450, 000 TO COVER a further increase in the cost of living in Rome, which the Council had in fact authorized the Director-General to make as of 1 December 1965; and a further $69, 000 to cover the unexpected rise in the Italian postal rates. These mandatory increases added up to $3,609,000. (See para. 386.)
Miscellaneous income
329. The Conference reviewed the Director-General's estimates of miscellaneous income, and incorporated increases, recommended by the Finance Committee at its Thirteenth Session and endorsed by the Forty-Fourth Session of the Council, involving the following amendments:
(i) Interest on investments and bank interest to read: $543,000
(ii) Refunds of prior period's expenditure and lapse of prior period's accrued liabilities to read: $1100000
(iii) Income from Commissary to read: $22,000
(iv) Balance of Publications Revolving Fund to read: $85000
(v) Other to read: $165,000
330. The budgeted estimate for Miscellaneous Income was accordingly increased from $860, 000 to $1,000,000 for the 1966-67 biennium.
G. Interagency relations and consultations on matters of common interest
Matters arising out of ECOSOC and ACC discussions
FAO/UNICEF relations
Codex Alimenitarius commission
FAO/IBRD co-operative program
Joint activities with the Inter-American development bank (IDB)
Matters arising out of ECOSOC and ACC discussions
331. The Conference reviewed the report of the Director-General on matters arising out of ECOSOC and ACC discussions (document C 65/24), and generally endorsed the manner in which the Director-General was arranging FAO's contribution to interagency co-operation and co-ordination matters.
332. Among other things, the Conference noted the standing arrangement for closer co operation between ECOSOC and ACC; measures initiated to provide ECOSOC with Information on approved programs of work of agencies, in lieu of the agencies having a uniform layout for the presentation of budgets which, in practice, would be difficult to achieve; the close liaison FAO was maintaining with the ECOSOC Advisory Committee on Science and Technology, and the manner in which the Director-General proposed to take into account the recommendations of the Committee in fulfilling his constitutional responsibilities and in formulating the work program of the Organization to the Conference.
333. The Conference took special note of Resolution 1078 of the Thirty-Ninth Session of ECOSOC on Land Reform, as being of great importance to social and economic development and of particular interest to developing countries. It recommended that the Director-General take the necessary measures to implement those aspects of the resolution which concerned the Organization. It also expressed particular Interest in the forthcoming UN/FAO World Land Reform Conference to be convened in 1966 (see also paras. 46, 215, 294 and 383).
334. Finally, the Conference noted with interest FAO's participation in the work of the Regional Economic Development and Planning Institutes, in view of the Organization's concern with planning and development programing in the agricultural sector. It also noted the stress laid by ACC on the importance of standing institutional arrangements between these Regional Institutes and substantially interested Specialized Agencies such as FAO (see also para. 277).
FAO/UNICEF relations
335. The Conference considered the report submitted by the Director-General on FAO/UNICEF relations (C 65/25). It noted that the recommendations in the Report of the FAO/UNICEF Joint Policy Committee, which met in New York from 31 March to 2 April 1965, had been accepted by the Forty-Fourth Session of the FAO Council and by the UNICEF Executive Board at their June 1965 Sessions. This Report had dealt largely with the technical aspects of FAO/UNICEF co-operation, within the policies laid down by the two Organizations in applied nutrition, the development of new protein-rich food, milk conservation schemes and the planning for food and nutrition needs of children in the overall development programs of different countries.
336. The Conference noted that UNICEF was continuing to contribute generously toward the provision of funds to FAO for FAO field project experts on jointly-assisted projects. It also noted with satisfaction that an increased number of such experts was now included in the FAO/EPTA programs and that the number of FAO/UNICEF jointly-assisted projects was increasing.
337. Note was taken of the new emphasis being placed in the FAO/UNICEF jointly-assisted projects on the increased importance of training nationals at country and/or regional levels, the intensification of activities leading to increased milk production to be processed in jointly aided milk plants, the increased attention being devoted to assisting young people in rural areas through various organized activities, often involving agricultural extension services, and the attention being devoted to ensuring adequate provision regarding children and young people in overall plans of national economic and social development.
338. Certain delegates were concerned about reported underutilization of some of the milk plants established jointly by FAO and UNICEF, which was caused by inadequate supplies of locally produced milk and of Imported skimmed milk powder. The Conference considered that a careful survey of the quantities of skimmed milk powder required, and of the availability and sources of such supplies needed, should be made before a new milk plant was established. It also requested that the Director-General of FAO and the Executive Director of UNICEF arrange for an investigation into the value of milk plants in the development of local dairying industries. This investigation should be carried out in close connection with the CCP study Economic Impact of Dairy Development in Developing The findings of this investigation should be made available to the Fourteenth Session of the Conference (see also para. 170).
339. A plea was made for increased representation of developing countries on the FAO/UNICEF Joint Policy Committee, and for greater rotation in membership. The Conference was of the opinion that this matter could be considered by the Council when a decision would next be taken on the membership of the Joint Committee and the policy of the two Organizations regarding the Committee's future.
340. The Conference welcomed the assurances given of increasingly close co-operation between the two Organizations, and expressed the hope that resources would be forthcoming to enable this joint program to be still further developed.
Codex Alimenitarius commission
341. The Conference reviewed the report of the Director-General on matters arising out of the Second and Third Sessions of the Codex Alimentarius Commission (document C 65/27), and expressed its satisfaction at the way in which work on food standardization was developing. The Codex Alimentarius Commission had adopted working arrangements which would afford all governments an opportunity to comment at each stage of the elaboration of standards by the Commission. The Conference stressed the importance of these procedures and also of the general principles which should be followed in preparing the standards. The Conference expressed the view that these arrangements constituted a practical and realistic approach to the problem of international agreement on food standards in relation to the two principal aims of the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Program, protection of the health of the consumer and the facilitating of international trade in food.
342. The Conference was pleased to note that some sixty countries were participating regularly in the work of the FAO/WHO Food Standards Program, and that following the Conference's approval of the incorporation of the FAO/WHO Food Standards Program into the Program of Work and Budget of the Organization the Director-General of FAO and WHO would be inviting all Members and Associate Members of both Organizations to join the Codex Alimentarius Commission. The Conference considered that as a result of the arrangements for a more stable method of financing, the number of governments who would wish to participate in the activities of the Commission was likely to increase. A much wider participation could also be expected from developing countries. The Conference welcomed this Increased interest, and noted a proposal of Member Countries of the African region for the establishment of a co-ordinating committee for Africa. The Director-General would be communicating with governments
in the African region concerning this proposal, and in the light of their replies a report would be submitted for consideration by the Codex Alimentarius Commission at Its next session.
343. The Conference approved the Incorporation of provision for the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Program in the Regular Program of Work and Budget for 1966/67, and noted that similar action had been taken by the Eighteenth World Health Assembly of WHO. The Conference further noted that in view of the rapid expansion and progress of the work by the subsidiary bodies of the Codex Alimentarius Commission, an increasing workload was falling upon the Joint Office of the FAO/WHO Food Standards Program. The Conference welcomed the fact that a careful review of the resources available to the Program would be made so that adequate finance and staffing could be provided for in the biennium 1968/69. In the mean time, and in view of the priority which should be given to work on International food standards, the Conference thought that there might be some strengthening of the Joint Office of the FAO/WHO Food Standards Program in 1966/67, should the Director-General be able to find the
necessary savings.
<section>a</section>
FAO/IBRD co-operative program
344. The Conference strongly supported the FAO/IBRD Co-operative Program, and noted with satisfaction the progress achieved so far by the joint FAO/IBRD teams (document C 65/50). It recognized that this partnership fulfilled an essential function by combining FAO's philosophy and experience in the field of agriculture with the Bank's resources and expertise in financing development. The Program Illustrated the appreciation by the Bank of the role of agriculture in economic development, and It was also a major vehicle for better co-ordinated and more effective international aid. The Conference took note that already 80 missions had been organized, and that for missions under appraisal in which the Program had participated the total of loans signed exceeded $100 million. It was generally agreed that the real test of the Program would be the extent to which it would promote an increase in agricultural development through enlarged possibilities of financing, and also the extent
to which its activities would cover the whole gamut of agricultural development, including forestry and fisheries. However, it was emphasized that It would be necessary to take care in promoting new projects to avoid the establishment of new institutions or services where these might duplicate those already established.
345. In view of the large number of suggestions which had been made for increased activities under the Program, many delegate expressed the hope that the resources of the Program would be reinforced, and also that the Bank would simplify Its procedures for loans in order to speed up implementation. Other delegates drew attention to the investment opportunities for forestry Including new plantations, transport and related industries, and in the food processing industries. Other delegates, while expressing appreciation of the Program, urged the need for caution in expanding the Program as FAO's financial participation, under the terms of the new agreement, was necessarily subject to the availability of financial resources. The Conference was informed that because of the heavy demand from Member Countries and the limited availability of staff, the Program was extremely selective in undertaking missions.
346. Satisfaction was expressed at the fact that continuous consultation had been maintained between the Bank and FAO at all stages of the work, and it was emphasized that this was Indeed necessary to secure smooth transition from study to action. The Conference recognized that the responsibility for final appraisal rested with the Bank but expressed the hope that, an a result of the present partnership between the two organizations, It should now be possible in the evaluation of the projects to take into account. all aspects of agricultural development, and that in measuring the Impact of particular projects a broad view should be taken so as to reflect all aspects relating to the economic justification rather than to confine appreciation to their direct benefit alone. For this type of evaluation and activity the team approach, which the Program followed, and which received backstopping from FAO and its regional offices, was considered essential.
347. Many delegates suggested that the Program could fulfil an educational role in training or assisting in training counterpart staff from developing countries in the preparation of projects both in the course of mission work and by accepting trainees at Program head quarters. While it was recognized that there was great need for such training, it was pointed out that possibilities in this respect should be considered in the context of wider co operation between FAO and the Bank and taking due account of the training courses in agricultural planning and development currently organized by both institutions. Some delegates suggested that the Bank and FAO organize courses in the management and execution of agricultural projects as well. Theme courses could be of great use to many developing countries in implementing their agricultural development plans.
348. In the discussion of methods of work of the Program, the suggestion was made that detailed questionnaires should be sent if possible well in advance of the arrival of missions. There might also be need for arrangements for missions of longer duration than those at present organized under the Program. It was recognized, however, that this depended on the staff resources available. The suggestion was also made that some of the work of the Program be published as appropriate to provide guidance to governments in their work on project identification and preparation.
Joint activities with the Inter-American development bank (IDB)
349. The Conference was Informed that the Director-General and the President of the Inter-American Development Bank had signed, subject to approval by the Conference, a basic Agreement to co-operate in the identification, formulation and execution of agricultural development projects in the Latin-American region. Countries in this area were extremely interested in obtaining external financing for these types of projects and the Inter-American Development Bank, since its establishment in 1959, had paid considerable attention to granting loans for their implementation. Unfortunately, very often these projects were inadequately prepared and required considerable elaboration before being ready for financing. Within the framework of the Agreement, FAO, with its considerable experience, could make an Important contribution to their preparation and implementation.
350. The Conference was also informed that in spite of the fact that the Agreement was only a few months old, FAO and IDB were in the process of Identifying and preparing projects with a potential Investment of about U. S. $ 70 million, in twelve Latin American countries. For this purpose, the Director-General had temporarily appointed, as co-ordinator of the FAO/IDB activities, an officer of the Headquarters staff, who had been assisted by staff from the Latin American Regional Office. Among the projects for Immediate implementation were a colonization scheme in Argentina, the identification of small-scale irrigation works in Uruguay and the Improvement of Irrigation projects in Chile. Other projects -would follow in rapid succession.
351. The Conference noted that the FAO/IDB relationship within the framework of the Agreement comprised more than the simple assignment and payment of experts for specific tasks. The goal was an Integrated approach to each project and, consequently, prior planning and continuous follow-up became particularly Important.
352. Some delegates drew attention to the investment opportunities, also under this Program, for forestry Including new plantations, transport and related industries; and for the food processing industries.
353. The Conference recommended that the Director-General establish on a permanent basis, in the Latin American Regional Office, a post of co-ordinator of the FAO/IDB Program, subject of course to the availability of funds. The Conference also noted that similar agreements might be considered with other regional financial institutions now in the process of being created.
H. Technical co-operation programs
General considerations
Future conference review of development programs
Impact of field programs on the regular program
Co-operation between multilateral and bilateral aid programs
Increased technical assistance
International guarantee for government land reform bonds
Evaluation of conferences, seminars and visits of experts
General considerations
354. In considering FAO's activities in the field, the Conference noted the decision of the United Nations General Assembly to merge the management of the Expanded Program for Technical Assistance (EPTA) and the United Nations Special Fund (UNSF) into the "United Nations Development Program." The Conference felt that this merger would further improve the planning and implementation of development assistance.
355. The Conference, being aware of the complementary role of the two Programs, expressed the hope that the two types of development assistance would continue to be available to countries in need of such assistance. In this connection, the Conference felt that the EPTA-type assistance had played, and should continue to play, a crucial role in preparing, where feasible, the ground for UNSF-type assistance projects. Secondly, there were occasions when assistance on a small scale should continue to be given after the cessation of concentrated International assistance to national development projects. Thirdly, the EPTA-type assistance should continue to be available to countries requesting development activities which did not require or were not suitable for international assistance on a large scale.
356. The Conference, at earlier sessions, had emphasized more than once the need for developing countries to prepare carefully considered development plans in order to ensure the most effective utilization of limited resources. In this connection, the Conference stressed the need for careful consideration to be given to priorities for development projects, particularly those for which international assistance was requested. The establishment of sound priorities was of the utmost importance, both because it helped ensure the most effective use of internationally available development funds, and because the United Nations Development Program and bilateral assistance programs usually required participating countries to make considerable national efforts which in monetary terms in several cases exceeded the total of external funds being made available.
357. The Conference, recognizing the increasing demand for qualified experts required for development assistance work, requested the Director-General to consider ways and means by which the Organization could make still better use of the experienced personnel available in the world. The Conference further recommended that the Director-General should continue to study and implement procedures whereby delays in the recruitment of experts and associate experts would be reduced to a minimum, bearing in mind that full use should be made of the appropriate government agencies and nongovernmental organizations established in the Member Countries for the purpose of assisting in the location of suitable candidates.
358. The Conference realized that one of the difficulties in recruiting qualified staff was that for the field programs the Organization could not give career appointments. Some of the economically developed countries had contributed to the solution of this problem by creating at the national level a "pool of experts" to help ensure security of employment for staff between overseas international or bilateral assignments. The Conference was also informed that the entire question of recruitment and conditions of service for or United Nations field assignments would be subject to a systematic and analytical review by the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Program.
359. The Conference once again noted that several countries required technical assistance in order to fill gaps in the national personnel establishments caused by the absence of qualified national staff. It was reassured that Individual FAO experts could be given certain limited operational tasks in national institutions or departments, in accordance with the normal policies of the United Nations Development Program. In those cases where participating countries wished to have international assistance to fill a vacant technical post in the national establishment, they could include in their category I submission for technical assistance, a request for operational assistance which was now available from FAO and other Specialized Agencies under conditions similar to the United Nations OPEX Program.
360. The Conference noted with approval that, in considering requests from participating countries for larger United Nations Special Fund-type projects, the United Nations Development Program, in consultation with the Specialized Agencies, tried to be sure that the activities for which the requests were made were of high priority within the total Government development effort. The United Nations Development Program and the participating agencies, through their field representatives and headquarters staff, endeavoured to assist governments in this respect.
361. The Conference took note of a statement on behalf of the Director-General outlining the procedures followed in programing, preparation and execution of field projects in which evaluation took a prominent part (document C 65/LIM/7). Evaluation should continue to be given increasing attention, both on the part of participating governments, the agencies concerned, the Council and Conference.
362. One important factor in the evaluation of field programs and projects was constituted by the follow-up action taken by participating governments after technical assistance had ceased. Such a follow-up depended, of course, upon the nature of the project. In projects where national institutions had been supported or strengthened by international assistance, the follow-up action would be mainly a national effort. Other projects, particularly of the survey type which represented a truly preinvestment activity, required at the next stage financing which might be on only a national scale or supplemented by foreign financial assistance or investment comming from public and/or private sources.
363. The Conference noted the Importance which the Director-General was giving to adequate follow-up of the Organization's field projects. In this connection, it commended the session which had been held in October 1965 in Santiago, Chile, in full co-operation with the UNSF, IBRD and IDB, of Project-Managers in Latin America together with their national Co-Managers and other interested government officials to review the development of UNSF projects, particularly with regard to follow-up activities, including investment possibilities. The Conference recommend that the Director-General and the Administrator of the United Nations Development Program consider the organization of similar sessions in other regions in the future, in order to strengthen contacts between all those involved in the operation of development projects and, particularly in their Identification, preparation, execution and financing. The Director-General was also requested to consider the possibility of
arranging for the participation of representatives of bilateral aid programs in the above mentioned sessions.
364. The Conference recognized that, in order to accelerate adequate follow-up action Particularly of large scale projects, it was essential to prepare and distribute as quickly as possible the final reports containing the technical and economic data collected during the investigations and the recommendations for further action. The Conference, however, also recognized that the preparation and publication of such reports constituted an Increasingly large workload upon the Organization and that the process of careful preparation, printing and presentation of reports, especially where these included designs and maps, usually caused delays. While commending the arrangements made by the Director-General to reduce as much as possible this time lag, the Conference felt that it mould be desirable, before the finalization of the total report, to present separate parts of it on an informal basis to government a so that follow-up work could be started promptly.
365. The Conference considered the procedures followed in preparing and implementing UNSF-supported projects (document C 65/35). It recognized that, on the whole, the procedures for the implementation of projects were satisfactory. On the other hand delays had occurred during the preparatory and Initial stages of these projects, which should be avoided as much as possible in the future. The Conference agreed with the Director-General and the Representative of the United Nations Development Program, however, that more adequate preparatory work for the larger UNSF development projects would mean time well spent, since such sound preparation of projects would reduce considerably delays in implementation.
366. The Conference endorsed the continued discussions of the Director-General with the United Nations Development Program with a view to perfecting the preparatory work for the larger projects. In this connection, the Conference agreed that the establishment of "pre-projects" of a smaller size to prepare larger projects on the spot, in close co-operation with the government authorities concerned, was well worth further consideration.
367. In order to make full use of the available expertise, the Conference also recommended that more attention should be given by the Organization to the possibility of subcontracting the execution of development assistance projects, or parts thereof, to consulting firms or non commercial institutions.
368. The Conference stressed that missions visiting developing countries for project Identification and preparation be properly co-ordinated between the Organization and the other United Nations agencies Involved. It also recognized that the host countries should be given as much advance notice an possible of the dates of much visits in order to allow for adequate preparations to be made by the governments concerned.
369. The Conference agreed that in drawing up development projects adequate attention should be given to the marketing of agricultural, fisheries and forestry products. Surveys and studies of internal and external market possibilities should be included in these projects in order to help ensure the best economic returns to the producer. Although several of the United Nations Development Program projects executed by the Organization included or were related to marketing studies and training in marketing, the Conference felt that the governments concerned should pay more attention to these important aspects in their future requests for development assistance projects, where appropriate. It also le toted the Director-General me to give high priority to requests of Member Governments for assistance in the planning and preparation of prows related to improved marketing of agricultural, fisheries and forestry products
370. The Conference reiterated that the Organization's work in planning, managing and evaluating Us development programs was a functional element of Its operations; nevertheless It recognized that the preparation, evaluation, execution and co-ordination of individual projects as well as programs as a whole, constituted a considerable task for the Director General, particularly since this had greatly increased in volume and scope. The Conference therefore request that continuous attention be given to equipping the Organization more adequately for carrying out these tasks. It also recommended that the Director-General continue to arrange for attention to be given by the Organization to adequate follow-up of preinvestment activities.
Future conference review of development programs
371. The Conference reiterated that development assistance funds enabled the Organization to give effect to Article 1 (3) of its Constitution, and hence to accelerate progress toward Its general alms. Since the activities under these funds had increased considerably in recent years, both in volume and scope, the Conference decided that more attention should be given at each of Its sessions to a detailed review and evaluation of these activities, in terms of both policy and operations. Consequently, the Conference decided that Institutional arrangements should be so constituted as to provide for the efficient discharge of the Organization's field program responsibilities, including an appropriate review of Its field activities.
372. The Conference recommended that the proposed review should include, but not necessarily be limited to:
(a) The effectiveness of field projects in the technical, operational and economic sense, especially with regard to their impact on agricultural development in the countries concerned and their influence on the state of food and agriculture in the world.
(b) The effectiveness of the Organization's machinery for planning and evaluating Individual projects, of itself, and in its relations with the machinery of other organizations and of countries,
(c) The effectiveness of the Organization's management of its development assistance program.
373. This review should take into consideration, in particular and among others, the following matters:
(a) The arrangements by which the Regular Program contributed to development assistance, and by which Regular Program staff participated in the field program, and to what extent the Regular Program staff contributed to It and drew benefit from it.
(b) The need for continuing revision of the techniques of project evaluation in a technical, economic and operational sense.
(c) The importance and role of education and training in all development projects.
374. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 8/65
Future Conference Review of Development Programs
THE CONFERENCE
Considering that it falls within the competence of the Program Committee to examine the development assistance programs (Article XXV1, para 7(a) (iii) of the General Rules of the Organization),
Considering that the integrated analysis of these programs can only be made after sectorial examination by the Technical Committees, and further
Considering the great Interest of all Member Countries to participate in the review and evaluation of development projects, which participation would be possible only through consideration of the matter at each session of the Conference
Requests the Council to make arrangements, through its Program Committee or by such other procedures as It may find appropriate, for a detailed review and analysis of the development assistance programs and the impact of the field programs on the Regular Program, with particular regard to their effectiveness, and to prepare a report thereon;
Decides that this report should first be considered by the existing Technical Committees of the Conference, and subsequently by Commission II together with a special committee of Commission II on development assistance programs, or by such other method as may be agreed by the next session of the Conference based upon recommendations of the Council;
Notes that in making the above review the Council would need to consider carefully the documentation required for Council and Conference review; and
Suggests that this documentation should include for each particular project under review, information on matters such as the following:
(a) its relation to the national development plan, if such a plan exists, or alternatively to the national list of priorities for development;
(b) a descriptive summary of results achieved, including quantitative data and information;
(c) what steps have been taken by the government concerned to ensure training at all levels of national personnel needed to carry out and possibly amplify the project recommendations and results in the same field;
(d) how the international expert or experts have integrated their work into the national structures, and the way national counterparts have participated in the implementation of the project;
(e) where relevant, a detailed breakdown of investments following project recommendations, including the origin of funds made available - national, international or bilateral.
(Adopted 7. 12. 65)
Impact of field programs on the regular program
375. The Conference recognized the complementary nature of the two programs, and considered that field programs were an integral part of the Organization's activities. It felt that the Organization had greatly benefited. from the expansion which had taken place in the operational work. In a number of divisions, a very large proportion of total staff time was now devoted to field programs, while in others the proportion of time was less, mainly because of the smaller number of projects in the relevant subject matter fields. The Conference noted that a Division first welcomed enthusiastically the extension of Us activities through field programs and found it not too difficult to cope with the extra work, but that then as the number of projects grew, the inadequate rate of reimbursement for overhead costs made it impossible to recruit sufficient additional staff to cope with the additional work, with the result that the work of the Regular Program, authorized by previous
Sessions of the
Conference, was not done or was excessively delayed. Moreover the supervision of the field projects themselves could become seriously affected.
376. In this connection the Conference noted the following distribution of professional, staff by Divisions in the Technical and Economic Departments (Posts filled as of 31 October 1965).
HQ and Regional Offices of which
Field Project Personnel
Divisions
Total
Outposted to regions
UNSF Ag. Costs
UNSF
Other
TECHNICAL 
ADG and Atom. 18 6 2 - -
Fisheries 54 6 4 49 34
Forestry 58 14 11 128 61
Nutrition 47 14 2 6 62
Animal 36 5 5 93 112
Land and Water 64 5 20 210 155
Plant 44 4 7 82 83
Total TEC 321 54 51 568 507
ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL 
ADG 18 13 1 -
Commodities 42 - - - 2
Statistics 34 5 - 4 37
Economic Anal. 52 8 4 31 44
Rural 57 16 6 34 88
Total ESA 203 42 11 69 171
377. The Conference expressed its concern that funds voted for specific activities of the Regular Program were, in practice, spent on others, and it therefore reiterated Its view that the rate of reimbursement of headquarters costs was inadequate, even though a small improvement had been authorized. It requested the Director-General to continue his efforts to obtain an adequate level of reimbursement and urged Member Countries, through their representatives in other fora, to support the case for a higher rate.
Co-operation between multilateral and bilateral aid programs
378. The Conference recognized that It was essentially the responsibility of recipient countries to co-ordinate multilateral and bilateral aid programs, and that this should be done within the framework of the national development plans.
379. It noted that it was the policy of the Organization to lay great stress on the importance of close co-operation between FAO field staff and locally based bilateral aid officers.
380. It drew the attention of the Director-General to the need for encouraging much closer co-ordination between multilateral and bilateral programs, especially in the planning phases.
381. The Conference also urged the Director-General to encourage recipient countries to pay particular attention to the need for co-ordination of all forms of aid in preparing their national development plans.
Increased technical assistance
382. The Conference adopted the-following resolution,
Resolution No. 9/65
Increased Technical Assistance
THE CONFERENCE
Being aware that, although in some cases profound structural reforms are the decisive means for developing countries most swiftly and efficiently to achieve economic and social advancement, technical assistance can and should be a valuable additional contribution to progress in these countries,
Considering that the flow of technical and economic assistance to the developing countries is not yet fully adequate,
Realizing that technical assistance Is most useful in those developing countries which make serious efforts and adequate reforms of their own to overcome their backwardness,
Recommends that FAO should endeavor to secure increased technical assistance programs for these countries, bearing in mind the original guiding principles of an expanded program of technical assistance for economic development.
(Adopted 7.12. 65)
International guarantee for government land reform bonds
383. The Conference recognized the importance of the problem of financing land reform, and in this connection considered the following draft resolution supported by it number of delegations for the guaranteeing of land reform bonds by an international credit agency:
"The Conference,
Considering the discussion held during the Forty-Fourth Session of the Council, recorded in the Report at that Session, on the advisability of having studies conducted on the feasibility of obtaining an International guarantee for government land reform bonds,
Recommends. that: (a) early practical steps be taken to finalize the proposal for the establishment within an international credit agency of a system of guarantees for bonds issued in payment for land by countries that carry out land reform; (b) the responsibility for the financial servicing of such bonds devolves upon the country issuing them, and that only in case of "force majeure duly confirmed by the guaranteeing body shall this system of international security come into operation; and (c) that the underwriting body shall provide such guarantee after a study of the land reform legislation of the country concerned. "
However, other delegates were not in full agreement with this draft resolution, especially since studies were in progress. The Conference welcomed the fact that the Director-General had initiated such studies, and that a first report would be available in time for the World Land Reform Conference, to be held in 1966. The Conference expressed the hope that these studies would lead to a successful solution of the problem of financial assistance for land reform (see also paras. 46, 215, 294 and 333).
Evaluation of conferences, seminars and visits of experts
384. The Conference considered that conferences, seminars and visits of experts were not necessarily the most appropriate or beneficial of activities unless preparatory work was improved and the activities were vigorously followed up. The Conference recommended that the Director-General should give due consideration to the possibility of reviewing and evaluating, within the Organization, the past work of this kind with a view to ascertaining whether it had made an effective contribution to the achievement of the goals of the Organization and what, if any, improvement in the preparatory and follow-up work might be necessary (see also paras. 291 and 313).
I. Program of work and budget 1966-67
Appropriations for the biennium 1966-67
385. The Conference was in support of the Program of Work and Budget as proposed by the Director-General and recommended by the Council. Many delegations expressed the view that the level of the budget represented a reasonable reconciliation between the expanding demands on FAO and the administrative and resources problems created by a rapidly rising budgetary level. They felt that the proposed increase was reasonable, bearing in mind the innumerable activities of the Organization.
386. A substantial number of delegations considered the budget level conservative in the light of the urgent needs of developing countries. On the other hand, quite a number of delegations, while being in support of the level of the budget in existing circumstances expressed concern regarding the rate of growth of the budget, and the hope was expressed by some delegates that in the future the budget level would be stabilized. One delegate expressed the point of view that the budget could be kept at a lower level. The view was expressed that It would first be necessary to go through the phase of putting the agricultural economy of developing countries on a sound basis and in particular providing the necessary trained staff before the budget level could be stabilized. Some delegates felt that the mandatory increases should have been explained in greater detail and with more clarity. One delegate expressed the view that It was desirable to have a functional classification of
the budget to make It easier for Member Nations to understand.
387. In accordance with Article XVIII, paragraph 5 of the Constitution, the Conference adopted the following resolution by a vote of 71 in favor, 0 against and 2 abstentions:
Resolution No. 10/65
Appropriations
THE CONFERENCE
Having discussed the Director-General's Program of Work and Budget and the conclusions of the Technical Committees and Commissions Approves the Program of Work proposed by the Director-General for 1966-67;
Resolves that for the financial period 1966-67.
1. Appropriations are voted for the following purposes:
Chapter I - Conference and Council 504,500
Chapter II - Office of the Director-General 2,526,250
Chapter III - Department of Public Relations and Legal Affairs 71,3501,700
Chapter IV - Department of Administration and Finance 2,846,300
Chapter V - Common Services 5,067,600
Chapter VI - Technical and Economic Program 26,039,000
Chapter VII - Area Liaison Service (Regional Offices) 3,672,750
Chapter VIII - Freedom from Hunger Campaign 1,335,100
Chapter IX - Miscellaneous Expenditure 281,800
Chapter X - Contingencies 350,000
Total: $ 49,9741,000
2. The appropriations voted in paragraph 1 above should be financed by contributions from Member Nations and Associate Members after adjustment as provided in the Financial Regulations; for this purpose it is assumed that: the Administrative and Operational Servicing Costs accruing from the Expanded Program of Technical Assistance to the FAO Regular Program would be $1,657,293 for 1966 and approximately the same amount for 1967, totaling $3,314,000, of which, however, $1,000,000 would be applied to finance the increase in the Working Capital Fund, so that the EPTA lump-sum allocation available to the Regular Program Budget would be $2,314,000 for the biennium, leaving an amount of $47,660,000 to be assessed against Member Nations and Associate Members.
3. The contributions from Member Nations and Associate Members in 1966 and 1967 should be paid in accordance with the Scale adopted by the Conference at its Thirteenth Session (Appendix D).
(Adopted 6.12. 65)
<section>b</section>
J. Review of the organization's general structure
388. The Council, in Resolution No. 11/44 of its Forty-Fourth Session placed on the agenda of the Conference a proposal for the review of the organizational structure of FAO, and invited the Director-General to prepare the framework of such a review for consideration by the Forty-Fifth Session of the Council and by the Conference.
389. In Resolution No. 2/45 of its Forty-Fifth Session, the Council set forth its recommendations regarding the major procedural aspects of the proposed review on the basis of the Director General's proposals in para. 29 of C 65/2 8 Rev. 2. In this document the Director-General put forward his personal assessment of the factors which he felt merited priority consideration in determining the future structure of the Organization.
390. The Conference considered the comprehensive framework presented by the Director General and concurred with the Director-General's view that the basic objective of the review should be not a survey of detailed management procedures and operating efficiency, but on the contrary a broad forward-looking evaluation of the structure and of the employment of resources which the Organization will require in order to meet the growing demands upon its program and staff foreseen in the critical period ahead.
391. The Conference agreed that the Twentieth Anniversary of the Organization provided a timely occasion for a review of the organizational structure of FAO, particularly in the light of Its recent rapid growth, and the unavoidable changing emphasis of its activities in order to confront adequately the pressures of current and future developments. It therefore directed the Council to arrange for such a review to be conducted under the guidance of the Director General in consultation with an ad hoe review committee of the Council.
392. The Conference approved the Council's proposals for the conduct of the review, which were designed, in view of the broad scope and far-reaching objectives, to recognize, clearly and realistically, the inter-related and complementary responsibilities of both the Director-General and the Member Governments.
393. The Conference discussed the various phases of the review which appeared particularly pertinent to consideration by the expert review team, of the type of organizational structure that would contribute most effectively to the achievement of the Organization's objectives, within foreseeable resources. Delegates referred to the different aspects of the relationship between Headquarters co-ordination and. field operations, taking into account the special needs of developing nations; the extent to which the execution of operational functions could be delegated to regional offices within the basic centralized structure of the Organization; the strengthening of the role of regional offices through both additional posts and systematic rotation of Headquarters staff to regional and field activities; the role of fun-time country representatives.
394. Delegates also emphasized the need for relating structure to program priorities; the phasing of action designed to strengthen the structure so as to anticipate the gaps which could develop as new functions were assumed; the ensuring of balance between expanding technical activities and the essential operational and administrative support; the mechanism required to ensure co-ordinated programing relations with other United Nations agencies and regional bodies, and the most effective execution of technical assistance programs; the most suitable organizational status for certain major program activities; and the means of ensuring the effective exchange of information and effective working relations between the Member Governments and the Director-General and his staff.
395. It was recognized that, while the Organization might well need to be streamlined to facilitate operational effectiveness, this process of rationalizing its structure should not be regarded as synonymous with "pruning" in view of the inevitable increase in scope, complexity and urgency of the tasks falling to FAO.
396. The Conference requested the Director-General to invite Member Governments to submit their comments in writing. It agreed that the review, while taking Into account the points made by Member Governments at the Conference or subsequently in writing, as well as the analysis presented by the Director-General, should have a completely objective point of departure, and also reaffirmed that the conduct of the review was not do be regarded as affecting the Director General's authority for administering the work of the Organization.
397. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 11/65
Review of the Organization's General Structure
THE CONFERENCE
In recognition
of Resolution No. 11/44 of the Forty-Fourth Session and 2/46 of the Forty-Fifth Session of the Council,
And after considering
the paper presented by the Director-General (C 65/28 Rev. 2) in -response to Resolution No. 11/44,
Affirms
the need for a Review of the organizational structure of FAO in terms of evaluating its potential to meet the urgent responsibilities of the years ahead, with the view that a final report together with recommendations by the Director-General will be submitted to the Council at Its next pre-Conference session for consideration and submission to the Fourteenth Session of the Conference;
Directs
the Council to arrange for such a Review, to be conducted under the guidance of the Director-General in consultation with an Ad Hoe Review Committee, along the following lines;
1. The Review should concentrate on a broad study of the organization and top structure of FAO and become involved in the lower structure only to the extent necessary to resolve Issues that might develop;
2. Members of the Ad Hoc Review Committee should be selected by the Council with due regard to geographic factors and to that end It should consist of one Member Government's representative from each of the seven FAO regions. In order to insure that the Ad Hoc Review Committee to made up of highly competent individuals with deep Interest in and substantial acquaintance with FAO, it should consist of individuals who normally serve as senior members of delegations to the Council;
3. The Ad Hoc Review Committee should be. charged with the following responsibilities:
(a) it should consult with the Director-General with regard to his appointment of a Review Team to actually carry out the Review - such Team to be composed of three to five members, selected from among persons from various countries who have the essential management and/or substantive backgrounds and an understanding of the problems to be tackled. This Team should represent an appropriate balance between persons with management and substantive experience;
(b) the Ad Hoc Review Committee should further, in consultation with the Director-General, formulate the terms of reference within which the Review Team should make its study. In formulating such terms of reference account should be taken of the paper presented by the Director-General (C 65/28 Rev. 2) as well as of the views of Member Governments on the principal future responsibilities of FAO as expressed in the Thirteenth Session of the Conference and as communicated in writing through the Director-General to the Ad Hoc Review Committee. These terms of reference as well as the make-up of the Review Team should be reported to the Forty-Seventh Session of the Council (Autumn 1966);
(c) the Ad Hoc Review Committee should then continue to represent the Council in an advisory- liaison capacity with the Director-General with respect to the activities of the Review Team;
4. The expert Review Team should give consideration to the accepted goals of FAO and to the kind of organizational structure that would contribute to the achievement of those goals in the most effective, economical and appropriate manner,
5. A senior Secretariat official should be designated as the Team's liaison with the Organization
6. Since the actual work of the Review Team may not get under way until late 1966, the Director-General, in consultation with the Ad Hoc Committee, should develop estimates of probable costs and present them to the Forty-Seventh Session of the Council for consideration.
(Adopted 7.12.65)
<section>c</section>
VI. Constitutional, financial and administrative matters
A. Constitutional and legal matters
B. Financial matters
C. Administrative matters
A. Constitutional and legal matters
Amendment of the preamble of the constitution
Amendment of article V of the constitution - committee on fisheries
Increase in the number of council seats
Committees, working parties and panels of experts
Procedures which could be applied in the event of urgent issues arising between council sessions
Independent chairman of the council
Increase in membership of the committee on commodity problems (CCP)
Statutory report on the status of conventions and agreements, and on amendments thereto (article XIV of the constitution)
Relationship agreements with international organization
Statutes and rules of procedure of article VI bodies
Relations with international organizations other than the United Nations and specialized agencies, and granting of consultative status to international nongovernmental organizations
Technical committees of the conference
Convention on the privileges and immunities of tee specialized agencies amendment to annex
Amendment of the preamble of the constitution
398. The Forty-Fourth Session of the Council noted that the draft Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights which was before the Twentieth Session on the General Assembly of the United Nations formally recognized the fundamental right of everyone to be free from hunger.
399. While the FAO Constitution, which set out the purposes, functions and responsibilities of the Organization, clearly Indicated that this was the ultimate aim of all the work of the Organization, the Council considered that the Preamble of the FAO Constitution should not on such a problem be any less specific than the proposed Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
400. The Council, therefore, felt that a statement regarding humanity's right to freedom from hunger should be Inserted in the Preamble of the FAO Constitution.
401. Consequently, the Council, acting in accordance with the provisions of Article XX of the Constitution, proposed that the Conference at its Thirteenth Session make an appropriate amendment to the Preamble of the Constitution. Due notice of the amendment proposed by the Council was given to all Member Nations and Associate Members.
402. The Conference accordingly adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 12/65
Amendment of the Preamble of the Constitution
THE CONFERENCE
Considering that the ultimate aim of all the work of the Organization as reflected in its purposes, functions and responsibilities, embodied in the Constitution of the Organization is to ensure the fundamental right of everyone to be free from hunger,
Decides to amend the Preamble of the Constitution of the Organization by the addition of the words underlined below:
"The Nations accepting this Constitution, being determined to promote the common welfare by furthering separate and collective action on their part for the purpose of:
raising levels of nutrition and standards of living of the peoples under their respective jurisdictions;
securing improvements in the efficiency of the production and distribution of all food and agricultural products;
bettering the condition of rural populations;
and thus contributing toward an expanding world economy and ensuring humanity's freedom from hunger;
hereby establish the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, hereinafter referred to as the "Organization," through which the Members will report to one another on the measures taken and the progress achieved in the field of action set forth above.
(Adopted 1. 12. 65)
Amendment of article V of the constitution - committee on fisheries
403. The Conference, at Its Twelfth Session (November 1963), by Resolution No. 8/63 requested the Director-General to prepare, for consideration by the Council and the Thirteenth Session of the Conference, proposals to ensure that FAO would have, in future years, the status of being the leading intergovernmental body in encouraging the rational harvesting of food from the oceans and Inland waters.
404. One of the two main proposals made by the Director-General was the establishment of a permanent Committee on Fisheries made up of selected Member Nations. This. proposal was endorsed by the Forty-Third Session of the Council (October 1964) which also established an Ad Hoc Committee to report and make recommendations to the Forty-Fourth Session of the Council (June-July 1965) with a view to assisting that Session in taking action on Conference Resolution No. 8/63.
405. The Forty-Fourth Session of the Council discussed the alternative constitutional means by which a permanent Committee could be established (under Articles V, VI or XIV of the Constitution). While several Members favored the establishment of the permanent Committee under Article XIV of the Constitution, they agreed that the necessary procedures were too time consuming but that if the Committee could be established under Article VI or by amendment of Article V the permanent Committee itself could, of desired, take steps toward the establishment of a committee under Article XIV. Having considered the respective merits of Articles V or VI the majority of the Council preferred Article V and the Council therefore adopted a draft resolution to this effect for submission to the Conference.
406. This draft resolution, containing an amendment to Article V of the Constitution and a new Rule to be added to the General Rules of the Organization, was submitted to and amended by the Fifteenth Session of the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters (CCLM), which in turn reported to the Forty-Fifth Session of the Council (November 1965).
407. The Forty-Fifth Session of the Council adopted the amendments proposed by the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters, with exception of para. 7 of the new Rule which the Council decided to modify. The draft resolution thus amended was submitted to the Conference by the Council in document C 65/LIM/11.
408. The Conference decided to endorse the draft resolution, and accordingly adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 13/65
Committee on Fisheries
THE CONFERENCE
Noting that one of the major proposals prepared by the Director-General in response to Resolution 8/63 adopted at the Twelfth Session of the Conference is for the establishment of a permanent Committee on Fisheries within the framework of FAO,
Agreeing with the view expressed by the Council at its Forty-Third Session that the desired ends in international collaboration in fisheries might best be achieved through the establishment of a permanent Committee on Fisheries, consisting of selected Member Nations to deal with these matters and to advise the Conference and Council as well as the Director-General on the formulation, implementation and coordination of policy and on the Organization's programs and activities in this field,
Agreeing further with the recommendation made by the Council at Its Forty-Fourth Session that? in view of the considerations set out in the Director-General's proposals and the comments made at the Ad Hoc Committee on Conference Resolution No. 8/63 established by the Council at its Forty-Third Session, a Committee on Fisheries should be established by amending Article V of the Constitution, and that the composition and terms of reference of such a Committee should be governed by a Rule to be added to the General Rules of the Organization,
Also agreeing with the further recommendation by the Forty-Fourth Session of the Council that non-Member Nations should be eligible for membership in the subsidiary bodies of the Committee on Fisheries in the same way as they are for membership in Commodity Study Groups,
Adopts the following amendment to Article V.6 of the Constitution (words underlined to be added);
"6. To assist the Council in performing Its functions, the Council shall appoint a Program Committee, a Finance Committee, a Committee on Commodity Problems, a Committee on Fisheries and a Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters. These committees shall report to the Council and their composition and terms of reference shall be governed by rules adopted by the Conference. "
Amends the General Rules of the Organization by adding after Rule XXIX a new Rule XXX [the present Rules XXX to XXXVIII being renumbered XXXI to XXXIX], the text of which shall read as follows:
"RULE XXX
Committee on Fisheries
1. The Committee on Fisheries provided for in paragraph 6 of Article V of the Constitution shall be composed of not more than thirty Member Nations elected by the Council for a period of two years at the session of the Council immediately following the regular - session of the Conference. In selecting the members of the Committee the Council shall give due consideration to the desirability of ensuring adequate representation both of nations with special Interests in fisheries and of nations having Interests in different parts of the oceans and inland waters. The Council shall, as well, give due consideration to continuity of experience in matters dealt with by the Committee. The members of the Committee shall be eligible for reelection. The Committee shall elect its own Chairman from among its members.
2. Nomination of any Member Nation for election to the Committee shall be submitted in writing by one or more Member Nations to the Secretary-General of the Conference or Council by a deadline to be determined by the Chairman of the Council in time to be circulated on the morning of the day set for the election. A Member Nation may nominate Itself. Member Nations nominated shall signify their willingness to serve on the Committee if elected. Members of the Committee should, as far as possible, be represented by their most senior officers responsible for fisheries.
3. The provisions on voting arrangements of Rule XII of these Rules shall apply mutatis mutandis to the election of members of the Committee.
4. The Committee shall determine the date and place of its sessions. Normally the Committee shall hold two sessions during each biennium, to be convened by the Director-General in consultation with the Chairman of the Committee. One of these sessions shall be convened sufficiently in advance of the sessions of the Council held approximately midway between the regular sessions of the Conference, in order that the report of the Committee may be circulated to the Members of the Council, in accordance with the provisions of Rule XXV. 7 (a) of these Rules.
5. If required, the Committee may hold additional sessions on the call of Its Chairman or the Director-General or on request submitted in writing to the Director-General by a majority of the members of the Committee.
6. The Committee shall:
(a) review the programs of work of the Organization in the field of fisheries and their implementation;
(b) conduct periodic general reviews of fishery problems of an international character and appraise such problems and their possible solutions with a view to concerted action by nations, by FAO and by other intergovernmental bodies;
(c) similarly review specific matters relating to fisheries referred to the Committee by the Council or the Director-General, or placed by the Committee on its agenda at the request of a Member Nation in accordance with the rules of procedure of the Committee, and make recommendations as may be appropriate;
(d) consider the desirability of preparing and submitting to Member Nations an international convention under Article XIV of the Constitution to ensure effective international co-operation and consultation in fisheries on a world scale;
(e) report to the Council or tender advice to the Director-General, as appropriate, on matters considered by the Committee.
7. Any recommendation adopted by the Committee which affects the program or finances of the Organization shall be reported to the Council with the comments of the appropriate subsidiary committees of the Council. The reports of the Committee should, as in the case of certain other Committees established under Article V of the Constitution, also be placed before the Conference.
8. The Director-General or his representative shall participate in all meetings of the Committee and may be accompanied by such officers of the staff of the Organization as he may designate.
9. The Committee may adopt and amend its own rules of procedure, which shall be consistent with the Constitution and the General Rules of the Organization.
10. The Committee may, when necessary, establish subcommittees, subsidiary working parties or study groups subject to the necessary funds being available in the relevant chapter of the approved budget of the Organization, and may include in the membership of such subcommittees, subsidiary working parties or study groups Member Nations that are not members of the Committee and Associate Members. The Council may admit to membership of subcommittees, subsidiary working parties and study groups established by the Committee nations which, while not Member Nations or Associate Members of the Organization, are members of the United Nations. Former Member Nations of the Organization that have withdrawn leaving arrears of contributions shall not be admitted to membership until such time as they have paid up all such arrears, or the Conference has approved an arrangement for the settlement thereof, or unless the Council in special circumstances decides otherwise with respect to
such admission.
11. The subsidiary bodies referred to in the preceding paragraph may adopt or amend their own rules of procedure, which shall be approved by the Committee on Fisheries and shall be consistent with the rules of the Committee!'
(Adopted 1. 12. 65)
409. In the course of the discussion of the above resolution by the Conference, a number of Member Nations referring to para. I of the proposed new Rule which provided that the Committee on Fisheries should be composed of "not more than thirty Member Nations," expressed the view that on account of the great importance of fisheries to the majority of Member Nations of the Organization, the Committee should be composed of at least thirty members.
410. The Conference also recalled that during discussions in the Council of the Article of the Constitution under which the Committee should be established, some Member Nations had favored Article XIV of the Constitution. In this connection one Member Nation noting that according to para. 6 (d) of the new Rule, the Committee on Fisheries should consider the desirability of submitting to Member Nations an international convention under Article 311V to ensure effective International co-operation and consultation in fisheries on a world scale, felt that the Committee on Fisheries, when considering this matter, should take Into account all the statements in favour of establishing the Committee under Article XIV which had been put forward on previous occasions.
Increase in the number of council seats
411. At Its Twelfth Session the Conference decided to increase the number of Council seats to a total of thirty or thirty-one, and requested that before its Thirteenth Session the Council, in the light of considerations set out in the Report of the Twelfth Session of the Conference, take measures to:
(a) draft the necessary amendment to the Constitution and to instruct the Director-General to circulate it to Member Governments at least 120 days before the opening of the Conference Session, and also to draft the consequential amendments to the General Rules of the Organization so that the Increase in the number of Council seats could be effected at that Session;
(b) recommend to the Conference whether the increase in the number of seats should be three or four;
(c) study and recommend to the Conference the allocation of the additional seats to the various regions of the Organization;
(d) study and recommend to the Conference the means by which in each region stricter application of the principle of rotation of Council membership laid down in Rule XXII.-3(c) could be ensured in the future.
412. The Council at its Forty-Third Session considered this question, and recommended that the Conference at its Thirteenth Session increase the number of Council seats by four to a total of thirty-one, and proposed the text of amendments to the Constitution and General Rules of the Organization to Implement the change.
413. The Conference concurred with the Council's recommendation that the number of Council seats be increased from twenty-seven to thirty-one, and accordingly adopted the following amendments to the Constitution and General Rules of the Organization:
(underlined words to be added, [bracketed] words to be omitted)
Article V.1 of the FAO Constitution:
" A Council of the Organization consisting of [twenty-seven] thirty-one Member Nations shall be elected by the Conference ... "
Rule XXIII.1 (b) of the General Rules of the Organization:
"The Conference shall make such provisions as will ensure that the terms of office of [nine] ten Members of the Council shall expire in each of two successive calendar years and eleven in the third calendar year."
(Adopted .1. 12. 65)
414. The Conference also decided that three of the four additional seats be allocated to the African region and one to the Latin-American region. Some delegations were in favor of allocating one seat to the region of Asia and the Far East, and other delegations favored allocating one seat to the European region.
415. In order to meet or conciliate the differing points of view, certain delegations proposed the allocation of one of the four seats alternately to the region of Asia and the Far East and the African region,. and another alternately to the European region and the Latin American region; other delegations proposed the allocation of one of the four seats alternately to the region of Asia and the Far East and the Latin-American region.
416. In the light of the foregoing considerations, some delegations suggested a further increase in the. number of Council seats to provide for fair and equitable representation on the Council of all regions, in accordance with Rule XXII.3 (a), (b) and (c) of the General Rules of the Organization. The Conference appreciated the need, and requested that before its Fourteenth Session, the Council take measures to:
(a) prepare for the Conference proposals to increase by three the number of Council Members, one of these seats being allocated to the region of Asia and the Far East, the second to the European region, and the third to the Near East region;
(b) draft the necessary amendment to the Constitution and Instruct the Director-General to circulate it to Member Governments at least 120 days before the opening of the Conference Session, and also draft the consequential amendments to the General Rules of the Organization so that the increase in the number of Council seats could be effected at the Fourteenth Session.
417. The Conference recalled the principles enunciated in Rule XXII 3 of the General Rules of the Organization, and in particular the principle of rotation of Council seats, and noted the Council's proposal that advantage should be taken of the FAO regional conferences at future sessions to consider measures to achieve more effective Implementation of the principle of rotation of Council membership within the respective regions.
Committees, working parties and panels of experts
418. In 1961 the Conference requested the Council to undertake a study of FAO's expert committees and panels, pointing out that "while-this was a useful method of working, care should be taken to ensure that such groups or panels should only be set up for specific purposes and only for the length of time required to accomplish their main purpose, so that they may not develop into permanent bodies."
419. In accordance with the recommendations of the Program Committee which had studied the matter on behalf of the Council, the Council submitted its recommendations to the Conference (C 65/32).
420. The Conference welcomed the Council's report, which it considered would assist considerably in achieving greater co-ordination, and confirmed these recommendations, namely:
(a) adherence to the nomenclature used in Article VI of the Constitution;
(b) amendment of Rule XXXI as set out below;
(c) effective and economical application of the system of panels and expert committees,.
(d) application of the internal supervisory machinery proposed by the Director-General.
421. With regard to the nomenclature to be used, the Conference reiterated its earlier request that only the nomenclature used in Article VI of the Constitution be used in regard to bodies set up by FAO. In particular, the Conference Weed that for bodies set up under paras. 2 and 4 of Article VI, the following should apply:
(a) "Committee" applies to committees of selected Member Nations or Associate Members set up to study and report on matters pertaining to the purpose of the Organization;
(b) "Working Party" applies to working parties of selected Member Nations or Associate Members set up to study and report on matters pertaining to the purposes of the Organization;
(c) "Panel of Experts" is a list of experts selected in their individual capacity, on the basis of their expert knowledge, to give advice on specific subjects by correspondence and/or by participation in meetings of some or all of them;
(d) "Committee of Expert" and
(e) "Working Party of Expert," these terms apply to groups of experts selected in their personal capacity. Whether or not their members are drawn from a panel of experts, they can only be established on the authority of the Conference or the Council. They are governed by Rule XXXI.3 of the General Rules of the Organization, which limits the duration of the term of office of their members.
422. While recognizing that special problems arise when bodies are set up or sessions convened jointly with other United Nations Agencies or intergovernmental organizations, the Conference urged that every effort should be made to avoid confusion and adhere as far as possible, even in such cases, to the nomenclature established by FAO.
423. Attention was also drawn to departures from the established nomenclature in the case of bodies established under certain programs, such as Codex Alimentarius and requested the, Director-General to ensure that bodies established under such programs adhere to FAO practices.
424. With regard to the establishment of panels of experts or committees and working parties of experts, attention was drawn to the terms of Article VI-4 of the Constitution, whereby the Director-General consults with Member Nations, Associate Members and National FAO Committees on the establishment of panels of experts. Similarly, attention was drawn to Article XIII.4, and Rule XXXIV of the General Rules regarding the procedures to be followed to secure proper consultation with Governments in regard to relations between the Organization and national institutions or private persons.
425. With regard to conferences or sessions to which both Governments and Individuals or national institutions were invited, the Conference requested the Director-General to ensure that the requirements of the above provisions were also applied.
426. The Conference noted that the Council had emphasized the need for continuing and careful scrutiny of the complex of bodies and panels of experts appointed in their personal capacity on the one hand, and of ad hoc committees and working parties of government representatives on the other, to ensure the best use of the Organization's resources. The Conference requested the Council to undertake a review of all such bodies and panels of experts over a four-year cycle, to ensure that these bodies are maintained only for the length of time required to accomplish their main purpose and do not develop Into permanent bodies.
427. The Conference also requested the Director-General to avoid proliferation of such committees, working parties or panels of experts and to avoid duplication of functions with existing bodies, either within the Organization or established by other agencies.
428. The Conference welcomed the Director-General's initiative regarding the internal supervisory machinery established by him to ensure the implementation of the foregoing proposals, as set out in document C 65/32, para. 17 (a), (b), (c), (d).
429. The Conference agreed that for convenient reference the foregoing paragraphs dealing with committees, working parties and panels of experts should be incorporated in the next edition of the Basic Texts, Volume II.
430. Finally, in the light of the foregoing, the Conference adopted the following amendment to Rule XXXI of the General Rules of the Organization in order to clarify the constitutional position of such committees, working parties and panels of experts:
"Rule XXXI
Commissions, Committees and Working Parties
1. Commissions, committees and working parties, set up in pursuance of Article VI of the Constitution may establish subcommissions, subcommittees or subsidiary working parties either to perform a substantive part of their functions or to carry out a specific task. Associate Members may participate in the deliberations of such subcommissions, subcommittees or subsidiary working parties but shall not hold office nor have the right to vote.
2. The first paragraph of this Rule shall be interpreted in conformity with the provisions of Rule XXIV paragraph I (e) (v) of these Rules.
3. A panel of experts as referred to in Article VI, paragraph 4 of _the Constitution, is a list of experts selected in their Individual capacity on the basis of their expert knowledge to give advice on specific subjects by correspondence, or by participation in conferences or consultations when it is so decided by the Director-General.
4. The terms of office of members of committees of expert or working parties of experts appointed in their personal capacity in conformity with [the provisions of] paragraph 2 of Article VI of the Constitution shall not exceed [three] four years but shall be renewable. The terms of office of members of panels of experts shall likewise be for a maximum of four years but shall be renewable. Appointments to fill vacancies [in membership] in committees of experts, working parties of experts and panels of experts [due to the expiration of terms of office or to the death or retirement of a member] shall be effected in the same manner as the original appointments. When a vacancy occurs due in resignation, death disability or any other reasons, the terms of office of the new appointee shall be for the remainder of the term of office of the member that is being
5. Unless other specific arrangements are made, the expenses incurred by individuals invited in personal capacity to attend sessions of commitees of experts of working parties of experts, or conferences or consultations of experts, shall be defrayed by the Organization in accordance with its travel regulations."
Procedures which could be applied in the event of urgent issues arising between council sessions
431. When considering the Memorandum of Understanding between FAO and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, which had been Biped by the Director-General of FAO an interim and conditional basis with a proviso that the continuation thereof would be subject to the approval of -the FAO Council, the Forty Third Session of the Council noted that there was a. lacuna in the FAO Statutes with respect to urgent matters arising between sessions of the Council and requiring Council approval. The Council therefore requested the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters (CCLM) to examine the possibility of introducing procedures which could be applied in the event of urgent Issues arising between Council sessions.
432. The Council, after having considered the Report of CCLM (CL 44/4, paras. 1-9), endorsed the suggestion of CCLM that a procedure might be Introduced to deal with cases of exceptional urgency arising between Council Sessions, and that this could be effected by the adoption of an appropriate amendment to Rule XXV of the General Rules of the Organization,
433. The Conference, having given careful consideration to the various aspects of the amendment recommended by the Council, adopted the following Resolution:
Resolution No. 14/65
Procedures which could he Applied in the Event of Urgent Issues arising between Council Sessions
THE CONFERENCE
Having considered the recommendations of the Council, as contained in the Report of the Forty-Fourth Session of the Council, designed to introduce a procedure which could be applied in the event of urgent Issues arising between Council Sessions;
Decides to amend Rule XXV of the General Rules of the Organization by the addition thereto of the following paragraph 14:
"Should matters of exceptional urgency arise between two sessions of the Council, on which Council action to required, the Director-General, after having consulted the Chairman of the Council, or after notifying him, should such consultation not prove feasible, may seek the opinion of the Members of the Council by any rapid means of communication, informing at the same time all other Member Nations as well as Associate Members and the Chairman of the Council. Subject to the provisions of paragraph I of this Rule, the Director-General may proceed with the action contemplated, as soon as he has received concurrence by cable or letter either from the majority of the Members of the Council in cases where decisions of the Council normally have to be taken by a majority of the votes cast, or from two-thirds of the Members of the Council where a qualified majority is required. Any such action shall be Immediately reported by the Director-General to all Member Nations and
Associate Members of the Organization and to the Chairman of the Council."
(Adopted 1. 12.65)
Independent chairman of the council
434. The representative of Finland at the Forty-Third Session of the Council had drawn the attention of the Council to a problem which had arisen as the result of the untimely decease of the
Independent Chairman of the Council; namely that there was no provision for a successor to exercise his functions prior to the election of a new Independent Chairman of the Council by the following Session of the Conference. The Forty-Third Session of the Council referred this matter to the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters (CCLM), which reported thereon to the Forty-Fourth Session of the
Council.
435. The Forty-Fourth Session of the Council considered the various possible solutions suggested by CCLM and adopted Resolution No. 4/44, recommending that the Conference add new paragraphs 3 and 4 to Rule XXIII of the General Rules of the Organization.
436. The Conference endorsed the Council's recommendation, and adapted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 15/6
Independent Chairman of the Council
THE CONFERENCE
Decided to amend Rule XXIIII of the General Rules of the Organization by the addition of new paragraphs 3 and 4 to read as follows:
"3. If the Independent Chairman of the Council is prevented from exercising his functions for the remainder of his term of office due to resignation, disability, death or for any other reasons, his functions shall ipso facto be assumed by the Chairman of the Program Committee for the remainder of the term of office. The Director-General shall forthwith notify all Member Nations and Associate Members and the Chairman of the Program Committee thereof.
4. The Chairman of the Program Committee shall receive on a pro rat basis for such period as he may be called upon to act as Chairman of the Council, such emoluments as were approved by the Conference when determining the conditions of appointment of the Chairman of the Council whom he succeeds."
(Adopted 1. 12-65)
Increase in membership of the committee on commodity problems (CCP)
437. The Conference considered the Report of the Forty-Fourth Session of the Council, and agreed with the Council that the present membership of the Committee on Commodity Problems did not allow for participation by African Member Nations on a scale commensurate with their representation in the Organization and the role they played in the world production of, and trade in, agricultural commodities. The matters discussed in the Committee on Commodity Problems were of great interest to those countries since in most of them, agricultural production and exports formed the largest sector of economic activity.
438. The Conference therefore decided to increase the membership of the Committee from the present number of 24 to 30, and adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 16/65
Membership of the Committee on Commodity Problems
THE CONFERENCE
Noting para. 145 of the Report of the Forty-Fourth Session of the Council,
Acting in accordance with the provisions of Rule XXXVIII of the General Rules of the Organization,
Decides to increase the membership of the Committee on Commodity Problems to 30 members; and
Amends accordingly the first sentence of para. I of the Rule I= of the General Rules of the Organization, to read as follows:
"The Committee.... shall be composed of 30 Member Nations...";
Recommends that the Council, in electing the Committee, should take into account the increase in number of Member Nations from the African region and their interest in world agricultural production and trade.
(Adopted 1. 12. 6 5)
439. The Conference noted that under the General Rules of the Organization, membership of the Committee on Commodity Problems was based not on regional representation, but on balanced representation of exporting and importing countries, and continuity of experience in matters dealt with by the Committee.
440. While many delegations felt that the resolution adopted did not establish precise means for ensuring the implementation of the objective of increased membership of African countries on the Committee, the Conference felt that this question could be reviewed by the Council in the light of developments as regards the actual future membership of the Committee.
Statutory report on the status of conventions and agreements, and on amendments thereto (article XIV of the constitution)
441. Para. 5 of Rule XXI of the General Rules of the Organization provides that "the Director General shall report to the Conference whenever a convention, agreement, supplementary convention or agreement has, in accordance with its terms, come into force or ceased to be in force, or has been amended and the amendments come into force.
442. The Conference had before it document C 65/39 entitled Statutory Report on the Status of Conventions and Agreements and on Amendments thereto which was submitted to it in accordance with the above requirement, as well as Appendix A thereto, setting forth the Spanish version of the Agreement for the Establishment of a General Fisheries Council for the Mediterranean (GFCM), which had been formally adopted by GFCM at its Eighth Session (Rome, 20-25 May 1965)
443. The Conference approved the Report, and adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No, 12/65
Agreement for the Establishment of a General Fisheries Council for the Mediterranean (GFCM
THE CONFERENCE
Recalling Resolution No. 39/63 whereby, at its Twelfth Session, it approved the amendments to the Agreement for the Establishment of a General Fisheries Council for the Mediterranean which were adopted by that Council at its First Special Session (Rome, 22 May 1963),
Noting that heretofore French and English had been the authentic languages of the Agreement as registered with the Secretariat of the United Nations, but that when amending the Agreement the General Fisheries Council for the Mediterranean, at its First Special Session, had provided in Article XV of that Agreement for authentic versions in three languages, namely
English, French and Spanish,
Having taken cognizance of the Spanish text of the Agreement as subsequently adopted by the General Fisheries Council for the Mediterranean at its Eighth Session (Rome, 20-25 May 1965), and appearing in Appendix A to document C 65/39,
Hereby approves the aforementioned Spanish text as the authentic Spanish version of the Agreement for the Establishment of a General Fisheries Council for the Mediterranean, and which is reproduced in Appendix E hereto; and
Request that this authentic Spanish text of the Agreement be duly registered with the Secretariat of the United Nations.
(Adopted 1. 12. 65)
Relationship agreements with international organization
a) Agreement with the intergovernmental maritime consultative organization (IMCO)
b) Agreement for the co-ordination of FAO and Inter-American development bank (IDB) activities
c) Agreement between FAO and the international bank for reconstruction and development (IBRD)/ international development association (IDA)
a) Agreement with the intergovernmental maritime consultative organization (IMCO)
444. The Conference noted that a draft Relationship Agreement with the Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization had been submitted to the Council at its Forty-Third Session. The Council, acting in conformity with the provisions of Rule XXIV,.4(c) of the General Rules of the Organization, had approved the aforementioned Agreement and transmitted it to the Thirteenth Session of the Conference for confirmation, in accordance with Article XIII,1 of the Constitution.
445. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 18/65
Agreement with the Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative
THE CONFERENCE
Considering the desirability of concluding an Agreement with the Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization for the purpose of ensuring co-operation between FAO and that Organization,
Noting that the Forty-Third Session of the Council, acting in accordance with the provisions of Rule XXIV. 4(c) of the General Rules of the Organization, had entered Into such an Agreement subject to confirmation by the Conference,
Noting further with satisfaction that the Assembly of the Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization at its Fourth Session, held in Paris from 15 to 29 September 1965, approved the proposed Agreement,
Confirms, in conformity with the provisions of Article XIII,1 of the Constitution of the Organization, the decision of the Forty-Third Sessions of the Council approving the Agreement between FAO and the Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization, the text of which is appended as Appendix F hereto.
(Adopted 1. 12. 6 5)
b) Agreement for the co-ordination of FAO and Inter-American development bank (IDB) activities
446. The Conference noted that the Council at Us Forty-Fourth Session; by Resolution No. 8/44, had approved in accordance with Rule XXIV. 4(c) of the General Rules of the Organization, an Agreement between FAO and the Inter-American Development Bank for the co-ordination of their activities, which Agreement was submitted to the Conference for confirmation.
447. The Conference also noted that this Agreement had been negotiated on the basis of the Spanish text, and that there were some discrepancies between the English translation made by FAO, and approved by the Council (document C 65/40) and a translation made by IDB. As consultations had been held to reconcile these two translations, the Conference derided that the English translation, reproduced in document C 65/40 Sup. 1, which resulted from these consultations, should henceforth be considered the official English version of the Agreement.
448. Considering that co-ordination of the activities of FAO and IDB would be to the advantage of Member Nations in the Latin -American region, the Conference decided to confirm the Agreement approved by the Forty-Fourth Session of the Council, and adopted the following resolution.
Resolution No. 19/6
Agreement for the Co-ordination of FAO and Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) Activities
THE CONFERENCE
Confirms, in conformity with Article XIII. 1 of the Constitution of the Organization the decision of the Forty-Fourth Session of the Council approving the Agreement between the Organization and the Inter-American Development Bank, the text of which Is attached as Appendix G hereto.
(Adopted 1. 12.65)
<section>d</section>
c) Agreement between FAO and the international bank for reconstruction and development (IBRD)/ international development association (IDA)
449. The Conference noted that at its Forty-Third Session the Council had by Resolution No. 1/43 approved, in accordance with Rule XXIV 4(c) of the General Rules of the Organization, an Agreement between FAO and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), setting out the working arrangements for a joint FAO/IBRD Program.
450. The Conference further noted that at its Forty-Fourth Session the Council had approved. By Resolution No. 12/44, two amendments to this Agreement, and that in accordance with Rule XXIV.4(c) the Agreement as amended, reproduced in document C 65/50, had been submitted to the Conference for confirmation.
451. Considering the desirability of continuing the successful co-operation already achieved between FAO and IBRD under the Joint Program, the Conference derided to confirm the above mentioned agreement, as amended by the Forty-Fourth Session of the Council, and adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 20/65
Agreement between FAO and IBRD/IDA
THE CONFERENCE
Confirms, in conformity with the provisions of Article XIII-1 of the Constitution of the Organization, the decisions of the Forty-Third and Forty-Fourth Sessions of the Council approving the Agreement between the Organization and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the text of which is attached as Appendix H hereto.
(Adopted 0. 12. 6 5)
452. While confirming the Agreement, the Conference considered that the terms of the Agreement might, with special reference to the financial provisions thereof, be reviewed again after the 1966-67 biennium in the light of developments and of experience under the Program.
453. During the discussions regarding the confirmation of the Agreement, the Delegate of Poland stated that his Government considered that the financial provisions of the Agreement involved a departure from the general principle applicable to other programs, such as the Special Fund and the Expanded Program of Technical Assistance, according to which FAO claims full reimbursement for the costs which It incurred in connection with its participation in these programs. Therefore, in his Government's view, the financial provisions of the Agreement should be reviewed, after the 1966-67 biennium, taking this principle into account. The Delegate of Poland tabled a resolution to this effect, which, however, was not adopted. The Delegate of Poland stated that therefore his Delegation could not support the Agreement in its present form.
Statutes and rules of procedure of article VI bodies
a) Rules of procedure of the Codex Alimentarius commission
b) Statutes of the statistics advisory committee
c) Rules of procedure of the near east plant protection commission
454. The Conference had before it document C 65/41 which was submitted to it by the Director
General.
a) Rules of procedure of the Codex Alimentarius commission
455. The FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission established by the Eleventh Session of the Conference and the Sixteenth World Health Assembly, adopted Rules of Procedure at its First Session (1963) in accordance with para. 7 of the Statutes of the Commission.
456. Amendments to these Rules were adopted by the Commission at its Second Session (September 1964).
457. The Rules of Procedure as amended were approved by the Director-General on 21 June 1965. In conformity with the provisions of Article VI. 3 of the FAO Constitution, these Rules are subject to confirmation by the Conference. However, the Conference noting that the work of the Commission was to be brought within the framework of the regular Programs of Work and Budget of FAO and WHO, and that further amendments to the Rules of Procedure of the Commission would consequently be required to adapt them to the new situation, decided to defer for the time being any action regarding the present Rules of Procedure.
b) Statutes of the statistics advisory committee
458. In accordance with the provisions of Article VI. 2 of the Constitution, the Director-General, on the authority of the Conference or Council, may establish committees of individuals appointed in their personal capacity, in view of their special competence in technical matters, and determine the terms of reference and the reporting procedures of such committees. The Director-General, considering the terms of Resolution No. 46/59 of the Tenth Session of the Conference and the action of the Eleventh Session of the Conference, as reflected in para. 294 of its Report, established on 26 June 1962 under Article VI, para. 2 of the Constitution, a Committee known as the FAO Statistics Advisory Committee, consisting of individuals to be appointed in their personal capacity.. and promulgated Statutes for the Committee subject to confirmation by the Conference. The Committee, at its First Session (October 1963) proposed some amendments to Its Statutes, which the Director-General
promulgated making such approval, likewise, subject to confirmation by the Conference.
459. The Conference had before It the Statutes of the Statistics Advisory Committee as amended and promulgated by the Director-General. and approved these Statutes, the text of which is attached to document C 65/41 as Annex 1.
c) Rules of procedure of the near east plant protection commission
460. The Twelfth Session of the Conference, taking into consideration the views and recommendation of the FAO Plant Protection Meetings for the Near East (1961 and 1962), and of the Eleventh Session of the Conference, established under Article VI, para. 1 of the FAO Constitution, a Regional Commission called The Near East Plant Protection Commission, and adopted Statutes for this Commission. In accordance with para. 9 of its Statutes, the Commission, at its First Session (June 1965) adopted Rules of Procedure which were approved by the Director-General on 15 September 1965.
461. In accordance with the requirements of Article VI, para. 3 of the FAO Constitution, these Rules were subject to confirmation by the Conference.
462. The Conference, having taken cognizance of the Rules of Procedure of the Near East Plant
Protection Commission, confirmed the aforementioned Rules of Procedure which appear in Annex II of document C 65/41.
Relations with international organizations other than the United Nations and specialized agencies. and granting of consultative status to international nongovernmental organizations
463. The Conference noted the report (C 65/42) which the Director-General had submitted in accordance with the policy governing relations with International Organizations, adopted at the Seventh Session of the Conference.
Technical committees of the conference
464. At its Forty-Third and Forty-Fourth Sessions the Council considered the utility and timing of the Technical Committees of the Conference. An excerpt from the Report of the Forty-Fourth Council Session was circulated to the Conference (C 65/43).
465. The Conference agree in general with the conclusions contained in the Council's report, and in particular decided that. at its next (Fourteenth) Session in 1967 the same six Technical Committees be established, i.e.:
Technical Committee on Agriculture
Technical Committee on Economics
Technical Committee on Fisheries
Technical Committee on Forestry and Forest Products
Technical Committee on Information and Publications
Technical Committee on Nutrition
466. The Conference also agree that the Committees should convene in time to conclude their work before the formal opening of the Fourteenth Session, as was the case at the Thirteenth Session.
467. The Conference, recalling that in earlier sessions arrangements had been made for delegates attending the Technical Committee on Agriculture to participate in the Technical Committee on
Economics when work in the field of rural institutions and services was under review, noted the desirability of reverting to these arrangements in future sessions.
468. With regard to the methods of work and reporting by the Technical Committees, the Conference noted a considerable improvement as compared to earlier Conference Sessions but felt that some aspects still required consideration. The work of the Technical Committees of the Rapporteur and of Commission II of the Conference were complementary and needed to be examined as a whole.
469. It was stressed that both the agendas of the Technical Committees and the presentation of Items should adhere to the terms of reference of the Technical Committees, as set out in Rule XV. 3 of the General Rules of the Organization, which read as follows:
"(a) review the activities of the biennium coming to an end relating to the regular, technical assistance and other programs;
"(b) consider from a technical standpoint the different chapters of the draft program of work for the ensuing biennium;
"(c) consider the trends of the Program of Work beyond the ensuing biennium; and
"(d) study such items as may be specifically referred to It by the Council."
This had not always been the case at the Technical Committee meetings at the Thirteenth Session of the Conference.
470. The agenda for the six Technical Committees, which had been drawn up at the Forty-Fourth Session of the Council and circulated in that form, had in some cases been modified when presented to the Committees at their opening meetings; this had tended to cause some confusion.
471. The Conference agreed that in future the Technical Committee on Information and Publications should review all the activities of the Department of Public Relations and Legal Affairs.
472. Attention was also drawn to the need for the Technical Committees to adhere to the instructions laid down for them on the way in which their reports should be drawn up. It was important that the recommendations which required Conference action or decision should be clearly and concisely set out, so that the Rapporteur on the Technical Committees could select these items for presentation to Commission II of the Conference.
473. It was also suggested that the instructions given to the Rapporteur on the work of the Technical Committees needed to be clarified, and that the Rapporteur's report should be in the form of a draft section of the Conference Report.
474. Finally, attention was drawn to the need to allocate sufficient time for consideration by delegates of the various technical aspects of FAO's work in the Technical Committees, and one delegation suggested that this might be achieved by considering in detail at each Conference Session the work of half the total organizational units concerned, so that in a four-year period the work of these units would have been considered in detail. Another means of ensuring sufficient time for technical discussion would be to present the material in a more concentrated form, perhaps providing more of the background information in tabular form on the programs of the biennium just ending, and of the Immediately forthcoming biennium.
475. The Conference suggested that the Council consider whether at future sessions of the Technical Committees an additional document should be provided covering the past work of the divisions and future Intentions, together with a synopsis of all relevant information in a form which delegates could readily appraise.
476. The Conference requested the Council to re-examine at Its Forty-Seventh Session the work of the Technical Committees and of Commission II, to provide clear guidelines on the duties and responsibilities of the Rapporteur on the Work of the Technical Committees, and to report thereon to the Fourteenth Session of the Conference.
Convention on the privileges and immunities of tee specialized agencies amendment to annex
477. The Conference had before it a proposal by the Director-General, contained in document C 65/LIM/31, that para. 3 of Annex II of the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized Agencies, applicable specifically to FAO, be amended. The purpose of this amendment was to extend to the Assistant Directors -General of FAO the privileges and immunities granted to the Director-General under Section 21 of the standard clauses of the Convention which, by para. 3 of Annex 11 adopted by the Fourth Session of the Conference (1948), were extended to the Deputy Director-General.
478. Many delegations supported the Director-Generals proposal. In particular, as officials having the rank of Assistant Directors-General in other organizations of the United Nations family, in which this rank existed, already enjoyed the privileges and Immunities to which the Director-General's proposal referred, these delegations felt that the Assistant Directors-General of FAO should receive the same treatment.
479. Many other delegations, while not opposed in principle to the Director-General's proposal, felt that their governments had not had sufficient time in which to study its implications since this item was added to the Conference agenda on the first day of the Session.
480. The Conference approved the Director-General' a proposal to amend para. 3 of Annex II of the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized Agencies contained in document C 65/LIM/31, and adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 21/65
Amendment to Paragraph 3 of Annex II of the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized Agencies.
THE CONFERENCE
Considering that para. 3 of Annex III to the Convention on the Privileges I and Immunities of the Specialized Agencies provides that the Deputy Director-General shall enjoy the privileges and immunities granted to the Director-General under Section 21 of the standard clauses of the Convention,
Considering it desirable to extend the privileges and immunities to the Assistant Directors -General of the Organization,
Decides to amend para. 3 of Annex 11 of the Convention by the addition of the words underlined:
"3. The privileges, immunities, exemptions and facilities referred to in Section 21 of the standard clauses shall be accorded to the Deputy Director-General and the Assistant Directors -General of the Organization."
Requests the Director-General to transmit Annex 11 as revised to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, and to such Member Nations of the Organization as are not Members of the United Nations.
(Adopted 8. 12. 6 5)
B. Financial matters
Audited accounts
Financial position of the organization
Scale of contributions, 1966-67
Assessment of Tanzania
Contributions and advances by new members and associate members
Status of contributions
Working capital fund
Salary of the director-general and representation allowances of the director-general and deputy director-general
Publications revolving fund
Audited accounts
a) Regular program and freedom from hunger campaign, 1962-63
b) European commission for the control of foot-and-mouth disease, 1963 and 1964
c) United Nations special fund, 1963 and 1964
d) World food program 1963 and 1964
a) Regular program and freedom from hunger campaign, 1962-63
481. The Conference considered and approved the audited accounts of the Regular Program and the Freedom from Hunger Campaign for the financial period 1962-63, ended 31 December 1963, and the Report of the External Auditor thereon as submitted by the Forty-Fourth Session of the Council, and adapted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 22/05
Regular Program and Freedom from Hunger Campaign, Audited accounts for 1962-63
THE CONFERENCE
Having examined the audited accounts of the Regular Program and the Freedom from Hunger Campaign for the fifteenth financial period 1962-63 and the External Auditor's Report thereon,
Adopts the audited accounts for the abovementioned period.
(Adopted 6.12.65)
b) European commission for the control of foot-and-mouth disease, 1963 and 1964
482. The Conference considered and approved the audited accounts of the European Commission for the Control of Foot-and-Mouth Disease for the year 1963, and the Report of the External Auditor thereon, as submitted by the Forty-Fourth Session of the Council, and adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 23/65
European Commission for the Control of Foot -and -Mouth Disease, Audited accounts for 1963
THE CONFERENCE
Having examined the audited accounts of the European Commission for the Control of Foot-and-Mouth Disease for the financial year 1963 and the External Auditor's Report thereon, Adopts the audited accounts for the abovementioned period.
(Adopted 6. 12. 65)
483. The Conference considered and approved the audited accounts for the year 1964 of the European Commission for the Control of Foot-and-Mouth Disease, as submitted by the Forty-Fifth Session of the Council, and adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 24/65
European Commission for the Control of Foot-and-Mouth Disease Audited Accounts for 1964
THE CONFERENCE
Having examined the audited accounts of the European Commission for the Control of Foot-and-Mouth Disease for the financial year 1964 and the External Auditor's Report thereon,
Adopts the audited accounts for the abovementioned period.
(Adopted 6.12.65)
Expanded Program of Technical Assistance, 1963 and 1904
484. The Conference considered and approved the audited accounts for the Expanded Program of Technical Assistance for the year 1963 and the Report of the External Auditor thereon, as submitted by the Forty-Fourth Session of the Council, and adopted the following resolution.:
Resolution No. 25/65
Expanded Program of Technical Assistance, Audited Accounts for 1963
THE CONFERENCE
Having examined the audited accounts of the Expanded Program of Technical Assistance for the financial year 1963 and the External Auditor's Report thereon,
Adopts the audited accounts for the abovementioned period.
(Adopted 6.12.65)
485. The Conference considered and approved the audited accounts for the Expanded Program of Technical Assistance for the year 1964 and the Report of the External Auditor thereon, as submitted by the Forty-Fifth Session of the Council, and adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 26/65
Expanded Program of Technical Assistance, Audited Accounts for 1964
THE CONFERENCE
Having examined the audited accounts of the Expanded Program of Technical Assistance for the financial year 1964 and the External Auditor's Report thereon,
Adopts the audited accounts for the abovementioned period.
(Adopted 6. 12.65)
c) United Nations special fund, 1963 and 1964
486. The Conference considered and approved the audited accounts of the United Nations Special Fund for 1963 and the External Auditor's Report thereon, as submitted by the Forty-Fourth Session of the Council, and adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 27/65
United Nations Special Fund, Audited Accounts for 1963
THE CONFERENCE
Having examined the audited accounts of the United Nations Special Fund for the financial year 1963 and the External Auditor's Report thereon,
Adopts the said audited accounts for the abovementioned period.
(Adopted 6. 12. 6 5)
487. The Conference considered and approve the audited accounts of the United Nations Special
Fund for 1964 and the External Auditor's Report thereon, as submitted by the Forty-Fifth Session of the Council, and adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 26/65
United Nations Special Fund, Audited Accounts for 1964
THE CONFERENCE
Having examined the audited accounts of the United Nations Special Fund for the financial year 1964 and the External Auditor's Report thereon,
Adopts the audited accounts for the abovementioned period.
(Adopted 6. 12. 65)
d) World food program 1963 and 1964
488. The Conference considered and approved the audited accounts of the World Food Program for the financial year 1963 and the Report of the External Auditor thereon, as submitted by the Forty-Fourth Session of the Council, and adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 29/65
World Food Program, Audited Accounts for 1963
THE CONFERENCE
Having examined the audited accounts of the World Food Program for the financial year 1963 and the External Auditor's Report thereon,
Adopts the audited accounts for the abovementioned period.
(Adopted 6. 12. 6 5)
489. The Conference considered and approved the audited accounts of the World Food Program for the financial year 1964, and the Report of the External Auditor thereon, as submitted by the Forty-Fifth Session of the Council, and adapted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 30/65
World Food Program, Audited Accounts for 1964
THE CONFERENCE
Having examined the audited accounts of the World Food Program for the financial year 1964 and the External Auditor's Report thereon,
Adopts the audited accounts for the abovementioned period.
(Adopted 6.12.65)
Financial position of the organization
490. The Conference noted with gratification the satisfactory rate of collection of the current year's assessments, but observed that some Important contributions were still in arrears.
491. The Conference stressed the importance of receiving assessments promptly when due, and appealed to Member Nations in arrears to regularize their positions.
Scale of contributions, 1966-67
492. The Conference, at its Eighth Session, decided that the FAO Scale of Contributions would in future be derived directly from the United Nations Scale of Assessments as in force during the calendar of the Conference Session, and that such scale would be applicable to the two following years.
493. A draft of the proposed Scale of Contributions for 1966-67, based on the Scale for 1965 recommended by the United Nations Committee on Contributions, had been recommended by the Forty-Fourth Session of the Council for adoption by the Conference, subject to the appropriate adjustments arising from the admission of new Members.
494. The Conference examined the thus amended Scale of Contributions for 1966-67 and noted that the Forty-Fifth Session of the Council had recommended that, in line with a corresponding action by the United Nations, the assessment of Malaysia be reduced from 0. 20 percent to 0. 16 percent in view of Singapore having become independent in August 1965.
495. The Conference consequently adopted the following resolution, with the Delegate of the Government of the Polish People's Republic reserving the position of his Government:
Resolution No. 31/65
Scale of Contributions, 1966-67
THE CONFERENCE
Having considered the Reports of the Forty-Fourth and the Forty-Fifth Sessions of the Council;
Noting the recommended United Nations Scale of Assessments for 1965,
Decides to adopt for use in 1966 and 1967 the Scale of Contributions set out in Appendix D which is derived from the above United Nations Scale of Assessments for 1965, except that the assessment of Malaysia for 1966 and 1967 shall be 0. 16 percent,
Further noting that the Government of the Republic of Indonesia had withdrawn from the Organization, its withdrawal becoming effective during 1966,
Decides that the contribution due from the Government of the Republic of Indonesia for 1966 should accrue to Miscellaneous Income.
(Adopted 6.12.65)
Assessment of Tanzania
496. The Conference noted the recommendation of the Forty-Fourth Session of the Council that in view of the union of Tanganyika and Zanzibar on 26 April 1964, the separate assessments of these countries for 1964 and 1965 be cancelled and replaced with the single assessment of the United Republic of Tanzania.
497. The Conference consequently adopted the following resolution.
Resolution No. 32/65
Assessment of Tanzania
THE CONFERENCE
Having considered the Report of the Forty-Fourth Session of the Council,
Noting the recommendations of the United Nations Committee on Contributions under which the United Republic of Tanzania would be assessed in the United Nations Scale of Assessments at 0.04 percent,
Recalling that the Twelfth Session of the Conference had assessed the former individual States of I Tanganyika and Zanzibar at the minimum rates of 0. 04 percent and 0. 024 percent respectively for the years 1964 and 1965,
Decides to cancel the separate assessments of the former States of Tanganyika and Zanzibar for the years 1964 and 1965, and to fix the assessment of the United Republic of Tanzania for those same years at 0. 04 percent.
(Adopted 6.12.65)
Contributions and advances by new members and associate members
Contributions
498. In accordance with the provisions of Article XVIII. 3 of the Constitution, Rule XIX. 3 of the General Rules of the Organization and Financial Regulation 5. 8, the Conference decided that the contributions to be paid by the newly-admitted Member Nations and Associate Members for the year 1965 would be as follows:
Member Nations
Gambia $1,775
Malawi $1,775
Zambia $1,775
Associate Members
Basutoland $ 1,065
Bechuanaland $ 1,065
Advances
499. In accordance with Financial Regulations 6. 2 (b) (ii) the advances to the Working Capital Fund by new Member Nations were as follows:
Gambia $19000
Malawi $1,000
Zambia $1,000
Status of contributions
Arrears from Bolivia
500. The Conference considered the reports of the Forty-Fourth and Forty-Fifth Sessions of the
Council concerning the proposal of the Government of Bolivia to liquidate its arrears of contributions over a ten-year period, while at the same time meeting current assessments.
501. The Conference, having considered the difficult economic and financial position of Bolivia, adopted the following resolution, stressing however that this should not be regarded as constituting a precedent:
Resolution No.33/65
Arrears from Bolivia
THE CONFERENCE
Noting that the Government of Bolivia had made a proposal, at a time when its arrears of contributions amounted to $28,930.71, that Us arrears be liquidated over a period of 10 years while at the same time paying its current contribution when due,
Further noting that the first installment amounting to $2, 893. 14 due under such an arrangement as well as the contribution due for 1964 had been received in 1964,
Decides that:
(a) notwithstanding Financial Regulation 5. 5, Bolivia's arrears shall be settled through the payment of ten annual installments;
(b) the first instalment, amounting to $2, 893. 14, having been paid in 1964, the following eight instalments shall be of equal amounts of $2, 893. 00, and the final instalment payable in 1973 shall be $2,893. 57;
(c) the annual payment of the instalments referred to above, together with the payment of each current contribution in the calendar year of assessment and any advances to the Working Capital Fund shall be considered as fulfilment of Bolivia's financial obligations to the Organization.
(Adopted 6.12.65)
Working capital fund
a) Level of the working capital fund
b) Authority of the director-general for emergency action for the control of livestock diseases
c) Reimbursement of withdrawal - amendment of pensionable remuneration
a) Level of the working capital fund
502. The Conference noted that the Director-General had recommended a Working Capital Fund of $5,000,000 in view of:
- The increase in the level of the budget.
- The provision of funds for use in the control of Epizootics in certain emergencies.
- The change in the payment pattern of contributions.
- The problems encountered in the 1964-65 biennium in meeting the cost of unbudgeted and unforeseen Increases.
503. The Conference further noted that the Finance Committee at Its Thirteenth Session and the Council at Its Forty-Fourth Session had agreed with the Director-General that an Increase in the level of the Working Capital Fund was necessary. However, the Council concurred with the recommendation of the Finance Committee that a level of $4,500,000 (including an amount of $500,000 to fund emergency expenditure on Epizootics) would be appropriate in the circumstances. The Finance Committee had recommended and the Council had concurred that the increase from $2.95009000 to $4,500,000 should be financed in the following manner:
- To the extent of $1 million, by application to the Fund of the Miscellaneous income of the 1966-67 biennium;
- To the extent of $1 million, by application to the Fund of a part of the Administrative and Operational Servicing Costs accruing from the Expanded Program of Technical Assistance in the 1966-67 biennium.
504. The Conference noted that this method of financing was at variance with the provisions of Financial Regulations 5. 2 (a) and 7. 1, but that it would ensure a more speedy build-up in the level of the Fund while not affecting the total financial obligations of Member Nations, and adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 34/65
Level of the Working Capital Fund
THE CONFERENCE
Considering the need to provide an appropriate relationship between the level of the Working Capital Fund and the level of the Budget in order to safeguard the financial liquidity of the Organization,
Considering also the need to increase the Working Capital Fund to cover demands that may be made on it to provide funds for use in the control of Epizootics in certain emergencies,
Noting that the Finance Committee recommended that the level of the Working Capital Fund be increased to $4,500,000, and that this Increase be met:
First by applying the estimated Miscellaneous Income for 1966-67 to the extent of $1,000,000 and,
Secondly by applying $1,000,000 of the Administrative and Operational Servicing Costs which will accrue to the Organization in 1966-67 from the Expanded Program of Technical Assistance,
Noting further that the Council at Its Forty-Fourth Session concurred in the recommendations of the Finance Committee,
Decides that as from I January 1966 the level of the Working Capital Fund shall be $4,500,000, and that:
(a) Member Nations shall be reassessed in accordance with the provisions of Financial Regulations 6. 2 (v) as from I January 1966 on the basis of the Scale of Contributions for 1966-67;
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of Financial Regulation 5.2(a) the estimated Miscellaneous Income for 1966-67 in the amount of $1,000,000, together with $1,000,000 of the Administrative and Operational Servicing Costs which will accrue to the Organization in 1966-67 from the Expanded Program of Technical Assistance, shall be applied to meet the increase, and credited to Member Nations in accordance with the 1966-67 Scale of Contributions.
(Adopted 6.12.65)
505. Some governments expressed reservations concerning the financing of emergency expenditure on Epizootics from the Working Capital Fund.
b) Authority of the director-general for emergency action for the control of livestock diseases
506. The Conference considered the proposal of the Finance Committee as endorsed by the Council concerning the financing of initial emergency measures to control Epizootics, and adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 35/65
Authority of the Director-General for Emergency - Action for the Control of Livestock Diseases
THE CONFERENCE
Recalling that at Its Twelfth Session It had authorized the Director-General to withhold the distribution of any cash surplus of the 1962-63 biennium in order to establish an Emergency Fund for the Control of Livestock Diseases (Resolution No. 25/63),
Noting that no cash surplus arose from that biennium,
Recalling further that It had requested the Director-General, in such event, to give consideration to the establishment of a Fund from outside sources, and to request Member Nations to offer practical suggestions to this effect,
Noting that no practicable proposals for financing from outside sources were received;
Concurs in the opinion of the Finance Committee that the augmented Working Capital Fund has been established at a level sufficient to finance initial emergency measures for the control of outbreaks of livestock diseases under emergency circumstances which constitute a potential epizootic threat to livestock of other countries;
Authorizes the Director-General, after consultation with the Chairman of the Finance Committee or another member of that Committee designated by him, and in the light of the recommendations of an Advisory Panel of technical experts, notwithstanding the provisions of Financial Regulation 6.3, to withdraw up to $500,000 from the Working Capital Fund to finance such measures, subject to the proviso that no more than $100.000 may be withdrawn up to 30 June 1966;
Requests the Director-General to:
(a) establish under Article VI(4) of the Constitution such an Advisory Panel comprising three experts of acknowledged competence in epizootiology with three alternates, each being a national of a different Member Nation;
(b) report to the Council or to the Finance Committee, whichever meets first, immediately after funds have been withdrawn from the Working Capital Fund under this Resolution, giving details of the use made of such withdrawals.
(Adopted 6.12.65)
c) Reimbursement of withdrawal - amendment of pensionable remuneration
507. The Conference noted that the General Assembly of the United Nations had established I March 1965 as the effective date for the introduction of the "full gross" basis for pensionable remuneration of staff members of the United Nations, and that at its Forty-Fourth Session the FAO Council had authorized the Director-General to withdraw an amount of $140,000 from the Working Capital Fund in order to finance the Introduction of this measure for FAO staff in 1965.
508. The Conference endorsed the Council's recommendation that, notwithstanding the provisions of Financial Regulation 6.1(b), an amount of $140,000 from the excess miscellaneous income of 1964/65 should be used to reimburse the Working Capital Fund with the amount withdrawn from the fund for this purpose, and adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 36/65
Reimbursement of Withdrawal - Amendment of Pensionable Remuneration
THE CONFERENCE
Noting that the Forty-Third Session of the Council authorized the withdrawal from the Working Capital Fund of an amount of $170,000 to meet the unbudgeted expenditure resulting from the change in the basis of pensionable remuneration as adopted by the United Nations General Assembly (Resolution A/RES/2007 (XIX)),
Noting that the amount required for this purpose was re-estimated by the Forty-Fourth Session of the Council at $140,000,
Noting that in accordance with Financial Regulation 6.5(b) advances made from the Working Capital Fund shall be reimbursed by such method as the Conference determines;
Further noting that Miscellaneous Income in 1964/65 is expected to exceed substantially the original estimate,
Decides that notwithstanding the provisions of Financial Regulation 6.1(b) an amount of $140,000 from the excess Miscellaneous Income of 1964/65 shall be used to reimburse the Working Capital Fund for the abovementioned withdrawal.
(Adopted 6.12.65)
Salary of the director-general and representation allowances of the director-general and deputy director-general
509. In accordance with the provisions of General Rule XXXII. 1(b), the Conference approved that the emoluments of the Director-General be amended to a gross annual salary of $43,000 ($28,100 net) with a representation allowance of $10,000 and decided also that the representation allowance of the Deputy Director-General be amended to $3,700, such amendments to be effective as of 1 January 1966.
Publications revolving fund
510. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 37/65
Publications Revolving Fund
THE CONFERENCE
Approves the budget for the 1966-67 biennium for the Publications Revolving Fund, as presented by the Director-General and contained in Annex XII to the 1966-67 Program of Work and Budget (document C 65/3), except that the allocation for sales promotion purposes in the biennium 1966-67 shall not exceed $40,000.
(Adopted 6.12.65)
<section>e</section>
C. Administrative matters
Headquarters accommodation
511. The Conference had before it a report of the Director-General (document C 65/47), out lining recent developments, and describing the future outlook with regard to office premises at Headquarters. A report on the same subject by the Forty-Fifth Session of the Council (C 65/LIM/38) was also available.
512. The Conference noted that additional office space would be required in the near future as a result of the rapid expansion of the Organization's programs. Recalling that the Italian Government had promised at the Twelfth Session of the Conference to make available Building "D" at the earliest possible date, the Conference appealed to the Government to speed the handover of this building as the only fully satisfactory solution. The Conference recognized however that the acquisition of Building "D" might require some additional time, in spite of all co-operative efforts, and therefore requested the Italian Government to be good enough to assist the Director-General in acquiring additional office premises. In this connection, the Conference was informed that negotiations were currently under way for such premises, and that the Government was lending support and assistance.
513. The Conference noted that additional expenditures would necessarily be Incurred for such extra space as might be acquired. The Director-General indicated, that the first effort would be to achieve savings to meet these costs; If necessary, also other means of financing would be sought.
514. The Conference recalled that at its Twelfth Session the problem of revising the Headquarters boundaries had been reviewed. As the matter was still not resolved, the Conference appealed to the Italian authorities to take all possible steps to speed the conclusion of the long negotiations. The Conference was informed by the Italian Delegation that the necessary approvals had been secured at the governmental level and that only final action by local authorities remained to be taken. The Italian Delegation assured the Conference that the matter would be satisfactorily resolved in the very near future.
<section>f</section>
VII. Membership, elections and appointments
A. Admission of new member nations and associate members
B. Status of British Guiana and Mauritius
C. Withdrawal of Indonesia
D. United republic of Tanzania
E. Election of council member
F. Appointment of the independent chairman of the council
G. Appointment of the FAO staff pension committee
A. Admission of new member nations and associate members
515. The Conference had before it:
(a) Applications for membership from:
Gambia
Malawi
The Republic of Zambia
(b) Applications for associate membership on behalf of:
Basutoland
Bechuanaland
516. All the above applications were submitted within the time limit prescribed by Rule XIX of the General Rules of the Organization. They contained or were supplemented by the formal Instruments required under Article II of the Constitution and were thus found to be in order.
517. The Conference proceeded to a secret ballot on the five applications in accordance with Article H. 2 of the Constitution and Rule XII. 9 of the General Rules of the Organization.
518. The results of the voting were as follows:
Gambia
Votes cast: 87, For: 87 Against: 0 Abstentions: 2
Malawi
Votes cast: 88, For: 88 Against: 0 Abstentions: 1
The Republic of Zambia
Votes cast: 88, For: 88 Against: 0 Abstentions: 1
Basutoland
Votes cast: 86, For: 86 Against: 0 Abstentions: 3
Bechuanaland
Votes cast: 85, For: 85 Against: 0 Abstentions: 4
519. The Conference decided that when Basutoland and Bechuanaland become independent, their status in the Organization would become that of full membership once the Government of the new Independent nation submitted to the Director-General an instrument confirming its desire to be Member of the Organization and its acceptance of the obligations of the FAO Constitution. This change of status would take effect on the day on which the aforesaid instrument was received by the Director-General, If found valid. All Member Nations would be notified Immediately accordingly.
520. At the request of the Government of the United Kingdom, the Conference did not proceed with the United Kingdom's application for associate membership for Southern Rhodesia.
B. Status of British Guiana and Mauritius
521. The Conference was Informed that the Director-General had received two communications from the United Kingdom requesting that action be taken in order that the two above Associate Members be granted full membership of the Organization upon attaining Independence, subject to the Governments of British Guiana and Mauritius confirming at that time their desire to become full Members of the Organization and accepting the obligations of the Constitution.
522. The Conference noted that when British Guiana and Mauritius were admitted as Associate Members at the Eleventh Session of the Conference in 1961, no proviso had been Included regarding the granting of fall membership. The Conference therefore adopted the following resolutions:
Resolution No. 38/65
Status of British Guiana
THE CONFERENCE
Noting that British Guiana had been granted associate membership in the Organization from 9 November 1961,
Further noting that British Guiana will shortly become Independent,
Decides, at the request of the Government of the United Kingdom and in accordance with a precedent established at Its Tenth Session, that.
(a) British Guiana should become a fall Member Nation of the Organization after It has attained independence and after the Government of the newly- Independent nation has submitted to the Director-General in instrument confirming its desire to be a Member of the Organization and Us acceptance of the obligations of the Constitution;
(b) this change of status should take place on the date of receipt by the Director-General of the aforesaid instrument, If found valid;
(c) all Member Nations should immediately be notified accordingly.
(Adopted 8.12.65)
Resolution No. 30Z65
Status of Mauritius
THE CONFERENCE
Noting that Mauritius has been granted associate membership in the Organization from 9 November 1961,
Further noting that Mauritius will shortly become independent,
Decides, at the request of the Government of the United Kingdom and in accordance with the precedent established at its Tenth Session, that:
(a) Mauritius should become a full Member of the Organization after it has attained independence and the Government of the newly-independent nation has Submitted to the Director-General an instrument confirming Its desire to be a Member of the Organization and its acceptance of the Constitution;
(b) this change of status should take place on the date of receipt by the* Director-General of the aforesaid instrument, if found valid;
(c) all Member Nations should be notified accordingly.
C. Withdrawal of Indonesia
(Adopted 8. 12. 65)
523. The Conference took note that Indonesia would cease to be a member of the Organization on 12 February 1966, and that Its financial obligations include the entire year 1966.
D. United republic of Tanzania
524. The Conference took cognizance of the merger of Tanganyika and Zanzibar on 26 April 1964, and recognized officially that the United Republic of Tanzania replaced the former Member Nation Tanganyika, and the former Associate Member Zanzibar (see paras. 496 and 497).
E. Election of council member
Additional council seats
525. In order to save time on the voting for uncontested Council seats, the Conference agreed to the proposal to suspend Rule XII-9(a) of the General Rules, and that such seats be filled by clear general consent without the formality of a ballot. The Conference requested the Council to consider Rule XIII.9 (a), possibly with the assistance of CCLM, with a view to amending this paragraph so that in future the Conference need not cast ballots for Council seats in regions where the seats are uncontested.
526. The Conference elected the following Member Nations for membership of the Council:
Period: December 1965 to 31 December 1968
Region and, Seats
Members
Africa (two) Ivory Coast
Tunisia
Europe (one) Yugoslavia
Latin America (two) Brazil
Costa Rica
Near East (two) Afghanistan
Sudan
North America (two) Canada
United States of America
Period: 1 January 1967 to November 1969
Region and Seats
Members
Africa (one) Mau
Asia and Far East (two) India
Pakistan
Europe (three) France
Sweden
United Kingdom
Latin America (one) Chile
Near East (one) United Arab Republic
S.W. Pacific (one) Australia
Additional council seats
527. In accordance with the decision of the Conference the following terms of office of the additional four Council seats were decided by lot:
December 1965 to 31 December 1968
Colombia
Kenya
December 1965 to 31 December -1966 and 1 January 1967 to November 1969
Uganda
December 1960 to November 196
Chad
F. Appointment of the independent chairman of the council
528. After having proceeded to a secret ballot in conformity with Rule XXXIII of the General Rules of the Organization, the Conference &Minted Mr. Maurice Gemayel Independent Chairman of the Council for a period of two years (i.e. until the end of the next regular session of the Conference), and decided that the allowance attached to this office should be the same as for the biennium 1964-65, and that the per them allowance for the Chairman, while in Rome, will be established at U.S. $23.
G. Appointment of the FAO staff pension committee
529. In accordance with Article XX of the Regulations of United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund the Conference reappointed
Mr. M. H. Brodhaag
Agricultural Attaché
Resident Representative of the Netherlands to FAO
Royal Netherlands Embassy
Rome
Mr. Hussein Sadegh
Minister Plenipotentiary
Resident Representative of Iran to FAO
Imperial Embassy of Iran
Rome
Dr. Vittorio de Asarta
Secretary
Italian National FAO Committee
Rome
as members of the Staff Pension Committee, and
Mr. Ahmed Barkat
Agricultural Counsellor
Resident Representative of Pakistan to FAO
Embassy of Pakistan
Rome
and
Mr. E.A. Okwuosa
Agricultural Attaché
Resident Representative of Nigeria to FAO
Embassy of Nigeria
Rome
as alternate members of that Committee.
530. The Conference appointed
Mr. Paul Byrnes
Office of International Administration
Bureau of International Organization Affairs
Department of State
Washington, D. C.
as alternate member of the Committee, all appointments being for the period 1 January 1966 through 31 December 1967.
<section>g</section>
VIII. Date and the fourteenth session of the conference
531. The Conference decided that Its Fourteenth Session should be held in November 1967, in Rome.
<section>h</section>
IX. Appendixes
A. Agenda
B. Delegates and observers attending the thirteenth session of the conference
C. List of documents
D. Scale of contributions 1966-1967
E. Convenio para la creacion del consejo general de pesca del mediterraneo
F. Agreement between the food and agriculture organization of the United Nations and the intergovernmental maritime consultative organization (IMCO)
G. Agreement for the co-ordination of FAO and Inter-American development bank (IDB) activities
H. Memorandum of understanding with respect to working arrangements between the food and agriculture organization of the United Nations and the international bank for reconstruction and development (IBRD) and the international development association (IDA)
A. Agenda
INTRODUCTORY - PROCEDURE OF THE SESSION
1. Election of Chairman and Vice-Chairmen
2. Appointment of General Committee and Credentials Committee
3. Adoption of the agenda
4. Arrangements for the Session and allocation of agenda items
5. Admission of Observers to the Session
PART I - MAJOR TRENDS AND POLICY QUESTIONS IN FOOD AND AGRICULTURE
6. World situation and outlook
(a) Salient features in the world situation
(b) Commodity problems
(c) Relations between CCP and UNCTAD
(d) 1970 World Census of Agriculture and Agricultural Census Fund
7. Indicative World Plan
8. World Food Program - Report on the future development of the Program
9. Freedom from Hunger Campaign
(a) Report on results achieved and future orientation of the Campaign
(b) Plans for the Second World Food Congress
(c) International Rice Year
10. Article XI Reports
PART II - ACTIVITIES AND PROGRAMS OF THE ORGANIZATION
11. Report of the Rapporteur on the Work of the Technical Committees of the Conference
(a) Matters requiring formal approval by the Conference
- Establishment of a Committee on Tropical Forestry
- Emergency Fund for the control of Plant Pests and Diseases
(b) Salient points of the Technical Committee reports (other than the formal matters dealt with in (a) above) which have a bearing on the Program of Work and Budget for 1966-67
(c) Considerations which affect the policies and methods of the Organization as a whole (Including such matters as the impact of field programs on the Regular Program, etc.)
12. Review of topics relating to Program of Work and Budget which were not covered by Technical Committees (Chapters I, II, IV, V, VI.A (i), VI.E, VII, VIII, IX, X, XI, XII)
13. Interagency relations and consultations on matters of common interest
(a) Matters arising out of ECOSOC and ACC discussions
(b) FAO/UNICEF relations
(c) Codex Alimentarius Commission
(d) FAO/IBRD Co-operative Program
(e) Joint activities with the Inter-American Development Bank
14. Technical Co-operation Programs
(a) Expanded Program of Technical Assistance
(b) United Nations Special Fund
15. Program of Work and Budget 1966-67
16. Review of the Organization's general structure
PART III - CONSTITUTIONAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS
17. Constitutional and Legal Matters
(a) Amendment of the Preamble of the Constitution
(b) Amendment of Article V of the Constitution - Committee on Fisheries
(c) increase in number of Council seats
(d) Committees, Working Parties and Panels of Experts
(e) Procedures which could be applied in the event of urgent issues arising between Council Sessions
(f) Appointment and functions of Vice-Chairmen of Council
(g) Increase in membership of CCP
(h) Amendments to the Constitution and General Rules of the Organization arising out of items 17(a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f) and (g)
(i) Draft International Conventions (Article XIV of Constitution)
(j) Statutory report of Status of Conventions and Agreements and Amendments thereto (Article XIV)
(k) Relationship agreements with International Organizations:
(i) FAO/IBRD Agreement
(ii) FAO/IMCO Agreement
(iii) Agreement for the co-ordination of FAO and Inter-American Development Bank (IBD) activities
(iv) Other Agreements (if any)
(l) Statutes and Rules of Procedure of Article VI Bodies
(m) Relations with international organizations and granting of consultative status to international nongovernmental organizations
(n) Technical Committees of the Conference
(o) Amendment to Annex II of the Convention on Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized Agencies
18. Financial matters
(a) Audited accounts
(i) Regular Program and FFHC, 1962-63
(ii) European Commission for Control of Foot-and-Mouth Disease, 1963 and 1964
(iii) EPTA, 1963 and 1964
(iv) UNSF, 1963 and 1964
(v) World Food Program, 1963 and 1964
(b) Scale of Contributions 1966-67
(c) Working Capital Fund
(i) Level of the Fund
(ii) Authority of the Director -General for emergency action for control of livestock diseases
(iii) Reimbursement of withdrawal - Amendment of pensionable remuneration
(iv) Reimbursement of withdrawal - Unbudgeted increase in salaries and related costs in 1964-65
19. Administrative matters
(a) Headquarters accommodation
(b) Other financial and administrative matters
PART IV - APPOINTMENTS AND ELECTIONS
20. Applications for membership and associate membership in the Organization
21. Election of Council Members
22. Appointment of Independent Chairman of Council
23. Appointment of Representatives of Staff Pension Committee
PART V - OTHER MATTERS
24. Date and place of Fourteenth Conference Session
<section>i</section>
B. Delegates and observers attending the thirteenth session of the conference
ANNEXE B - DELEGUES ET OBSERVATEURS A LA TREIZIEME SESSION DE LA CONFERENCE
APENDICE B - DELEGADOS Y OBSERVADORES QUE ASISTIERON AL 13° PERIODO DE SESIONES DE LA CONFERENCIA
MEMBER NATIONS
ETATS MEMBRES
ESTADOS MIEMBROS
AFGHANISTAN - AFGANISTAN
Delegate
Mohamed Y. MAYEL, President, Agriculture and Cottage Industries Bank, Kabul
Associates
Abdullah FAIZYAR, Chief of Irrigation and Construction Unit, Kabul
Mohd Afzal AAZANI, Assistant Director-General Foreign Relations, Ministry of Agriculture, Kabul
ALGERIA - ALGERIE - ARGELIA
Délégué
ALI MAHSAS Ministre de l'agriculture et de la réforme agraire, Alger
Suppléant
Mouloud TIAB, Chargé d'affaires, Ambassade d'Algérie, Rome
Conseillers
Zouaoui REGGAME, Directeur de l'Office national de la réforme agraire, Alger
Mohamed NABI, Directeur de l'orientation agricole, Alger
Mustapha BOUZIANE, Ingénieur en Chef, Ministère de l'agriculture et de la réforme agraire, Alger
Abdel Hamid AIT YOUNES, Chargé de Mission, Ministère des finances et du plan, Alger
H. ELKENZ, Sous-Directeur de l'action sociale, Ministère du travail et des affaires sociales, Alger
Omar BENZITOUNI, Ministère des affaires étrangères, Division des organisations internationales, Alger
B. HAKKA, Ingénieur agronome, Directeur des forêts et de la restauration des sols, Ministère de l'agriculture et de la réforme agraire, Alger
D. MEDDAHI, Ingénieur en Chef des services agricoles, Ministère de l'agriculture et de la réforme agraire, Alger
Si Abdallah SI AHMED, Fonctionnaire du Ministère de l'agriculture, Alger
Khaled DIMERDJI, Directeur, Office national des pêches, Alger
ARGENTINA - ARGENTINE
Delegado
Walter KUGLER, Ingeniero Agrónomo, Secretario de Agricultural y Ganadería, Buenos Aires
Suplente
Norberto REICHART, Director General de Extensión y Fomento Agropecuario del Instituto Nacional de Tecnología Agropecuaria, Buenos Aires
Adjuntos
Esteban A. TAKAOS, Administrador General de Bosques, Buenos Aires
Tomas L. MARINI, Director General de Pesca, Buenos Aires
Carlos Darwin SANCHEZ AVALOS, Asesor del Secretario de Agricultura, y Ganadería, Buenos Aires
Vicente C. BRUNINI, Ingeniero Agronómo, Roma
Juan B. MARTESE, Consejero Económico, Embajada de Argentina, Roma
Rodolfo Juan TURAZZINI, Secretario de Embajada, Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores y Culto, Delegado permanente suplente ante la FAO, Roma
D. Juan C. SANCHEZ ARNAU, Buenos Aires
AUSTRALIA - AUSTRALIE
Delegate
A.C.B. MAIDEN, Permanent Head, Department of Primary Industry, Canberra
Alternate
A. G. STRICKLAND, Director of Agriculture, South Australia, Adelaide
Associates
M.R. JACOBS, Director General, Forestry and Timber Bureau, Canberra
AUSTRALIA - AUSTRALIE
Associates
G.L. KESTEVEN, Assistant Chief, C.S.I.R.O., Division of Fisheries and Oceanography, Cronulla
S. F. HARRIS, Assistant Director, Bureau of Agricultural Economics, Canberra
K.W. RYAN, Commercial Counsellor, Embassy of Australia, Rome
D. G. WILSON, First Secretary, Embassy of Australia, Rome
M.S. DOWNEY, Medical Officer, Embassy of Australia, Rome
R.J. CORNISH, Agricultural Attaché, Embassy of Australia, Rome
R. C. BOLDUAN, External Relations Branch, Department of Primary Industry, Canberra
Adviser
J.N. LEWIS, Professor of Agricultural Economics, University of New England, Armidale
AUSTRIA - AUTRICHE
Delegate
Leopold DORFWIRTH, Chief, Department of Multilateral Affairs of International Organizations, Vienna
Associates
Erich PULTAR, Section Chief, Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Vienna
Alexander BAUER, Section Chief, Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Vienna
Rudolf ENDER, Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Vienna
H. REDL, Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Vienna
Mrs. Helga WINKLER, Attaché Embassy of Austria, Rome
Karl HAAS, Resident Representative of Austria to FAO, Rome
BELGIUM - BELGIQUE - BELGICA
Délégué
P. d'Otreppe, Président, Comité national belge de la FAO, Bruxelles
Suppléant
Georges TILKIN, Conseiller, Ambassade de Belgique, Rome
Conseillers
R.H. de SUTTER, Ingénieur en Chef, Directeur, Institut économique agricole, Ministère de l'agriculture, Bruxelles
A. CAM, Ingénieur en Chef, Directeur des eaux et forêts, Ministère de l'agriculture, Bruxelles
Henri MAHU, Inspecteur des services agricoles et de l'enseignement agricole et ménager de la province de Liège
Ch. WAHLIN, Chargé de mission, coopération, développement et commerce extérieur
M.R. HUYBENS, Conseiller adjoint, Ministère des affaires étrangères
M. J. HUBERT, Ingénieur principal, Ministère de l'agricuture, et Secrétaire du Comité national belge de la FAO
A.A. Willy VAN LANCKER, Attaché agricole, Bruxelles
BOLIVIA - BOLIVIE
Delegado
Edmundo OLAGUIVEL, Encargado de Negocios de Bolivia an Italia, Roma
Adjunto
Enzo CHERLINI, Cónsul de Bolivia, Roma
BRAZIL - BRESIL - BRASIL
Delegate
Antonio CORREA DO LAGO, Ambassador, Head of Brazilian Permanent Delegation to the European Off ice of the United Nations, Geneva
Alternates
José Monteiro DE CASTRO, Rio de Janeiro
Francisco Arinos COSTA SILVA, Deputy Chief of Cabinet of the Minister of Agriculture, Rio de Janeiro
Julian CHACEL, Representative, Ministry of Planning, Rio de Janeiro
Emilio VAROLI, Superintendent, Superintendency of Development of Fisheries, Rio de Janeiro
Mauricio REIS, Planning Commission, Ministry of Agriculture, Rio de Janeiro
Luis Augusto PEREIRA SOUTO MAIOR, First Secretary, Brazilian Permanent Delegation to the European Office of the United Nations, Geneva
D. AZAMBUJA, Secretary of International Commissions, Ministry of Agriculture, Rio de Janeiro
Advisors
Mrs. Yvonne Magno PANTOJA, Resident Representative of Brazil to FAO, Rome
José Mario Ruiz DE GAMBOA, Executive Secretary of the Sub-Committee of Agricultural Projects, Ministry of Foreign Relations, Rio de Janeiro
José BOTAFOGO GONCALVES, Second Secretary, Embassy of Brazil, Rome
R. M. SARDENBERG, Secretary of Embassy, Ministry of External Relations, Rio de Janeiro
Armando FALCÃO, Parliamentary Observer, Rio de Janeiro
BURMA - BIRMANIE -BIRMANIA
Delegate
Tin SOE, Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture and Forests, Rangoon
Associates
U Tun SEIN, Deputy Director, Department of Agriculture, Rangoon
U Kyin CHOON, Deputy Director, Veterinary Department, Rangoon
U Tint HLAING, Director, Fisheries Directorate, Rangoon
BURUNDI
Délégué
Sylvère NGOWENUBUSA, Vice Premier Ministre et Ministre de l'agriculture et de l'élevage, Bujumbura
Suppléants
Pascal KABURA, Directeur général du Ministère de l'agriculture et de l'élevage, Bunjumbura
Théophile MURIVA, Directeur du Département des eaux et forêts, Bujumbura
CAMBODIA - CAMBODGE - CAMBOYA
Délégué
Tan Kim HUON, Inspecteur général, Directeur des eaux, forêts et chasse, Phonm-Penh
Suppléant
Te Sun HOA, Ingénieur de 3ème classe des travaux, Directeur-Adjoint technique de la Direction de l'agriculture, Pnom-penh
CAMEROON - CAMEROUN - CAMERUN
Délégué
Jean KEUTCHA Secrétaire d'Etat au développement rural, République Fédérale du Cameroun
Suppléants
Mouen MAKOUA, Directeur adjoint du Service de l'agriculture, Yaoundé
R. E. G. BURNLEY, Directeur de l'agriculture, Buéa
S.C. TAMAJONG, Chief Conservator of Forests, Buéa
CANADA
Delegate
Maurice SAUVE, Minister of Forestry, Ottawa
Alternates
S.C. BARRY, Deputy Minister of Agriculture, Ottawa
L. Z. ROUSSEAU, Deputy Minister, Department of Forestry, Ottawa
Associates
A.W. H. NEEDLER, Deputy Minister of Fisheries, Ottawa
Frank SHEFRIN, Director, Marketing and Trade Services Division, Department of Agriculture, Ottawa
I.S. McARTHUR, Chairman, Fisheries Prices Support Board, Department of Fisheries Ottawa
James Crawford WOODWARD, Associate Director General, Research Branch, Department of Agriculture, Ottawa
Georges CHARPENTIER, Counselor, Embassy of Canada, Rome
R. F. HURLEY, Executive Assistant to the Deputy, Minister of Forestry, Department of Forestry, Ottawa
William JENKINS, Commercial Secretary, Embassy of Canada, Rome
Ernest T. WIENS, Second Secretary and Vice-Consul, Embassy of Canada, Rome
D.R. STEPHENS, Resources and Development Division, Department of Finance, Ottawa
J. E. MONAGLE, Chief, Nutrition Division, Department of National Health and Welfare, Ottawa
C.V. PARKER, Director, Agricultural Division, Dominion Bureau of Statistics, Ottawa
Adviser
J.M. BENTLEY, President, Canadian Federation of Agriculture, Ottawa
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC - REPUBLIQUE CENTRAFRICAINE - REPUBLICA CENTROAFRICANA
Délégué
Albert PAYAO, Ministre du développement du Gouvernement centrafricain, Bangui
Adjoint
F. BEYELE, Responsable du Service de la protection des végétaux, Bangui
CEYLON - CEYLAN - CEILAN
Delegate
B. MAHADEVA, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Food and Agriculture, Colombo
Alternates
Yogendra DURAISWANY, Chargé d'Affaires, Embassy of Ceylon, Resident Representative to FAO, Rome
D.C.L. AMERASINGHE, Director of Agriculture, Colombo
R.C.S. KOELMEYER, Representative far Ceylon in Geneva, Geneva
CHAD - TCHAD
Délégué
Eugène BOURGAD, Conseiller technique du Ministre de l'agriculture et de la production animale, Fort Lamy
Suppléant
Victor ROUMBA, Ingénieur d'agriculture, Sous -Directeur de l'agriculture, Fort Lamy
CHILE - CHILI
Delegado
Francisco A. PINTO, Embajador de Chile en Italia, Delegado permanente ante la FAO, Roma
Suplentes
Daniel BARRIA, Subsecretario de Agricultur, Santiago
Jacques CHONCHOL, Vicepresidente del Instituto de Desarrollo Agropecuarto, Santiago
Fernando GARRIDO, Ingeniero Forestal, Universidad de Chile, Santiago
Consejero
Rolando STEIN, Secretario, Embajada de Chile, Roma
COLOMBIA - COLOMBIE
Delegado
Juan LOZANO y LOZANO, Embajador ante el Gobierno de Italia, Roma
Suplente
Gonzalo BULA HOYOS, Consejero de la Embajada de Colombia, Roma
Adjuntos
Señora Clara Inés DE ZAWADSKI, Cónsul General en Roma, Representante permanente de Colombia ante la FAO, Roma
Guillermo RICO, Funcionario del Ministerio de Agricultura, Bogotá
CONGO (Brazzaville)
Délégué
Augustin KOMBO, Directeur général des services agricoles et zootechniques, Brazzaville
Adjoint
Gabriel KODIA, Premier Secrétaire, Ambassade du Congo, Paris
CONGO, DEM. REP - CONGO, REP. DEM. - CONGO. REP. DEM.
Délégué
Charles Bruno MFUNI, Secrétaire général du Ministère de l'agriculture, Léopoldville
Supléants
Pierre LUMBALA, Directeur, Chef des services, études et politiques agricoles, Léopoldville
Jean A. MUEMA, Directeur de la production et santé animales, Léopoldville
Jules CLAES, Sous-Directeur à la vulgarisation agricole, Léopoldville
Justin HEMEDY, Secrétaire particulier du Ministère de l'agriculture, Léopoldville
COSTA RICA
Delegado
Carlo DI MOTTOLA, Embajador, Representante de Costa Rica Ante la Oficina Europea de las Naciones Unidas y la FAO
Alterno
Lino VICARIOLI, Director General de Agricultura del Ministerio de Agricultura y Ganadería, San José
COSTA RICA
Adjunto
Gavino di SUNI, Consejero, Representante permanente Alterno de Costa Rica ante la FAO, Roma
CUBA
Delegado
Mario García INCHAUSTEGUI, Embajador, Director de Organismos Internacionales del Ministerio de Comercio Exterior
Suplentes
José Enrique CAMEJO ARGUDIN, Embajador, Delegado permanente de Cuba ante la Oficina Europea de las Naciones Unidas y los Organismos Internacionales y Representante permanente de Cuba ante la FAO
Pablo León ECHANDI, Ingeniero, Director General del Servicio Técnico del Vice-Ministerio Técnico Agropecuario del Instituto Nacional de Reforma Agraria, Lattabana
Adjuntos
Severino Mansur JORGE, Encargado de Negocios ad iterim de Cuba en Italia y Delegado Alterno de Cuba ante la FAO, Roma
Luis Hernández OJEDA, Primer Secretario, Embajada de Cuba en Italia, Roma
Señora Fraternidad BRIONES FERNANDEZ, Asistencia Técnica del Instituto Nacional de la Pesca, Asistente Técnico, Habana
CYPRUS - CHYPRE - CHIPRE
Delegate
J. Chr. MOUSKOS, Director-General, Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Nicosia
Alternate
R. MICHAELIDES, Director, Department of Agriculture, Nicosia
Associates
Th. CHRISTOU, Director, Agricultural Research Institute, Nicosia
A. POLYCARPOU, Director, Department of Forests, Nicosia
DAHOMEY
Délégué
Adrien DEGBEY, Ministre du développement rural et de la coopération, Porto Novo
Suppléants
Bruno AMOUSSOU, Directeur du Service du génie rural, Porto Novo
François PARAISO, Directeur du Service des pêches, Porto Novo
Francis d'ALMEIDA, Secrétaire du Comité national, Porto Novo
Conseiller
DENEUFBOURG, Ingénieur du génie rural, Porto Novo
DENMARK - DANEMARK - DINAMARCA
Delegate
Chr. THOMSEN, Minister of Agriculture, Copenhagen
Alternates
V. BRORSON, Deputy Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Copenhagen
H.J. KRISTENSEN, Counselor, Ministry of Agriculture, Copenhagen
Associates
H. FRØLUND, Director of the Government, Forest Department, Copenhagen
J. HERTOFT, Ministry of Fisheries, Head of Section, Copenhagen
Henning NORMANN, Head of Section, Government Statistical Department, Copenhagen
Grete HEKKERUP, Member of Parliament, Copenhagen
Jorgen PEDERSEN, Secretary General, Federation of Danish Smallholders' Association, Copenhagen
A. Vesten PEDERSEN, Head of Section, Danish Agricultural Council, Copenhagen
K. SKOVGAARD, Professor, Royal Veterinary and Agricultural College, Copenhagen
Carlo VALENTIN HANSEN, Agricultural Counselor, Embassy of Denmark, Copenhagen
O.W. FRIIS, Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Copenhagen
Erik ANDERSEN, Counselor, Embassy of Denmark, Rome
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC - REPUBLIQUE DOMINICAINE - REPUBLICA DOMINICANA
Delegado
Silvestre ALBA DE MOYA, Ministro de Agricultura, Santo Domingo
Suplente
Pedro PADILLA TONOS, Delegado permanente de la república Dominicana ante la FAO, Roma
Adjuntos
Luis NEY AYBAR ANDINO, Oficial Mayor, Ministerio de Agricultura, Santo Domingo
Eduardo READ BARRERA, Embajador de la República Dominicana, Roma
ECUADOR - EQUATEUR
Delegado
José Aray MARIN, Ministro de Agricultura y Ganadería, Quito
Adjuntos
Orlando GABELA, Eneargado de Negocios ad interim del Ecuador, Quito
Héctor CHIRIBOGA, Asesor Capitán de Fragata, Quito
Joaquin ZEVALLOS, Quito
Consejeros
Gustavo PEREZ CHIRIBOGA, Embajador del Ecuador, Roma
Edmundo CADENA, Consejero Comercial de la Embajada del Ecuador, Roma
EL SALVADOR
Delegado
José Leonel ARGÜELLO, Primer Secretario, Embajada de El Salvador, Roma
ETHIOPIA - ETHIOPIE - ETIOPIA
Delegate
Ato Akalework HABTEWOLD, Minister of Agriculture, Addis Ababa
Alternate
Yohannes HABTU, Director General, Economic and Technical
Assistance Office and Executive Secretary, FFHC National Committee, Addis Ababa
Associates
Woldemicael KELECHA, Director General, Forestry Department
Ministry of Agriculture, Addis Ababa
Woldearegay REDA, Director-General, Fisheries Department,
Ministry of National Defence, Addis Ababa
Associate
Zageye ABERRU, Director-General, Plant Production and Protection Department, Ministry of Agriculture, Addis Ababa
Ayele YESHEWALUL Vice-General Manager, Livestock and Meat Board, Addis Ababa
Pascal WOLDEMARIAM, Director-General, Animal Health Department, Ministry of Agriculture, Addis Ababa
Amde WONDAFRASH, Director General, Animal Production Department, Ministry of Agriculture, Addis Ababa
FINLAND - FINLANDE - FINLANDIA
Delegate
Mauno JUSSILA, Minister of Agriculture, Helsinki
Alternate
Eino SAARI, Chairman of the National FAO Committee of Finland, Helsinki
Associates
Pekka NISKANEN, Inspector of Fishing Economics at the National Board of Agriculture, Helsinki
Mrs. Elizabeth BEAURAIN-PIHKALA, Secretary General of the National FAO Committee of Finland, Helsinki
Antti NIKKOLA, Research Assistant of the Agricultural Economics Research Institute, Helsinki
Mrs. Sirkka KOUKI, Chief of Home Economics Division at the National Board of Agriculture, Helsinki
Olli AUERO, Counselor, Embassy of Finland, Rome
Viljo HOLOPAINEN, Director, Finnish Forest Research Institute, Helsinki
FRANCE - FRANCIA
Délégué
Edgard PISANI, Ministre de l'agriculture, Ministère de l'agriculture, Paris
Suppléant
M. CEPEDE, Président du Comité interministériel de l'alimentation et de l'agriculture, Paris
Adjoints
Bernard TOUSSAINT, Conseiller des affaires étrangères, Paris
Henri JANTON, Contrôleur d'Etat, Ministère des finances et des affaires économiques, Paris
J. de VAISSIERE, Inspecteur general de l'agriculture, Paris
Conseillers
M. ANGLADETTE, Inspecteur général de la recherche agronomique tropicale, Paris
Bernard BOCHET, Conseiller des affaires étrangères, Service de coopération économique, Paris
Carlos BOUVET, Administrateur civil, Ministère des finances, Direction du trésor, Paris
Lucien BUGEAT, Sous-Directeur des études techniques, Ministère de la coopération, Paris
M. CAMUS, Directeur général de l'Office de recherche scientifique et technique d'outre-mer, Paris
P.M. DESSINGES, Consultant du Gouvernement français, Président de la section Presse du Comité français de la Campagne mondiale contre la faim, Paris
Daniel CONTENAY, Secrétaire des affaires étrangères, Conseiller au Cabinet du Ministre de l'agriculture, Paris
Lucien ESCARD, Sous-Directeur, Ministère de l'agriculture, Paris
Michel HURIET, Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO, Rome
Raymond LIGNON, Ingénieur agricole, Service de Coopération technique du Ministère des affaires étrangères, Paris
Paul MASSON, Directeur du Bureau pour le développement et la productivité agricoles, Paris
Bernard PECRIAUX, Administrateur civil au Ministère de la coopération, Paris
Armand WALLON, Chef du Service des relations extérieures, Ministère de l'agriculture, Paris
Gérard WEILL, Secrétaire général du Comité interministériel de l'alimentation et de l'agriculture, Paris
M. WOUTERS, Conseiller agricole, Ambassade de France, Rome
Jeanne PICARD, Conseiller économique et social (Consommateurs), Paris
P. MARTIN, Conseiller économique et social (Producteurs agricoles), Paris
Pasteur J. BEAUMONT, Vice-Président du Comité français pour la Campagne mondiale contre la faim, Paris
Jean RAFFARIN, Conseiller économique et social (Coopération agricole), Paris
GABON
Délégué
Pierre-Marie ONDO, Ministre de l'agriculture et des eaux et forêts, Libreville
Adjoints
Georges BEKALE, Chef de la région agricole de l'Estuaire, Libreville
Ange MBA, Directeur p. i. des eaux et forêts, Libreville
Edouard TEALE, Directeur de l'agriculture, Libreville
Emmanuel NZUE, Député du Gabon, Libreville
GAMBIA - GAMBIE
Delegate
A.S. KANY, Minister of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Bathurst
Alternate
L.J. MARENAH, Acting Director of Agriculture, Bathurst
GERMANY, FED. REP - ALLEMAGNE, REP. FED. - ALEMANIA, REP-FED.
Delegate
Norbert THIENEL, Under -Secretary, Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry, Bonn
Alternates
Gustav-Adolf SONNENHOL, Director-General, Federal Ministry for Economic Co-operation, Bonn
Hans-Joachim SCHARMER, Senior Counselor, Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry, Bonn
Associate
Gerhard MESECK, Director, Fisheries Division, Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry, Bonn
D. H. von HEGEL, Senior Counselor, Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry, Bonn
Wilhelm RAUHUT, Counselor, Embassy of the Federal Republic of Germany, Bonn
Irene HAAS, Counselor, Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry, Bonn
Herman SCHORR, Counselor, Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry, Bonn
Felix KRUSEN, Counselor, Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry, Bonn
Franz Josef SPECKS, Counselor, Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry, Bonn
GHANA
Delegate
F.A. JANTUAH, Minister of Agriculture, Accra
Alternates
Osei BONSU, Ambassador of Ghana, Embassy of Ghana, Rome
Martin Appiah DANQUAH, General Secretary, Ghana Farmers Co-operatives Council, Accra
Associates
C.A. DADDEY, Principal Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Accra
Alfred Kofi ASEM, Agricultural Development Co-ordinator, Ministry of Agriculture, Accra
J. E. AMOAFO, Chief Agricultural Economist, Ministry of Agriculture, Accra
A.K. OWUSU-AFRIYIE, Chief Conservator of Forests, Accra
John Nii-Nmashi ADJETEY, Chief Fisheries Officer, Accra
S. B. K. QUARTEY, Deputy Chief Veterinary Officer, Accra
B.B. BISMARCK, National Organizer of Co-operatives, Accra
Emanuel HAGAN, Agricultural Attaché, Embassy of Ghana, Rome
GREECE - GRECE - GRECIA
Délégué
L. EUTAXIAS, Ex-Ministre de l'agriculture, Président du. Comité national FAO, Athènes suppléants
John YANNAKAKIS, Conseiller, Ambassade de Grèce, Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO, Rome
T.D. ANAGNOSTOPOULOS, Conseiller commercial, Ambassade de Grèce, Rome
Conseillers
Ch. SERBETIS, Directeur au Ministère hellénique de l'industrie, Athènes
C. TSIPOURIS Attaché au Conseiller commercial, Ambassade de Grèce, Rome
GUATEMALA
Delegado
Roberto AZURDIA PAIZ, Embajador de Guatemala, Roma
Adjunto
Ramiro DURAN F., Consejero, Embajada de Guatemala, Roma
GUINEA - GUINEE
Délégué
Mamadou FOFANA, Directeur des cultures industrielles, Conakry
HAITI - HAITI
Délégué
Louis BLANCHET, Directeur général, Département de l'agriculture, des ressources naturelles et du développement rural, Port-au-Prince
Suppléant
Frédéric KEBREAU, Doyen de la Faculté d'agronomie, Port-au-Prince
HONDURAS
Delegado
Eugenio MATUTE CAÑIZALES, Embajador Extraordinario y Plenipotenciario de Honduras, Roma
Suplente
Blas Humberto URSO, Consejero de la Embajada, Roma.
ICELAND - ISLANDE - ISLANDIA
Delegate
David OLAFSSON, Director of Fisheries, Reykjavik
Alternate
Einar BENEDIKTSSON, Counselor, of Embassy, Rome
INDIA - INDE
Delegate
C. SUBRAMANIAM, Minister of Food and Agriculture, New Delhi
Alternate
Utsavabhai PARIKH, Minister for Revenue, Agriculture and Industries, Government of Gujerat, New Delhi
Associates
J. C. MATHUR, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Food and Agriculture, New Delhi
J. S. MONGIA, Deputy Secretary, Ministry of Food and Agriculture, New Delhi
S.N. WAHI, President Farmers Co-operative Bank of India, New Delhi
Maharaj KRISHAN, Agricultural Attaché, Embassy of India, Rome
P.K. MUKHERJEE, Additional Economic and Statistical Adviser, New Delhi
S.M. SIKKA, Agricultural Commissioner, Ministry of Food and Agriculture, New Delhi
N -Kesava PANIKKAR, Director, Indian Ocean Expedition, C. S. I. R., New Delhi
Hari SINGH, Inspector General of Forests, New Delhi
R. BHARATH, Private Secretary to Minister of Food and Agriculture of India, New Delhi
IRAN
Délégué
Gen. B. RIAHI, Ministre de l'agriculture, Téhéran
Suppléants
Abbas DAVATCHI, Professeur à l'Université de Téhéran, Téhéran
Nasser GOLESORKHI Sous-Secrétaire d'Etat Ministère de l'agriculture, Téhéran
Adjoints
Mohammad KAZEMI, Membre du Conseil pour le Plan, Téhéran
Hussein SADEGH, Ministre de l'Ambassade de l'Iran, Rome
Ing. RIAHI, Doyen de la Faculté d'agriculture de l'Université de Téhéran, Téhéran
Conseillers
Habib HEDAYAT, Directeur de l'Institut pour l'alimentation et la nutrition, Téhéran
Hossein Ali SHEYBANI, Directeur général, Ministère de l'agriculture, Téhéran
Firouz ADL, Directeur général de l'Institut de zootechnie, Téhéran
Farhad NIKOUKHAH, Conseiller de presse de l'Ambasade de l'Iran, Rome
IRAQ - IRAK
Delegate
Dhia AHMED, Under -Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Bagdad
Alternates
Louay KADRY, Director, Division of Soils and Agricultural Chemistry, Bagdad
Hassan KITTANI, Director-General of Forestry, Bagdad
Associates
Mahmud AL-HAMED, Director, Fisheries Division, Zafraniyah Farm, Bagdad
Nuri JAMIL, Ambassador, Embassy of Iraq, Rome
IRELAND - IRLANDE - IRLANDA
Delegate
Charles HAUGHEY, Minister for Agriculture and Fisheries, Dublin
Alternates
J. C. NAGLE, Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Fisheries, Dublin
M. J. BARRY, Deputy Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Fisheries, Dublin
Associates
H. SPAIN, Deputy Chief Inspector, Department of Agriculture and Fisheries, Dublin
John P. CUFFEE, Assistant Principal Officer, Department of Agriculture and Fisheries, Dublin
Michael FLYNN, First Secretary, Embassy of Ireland, Rome
Joseph S. ROWAN, Senior Agricultural Inspector, Department of Agriculture and Fisheries, Dublin
Arthur Edward James Went, Inspector of Fisheries and Scientific Adviser, Dublin
ISRAEL
Delegate
Chaim GVATI, Minister of Agriculture, Jerusalem
Alternates
Felix D. MAAS Director, Agricultural Production and Extension Services, Ministry of Agriculture, Tel Aviv
Eliezer SAMUEL, Resident Representative to FAO, Rome
A. AROCH, Director, International Organizations Department, Ministry for Foreign Affairs, Jerusalem
Associates
A. KENNET, First Secretary (Economic Affairs), Embassy of Israel, Rome
Mrs. M.L. ROMAN, Director, Technical Assistance and Foreign Relations Bureau, Jerusalem
Moshe M. KOLLAR, Deputy Director, Forest Department, Land Development Authority, Haifa
S. TAL, Director, Fish Culture Division, Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Agriculture, Tel Aviv
ITALY - ITALIE - ITALIA
Délégué
Mario FERRARI-AGGRADI, Ministre de l'Agriculture, Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts, Rome
Suppléant
G. Ugo PAPI, Secrétaire général du Comité national Italien de la FAO, Rome
Conseillers
Bartolomeo MGONE, Président de la Commission CMCF, Rome
Sabato VISCO, Président de l'Institut national de nutrition, Rome
Guido DE MAREI, Président de l'Institut technique de propagande agraire, Rome
Raffaele CUSMAI, Directeur général des pêches, Ministère de la marine marchande, Rome
V. PIZZIGALLO, Directeur général des forêts, Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts, Rome
Alberto MASTROMARINO
Raffaele CHELINI, Président du Conseil de l'agriculture, Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts, Rome
Emilio BETTINI, Chef du Service IX, Direction générale des affaires économiques, Ministère des affaires étrangères, Rome
Vittorio De ASARTA, Secrétaire, Comité national italien de la FAO, Rome
Calisto ZAMBRANO, Inspecteur général, Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts, Rome
P. MILELLA, Inspecteur général, Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts, Rome
D. VAMPA, Inspecteur général, Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts, Rome
Pasquale BARRACANO, Inspecteur général de l'alimentation, Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts, Rome
Adelmo PETTI, Inspecteur général de l'alimentation, Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts, Rome
Francesco POLACCO, Inspecteur général de l'alimentation, Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts, Rome
Giovanni Paolo ROBUSTELLI, Comité national italien de la FAO, Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts, Rome
Valerio BENVENUTI, Inspecteur général, Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts, Rome
Luigi LOBINA, Inspecteur général des forêts, Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts, Rome
A. FERONE, Chef de la Division des statistiques économiques, Rome
Lamberto TOZZI, Directeur de Division, Bureau des relations internationales, Ministère de l'agriculture, Rome
G. MEGLIO, Directeur de Division, Ministère de la marine marchande, Rome
Giuseppe CIAFFEI, Directeur de Section, Ministère du commerce extérieur, Rome
Italo DI MUCCIO, Ministère des affaires étrangères, Rome
Conseillers
Alfonso FRONCILLO, Directeur de Division, Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts, Rome
Giuseppe MANTINO, Inspecteur en chef de la production agricole, Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts, Rome
A. CAPPARELLI, Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts, Rome
A. FILONZI, Inspecteur en chef, Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts, Rome
Aldo RAVASINI, Directeur de Division, Directeur général de la protection économique des produits agricoles, Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts, Rome
Mario BIXIO, Inspecteur, Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts, Rome
Michele DE PACE, Inspecteur en chef de la production agricole, Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts, Rome
Giovanni SALVIA, Inspecteur en chef de la production agricole, Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts, Rome
Mario ROSA, Inspecteur en chef de la production agricole, Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts, Rome
Giuseppe CIGLIANO, Inspecteur en chef de la production agricole, Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts, Rome
Alessandro OLIVA, Conseiller, Ministère de la marine marchande, Rome
Ilvo CAPECCHI, Expert, Rome
Marcello SALAMONE, Comité national italien de la FAO, Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts, Rome
Mlle Francesca ZAFARANA, Comité national italien de la FAO, Rome
Mme Elena LENER-MAMMONE, Fonctionnaire au Comité national Italien de la FAO, Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts, Rome
Tommaso MANIERI, Comité national italien de la FAO, Rome
Mme R. MIZZAU, Fonctionnaire, Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts, Rome
Curzio CANEVA, Conseiller, Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts Rome
Aldo ADEMOLLO, Directeur général des services vétérinaires, Ministère de l'hygiène, Rome
Mme Maria Ester ALESSANDRINI, Expert du Département agricole, Professeur agrégé en chimie analytique à l'Université de Rome, Rome
Manlio BORIONI, Chef de Division des statistiques agricoles, Institut central de la statistique, Rome
D. CAMANDONA, Observateur, Institut central de la statistique, Rome
Salvatore DE FRANCISCI, Institut central de la statistique, Rome
Giuseppe FOSSA, Directeur de division, Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts, Rome
A. GIORDANO, Secrétaire général, Institut national des conserves alimentaires, Rome
Mme Blanca GRECO, Conseiller, Ministère de la marine marchande, Rome
A. MARIANI, Institut national de la nutrition, Rome
Fian Tommaso SCARASCIA MOGNOZZA, Directeur, Laboratoire d'applications d'énergie nucléaire, Rome
Riccardo MORANDINI, Directeur adjoint, Station de recherches forestières, Florence
F. RANALI, Chef du Bureau d'études, Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts, Rome
Mme Anna RIMOALDI, Office des statistiques, Marché commun européen, Direction générale de la tutelle, Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts, Rome
Sebastiano RIZZO, Directeur, Ecole nationale de la mécanisation agraire, Rome
M.A. SPADONI, Directeur du Laboratoire biochimique de la nutrition, Institut national de la nutrition, Rome
IVORY COAST - COTE D'IVOIRE - COSTA DE MARFIL
Délégué
Casimir BROU, Ambassadeur, Ambassade de la Côte-d'Ivoire, Rome
Suppléant
Anghui AKA, Directeur de l'enseignement agricole et des structures, Abidjan
Conseillers
Kouame ALLAH, Conseiller, Ministère de l'agriculture, Abidjan
Ibrahim TOURE, Conseiller, Abidjan
Garba DICKO, Conseiller, Abidjan
JAMAICA - JAMAIQUE
Delegate
Probyn MARSH, Jamaican Permanent Mission at the United Nations, Geneva
Associate
Allan G. KIRTON Head of Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Agriculture and Lands, Kingston
JAPAN - JAPON
Delegate
Toru OSAWA, Special Assistant to the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Tokyo
Alternate
Masao SAWAKI, Counselor, Embassy of Japan, Rome
Associates
Koichiro YAMAGUCHI, First Secretary, Embassy of Japan, Rome
Akira ARIMATSU, First Secretary, Embassy of Japan, Rome
Yoshimaru INOUE, Chief, International Co-operation Section, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Tokyo
Sumio ONO, Secretary, Specialized Agencies Section, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Tokyo
Jiro HASHIGUCHI, Secretary, International Co-operation Section, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Tokyo
Special Adviser
Shigeru YOSANO, Ambassador, Embassy of Japan, Rome
JORDAN - JORDANIE - JORDANIA
Delegate
Ismail HEJAZI, Minister of Agriculture, Amman
Associates
Sami SUNNA, Director, Planning Department, Amman
Salah JUMMA, Director, Forestry Department, Amman
Taher QALYOUBI, Director, Bedouin Settlement Project, Amman
Mohammad SALIM, Director, Scientific Research Department, Amman
Kamal Izaat AL TAHER, Director-General of Veterinary Services and Fisheries, Amman
KENYA - KENIA
Delegate
Roy Bruce MCKENZIE, Minister of Agriculture, Nairobi
Alternate
S.O. AYODO, Minister of Natural Resources and Wildlife, Nairobi
Associates
ACHIENG A. P., Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Natural Resources and Wildlife, Nairobi
N.S. KUNGU, Under Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Nairobi
Raymond ROWE, Assistant Secretary, Ministry of Natural Resources and Wildlife, Nairobi
Advisers
N. ODERO, Fisheries Officer, Ministry of Natural Resources, Kismu
N. NGANGA, Senior Assistant Secretary, Ministry of Natural Resources and Wildlife, Nairobi
Ishmael Elijah MURIITHI Director of Veterinary Service, Nairobi
Paul Thiongo MIRIE Director of Agriculture, Nairobi
H.C. MALAVU, Vice Chairman, National Freedom from Hunger Campaign, Nairobi
KOREA - COREE - COREA
Delegate
Chong Chan LEE, Ambassador, Embassy of Korea, Rome
Alternates
Nam Kyu CHUNG, Vice-President, National Agricultural Cooperatives Federation, Seoul
Shin Yong LHO, Counselor, Embassy of Korea, Rome
In Su KIM, Chief, Food Administration Section, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Seoul
Suk Jae KANG, Second Secretary, Embassy of Korea, Rome
Kee Bock SHIN Officer In charge of FAO, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Seoul
KUWAIT - KOWEIT
Delegate
Khaled ALISSA, Minister of Public Works, Kuwait
Alternate
Yahia GHANNAM, Representative of the Kuwait FFHC Committee, Kuwait
Adviser
Ali Ahmad AL-GHANEM, Head, Research Stations, Ministry of Public Works, Kuwait
Abdul Rahman SALMAN, Head, Animal Husbandry Division, Kuwait
Subhi ALATTAR, Head, Hydroponics Division, Kuwait
Husein Saleh SELIM, Head, Fisheries Division, Kuwait
LAOS
Délégué
Princesse SOUVANNA PHOUMA, Présidente de la délégation, Vientiane
Suppléant
Phouang Kèoh PHANARETH, Vice-Président, Comité national pour le développement du Bassin inférieur du Mékong, Vientiane
Adjoints
Bouaphat CHANTHAPANYA, Directeur, Eaux et forêts, Vientiane
Tiao Somsavath VONGKOTH, Directeur de l'agriculture, Vientiane
LEBANON - LIBAN - LIBANO
Délégué
Maurice GEMAYEL, Député au Parlement et Président de la Commission du Plan, Délégué permanent auprès de la FAO, Beyrouth
Suppléants
Amin ABDEL MALEK, Délégué permanent auprès de la FAO, et Directeur des relations extérieures, Ministère de l'agriculture, Beyrouth
Alexandre AMMOUN, Premier Secrétaire à l'Ambassade du Liban auprès du Saint-Siège, Rome
Fouad KHOURY, Chargé d'affaires, Embassade du Liban, Rome
LIBERIA
Delegate
John W. COOPER, Secretary of Ministry of Agriculture, Monrovia
Alternate
Anthony J. MELTON, Special Assistant to Secretary of Ministry of Agriculture, Monrovia
Associate
James A. SIRLEAF, Director of Extension, Monrovia
LIBYA - LIBYE - LIBIA
Delegate
Othman EL GERBI, Under -Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Tripoli
Alternate
Mohamed HAMEDA ABDULKADER, Assistant Under-Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Tripoli
Associates
Khairi ASSAGHAIER, Director, Planning and Agricultural Economics Department, Ministry of Agriculture, Tripoli
Salah Ben SAUD, Director, Animal Health Department, Ministry of Agriculture, Tripoli
Mohamed Badreddin MESSAUDI, Director-General of Forest Department, Tripoli
Issa BELKHEIR, Director, Technical Cooperation Office, Ministry of Planning and Development, Tripoli
LUXEMBOURG - LUXEMBURGO
Délégué
Emile COLLING, Ministre de l'agriculture et de la viticulture, Luxembourg
Adjoints
Mathias GILLEN, Directeur honoraire de l'Administration des services agricoles, Luxembourg
Camille HANSEN, Directeur de l'Administration des services agricoles, Luxembourg
MADAGASCAR
Délégué
Jacques RABENMANANJARA, Ministre d'Etat chargé de l'agriculture, Tananarive
Adjoint
Roger RAJOELISOLO, Directeur de l'enseignement et de la formation agricole, professionnelle, Tananarive
Adjoints
Cesaire RABENORO, Commissaire genéral au Plan, Tananarive
Mlle Honorine RANIVOARIMANANA, Coordinatrice des équipes féminines d'éducation nutritionnelle, Tananarive
MALAWI
Delegate
G. W. KUMTUMANJI, Minister of Natural Resources, Zomba
Associate
A.J.K. SENDEZA, Parliamentary Secretary, Zomba
Adviser
R.J. DEWAR, Secretary for Natural Resources, Zomba
MALAYSIA - MALAISIE - MALASIA
Delegate
Mohammed Ghazali bin Haji JAWI, Minister of Agriculture and Cooperatives, Kuala Lumpur
Alternate
Chew Hong JUNG, Deputy Director of Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives, Kuala Lumpur
Associates
Mohamed Yusoff RAHIM, Acting Principal Assistant Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives, Kuala Lumpur
K.D. MENON, Chief Research Officer (Forestry), Kuala Lumpur
T. UBAIDILLAH, Deputy Director of Fisheries, Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives, Kuala Lumpur
Ali Bin PENDEK, Agriculture Office (Training) Department of Agriculture, Sabah, Jesselton
MALI
Délégué
Alioune SISSOKO, Député Vice-Président de l'Assemblée nationale du Mali, Koulouba
Suppléant
Dumar SOW, Chef de la Division economique du Ministere des affaires étrangères, Koulouba
Jean-Djigui KEITA, Ingénieur agronome, Directeur p.i. de la Direction nationale du développement, Koulouba
Bénitiéni FOFANA, Spécialiste des questions de nutrition, Ministère de la santé publique et des affaires sociales, Koulouba
Ibrahima KONATE, Directeur du Service national de l'élevage, Trésorier général du Comité national de la Campagne mondiale contre la faim du Mali, Koulouba
MALTA - MALTE
Delegate
Carmelo CARUANA, Minister of Agriculture, Power and Communications, Valletta
Alternate
Victor J. CASTILLO, Director of Agriculture and Fisheries, Valletta
Associates
C. Galea ENRIQUEZ, Agricultural Economist, Valletta
J. FRENDO, Chief, Fisheries Officer, Ministry of Agriculture, Power and Communications, Valletta
A. SCICLUNA-SPITERI, Agricultural Chemist, Valletta
F. PORTELLI, Horticulturist, Valletta
J. DEBATTISTA, Agricultural Officer, Valletta
J.A. SCICLUNA, Secretary to Minister of Agriculture, Power and Communications, Valletta
MAURITANIA MAURITANIE
Délégué
Cheikh Abdallahi YAHYA, Secrétaire d'Ambassade, chargé des affaires consulaires.
MEXICO - MEXIQUE
Delegado
Juan Gil PRECIADO, Secretario de Agricultura y Ganadería, México, D. F.
Suplente
Rafael FUENTES, Embajador de México, Representante permanente de México ante la FAO, Roma
Emilio GUTTIEREZ ROLDAN, Director de Productora Nacional de Semillas, México D.F.
Darlo L. ARRIETA MATEOS, Director General de Sanidad Vegetal, Secretaría de Agricultura y Ganadería, México D. F.
Jorge ECHANIZ RUVALCABA, Director General de Pesca e Industrias Conexas, Secretaría de Industria y Comercio, México D. F.
Oscar VALDES ORNELAS, Director General del Instituto Nacional de Investigaciones Pecuarias, México D.F.
Rodolfo RAMIREZ GRANADOS, Subdirector General de Pesca e Industrias Conexas, Secretaría de Industria y Comercio, México D. F.
Consejeros
Juan Manuel GONZALEZ, Asesor Técnico de la Subsecretaria Forestal y de la Fauna, Secretaría de Agricultura y Ganadería, México D. F.
Samuel FERNANDEZ-VELASCO, Jefe del Departamento de Capacitación Pesquera, Secretaría de Industria y Comercio, México D. F.
Guillermo HERNANDEZ CHAVARRIA, Jefe del Departamento de Promoción de la Dirección General de Pesca e Industrias Conexas, Secretaría de Indusrria y Comercio, México D.F.
MOROCCO - MAROC - MARRUECOS
Délégué
AHARDANE, Ministre de l'agriculture et de la réforme agraire, Rabat
Suppléants
Noureddine EL GHORFI, Ambassadeur du Royaume du Maroc auprès de la FAO, Rome
Abdallah BEKKALI, Ingénieur agronome, Ingénieur du génie rural, Secrétaire général du Ministère de l'agriculture et de la réforme agraire, Rabat
HADDAOUI, Directeur des études des affaires économiques et juridiques, Rabat
BERRADA, Ingénieur agronome, Officier forestier, Directeur de la Division des eaux et forêts, Rabat
NAJEM, Ingénieur agronome, Ingénieur du génie rural, Rabat
BENZIMRA, Licencié en sciences juridiques, Secrétaire général adjoint du Ministère de l'agriculture et de la réforme agraire, Rabat
NEPAL
Delegate
Bhuban Lall PRADHAN, Minister for Irrigation and Power, Kathmandu
Alternate
Krishna Bom MALLA, Secretary, Ministry of Food and Agriculture, Kathmandu
Associates
Prakash Chand THAKUR, Ambassador, Embassy of Nepal, Rome
Prabal SJB RANA, Second Secretary, Embassy of Nepal, Rome
R. B. THAPA, Fisheries Development Officer, Department of Agriculture, Kathmandu
M.B. THAPA,. Assistant Chief Conservator of Forests, Department of Forestry, Kathmandu
NETHERLANDS - PAYS-BAS - PAISES BAJOS
Delegate
B.W. BIESHEUVEL, Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries, The Hague
Alternates
Mr. RADHAKISHUN, Minister of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries of Surinam, Paramaribo
M.J.L. DOLS, Cabinet Adviser to the Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries, The Hague
Associates
R. A. van den WALL BAKE, Deputy Director-General of Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, The Hague
G.P. TIGGELMAN, Director for Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries, Paramaribo
G. BELGRAVER, International Relations Branch, Agriculture Department, Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, The Hague
Marinus Henri BRODHAAG, Agricultural Attaché, Embassy of the Netherlands, Rome
J. M. H. te FLIERHAAR, Officer of International Organizations Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, The Hague
F. PRONK, Deputy Director, Foreign Agricultural Service, Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, The Hague
H. RIEM, Division for Agricultural Commerce and Industry, Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, The Hague
Miss P.M. F. Van der TOGT, Liaison Officer for FAO Affairs. Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, The Hague
G. W. J. PIETERS, Director of Agricultural Trade and Industry, Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, The Hague
Advisers
J.S. KEYSER, Chairman of the Netherlands National FAO Committee The Hague
A.H. HAAK, Director International Agricultural Centre, The Hague
M.L. de HEER, Public Board of Agriculture, The Hague
N.J. BLIJLEVEN, Assistant Agricultural Attaché, Embassy of the Netherlands, Rome
Eric DENIG, Officer, Government Service for Land and Water Use
C.M. HUPKES, Adviser to the Director-General of Agriculture, Ministry of Agricultural and Fisheries, The Hague
Hendrik LODDER, Division of Agricultural Trade and Industry, Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, The Hague
A.J. GRANDJEAN, Deputy -Director, State Forest Service, Utrecht
J.G. DE WIT, Inspector, Fisheries Division, Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, The Hague
T.J. TIENSTRA, Director, Fisheries Division, Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, The Hague
NEW ZEALAND - NOUVELLE-ZELANDE - NUEVA ZELANDIA
Delegate
D.N.R. WEBB, Director-General of Agriculture, Wellington
Alternate
D.W. WOODWARD, Minister, New Zealand Embassy, Brussels
Associates
Denis McLEAN First Secretary, New Zealand Embassy, Parts
N.R. WOODS, Agricultural Adviser to the New Zealand High Commissioner, London
Russell SCOTT, Director, Farm Adviser Division, Department of Agriculture, Wellington
E.W. MCCALLUM, Wellington
Continue
<section>j</section>
Delegates and observers attending the thirteenth session of the conference
NICARAGUA
Delegado
Alberto REYES R. Ministro de Agricultura y Ganadería, Managua
Suplente
Eduardo ARGÜELLO CERVANTES, Embajador, Embajada de Nicaragua, Roma
Consejero
Enrique CERDA R, Director Técnico del Centro Experimental Agropecuario "La Calera", Managua
NIGER
Délégué
Seydou AMADOU, Ambassadeur du Niger, Paris
NIGERIA
Delegate
Prince Alade LAMUYE, Minister of Natural Resources and Research, Lagos
Alternate
s
L.O.V. ANIONWU, Ambassador, Embassy of Nigeria, Rome
B. ADEDIPE, Parliamentary Secretary, Federal Ministry of Natural Resources and Research, Lagos
G. E.O. OKIY, Acting Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Natural Resources and Research, Lagos
Associates
C.A. TUGBOBO, Administrative Officer, Senior Assistant Secretary, Lagos
E.A. OKWUOSA, Agricultural Attaché, Embassy of Nigeria, Rome
Adviser
s
B. SHAIB, Adviser on Animal Health and Production to the Nigerian Delegation, Lagos
Obed Chukwunedum MENAKAYA, Deputy Chief Inspector of Agriculture, Eastern Nigeria, Enugu
G.A. E. OGBE, Conservator of Forests, Mid-Western Nigeria
E.O. OJURONGBE, Assistant Chief Agricultural Extension Services Officer, Ibadan
E.O. BAYAGBONA, Principal Research Officer, Federal Fisheries Service, Lagos
I.O. NWERRI, Adviser on Agricultural Information and Publications to the Nigerian Delegation, Enugu
NORWAY - NORVEGE - NORUEGA
Delegate
John RINGEN, Director, Agricultural Research Council of Norway, and Chairman, National Nutrition Council (FAO Committee), Oslo
Associates
R. NICOLAYSEN, Professor, University of Oslo, Oslo
Aslak LIDTV EIT, Director-General of Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture, Oslo
R. VOLLAN, Director-General of Veterinary Services, Ministry of Agriculture, Oslo
Carl BJØRGE, Deputy Director, Ministry of Fisheries, Oslo
A. SOLBRAA, Deputy Managing Director, Norwegian Forest Owners Federation, Oslo
Olav BORGAN, Director, Federation of Agricultural Co-operative Associations, Oslo
Hallvard, EIKA, President, National Farmers' Union, Oslo
Per T. NAEVDAL, Counselor, Embassy of Norway, Rome
A. LÖCHEN, Secretary -General, National Nutrition Council (FAO Committee), Oslo
PAKISTAN
Delegate
A. H. M. Minister of Agriculture and Works, Rawalpindi
Alternate
Mohammed KHURSHID, Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture and Works, Rawalpindi
Associates
Ahmed BARKAT, Agricultural Counselor, Embassy of Pakistan and Resident Representative to FAO, Rome
H.R. MALIK, Member E.P. Water and Power Development Authority, Dacca
Mohammad AHMAD, Counselor, Embassy of Pakistan, Rome
Youssaf KHAD, Commercial Secretary, Embassy of Pakistan, Rome
PANAMA
Delegado
Rafael VALLARINO, Embajador, Embajada de Panamá, Roma
Adjunto
José Manuel WATSOND, Secretario de Embajada, Roma
PERU - PEROU
Delegado
Rafael CUBAS VINATEA, Ministro de Agricultura, Lima
Adjuntos
Javier SILVA RUETE, Ex-Ministro de Agricultura, Miembro del Consejo Nacional Agrario, Lima
Guillermo REY TERRY, Vicepresidente de la Corporación Financiera de la Reforma Agraria, Lima
Javier LABARTHE, Experto de pesca, Lima
Luis BERNALES CHIENDA, Presidente del Consejo Superior de Nutrición del Perú, Director Técnico de Alimentación, Ministerio de Salud, Lima
Andrés A. ARAMBURU, Representante permanente del Perú ante la FAO, Roma
PHILIPPINES - FILIPINAS
Delegado
Manuel ADEVA Ambassador, Embassy of the Philippines, Rome
Alternate
s
Eugenio E. CRUZ, Director of Plant Industry, Bureau of Plant Industry, Manila
J. F. JAMIAS, Chairman, Department of Agricultural Information and Communications, University of the Philippines, College of Agriculture, Los Baños
Manuel R. MONSALUD, Director, Forest Products Research Institute, College, Laguna
Anacleto B. CORONEL, Director of Animal Industry, Manila
Miss Lourdes S. GARABATO, Executive Secretary, Philippine National FAO Committee, Quezen City
Arsenio N. ROLDAN Jr., Commissioner, Philippine Fisheries Commission, Manila
Nicanor G. JORGE, Director, Bureau of Lands, Manila
Augustin MANGILA, Assistant Secretary, Economic Affairs, Manila
Vicente R. MARABABOL, Chief, Forest Management Division, Manila
POLAND - POLOGNE - POLONIA
Délégué
Józef OKUNIEWSKI, Sous-Secrétaire d'Etat au Ministère de l'agriculture, Varsovie
Suppléant
Stefan KROLIKOWSKI, Président du Comité national polonais de la FAO, Varsovie
Adjoints
Mieczyslaw BIRECKI, Secrétaire adjoint de la Section des sciences agricoles et forestières, Académie des sciences de Pologne, Varsovie
Jan SERWATOWSKI, Vice-Directeur de Département, Ministère du commerce extérieur, Varsovie
Wlodrimierz NATORF, Ministère des affaires étrangères, Varsovie
Marian PASZKOWSKI, Premier Secrétaire, Ambassade de Pologne, Rome
Józef MAJCHER, Deuxième Secrétaire, Ambassade de Pologne, Rome
Henryk PODEDWORNY, Conseiller, Comité d'Etat pour la coopération économique Internationale, Varsovie
PORTUGAL
Delegate
F. MAGALHAES CRUZ, Assistant Director-General, Economic Department, Foreign Affairs, Lisbon
Associates
Manuel Alfonso SIEUVE, Agronomist, Institute of Interior Colonization, Lisbon
Amaro GUERREIRO, Statistician, National Institute of Statistics, Lisbon
Adviser
s
A. LOBO MARTINS, Agricultural Engineer, Lisbon
QUINTANILH, Forestry Officer, Lisbon
Nataniel COSTA, First Secretary, Embassy of Portugal, Rome
Emlliano COSTA, Animal Production Officer, Lisbon
Duarte SILVA, President of the Central Commission on Fisheries, Ministry of Merchant Navy, Vice-President of National FAO Committee, Lisbon
Alves MORGADO, Director of Planning Department, Ministry of Overseas, Lisbon
Cristovao HENRIQUES, Agriculture Officer, Lisbon
A. Ramiro FERRAO, Ministry of Overseas, Lisbon
José Crisorão HENRIQUES, Forestry Engineer, Ministry of Overseas, Lisbon
Vasco de Albuquerque QUINTANILLA, Forest Engineer, Lisbon
ROMANIA - ROUMANIE - RUMANIA
Délégué
Nicolae GIOSAN, Ministre, Président du Conseil supérieur de l'agriculture, Bucarest
Suppléant
s
Nicolae STEFAN, Ministre adjoint, Vice-Président du Conseil supérieur de l'agriculture, Bucarest
Iacob IONASCU, Directeur de la Direction des relations économiques, Ministère des affaires étrangères, Bucarest
Adjoints
George MIRICA, Directeur de l'Institut de recherches piscicoles, Bucarest
Mircea ROMAS, Directeur au Conseil supérieur de l'agriculture, Secrétaire du Comité national roumain pour la FAO, Bucarest
Pompiliu CELAN, Deuxième Secrétaire de Légation, Ministère des affaires étrangères, Bucarest
Ion MILESCU, Chef de section, Secrétariat du Conseil des Ministres, Bucarest
Gheorge BAIA, Professeur d'Université, Bucarest
SAUDI ARABIA - ARABIE SAOUDITE - ARABIA SAUDITA
Delegate
Hassan MSHABI, Minister of Agriculture and Water, Riyadh
Alternate
Ibrahim Abou BOUTAIN, Director-General, Ministry of Agriculture and Water, Riyadh
Associates
Abdul Mannan TORJOMAN, Director of the Production Department, Riyadh
Khaled ALGOSAIBI, Director of the Planning Office, Riyadh
Hassan HAJRAH, Director of the land Reform Office, Riyadh
Yoursof ESEILAN, Geologist, Expert for Water Research and Survey, Riyadh
Ali AUDEH, Secretary of the Foreign Service, Ministry of Agriculture and Water, Riyadh
SENEGAL
Délégué
Margatte LO, Ministre de l'économie rurale, Dakar
Suppléant
Edouard Camille BASSE, Ambassadeur du Sénégal en Italie, Rome
Adjoint
El Hadj Malick FALL, Directeur du Cabinet du Ministre de l'économie rurale, Dakar
Conseillers
Mme Marie-Thérèse BASSE, Représentant permanent chi Sénégal auprès de la FAO,' Rome
Bocar LY, Conseiller technique, Ministère de l'économie rurale, Dakar
Samba Cor SARR, Directeur de l'élevage et des industries animales du Sénégal, Dakar
Babacar DIOP, Docteur vétérinaire, Directeur adjoint du Service des pêches, Dakar
Abdoulaye Chimère TALL, Dakar
Thianar N'DOYE, Médecin en chef du Bureau de l'alimentation et de la nutrition appliquée, Ministère de la santé, Dakar
SIERRA LEONE - SIERRA LEONA
Delegate
A. H. KABIA, Acting Minister of External Affairs, Freetown
Alternate
A. TEJAN, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Freetown
Adviser
s
J.S. SAWYER, Chief Conservator of Forests, Freetown
J.A. KAMARA, Senior Veterinary Officer, Freetown
SOMALIA - SOMALIE
Delegate
Ismail Dualeh WARSAMEH, Minister of Agriculture and Animal Husbandry, Mogadiscio
Alternate
Ali Hussen GURRAH, Ambassador, Embassy of Somalia, Rome
Associates
Hersi Abdallah FARAH, Director of Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Husbandry, Mogadiscio
Mohamud Mohamed HASSAN, Counselor, Embassy of Somalia, Rome
SPAIN - ESPAGNE - ESPAÑA
Delegado
Adolfo DIAZ-AMBRONA, Ministro de Agricultura, Madrid
Suplente
s
Ramón ESTERUELAS ROLANDO, Director General de Agricultura, Madrid
Miguel ECHEGARAY, Presidente del Instituto de Investigaciones Agronómicas, Madrid
Adjuntos
Francisco ORTUÑO, Director General de Montes, Caza y Pesca Fluvial, Madrid
Juan CABRERO, Secretario de Embajada, Madrid
Eladio ASENSIO VILLA, Jefe de la Sección de Relaciones Agronómicas con el Extranjero, Madrid
Ramón CANTOS -FIGUEROLA, Ingeniero Agrónomo, Ministerio de Agricultura, Madrid
Jaime NOSTI, Ingeniero Agrónomo, Dirección General de Economía de la Producción Agraria, Madrid
Arturo CAMILLERI LAPEYRE, Ingeniero Agrónomo, Secretaría General Técnica del Ministerio de Agricultura, Madrid
Javier GARCIA RAMOS, Agregado Agrónomo en la Embajada de España, Representante permanente de España ante la FAO, Roma
Carlos CAVERO BEYARD, Jefe Nacional del Sector Campo de la Vicesceretaría Nacional de Ordenación Ecónomíca
Ignacio del CUVILLO MERELLO, Director General de Pesca Marítima
Miguel BUENO GOMEZ, Ingeniero Agrónomo, Madrid
Enrique CASTELLA BERTRAN, Veterinario, Patronato de Biología Animal, Madrid
Guillermo ESCARDO, Ingeniero Agrónomo, Ministerio de Agricultura, Comité Nacional Español de la FAO, Madrid
Angel M. MAQUEDA, Ingeniero Agrónomo, Instituto Nacional de Colonización, Madrid
Juan Manuel PAZOS GIIL, Ingeniero Agronómo, Instituto Nacional de Colonización, Madrid
Olegario RODRIGUEZ MARTIN, Biólogo Asesor, Dirección General de Pesca Marítima, Madrid
José Maria PRAT FRIGOLA, Veterinario del Cuerpo Nacional, Madrid
Manuel VIDAL HOSPITAL, Jefe de la Sección de Análisis de las Explotaciones, Ministerio de Agricultura, Madrid
José Luis de MIGUEL ARENAL, Ingeniero Agrónomo, Secretaría Técnica del Ministerio de Agricultura, Madrid
Pedro CALDENTEY ALBERT, Ingeniero Agrónomo, Secretaría General Técnica, Ministerio de Agricultura, Madrid
Mariano BRIONES LEDESMA, Subdirector del Patrimonio Forestal del Estado, Madrid
Ricardo DE RADA, Ingeniero de Montes, Jefe de Relaciones Forestales, Dirección General de Montes, Madrid
SUDAN - SOUDAN
Delegate
Abdel Rahman EL NUR, Minister of Information and Labour and Acting Minister of Agriculture, Khartoum
Alternate
Wadie HABASHI, Director of Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture, Khartoum
Associates
Salih Mohamed Salih JAHEEN, Assistant Director, Ministry of Animal Resources, Khartoum
Mohamed Elyasaa KHALIFA, Assistant Director of Fisheries, Khartoum
Faroug Ibrahim EL MAGBOUL, Senior Inspector, Ministry of Commerce, Khartoum
Abu Bakr Abdel Rahman KAMIL, Assistant Conservator of Forests, Omdurman
Ahmed Mohamed IBRAHIM, Land Use Officer, Khartoum
Abdel Latif ABDEL HAMID, Embassy of Sudan, Rome
SWEDEN - SUEDE - SUECIA
Delegate
E. HOLMQVIST, Minister of Agriculture, Stockholm
Alternate
s
I. ECKERSTEN, Under -Secretary of State to the Ministry of Agriculture, Stockholm
V. PAULSSON, Under -Secretary of State to the Cabinet Office, Stockholm
Claes SENNING, Head of Division, Ministry of Agriculture, Stockholm
Associates
S. ALLARD, Ambassador, Permanent Representative to FAO, Rome
C. -G. BEVE, Counselor, Embassy of Sweden, Rome
U. HÄNNINGER, First Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Stockholm
E. GREBÄCK, Member of the Swedish Riksday, Stockholm
H. HAKANSSON, Director, Federation of Swedish Farmers Cooperatives, Stockholm
C. E. ODHNER, Economist, Trade Union Office, Stockholm
P. GRABÖ, Licentiate of Agriculture, Stockholm
J. HULT, Director in Chief, National Swedish Board of Fisheries and Fishery Research, Gothenburg
K. F. SVÄRDSTROM, Professor, University of Agriculture, Uppsala
G.R. YTTERBORN, Deputy Director-General, National Swedish Board of Agriculture, Stockholm
F. JOHANSSON, Director-General, National Swedish Board of Agriculture, Stockholm
SWITZERLAND - SUISSE - SUIZIA
Délégué
Louis MAIRE, Vice-Président du Comité national FAO, Genève
Suppléant
Paul HOHL, Chef de Section, Division de l'agriculture, Département fédéral de l'économie publique, Berne
Conseillers
Alfred KAUTER, Sous-Directeur, Division de l'agriculture, Berne
Josef JUNGO, Inspecteur général des forêts, Genève
Jean SCHNEEBERGER, Conseiller, Ambassade de Suisse, Rome
Anton HEGNER, Collaborateur diplomatique au Departement politique fédéral, Berne
Peter WIESMANN, Conseiller, Chef de Section (Coopération technique), Département politique fédéral, Berne
SYRIA - SYRIE - SIRIA
Délégué
Taher KHALIFE, Secrétaire général Ministère de l'agriculture, Damas
Suppléant
s
Jamil OBEID, Secrétaire général adjoint, Ministère du ravitaillement, Damas
Fahim LADKANY, Directeur de la santé animale, Ministère de l'agriculture, Damas
TANZANIA - TANZANIE
Delegate
D.N.M. BRYCESON, Minister for Agriculture, Forests and Wildlife, Dar es Salaam
Alternate
s
G. M. RUGARABAMU, Principal Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Forests and Wildlife Dar es Salaam
D.A. MWAKOSYA, Director of Agriculture, Dar es Salaam
Associates
G.J. KILEO, Chief Conservator of Forests, Dar es Salaam
J. M. HOLLOWAY, Assistant Director, Water Development and Irrigation
M.R. NABURI, Senior Agricultural Officer, Dar es Salaam
THAILAND - THAILANDE - TAILANDIA
Delegate
Phra Prakas SAHAKORN, Minister of Agriculture, Bangkok
Alternate
s
Somboon PALASTHIRA, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of Thailand, Embassy of Thailand, Rome
M.C. CHAKRABANDHU, Director-General, Department of Agriculture, Bangkok
Associates
Siribongse BOON-LONG, Secretary -General, National FAO Committee, Ministry of Agriculture, Bangkok
Vicharn NIVAT VONGS, Deputy Director-General, Department of Commercial Intelligence, Ministry of Economic Affaire, Bangkok
Kayoon LIMTHONG, Director of Budget Analysis Service, Bureau of Budget, Bangkok
Sanguan KUMVONGSAR, Secretary to the Minister, Ministry of Agriculture, Bangkok
Thalesng THAMRONG-NAWASAWAT, Deputy Secretary-General, The National Economic Development Board, Bangkok
Chakr PICHAIRONARONGSONGKRAM, Director-General, Department of Livestock Development, Ministry of Agriculture, Bangkok
Prida KARNASUT, Director-General, Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Agriculture, Bangkok
Thanom PREMRASMEE, Department of Forestry, Ministry of Agriculture, Bangkok
Prachoom INDRAMBARYA, Director, Division of Nutrition, Department of Health, Ministry of Public Health, Bangkok
TOGO
Délégué
F. F. ABALO, Ministre de l'économie rurale, Lomé
Suppléant
Léonard B. YWASSA, Directeur du Service de l'agriculture, Lomé
Adjoints
Peter Primus O'CLOO, Chargé du Service d'alimentation et nutrition, Ministère de l'économie rurale, Lomé
Adolphe Anani AGBEKODO, Ingénieur des eaux et forêts, Adjoint au Chef du Service des eaux et forêts, Lomé
Abdoul-Ganiyou SALAMI, Docteur vétérinaire, Chef de la région d'elevage du Centre, Sokodé
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO - TRINITE ET TOBAGO - TRINIDAD Y TOBAGO
Delegate
L. M. ROBINSON, Minister of Agriculture, Port-of-Spain
Alternate
Egerton John HAMILTON, Technical Officer, Crop Husbandry, Port-of-Spain
Adviser
s
Frank A. BARSOTTI, Senior Economist, Ministry of Agriculture, Port-of-Spain
W. CHALMERS, Assistant Conservator of Forests, Port-of-Spain
Andres ROSE, Permanent Representative of Trinidad and Tobago to the European Office of the United Nations, Geneva
Frank ABDULLAH, Counselor, Trinidad and Tobago High Commission, London
TUNISIA - TUNISIE - TUNEZ
Délégué
Mohammed JEDDI, Sous-Secrétaire d'Etat à l'agriculture, Tunis
Suppléant
s
Mohamed BADRA, Ambassadeur, Rome
Tahar HAOUET, Chef des Divisions de la production et du développement agricoles, Tunis
Conseillers
EL FAZAA Abdeljelil, Attaché d'Ambassade, Ambassade de Tunisie, Rome
Khaled Ben AMMAR, Chef de Division du développement régional, Tunis
Mahmoud BADRA, Directeur des forêts, Tunis
Hamadi Ben SLIMANE, Chef de la Section des Investissements, Tunis
Abdelmajid BOURICHA, Chef de la Section économique, Tunis
Mohsen CHAARI, Chef du Service des statistiques, Sous-Secrétariat d'Etat à l'agriculture, Tunis
Mustapha BEN SALEM, Médecin inspecteur et chef de Service de l'action sociale et de la nutrition appliquée, Tunis
Caid BEL GACEM, Ingénieur des travaux statistiques, Sous-Secrétariat d'Etat à l'agriculture, Tunis
Tahar JAWADI, Sous Secrétariat d'Etat, Ministère à l'agriculture, Tunis
Hamda HAFSIA, Directeur de l'Institut de recherches forestières
Slah-Eddine BENSAID, Sous -Directeur de la production agricole végétale, Tunis
Mohsen CHEBIL, Sous-Directeur, Sous-Secrétariat d'Etat à l'agriculture, Tunis
EL FOURGHI, Sous-Directeur au Sous-Secritariat d'Etat à l'agriculture, Tunis
BEN OSMAN, Ingénieur, Directeur au Sous-Secrétariat à l'agriculture, Tunis
Mohamed GHEDIRA, Directeur général de l'Office de la Medjerda, Tunisie
Abderralhmane BEN MESSAOOD, Commissaire coordonnateur, Cabinet du Sous-Secrétariat d'Etat à l'agriculture, Tunisie
TURKEY - TURQUIE - TURQUIA
Delegate
Bahri DAGTAS, Minister of Agriculture, Ankara
Alternate
s
Osman SOYSAL, Under-Secretary of State, Ministry of Agriculture, Ankara
K. BILGIC, Adviser in the Studying Board, Ministry of Agriculture, Ankara
Kâmran INAN, Permanent Representative of FAO, Embassy of Turkey, Rome
ÖZAR Third Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ankara
Associates
Nuri ALPUN, Commercial Counselor, Embassy of Turkey, Rome
Nurettin TÜRKÖZ, Director of the Reafforestation Section, Ankara
Adviser
Dogan YALIM, Assistant Director, Supervised Agricultural Development Loans Division, Ankara
UGANDA - OUGANDA
Delegate
M.M. NGOBI, Minister of Agriculture and Cooperatives, Entebbe
Alternate
J.K. BABHHA, Minister of Animal Industry, Game and Fisheries, Entebbe
Associates
J.S. LAKER, Acting Commissioner for Agriculture, Entebbe
F.J. LUSWATA, Acting Assistant Commissioner for Agriculture, Entebbe
M. RUKUBA, Acting Chief Conservator of Forests, Entebbe
G. K. BINAISA, Assistant Commissioner for Veterinary Services, Entebbe
S.N. SEMAKULA, Deputy Chief Fisheries Officer, Entebbe
Adviser
L. MWANGA, Foreign Service Officer, Entebbe
UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC - REPUBLIQUE ARABE UNIE - REPUBLICA ARABA UNITA
Delegate
S.A. EL-KHISHEN, Minister of Agriculture, Cairo
Alternate
s
Abdelfattah Ali MOURSI, Under-Secretary of State, Ministry of Agriculture, Cairo
M. H. SOBEIH, President, Desert Rehabilitation Authority, Cairo
S. MANSOUR, Under-Secretary of State, Ministry of Planning, Cairo
Hassan ABDALLAH, Director Foreign Relations Department, Ministry of Agriculture, Cairo
Associates
H.A. GOWHAR, Director-General, Fisheries Research Institute, Cairo
Ismail A. ABDOU, Director-General, Nutrition Institute, Cairo
H. EL-ESAWI, Commercial Counselor, Embassy of the United Arab Republic, Rome
Mohamed I. BADR, Controller of Agricultural Statistics, Ministry of Agriculture, Cairo
A. RASEM, Director, International Organizations Division, Foreign Relations Department, Ministry of Agriculture, Cairo
UNITED KINGDOM - ROYAUME-UNI - REINO UNIDO
Delegate
Mrs. Barbara CASTLE, Minister for Overseas Development, London
Alternate
W.A.C. MATHIESON, Under -Secretary, Ministry of Overseas Development, London
Associates
A.C. MANYELI, Minister of Education, Maseru, Basutoland
S. LETSIE, Minister of Agriculture, Maseru, Basutoland
M.P. K. NWAKO, Minister of Agriculture, Gaberones
Adviser
s
Mrs. E. DIBBEN, Clerical Officer, Ministry of Overseas Development, London
John HOSE, Executive Committee Member, National Union of Agricultural Workers, London
Gwylin T. WILLIAMS, Deputy President, National Farmers Union, London
Rosemary MILLER, Economist, National Farmers Union, London
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA - ETATS-UNIS D'AMERIQUE - ESTADOS UNIDOS DE AMERICA
Delegate
Mrs. Dorothy H. JACOBSON Assistant Secretary for International Affairs, Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.
Alternate
s
Ralph W. PHILLIPS, Director, International Organizations Staff, Office of Assistant Secretary for International Affairs, Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.
Robert ROSSOW, Counselor for FAO Affairs, Embassy of the United States of America, Rome
Herbert J. WATERS, Assistant Administrator for Material Resources, Agency for International Development, Department of State, Washington, D.C.
Congressional Advisers
Hon. George S. McGOVERN, United States Senate, Washington, D.C.
Hon. Jack MILLER, United States Senate, Washington, D.C.
Hon. Gaylord NELSON, United States Senate, Washington, D.C.
Hon. Robert DOLE, United States House of Representatives, Washington, D.C.
Hon. Alec G. OLSON, United States House of Representatives, Washington, D.C.
Merrill M. BLEVINS, Assistant FAO Liaison Officer, Embassy of the United States of America, Rome
Paul BYRNES, Office of International Administration, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State, Washington, D.C.
Henry CLEPPER, Executive Secretary, Society of American Foresters, Washington, D.C.
Mrs. Ursula H. DUFFUS, Embassy of the United States of America, Rome
Mordecai EZEKIEL, Chief, United Nations Section, Office of Program Coordination, Agency for International Development, Department of State, Washington, D.C.
Rulon GIBB, Director, Program Development Division, Foreign Agricultural Service, Department of Agriculture, Washington, D. C.
Henry L. GRAHAM, Legislative Representative, U.S. National Grange, Washington, D.C.
Adviser
s
Kenneth A. HAINES, Assistant Director, Foreign Research and Technical Program Division, Agricultural Research Service, Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.
Miss JoAnn HALLQUIST, Office of International Economic and Social Affairs, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State, Washington, D.C.
V. L. HARPER, Deputy Chief, Forest Service, Department of Agriculture, Washington, D. C.
Herbert HARRIS, II, American Farm Bureau Federation, Washington, D.C.
Reuben JOHNSON, National Farmers Union, Washington, D.C.
Miss Ruth M. LEVERTON, Assistant Deputy Administrator, Nutrition, Consumers and Industrial Use Research, Agricultural Research Service, Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.
E. P. LONGEWAY, Jr., Executive Director, National Fisheries Institute, Washington, D. C.
Donald L. McKERNAN, Director, Bureau of Commercial Fisheries, Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of the Interior, Washington, D.C.
Kenneth D. NADEN, Executive Vice-President, National Council Of Farmer Cooperatives, Washington, D.C.
James O'CONNOR, President, American Freedom from Hunger Foundation, American Institute of Food Marketing, St. Joseph's College, Philadelphia
Frank T. PISKUR, Chief, Foreign Fisheries Branch, Bureau of Commercial Fisheries, Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of the Interior, Washington, D.C.
Hon. Richard W. REUTER, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State, Department of State, Washington, D.C.
Gilbert L. SHIRK (Secretary of Delegation), Office of International Conferences, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State, Washington, D.C.
Roger STEWART, Assistant Chief, Food for Peace Division, Off tee of Material Resources, Agency for International Development, Department of State, Washington, D. C.
Robert C. TETRO, Agricultural Attaché, Embassy of the United States of America, Rome
Quentin M. WEST, Director, Foreign Regional Analysis Division, Economic Research Service, Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.
Robert K. WINTERS, Director, Foreign Forestry Services, Forest Service, Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.
Max L. WITCHER, International Organizations Specialist, International Organizations Staff, Off tee of Assistant Secretary, Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.
UPPER VOLTA - HAUTE -VOLTA - ALTO VOLTA
Délégué
G. SANOGOH, Directeur du Plan de la statistique et des études économiques, Ouagadougou
Conseiller
Léopold Wantissé SIRY, Directeur du développement rural, Ouagadougou
URUGUAY
Delegado
Mateo Y. MAGARIÑOS de MELLO, Embajador y Representante permanente del Uruguay, Embajada del Uruguay, Roma
Suplente
Alfredo BIANCHI, Representante permanente alterno del Uruguay ante la FAO, Roma
Adjunto
Alfredo MORETTI
VENEZUELA
Delegado
Carlos RAMIREZ McGREGOR, Representante permanente de Venezuela ante la FAO, Roma
Suplente
Armando GAMEZ, Vice-Ministro de Agricultura, Caracas
Adjuntos
José Luis PEÑALVER GOMEZ, Director, Ministerio de Agricultura y Cría, Caracas
Orlando TOVAR. Consultor Turfdico del M.A.C., Venezuela
Anastasio CARDENAS, Comisionado del Ministerio de Agricultura, Caracas
Sixto PERICCHI, Jefe, Division de Evacuación, Dirección de Recursos Naturales Renovables, Ministerio de Agricultura, Caracas
Consejeros
François MOANACK, Ministro Consejero de la Embajada de Venezuela, Roma
Nora Arnao MACHADO, Embajada de Venezuela, Roma
VIET-NAM
Délégue
Van Tri LAM, Ministre de l'agriculture, Saigon
Suppléant
Chuong LUONG-SI, Secrétaire général adjoint, Ministère de l'agriculture, Saigon
Conseillers
Van Phung DINH, Directeur des affaires rurales, Saigon
Thai VU-THIEN, Directeur de l'élevage, Saigon
Van Tan, NGUYEN, Directeur des affaires forestières, Saigon
Thành NGO-BA, Directeur des pêcheur Saigon
Quan CAO, Chef du Service des relations internationales, Représentant du Comité national de la FAO et CMCF, Ministère de l'agriculture, Saigon
YEMEN
Delegate
Mohamed Huthi HASHIM, Minister
Adviser
Abdurrahman ALHAYOUTI, Secretary Embassy of Yemen, Rome
YUGOSLAVIA - YOUGOSLAVIE
Délégué
Joze INGOLIC, Secrétaire fédéral de l'agriculture et des forêts, Belgrade
Suppléants
Milun IVANOVIC, Conseiller au Comité exécutif fédéral, Belgrade
Milan RISTIC, Conseiller, Secrétariat d'Etat des affaires étrangères, Belgrade
Adjoints
Grga LAVCEVIC, Conseiller au Secrétariat d'Etat des affaires étrangères, Belgrade
Vladimir DAMJANOVIC, Secrétaire du Comité national de la FAO, Belgrade
Conseillers
Dusan KLEPAC, Professeur la Faculté des forêts, Zagreb
Bogdan SESTAN, Professeur d'economie agricole, Zagreb
ZAMBIA - ZAMBIE
Delegate
J. CHIVUNGA, Minister of State In the Office of the President of Zambia, Lusaka
Associate
C. LIHUSHA, Economist, Ministry of Agriculture, Lusaka
Adviser
G. HUTCHESON, Director, Department of Agriculture, Lusaka
Associates
Mrs. I, SIBONGO, Freedom from Hunger Campaign Committee of Zambia, Lusaka
L. MUUKA, Principal, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Lusaka
Adviser
C. DAVIS, Ministry of Land and Natural Resources, Ndola
ASSOCIATE MEMBERS
MEMBRES ASSOCIES
MEMBROS ASOCIADOS
BASUTOLAND - BASUTOLANDIA
Delegate
S. LETSIE, Minister of Agriculture, Maseru
Alternate
A. C. MANYELI, Minister of Education, Maseru
Adviser
s
N.N. RADITAPOLE, Permanent Secretary for Agriculture, Basutoland, Maseru
J. T. MAPETLA, Principal Legal Adviser, Basutoland, Maseru
BECHUANALAND - BETCHOUANALAND - BECHUANIA
Delegate
M.P.K. NWAKO, Minister of Agriculture, Gaberones
Alternate
R. D. MOLEFE, Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister of Agriculture, Gaberones
Adviser
Peter Raymond WEARE, Senior Research Officer, Department of Agriculture, Magalapye
BRITISH GUIANA - GUYANE BRITANNIQUE - GUAYANA BRITANICA
Delegate
Llewellyn JOHN, Minister of Agriculture, Georgetown
MAURITIUS - ILE MAURICE - ISLA MAURICIO
Delegate
S. BOOLEL, Minister of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Port Louis
Alternate
L. PURMESSUR, Principal Assistant Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Port Louts
Associate
Jalal-ud-Din SHUJA, Senior Veterinary Officer, Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Réduit
PERMANENT OBSERVER
OBSERVATEUR PERMANENT
OBSERVADOR PERMANENTE
THE HOLY SEE - SAINT-SIEGE - SANTA SEDE
Observateurs
Right Rev. Monsignor L. G. Ligutti, Permanent Observer for the Holy See, Vatican City.
Emilio BONOMELLI, Permanent Observer for the Holy See, Vatican City
Monsignor Giovanni D'ASCENZI, Assistant to the Permanent Observers of the Holy See
Walter PERSEGATI, Secretary to the Permanent Observers of the Holy See Vatican City
Miss Marie GROOTHUIZEN, Liaison for women's work
OBSERVER NATIONS
NATIONS OBSERVATRICES
PAISES OBSERVADORES
BULGARIA - BULGARIE
Observateurs
Dimitre LAZAROV, Sofia
Kiril TANOUCHEV, Expert sur les questions économiques près le Ministère de l'agriculture, Sofia
Kirtl BRATANOV, Vice-Président de l'Académie des sciences agricoles, Sofia
UNITED NATIONS AND SPECIALIZED AGENCIES - NATIONS UNIES ET INSTITUTIONS
SPECIALISEES - NACIONES UNIDAS Y ORGANISMOS ESPECIALIZADOS
Representatives
Martin W. HILL, Deputy Under-Secretary for Economic and Social Affairs, New York
Albert DOLLINGER, Special Representative in Europe for Co-ordination, Palais des Nations, Geneva
Granville H. FLETCHER, Director, United Nations Information Centre, Rome
UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT - CONFERENCE DES NATIONS UNIES SUR LE COMMERCE ET LE DEVELOPPEMENT - CONFERENCIA DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS PARA EL COMERCIO Y DESARROLLO
Representative
Perce JUDD, Director, Commodities Division, Geneva
UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN'S FUND - FONDS DES NATIONS UNIES POUR L'ENFANCE - FONDO DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS PARA LA INFANCIA
Representatives
G. SICAULT, Director, UNICEF European Office, and Special Representative in Europe of the Executive Director, Parts
Sir Herbert BROADLEY, UNICEF Consultant
P. LARSEN, Deputy Director, UNICEF, European Office
E. W. MEYER, External Relations Officer, UNICEF Consultant
UNITED NATIONS SPECIAL FUND - FONDS SPECIAL DES NATIONS UNIES - FONDO ESPECIAL DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Representative
Roberto M. HEURTEMATTE, Associate Managing Director of United Nations Special Fund, New York
UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSION FOR REFUGEES - HAUT-COMMISSAIRE DES NATIONS UNIES POUR LES REFUGIES - ALTO COMISIONADO DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS PARA LOS REFUGIADOS
Representative
Raymond TERRILLON, Representative in Italy of UNHCR, Rome
GENERAL AGREEMENT ON TARIFFS AND TRADE - ACCORD GENERAL SUR LES TARIFS DOUANIERS ET LE COMMERCE - ACUERDO GENERAL SOBRE ARANCELES ADUANEROS Y COMERCIO
Representatives
A. BALENSI, Assistant Director-General for External Relations, GATT, Geneva
Chung-tse SHIH, Counsellor, External Relations Department, GATT, Geneva
Hanus KRAUS, Economic Affairs Officer, Agricultural Division, GATT, Geneva
INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANISATION - ORGANISATION INTERNATIONALE DU TRAVAIL - ORGANIZACION INTERNACIONAL DEL TRABAJO
Representatives
Peter SARTORIUS, Forestry Counseiler, ILO, Geneva
Pier Paolo FANO, Director, Italian Branch of the International Labour Office, Rome
Mrs. Vera SEMPRINI, ILO, Rome
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION - ORGANISATION MONDIALE DE LA SANTE - ORGANIZACION MUNDIAL DE LA SALUD
Representatives
C. FEDELE, Chief, External Relations, WHO, Geneva
Frank LOWENSTEIN, WHO Representative, Geneva
J. P. DUSTIN, Medical Officer, Nutrition, WHO, Geneva
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY - AGENCE INTERNATIONALE DE L'ENERGIE ATOMIQUE - ORGANISMO INTERNACIONAL DE ENERGIA ATOMICA
Representative
R.A. SILOW, Deputy Director
Joint FAO/IAEA Division for Atomic Energy in Agriculture, Vienna
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT - BANQUE INTERNATIONALE POUR LA RECONSTRUCTION ET LE DEVELOPPEMENT - BANCO INTERNACIONAL DE RECONSTRUCCION Y FOMENTO
Representatives
Harry CURRAN, Deputy Director IBRD/IDA, Washington, D. C.
L. J. C. EVANS, IBRD/IDA, Washington, D. C.
P.A. REID, IBRD Liaison Officer with FAO, Rome
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND - FONDS MONETAIRE INTERNATIONAL - FONDO MONETARIO INTERNACIONAL
Representative
Gertrude LOVASY, Department of Research and Statistics, Washington, D. C.
UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANIZATION - ORGANISATION DES NATIONS UNIES POUR L'EDUCATION, LA SCIENCE ET LA CULTURE - ORGANIZACION DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS PARA LA EDUCACION, LA CIENCIA Y LA CULTURA
Representatives
Mahdi ELMANDJRA, Director, Executive Office, Unesco, Parts
Paul BERTRAND, Director, Bureau of Relations with International Organizations and Programmes, Parts
Ralph KRAUSE, Director, Department of Application of Science to Development, Parts
Clara JAMES, Division of Relations with International Organizations, Paris
INTERGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS - ORGANISATIONS INTERGOUVERNEMENTALES - ORGANIZACIONES INTERGUBERNAMENTALES
INTER-AMERICAN COMMITTEE FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT - COMITE INTERAMERICANO DE DESARROLLO AGRICOLA
Observador
José Irineu CABRAL, Director Ejecutivo, Wáshington, D. C.
EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY - COMMUNAUTE ÉCONOMIQUE EUROPEENNE - COMUNIDAD ECONOMICA EUROPEA
Observateurs
Louis George RABOT, Directeur général de l'agriculture, Bruxelles
G. V. dal Pero BERTINI, Chef de Division, Direction générale de l'agriculture, Commission de la CEE, Bruxelles
P. TALIANI DE MARCHIO, Chef de Division, Secrétariat général du Conseil, CEE, Bruxelles
COUNCIL OF EUROPE - CONSEIL DE L'EUROPE - CONSEJO DE EUROPA
Observateurs
Anthony ESMONDE, Président de la Commission de l'agriculture, Irlande
BROCHON, Membre de la Commission de l'agriculture, Suisse
HAURET, Rapporteur de la Commission de l'agriculture, France
IZMEN, Membre de la Commission de l'agriculture, Turquie
JACOBS, Membre de la Commission de l'agriculture, Rép. féd. d'Allemagne
JACQUET, Membre de la Commission de l'agriculture, France
MATHEW, Membre de la Commission de l'agriculture, Royaume-Uni
REICHL, Membre de la Commission de l'agriculture, Autriche
RIDLEY, Membre de la Commission de l'agriculture, Royaume-Uni
COUNCIL OF EUROPE - CONSEIL DE L'EUROPE - CONSEJO DE EUROPA
Observateurs
SIBILLE, Membre de la Commission de l'agriculture, Italie
TJALMA, Membre de la Commission de l'agriculture, Pays-Bas
Bjarne UNDHEIM, Membre de la Commission de l'agriculture, Norvège
YVON, Membre de la Commission de l'agriculture, France
Pierre HORNECKER, Secrétaire de la Commission de l'agriculture, Strasbourg
DESERT LOCUST CONTROL ORGANIZATION FOR EASTERN AFRICA - ORGANISATION DE LUTTE CONTRE LE CRIQUET PELERIN DANS L'EST AFRICAIN - ORGANIZACION DE LUCHA CONTRA LA LANGOSTA DEL DESIERTO PARA AFRICA ORIENTAL
Observer
Abebe BEGASHAW, Executive Secretary, Asmara
INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK - BANCO INTERAMERICANO DE DESARROLLO
Observers
Juan Carlos LANGLOIS, Inter-American Development Bank, Paris
Mauricio HERMAN, Inter-American Development Bank, Washington, D. C.
INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION FOR AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRIES - COMMISSION INTERNATIONALE DES INDUSTRIES AGRICOLES - COMISION INTERNACIONAL DE LAS INDUSTRIAS AGRICOLAS
Observateur
Eladio ASENSIO VILLA, Représentant CIIA, Paris
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL FOR THE EXPLORATION OF THE SEA - CONSEIL INTERNATIONAL POUR L'EXPLORATION DE LA MER - CONSEJO INTERNACIONAL PARA LA EXPLORACION DEL MAR
Observer
A. J. AGLEN, Ficheries Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland, London
INTERNATIONAL OLIVE OIL COUNCIL - CONSEIL OLEICOLE INTERNATIONAL - CONSEJO OLEICOLA INTERNACIONAL
Observateur
Gaetano COPPOLA, Vice-Président et Directeur général de la Fédération Internationale d'oléiculture, Rome
INTERNATIONAL VINE AND WINE OFFICE - OFFICE INTERNATIONAL DE LA VIGNE ET DU VIN - OFICINA INTERNACIONAL DE LA VIÑA Y DEL VINO
Observateur
Eladio ASENSIO VILLA, Président de l'OIV, Paris
NORTH-EAST ATLANTIC FISHERIES COMMISSION - COMMISSION DES PECHES DE L'ATLANTIQUE NORD-EST - COMISION DE PESCA DEL NORDESTE DEL ATLANTICO
Observer
A. J. AGLEN, Ficheries Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland, London
INTERNATIONAL OFFICE OF EPIZOOTICS - OFFICE -INTERNATIONAL DES EPIZOOTIES - OFICINA INTERNACIONAL DE LAS EPIZOOTIAS
Observateurs
René VITTOZ, Directeur, OIE, Paris
Franca E. SILVA, Président sortant de l'OIE, Lisbonne
ORGANISATION FOR ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT - ORGANISATION DE COOPERATION ET DE DEVELOPPEMENT ECONOMIQUES - ORGANIZACION DE COOPERACION Y FOMENTO ECONOMICOS
Observateur
O. DEHEEGER, Chef de Division des marchés agricoles, OCDE, Paris
ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES - ORGANISATION DES ETATS AMERICAINS - ORGANIZACION DE LOS ESTADOS AMERICANOS
Observers
Raul G. Migone, Director of the European Office of Pan American Union
Louis O. DELWART, Organization of American States, Pan American Union, Geneva
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS - ORGANISATIONS NON GOUVERNEMENTALES - ORGANIZACIONES NOGUBERNAMENTALES
AFRO-ASIAN RURAL RECONSTRUCTION ORGANIZATION - ORGANISATION AFRO-ASIATIQUE POUR LA RECONSTRUCTION RURALE - ORGANIZACION AFROASIATICA PARA LA RECONSTRUCCION RURAL
Observers
KRISHAN CHAND, Secretary General, New Delhi
S. M. OSMAN, Director, Division of Rural Co-operatives, New Delhi
ASSOCIATED COUNTRY WOMEN OF THE WORLD - UNION MONDIALE DES FEMMES RURALES - ASOCIACION MUNDIAL DE CAMPESINAS
Observers
Mrs. O. L. FARQUHARSON, Area Vice -President for W. and S. Europe, Chairman of General Purposes Committee, Associated Country Women of the World, London
N. SCHRODER, past Area Vice-President for S. Pacific, Associated Country Women of the World, London
Mrs. BENCIVENGA, Rome
CATHOLIC INTERNATIONAL UNION FOR SOCIAL SERVICE - UNION CATHOLIQUE INTERNATIONALE DE SERVICE SOCIAL - UNION CATOLICA INTERNACIONAL DE SERVICIO SOCIAL
Observateurs
Giuseppe RIZZO, Directeur du Service social de l'ONARMO, Rome
Madre Erminia RODRIGUEZ DE ARMAS, Conseiller de la Fédération des religieuses italiennes (Assistance sociale)
EUROPEAN CONFEDERATION OF AGRICULTURE - CONFEDERATION EUROPEENNE DE L'AGRICULTURE - CONFEDERACION EUROPEA DE LA AGRICULTURA
Observateur
M. COLLAUD, Secrétaire général de la Confédération européenne de l'agriculture, CEA
COMMISSION OF THE CHURCHES ON INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS - COMMISSION DES EGLISES POUR LES AFFAIRES INTERNATIONALES - COMISION DE LAS IGLESIAS PARA LOS ASUNTOS INTERNACIONALES
Observer
D, Alan KEIGHLEY, Commission of the Churches on International Affairs, Rome
INTERNATIONAL CONFEDERATION OF FREE TRADE UNIONS - CONFEDERATION INTERNATIONALE DES SYNDICATS LIBRES CONFEDERACION INTERNACIONAL DE ORGANIZACIONES SINDICALES LIBRES
Observer
s
Paul BARTON, Chief, Economic and Social Affairs, ICFTU United Nations Office, New York
C.E. ODHNER, Economist, Trade Union Office, Stockholm
INTERNATIONAL CONFEDERATION FOR AGRICULTURAL CREDIT - CONFEDERATION INTERNATIONALE DU CREDIT AGRICOLE - CONFEDERACION INTERNACIONAL DE CREDITO AGRICOLA
Observateurs
André CRAMOIS, Président de la CICA, Paris
M. SELLA, Secrétaire général de l'Association nationale Italienne des Instituts de crédit agricole, Rome
EUROPEAN ASSOCIATION FOR ANIMAL PRODUCTION - FEDERATION EUROPEENNE DE ZOOTECHNIE - FEDERACION EUROPEA DE ZOOTECNIA
Observateurs
Christophe KALLAY, Secrétaire général, représentant de la FEZ, Rome
André Max LEROY, Président d'honneur de la FEZ
INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE - CHAMBRE DE COMMERCE INTERNATIONALE - CAMARA DE COMERCIO INTERNACIONAL
Observateur
L. CARRERI, Confédération générale de l'agriculture Italienne, Rome
INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE ALLIANCE - ALLIANCE COOPERATRVE INTERNATIONALE - ALIANZA COOPERATIVA INTERNACIONAL
Observer
s
Livio MALFETTANI, Representative, International Co-operative Alliance, Rome
Filippo CORTESI, Secretary, International Co-operative Alliance, Rome
B. ZLATERIC, Agricultural Secretary of the International Co-operative Alliance, London
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC UNIONS - CONSEIL INTERNATIONAL DES UNIONS SCIENTIFIQUES - CONSEJO INTERNACIONAL DE UNIONES CIENTIFICAS
Observer
F.W.G. BAKER, Acting Executive Secretary, International Council of Scientific Unions
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF WOMEN - CONSEIL INTERNATIONAL DES FEMMES - CONSEJO INTERNACIONAL DE MUJERES
Observer
Luciana CORCOS, Liaison Officer, Rome
INTERNATIONAL DAIRY FEDERATION - FEDERATION INTERNATIONALE DE LAITERIE - FEDERACION INTERNACIONAL DE LECHERIA
Observateur
G. PITTONI, Comité Italien du lait et produite dérivée, Rome
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCERS - FEDERATION INTERNATIONALE DES PRODUCTEURS AGRICOLES - FEDERACION INTERNACIONAL DE PRODUCTORES AGRICOLAS
Observer
s
H. D. NEWSOM, Master, U. S. National Grange, President of IFAP
R. SAVARY, Secretary General, IFAP, Paris
Robert HEWLETT, Liaison Representative of IFAP with FAO, Rome
Marc VEILLET-LAVALLEE, IFAP, Paris
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF CHRISTIAN TRADE UNIONS - CONFEDERATION INTERNATIONALE DES SYNDICATS CHRETIENS - CONFEDERACION INTERNACIONAL DE SINDICATOS CRISTIANOS
Observateur
S. PECORARO, CISC, Rome
INTERNATIONAL RAYON AND SYNTHETIC FIBRES COMMITTEE - COMTE INTERNATIONAL DE LA RAYONNE ET DES FIBRES SYNTHETIQUES - COMITE INTERNACIONAL DEL RAYON Y LAS FIBRAS SINTETICAS
Observateur
Giovanni BALELLA, Vice-Président, Comité international de la rayonne et des fibres synthétiques, Rome
INTERNATIONAL UNION FOR CHILD WELFARE - UNION INTERNATIONALE DE PROTECTION DE L'ENFANCE - UNION INTERNACIONAL DE PROTECCION A LA INFANCIA
Observateur
Elio ZAMBRANO, Directeur sanitaire central, Oeuvre nationale pour la maternité et l'enfance, Rome
INTERNATIONAL UNION OF CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATIONS OF EMPLOYERS AND MANAGERS - UNION INTERNATIONALE CHRETIENNE DES DIRIGEANTS D'ENTREPRISE - UNION INTERNACIONAL DE DIRIGENTES CRISTIANOS DE EMPRESA
Observer
D'Ardia CARACCIOLO, International Union of Christian Associations of Employers and Managers, UNIAPAC, Rome
INTERNATIONAL UNION FOR THE CONSERVATION OF NATURE AND NATURAL RESOURCES - UNION INTERNATIONALE POUR LA CONSERVATION DE LA NATURE ET DE SES RESSOURCES - UNION INTERNACIONAL PARA LA CONSERVACION DE LA NATURALEZA Y SUS RECURSOS
Observer
Alex MITCHELL, Principal Research Officer International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources
INTERNATIONAL UNION OF FAMILY ORGANIZATIONS - UNION INTERNATIONALE DES ORGANISMES FAMILIAUX - UNION INTERNACIONAL DE ORGANISMOS FAMILIARES
Observateur
G. FILIPPETTO, Représentant, UIOF, Rome
INTERNATIONAL UNION OF FOREST RESEARCH ORGANIZATIONS - UNION INTERNATIONALE DES INSTITUTS DE RECHERCHES FORESTIERES - UNION INTERNACIONAL DE ORGANIZACIONES DE INVESTIGACION FORESTAL
Observer
V. L. HARPER, Vice-President, Washington, D. C.
INTERNATIONAL UNION OF NUTRITIONAL SCIENCES - UNION INTERNATIONALE DES SCIENCES DE LA NUTRITION - UNION INTERNACIONAL DE CIENCIAS DE LA NUTRICION
Observer
H. GOUNELLE, International Union of Nutritional Sciences, Parts
INTERNATIONAL WOOL TEXTILE ORGANIZATION - FEDERATION LAINIERE INTERNATIONALE - FEDERACION LANERA INTERNACIONAL
Observer
Robert DODI, International Wool Textile Organization, Rome
WORLD UNION OF CATHOLIC WOMEN'S ORGANIZATIONS - UNION MONDIALE DES ORGANISATIONS FEMININES CATHOLIQUES - UNION MUNDIAL DE LAS ORGANIZACIONES FEMENINAS CATOLICAS
Observatrices
Mlle M. THOMPSON, Secrétaire générale de l'Union mondiale des organisations féminines catholiques, Paris
Mlle Maria CAROSI, Consultante permanente auprès de la FAO, Rome
UNITED SCHOOLS INTERNATIONAL - FEDERATION INTERNATIONALE DES ECOLES UNIES - FEDERACION INTERNACIONAL DE LAS ESCUELAS UNIDAS
Observer
Ji Ya LAL JAIN, Secretary General, United Schools International, Paris
WOMEN'S INTERNATIONAL LEAGUE FOR PEACE AND FREEDOM - LIGUE INTERNATIONALE DES FEMMES POUR LA PAIX ET LA LIBERTE - LIGA INTERNACIONAL DE MUJERES PRO PAZ Y LIBERTAD
Observer
s
Miss Gertrude BAER, International Representative Women's International League for Peace and Freedom, Geneva
Mrs. H. CAMPBELL, Scotland
Miss Sally CASTELNUOVO, Rome
Miss Luisa PECCHINOTTI, Rome
Miss Marianne PIANI, Rome
M. DELLA SETA, Rome
Miss Gabriella TITTA, Rome
Mrs. Pat HUGHSON, New Zealand
WORLD ASSEMBLY OF YOUTH - ASSEMBLEE MONDIALE DE LA JEUNESSE - ASAMBLEA MUNDIAL DE LA JUVENTUD
Observer
Piet DYKSTRA, Rural Secretary, Brussels
WORLD FEDERATION OF UNITED NATIONS ASSOCIATIONS - FEDERATION MONDIALE DES ASSOCIATIONS POUR LES NATIONS UNIES - FEDERACION MUNDIAL DE ASOCIACIONES PRO NACIONES UNIDAS
Observer
s
Franco A. CASADIO, Chairman, Executive Committee, WFUNA, Rome
Jan G.G. DE GEER, Secretary General, WFUNA, Geneva
WORLD VETERANS FEDERATION - FEDERATION MONDIALE DES ANCIENS COMBATTANTS - FEDERACION MUNDIAL DE EX-COMBATIENTES
Observer
Antonio RONCONI, Representative of the World Veterans Federation to FAO, Parts
WORLD VETERINARY ASSOCIATION - ASSOCIATION MONDIALE VETERINAIRE - ASOCIACION MUNDIAL VETERINARIA
Observer
Pietro SANSONETTI, Counselor Treasurer, WVA, Rome
WORLD YOUNG WOMEN'S CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATION - ALLIANCE UNIVERSELLE DES UNIONS CHRETIENNES DE JEUNES FILLES - ASOCIACION CRISTIANA FEMENINA MUNDIAL
Observer
s
Miss Ruud van HOOGEVEST, Secretary for Refugees and Service Projects Geneva
Miss Mary ROSSI, National General Secretary of World Young Women's Christian Association, Rome
<section>k</section>
C. List of documents
C 65/1
Agenda
C 65/2
Arrangements for Thirteenth Session of the Conference
C 65/2 - Rev. 1
Arrangements for Thirteenth Session of the Conference
C 65/2 - Supp. 1
Appendix IV * Technical Committees of the Thirteenth Session of the Conference
C 65/3
Program of Work and Budget
C 65/3 - Supp. 1
Role of FAO in world fishery development
C 65/3 - Supp. 2
Annex X. Trust Funds
C 65/3 - Rev. 1
Annex X. Trust Funds
C 65/3 - Corr. 1
Annex X. Trust Funds
C 65/3 - Supp. 3
Annex M. Trust Funds under the Freedom from Hunger Campaign
C 65/3 - Supp. 3 Rev. 1
Annex XI. Trust Funds under the Freedom from Hunger Campaign
C 65/3 - Supp. 4
Chapter M. Reserve to cover possible future mandatory increases
C 65/3 - Supp. 5
Supplementary estimates
C 65/3 - Supp. 5 Add. 1
Supplementary estimates of mandatory costs, salary and related common staff costs of professional category and above
C 65/3 - Supp. 6
Annex IX. Summary of United Nations Special Fund (revision)
C 65/3 - Supp. 7
Establishment and grading of posts
C 65/3 - Supp. 8
Consolidated estimates
C 65/3 - Supp. 8 - Rev. 1
Consolidated estimates
C 65/4
State of food and agriculture 1965
C 65/4 - Corr. 1
State of food and agriculture 1965
C 65/4 Supp. 1
Recent developments in the world food and agriculture situation
C 65/5
EPTA. Accounts for 1963
C 65/6
World Food Program Financial reports and statements from inception through 31 December 1963
C 65/6 - Corr. 1
World Food Program. Financial reports and statements from inception through 31 December 1963
C 6 5/7
Regular Program and FFHC. Accounts for 1963
C 65/8
European Commission for Foot-and -Mouth Disease. Accounts for 1963
C 65/9
UNSF. Accounts for 1963
C 65/10
Report by the Secretary -General of United Nations and the Director-General of FAO on the future development of the World Food Program with reference to General Assembly Resolution 1714 (XVI)
C 85/10 - Corr. 1
Report by the Secretary-General of United Nations and the Director-General of FAO on the future development of the World Food Program with reference to General Assembly Resolution 1714 (XVI)
C 65/11
FFHC. Basic Studies
C 65/12-Add. 1
Admission of observers to the Session Addendum to admission of observers to the Session
C 65/13
Supplementary items for the provisional agenda of the Session and arrangements for Thirteenth Conference Session
C 65/14
Activities under EPTA and UNSF (Ad Hoe Working Party)
C 65/16
1970 World Census of Agriculture and Agriculture Census Fund
C 65/17
Indicative World Plan for Agricultural Development
C 65/18
Report on results achieved and future orientation of the Freedom from Hunger Campaign
C 65/16 - Add. 1
Report on results achieved and future orientation of the Freedom from Hunger Campaign
C 65/19
Plans for the Second World Food Congress 1968
C 65/20
Report of the General Fisheries Council for the Mediterranean (GFCM) to the Thirteenth Session of the FAO Conference for the period from 1 July 1963 to I October 1965
C 65/21
Article XI reports
C 65/22
Not issued.
C 65/23
The work of FAO 1964-65
C 65/24
Matters arising out of ECOSOC and ACC discussions
C 65/25
FAO/UNICEF relations
C 65/26
Second report an André Mayer Fellowships 1956-64
C 65/27
Codex Alimentarius Commission. Report on Joint FAO/WHO Program on Food Standards
C 65/28
Survey of FAO's general structure
C 65/28. Rev. 2
Survey of FAO's general structure
C 65/29
World Food Program
C 65/31
Increase in the number of Council seats
C 65/32
Committees, working parties and panels of experts
C 65/33
Activities under EPTA and UNSF (Ad Hoc Working Party)
C 65/34
Technical Co-operation Programs UNSF and EPTA
C 65/35
Activities under EPTA and UNSF (Ad Ho Working Party)
C 65/36
Report on results achieved and future orientation of the Freedom from Hunger Campaign
C 65/37
Activities under EPTA and UNSF
C 65/38
Documentation Center
C 65/39
Statutory report of the status of conventions and agreements and on amendments thereto
C 65/40
Agreement between FAO and the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB)
C 65/40 - Supp. 1
Agreement between FAO and the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB)
C 65/41
Statutes and Rules of Procedure of Article VI bodies
C 65/42
Relations with international organizations (excluding United Nations and Specialized Agencies) and granting of consultative status
C 65/43
Technical Committees of the Conference
C 65/44
Scale of Contributions 1966-61
C 65/44 - Rev. 1
Scale of Contributions 1966-67
C 65/45
Working Capital-Fund
C 65/45 - Rev.
Working Capital Fund
C 65/46
Program of Work and Budget, 1966-67. Salaries of the professional category and above
C 65/47
Headquarters accommodation
C 65/48
Applications for Membership and Associate Membership in the Organization
C 65/48- Add. 1
Applications for Membership and Associate Membership in the Organization
C 65/49
Election of Council Members
C 65/50
FAO/IBRD Co-operative Program
C 65/51
Special Program for Education and Training in Africa
C 65/52
Appointment of Independent Chairman of Council
C 65/53
Working Party for Rational Utilization of Tuna Resources in the Atlantic Ocean
C 65/53 - Rev. 1
Working Party for Rational Utilization of Tuna Resources in the Atlantic Ocean
C 65/54
Report of Indo-Pacific Fisheries Council, Eleventh Session, to the Director-General, Food and Agriculture Organization
C 65/55
Farm broadcasting
C 65/55 - Supp. 1
Farm broadcasting
C 65/50
European Commission for the Control of Foot-and-Mouth Disease. Financial report and statements for the year ended 31 December 1964
C 65/56 - Corr. 1
European Commission for the Control of Foot-and-Mouth Disease, Financial report and statements for the year ended 31 December 1964
C 65/57
Expanded Program of Technical Assistance. Financial reports and statements for the year ended 31 December 1964
C 65/58
United Nations Special Fund. Financial report and statements for the period ended 31 December 1964
C 65/60
Appointment of Representatives to Staff Pension Committee
C 65/61
World Food Program. Financial report and statements from inception through 31 December 1964
C 65/61 - Corr. 1
World Food Program. Financial report and statements from inception through 31 December 1964
C 65/62
Emergency Fund for the Control of Plant Pests and Diseases
DELEGATE INFORMATION DOCUMENTS
C 65/INF/1
Excerpts from regulations governing voting and elections by the Conference
C 65/INF/2
Member Nations of FAO, Council Members, and Members of Council Committees
C 65/INF/3
Admission of new Members and Associate Members
C 65/INF/3 -Rev. I
Admission of now Members and Associate Members
C 65/INF/4
Nomination form for Council elections
C 65/INF/5
Fifth provisional list of delegates and observers attending the Thirteenth Conference Session
C 65/INF/5
List of Conference documents
C 65/INF/6 -Rev. I
List of Conference documents
C 415/INF/6 -Rev. 2
List of Conference documents an of 2 December 1965
C 65/INF/7
Check-list of Conference documents of Commission II
C 65/LIM/1
Report on results achieved and future orientation of the FFHC
C 65/LIM/2
Technical Committee on Fisheries. Proposed Committee on Fisheries
C 65/LIM/3
1965 McDougall Memorial Lecture
C 65/LIM/3- Rev. 1
1965 McDougall Memorial Lecture
C 65/LIM/4
Relations between CCP and UNCTAD
C 65/LIM/4 - Add. 1
Commodity problems. Extract from the report of the Forty-Fifth Session of the FAO Council
C 65/LIM/5
Status of contributions
C 65/LIM/6
Report of the Nominations Committee
C 65/LIM/7
The evolution of technical assistance activities and their evaluation
C 65/LIM/9
Report of the Rapporteur on the work of the Technical Committees to Commission II of the Thirteenth Session of the Conference
C 65/LIM/9- Supp. 1
Draft resolution submitted by the Rapporteur at the request of the Technical Committee on Forestry. Committee on Forest Development in the Tropics
C 65/LIM/9- Supp. 2
Nutrition recommendations and suggestions on points affecting the Program of Work within the approved Budget for the biennium 1966-67
C 65/LIM/10
First report of the General Committee. Organization of the Conference Session
C 65/LIM/11
Establishment of a Committee on Fisheries
C 65/LIM/12
Address by the Director-General
C 65/LIM/12 - Rev. 1
Address by the Director-General
C 65/LIM/13
Draft resolution submitted by Romania. Twenty years of FAO
C 65/LIM/13 - Rev. 1
Draft resolution submitted by Romania. Twenty years of FAO
C 65/LIM/14
Draft resolution submitted by Cuba. Exploitation of marine resources in international waters
C 65/LIM/15
Draft resolution submitted by Cuba, Technical assistance
C 6 5/LIM/15 - Rev. 1
Draft resolution submitted by Cuba. Technical assistance
C 65/LIM/16
Draft resolution submitted by Cuba. Technical institutes for the fisheries industry
C 65/LIM/17
Draft resolution submitted by Cuba. Information on methods and experimentation conducive to increasing agricultural production in the underdeveloped parts of the world
C 65/LIM/17 - Rev. 1
Draft resolution submitted by Cuba. Information on methods and experimentation conducive to increasing agricultural production in the underdeveloped parts of the world
C 65/LIM/18
Draft Resolution submitted by Cuba. Agricultural education and development
C 65/LIM/18 - Rev. 1
Draft resolution submitted by Cuba. Agricultural education and development
C 65/LIM/19
Draft resolution submitted by Cuba. Structural reform
C 65/LIM/20
Draft resolution submitted by Cuba. Free trade in foodstuffs, medicines and supplies for agricultural production
C 65/LIM/21
Commission I. Draft resolution submitted by Cuba. Differential tariffs on processed products
C 65/UM/22
Commission I. Draft resolution submitted by Cuba. Agricultural protection and trade
C 65/LIM/23
Commission I. Draft resolution submitted by Cuba. Access to markets and long-term trade agreements
C 65/LIM/24
Draft resolution submitted by Cuba. Agricultural trade among developing countries
C 65/LIM/25
Draft resolution submitted by Cuba. Foreign exchange for importing agricultural requisites
C 65/LIM/26
Second report of the General Committee. Organization of the Conference Session
C 65/LIM/27
Emergency Fund for the Control of Plant Pests and Diseases
C 65/LIM/28
Agricultural education, training and extension. Draft resolution submitted by the Government of Afghanistan
C 65/LIM/29
Commission U. Draft resolution submitted by the delegate from U.A.R. Technical Committee on Economics
C 65/LIM/30
Report of the Ad Hoc Working Party on Field Programs to Commission II
C 65/LIM/31
Convention on the privileges and immunities of the specialized agencies. Amendment to Annex II
C 65/LIM/32
World Food Program (Report of the Forty-Fifth Council Session)
C 65/LIM/33
Draft resolution submitted by Cuba. Increasing the consumption of food commodities in low-income countries through the World Food Program
C 65/LIM/34
Draft resolution proposed by the Peruvian delegation. International guarantee for government agrarian bonds
C 65/LIM/35
Survey of the Organization's general structure (Report of the Forty-Fifth Session of the Council)
C 65/LIM/36
Supplementary estimate of costs
C 66/LIM/37
Audited accounts, Expanded Program of Technical Assistance 1964, United Nations Special Fund 1964, European Commission for the Control of Foot-and-Mouth Disease 1964, World Food Program 1964
C 65/LIM/38
Headquarters accommodation
C 65/LIM/39
Commission I. Indicative World Plan
C 65/LIM/40
Report of the Credentials Committee
C 65/LIM/41
Third report of the General Committee
C 65/LIM/42
Report of the Second Freedom from Hunger Campaign Conference
C 65/LIM/43
Program of Work and Budget for 1966-67. Draft appropriations resolution
C 65/LIM/44
Commission I. Draft resolution of Colombia. 1970 World Agricultural Census
C 65/LIM/44 - Rev. 1
Commission I. Draft resolution of Colombia. 1970 World Agricultural Census
C 65/LIM/45
Commission I. World Food Program
C 65/LIM/46
Freedom from Hunger Campaign International Rice Year)
C 65/LIM/47
Professional staff by Divisions in the Technical and Economics Departments
C 65/LIM/48
Commission I. Draft resolution submitted by Chad, Senegal and Togo. Organization of world agricultural commodity markets
C 65/LIM/48 - Rev. 1
Commission I. Draft resolution submitted by Chad, Senegal and Togo. Organization of world agricultural commodity markets
C 65/LIM/49
Commission I. Draft resolution on Freedom from Hunger Campaign
C 65/LIM/50
Fourth, report of the General Committee
C 65/LIM/51
Commission I. Industrial co-operation to speed up agricultural productivity under the Freedom from Hunger Campaign
C 65/LIM/52
Fifth report of the General Committee
C 65/LIM/53
Second report of the Credentials Committee
C 65/LIM/54
Report of informal meetings of international nongovernmental organizations
C 65/REP
SERIES
C 65/REP/1
Draft report of Commission III, Part I
C 65/REP/I - Rev. 1
Draft report of Commission III, Part I
C 65/REP/I - Add. 1
Draft report of Commission III, Part I. Revised text on increase of Council seats, paras. 17 - 22
C 65/REP/2
Draft report of the Ad Hoc Working Party on Field Programs to Commission II
C 65/REP/3
Draft report of Commission II Part I
C 65/REP/3 - Rev. 1
Draft report of Commission II, Part I
C 65/REP/4
Report of Commission HI to the Plenary, Part I
C 65/REP/4 - Add. 1
Report of Commission III, Part I
C 65/REP/5
Draft report of Commission II, Part II
C 65/REP/5 - Add. 1
Draft report of Commission II, Part 11. Report of the Rapporteur on the work of the Technical Committees
C 65/REP/6
Draft report of Commission II, Part III
C 65/REP/7
Draft report of Commission III, Part II
C 65/REP/8
Draft report of Commission I, Part I
C 65/REP/9
Report of Commission II to the Plenary, Part III
C 65/REP/10
Draft report of Commission I, Part I (Revision of C 65/REP/8)
C 65/REP/11
Report of Commission III to the Plenary, Part II
C 65/REP/11 - Corr. 1
Draft report of Plenary. Convention on the privileges and immunities of the Specialized Agencies. Amendment to Annex II
C 65/REP/12
Draft report of Commission II, Part IV
C 65/REP/14
Report of Commission II to the Plenary, Part I
C 65/REP/15
Report of Commission II to the Plenary, Part II
C 65/REP/16
Report of Commission II to the Plenary, Part IV
(Revision of C 65/REP/12)
C 65/REP/17
Draft report of Commission I, Part III
C 65/REP/18
Draft report of Commission I, Part IV
C 65/REP/19
Draft report of Commission I, Part V
C 65/REP/20
Draft report of Commission I, Part VI
C 65/REP/21
Draft report of Commission I, Part VII
C 65/REP/22
Draft Conference report
C 65/REP/22 - Add. 1
Draft Conference report
C 65/REP/23
Report of Commission I to the Plenary, Part II
C 65/REP/24
Report of Commission I to the Plenary, Part III
C 65/REP/25
Report of Commission I to the Plenary, Part TV
C 65/REP/20
Report of Commission I to the Plenary, Part V
C 65/REP/27
Report of Commission I to the Plenary, Part VI
C 65/REP/28
Report of Commission I to the Plenary, Part VII
VERBATIM RECORDS
C 65/PV-1 to C 65/PV -21
Plenary meetings
C 65/PV-I/1 to C 65/l/PV-14
Commission I
C 65/II/PV-1 to C6 5/11/PV - 15
Commission III
C 65/III/PV-1 to C 65/III/PV-11
Commission III
TECHNICAL COMMITTEE DOCUMENTS
C 69/AG/1
First draft. Provisional agenda
C 65/AG/2-Rev. I
Land and Water Development Division. Introductory statement c 65/AG/3 Animal Production and Health Division. Introductory statement
C 65/AG/4
Provisional timetable
C 65/AG/5
Plant Production and Protection Division. Introductory statement
C 65/AG/6
Atomic energy in agriculture. Introductory statement
C 66/AG/7
Activities and future development of the FFHC Fertilizer Program
C 65/AG/8(a)
Draft report of Technical Committee on Agriculture. Animal Production and Health Division
C 65/AG/8(b)
Draft report of Technical Committee on Agriculture. Land and Water Development Division
C 65/AG/8(c)
Draft report of Technical Committee on Agriculture. Plant Production and Protection Division
C 69/AG/8(d)
Draft report of Technical Committee on Agriculture
C 65/AG/8(e)
Draft report of Technical Committee on Agriculture. Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Atomic Energy in Agriculture
C 65/AG/8(f)
Technical Committee on Agriculture
C 65/AG/9
Report of the Technical Committee on Agriculture
Economics
C 65/EC/1
Provisional agenda. First draft
C 65/EC/2
Report of the Second Session of the Statistics Advisory Committee
C 65/EC/3
Provisional timetable
C 65/EC/4
Economic Analysis Division. Introductory statement
C 65/EC/5
Rural Institutions and Services Division. Introductory statement
C 65/EC/6
Commodities Division. Statement of the Director
C 65/EC/7
Statistics Division. Introductory statement
C 65/EC/8
Report on the activities of the Division and program of education
C 65/EC/8(a)
Draft report of Technical Committee on Economics
C 65/EC/8(b)
Technical Committee on Economics. Draft report on activities of Rural Institutions and Services Division and the Special Program for Education and Training in Africa
C 65/EC/8(d)
Technical Committee on Economics. Commodities Division
C 65/EC/B(e)
Draft report of the Technical Committee on Economics. Economic Analysis Division and Technical Assistance of Regular Program
C 65/EC/8(f)
Draft report of Technical Committee on Economics. Statistics Division
C 65/EC/9
Draft report of Technical Committee on Economics. Indicative World Plan
C 65/EC/10
Report of the Technical Committee on Economics
C 65/EC/10-Corr. 1
Report of the Technical Committee on Economics
Fisheries
C 65/Fl/1
Provisional agenda. First draft
C 65/Fl/2
Provisional timetable
C 65/FI/3
Statement on FAO's role in fishery development
C 65/FI/4(a)
Draft report of Technical Committee on Fisheries. Part I
C 65/FI/4(b)
Draft report of Technical Committee on Fisheries. Part II
C 65/FI/4(c)
Draft report of Technical Committee on Fisheries. Part III
C 65/FI/4(d)
Draft report of Technical Committee on Fisheries, Part IV
C 65/FI/4(e)
Draft report of Technical Committee on Fisheries. Part V
C 65/FI/4(f)
Draft report of Technical Committee on Fisheries. Part VI
C 65/FI/4(g)
Draft report of Technical Committee on Fisheries
C 65/FI/5
Report of Technical Committee on Fisheries
Forestry
C 65/FO/l
Provisional agenda. First draft
C 65/FO/2
Arrangements and provisional timetable
C 65/FO/3
Introductory statement
C 65/FO/4(a)
Draft report of Technical Committee on Forestry and Forest Products. Part I
C 65/FO/4(b)
Draft report of Technical Committee on Forestry and Forest Products. Part II(b)
C 65/FO/4(d)
Draft report of Technical Committee on Forestry and Forest Products. Part II
C 65/FO/4(e)
Draft report of the Technical Committee on Forestry and Forest Products. Part I (b) (Continued)
C 65/FO/4(f)
Draft report of the Technical- Committee on Forestry and Forest Products. Part III (c)
C 65/FO/4(g)
Draft report of the Technical Committee on Forestry and Forest Products. Part I (c)
C 65/FO/4(h)
Draft report of the Technical Committee on Forestry and Forest Products. Part I (b)
C 65/FO/5
Report of the Technical Committee on Forestry and Forest Products
Nutrition
C 65/NU/1
Provisional agenda. First draft
C 65/NU/2
Provisional timetable
C 65/NU/3
Statement by Dr. M. Autret, Director, Nutrition Division
C 65/NU/4
Draft report of Technical Committee on Nutrition
C 65/NU/5
Report of Technical Committee on Nutrition
Information and publications
C 65/IP/1
Provisional agenda. First draft
C 65/IP/2
FAO Magazine
C 65/IP/2 - Supp. 1
FAO Magazine
C 65/IP/3
Field reports
C 65/IP/4
Introductory statement. Public Information Service
C 65/IP/5
Provisional timetable
C 65/IP/6
Publications Division. Introductory statement
C 65/IP/7(a)
Draft report of Technical Committee on Information and Publications. Publications (I)
C 6 5/IP/7 (b)
Draft report of Technical Committee on Information and Publications. Legislation Research
C 65/IP/7(c)
Draft report of Technical Committee on Information and Publications. Library
C 65/IP/7 (d)
Draft report of Technical Committee on Information and Publications. Publications (II)
C 65/IP/7(e)
Draft report of Technical Committee on Information and Publications. Public Information
C 65/IP/7 (f) Rev. 1
Draft report of the Technical Committee on Information and Publications. Public Information
C 65/IP/7(g)
Draft report of the Technical Committee on Information and Publications. Public Information
C 65/IP/8
Report of the Technical Committee on Information and Publications
<section>l</section>
D. Scale of contributions 1966-1967
Country
United Nations scale 1965
FAO scale
Afghanistan
Algeria
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Bolivia
Brazil
Burma
Burundi
Cambodia
Camero
Canada
Central African Republic
Ceylon
Chad
Chile
Colombia
Congo (Brazzaville)
Congo, Democratic Republic of
Costa Rica
Cuba
Cyprus
Dahomey
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Gabon
Gambia 2/
Germany, Federal Republic of 1/
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Guinea
Haiti
Honduras
Iceland
India
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Ivory Coast
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kenya 3/
Korea 1/
Kuwait
Laos
Lebanon
Liberia
Libya
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Mali
Malta 3/
Mauritania
Mexico
Morocco
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Pakistan
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Somalia
Spain
Sudan
Sweden
Switzerland 1/
Syria
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Uganda
United Arab Republic
United Kingdom
United States of America
Upper Volta
Uruguay
Venezuela
Viet-Nam
Yemen
Yugoslavia
Zambia
Indonesia 5/
0.51- 1966 only
Associate Members
Basutoland
Bechuanaland
British Guiana
Mauritius
1/ Not members of the United Nations. Their contributions are based on the percentage rates at which they contribute to certain United Nations activities.
2/ Admitted to United Nations Membership September 1965
3/ Associate Members in the 1964-65 Scale of Contributions
4/ As proposed for United Nations Scale 1966/67 (excluding Singapore)
5/ The contribution for 1966 to accrue to Miscellaneous Income.
E. Convenio para la creacion del consejo general de pesca del mediterraneo
Según quedó enmendado el 22 de mayo de 1963 en el Primer período extraordinario de sesiones del Consejo General de Pesca del Mediterráneo Roma, 21-22 mayo de 1963
PREAMBULO
Los Estados Contratantes, mutuamente Interesados en el fomento y adecuado aprovechamiento de los recursos del mar Mediterráneo y de las aguas adyacentes, y deseosos de conseguir estos fines promoviendo la cooperación Internacional mediante la creación de un Consejo General de Pesca del Mediterráneo, convienen en lo siguiente:
ARTICULO 1
El Consejo
1. Los Estados Contratantes establecen por el presente, dentro del marco de la Organiza ción de las Naciones Unidas para la Agricultura y la Alimentación (en lo sucesivo denominada "la Organización), un Consejo que llevará el nombre de Consejo General de Pesca del Mediterráneo (en lo sucesivo denominado "el Consejo") para que ejerza las funciones y asuma las responsabilidades estipuladas en el Artículo IV del presente Convenio.
2. Los Miembros del Consejo serán los Estados Miembros y Miembros Asociados de la Organización y los Estados que sin perte necer a ésta sean miembros de las Naciones Unidas y acepten el presente Convento de conformidad con las disposiciones del Artículo IX del mismo; queda entendido, no obstante, que estas disposiciones no afectarán a la condición de Miembro del Consejo de los Estados no miembros de las Naciones Unidas, que hubiesen pasado a ser parte del presente Convento antes del 22 de mayo 1963. Por lo que respecta a los Miembros Asociados, este Convenio, de conformidad con lo dispuesto en el Artículo XIV. 5 de la Constitución y en el XXI. 3 del Reglamento General de la Organización, será sometido por conducto de la misma a las autoridades responsables de las relaciones internacionales de tales Miembros.
ARTICULO II
Organización
1. Cada Miembro estará representado en los períodos de sesiones del Consejo por un solo delegado, que podrá Ir acompañado de un suplente y de varios expertos y asesores. La participación de los suplentes, expertos y asesores en las reuniones del Consejo no llevará consigo el derecho de voto excepto cuando un suplente reemplace al delegado titular en ausencia de éste.
2. Cada Miembro tendrá un voto. Las decisiones del Consejo se adoptarán por la mayoría de los votos emitidos, salvo que el presente Convento disponga lo contrario. La mayoría de todos los miembros del Consejo constituirá el quórum.
3. El Consejo elegirá un Presidente y ods Vicepresidentes.
4. Normalmente, el Presidente del Consejo convocará el período ordinario de sesiones del Consejo por lo menos una vez cada dos años a menos que la mayoría de sus miembros decida otra cosa. El lugar y la fecha de cada período de sesiones los fijará el Consejo en consulta con el Director General de la Organización.
5. El Consejo tendrá su sede en la sede de la Organización, en Roma.
6. La Organización facilitará los servicios de Secretaría del Consejo cuyo Secretario será nombrado por el Director General ante el cual será responsable administrativemente.
7. El Consejo podrá, por mayoría de dos tercios de sus miembros, adoptar y modificar su propio Reglamento, el cual deberá ser compatible con el Reglamento General de la Organizacion. El Reglamento del Consejo y cualesquiera modificación al mismo entrarán en vigor a partir de la fecha en que los apruebe el Director General a reserva de su ratificación por el Consejo de la Organización.
ARTICULO III
Comités, grupos de trabajo y especialistas
1. El Consejo podrá crear comités temporales, especiales o permanentes, para que estudien las cuestiones que sean de la competencia del Consejo y le Informen al respecto, así como grupos de trabajo que estudien problemas técnicos concretos y formulen las correspondientes recomendaciones.
2. El Presidente del Consejo convocará a los comités y grupos de trabajo mencionados en el párrafo anterior en las fechas y lugares que señale el Presidente en consulta con el Director General de la Organización.
3. El Consejo podrá proponer a la Organización la contratación o la designación de especialistas para que a expensas de ésta se encarguen del estudio de cuestiones o de problemas determinados.
4. La creación de los comités y grupos de trabajo mencionados en el párrafo 1 y la contratación o designación de los especialistas a que se alude en el párrafo 3 estarán subordinadas a la disponibilidad de los fondos necesarios en el capítulo pertinente del presupuesto aprobado de la Organización, incumbiendo al Director General de ésta el determinar tal disponibilidad. Antes de adoptar decisión alguna sobre la creación de comités y grupos de trabajo y la contratación o nombramiento de especialistas que entrañen gastos, el Consejo tendrá ante sí un informe del Director General de la Organización acerca de las consecuencias administrativas y financieras de dicha decisión.
ARTICULO IV
Funciones
El Consejo tendrá las siguientes funciones y responsabilidades:
a) Exponer todos los problemas oceanográficos y los aspectos técnicos del desarrollo y aprovechamiento adecuado de los recursos acuáticos;
b) Fomentar y coordinar los trabajos de investigación y la aplicación de los métodos de perfeccionamiento empleados en las actividades pesqueras y en las industrias afines con miras a utilizar los recursos acuáticos;
c) Reunir y publicar o divulgar todas las informaciones oceanográficas y técnicas relativas a los recursos acuáticos;
d) Recomendar a los Miembros las investigaciones nacionales e internacionales y los proyectos de desarrollo que se juzgue necesario o conveniente para llenar las lagunas que existan en tales conocimientos;
e) Emprender, cuando fuere apropiado,
Investigaciones conjuntas y elaborar proyectos de desarrollo con este fin;
f) Proponer y, cuando fuere necesario, adoptar medidas encaminadas a uniformar el equipo cientifico, las técnicas y la nomenclatura;
g) Llevar a cabo estudios comparativos de legislación pesquera con objeto de recomendar a los Miembros la coordinación de la misma, en la medida de lo posible;
h) Fomentar los estudios relativos a la higiene y profilaxis de las enfermedades profesionales de los pescadores;
i) Ayudar a los Miembros mediante sus buenos oficios a obtener el material y el equipo esenciales;
j) Informar sobre todas las cuestiones relacionadas con todos los problemas oceanográficos y técnicos que le fueren encomendados por sus Miembros o la Organización y, si lo cree conveniente, por cualesquiera otros organismos internacionales, nacionales o privados cuyos intereses sean afines;
k) Transmitir cada dos años un Informe con sus opiniones, recomendaciones y decisiones al Director General de la Organización y presentarle, asimismo, cuantos Informes considere necesarios o convenientes. Los informes de los comités y de los grupos de trabajo del Consejo previstos en el Artículo III del presente Convento, serán transmitidos al Director General de la Organización por conducto del Consejo.
ARTICULO V
Región
El Consejo ejercerá las funciones y llevará a cabo las tareas estipuladas en el Artículo IV en la región indicada en el Preámbulo del presente Convenio.
ARTICULO VI
Cooperación con los organismos Internacionales
El Consejo cooperará estrechamente con los demás organismos Internacionales en cuestiones de mutuo interés.
ARTICULO VII
Gastos
1. Los gastos ocasionados por los delegados y sus suplentes, los expertos y los asesores con motivo de su asistencia a los períodos de sesiones del Consejo, así como los gastos de los representantes enviados a los comités o grupos de trabajo, establecidos de conformidad con el Artículo III del presente Convenio, serán determinados y pagados por sus Gobiernos respectivos.
2. Los gastos de la Secretaría, incluso los de publicaciones y comunicaciones, así como aquellos que ocasione al Presidente y los Vicepresidentes del Consejo el cumplimiento de las funciones que ejerzan para dicho Consejo en los intervalos que median entre los períodos de sesiones, los determinará y abonará la Organización dentro de los límites de los créditos pertinentes previstos en el presupuesto de ésta.
3. Los gastos derivados de los trabajos de investigación y de los proyectos de desarrollo emprendidos por los diferentes miembros del Consejo, ya sea de propia iniciativa o por recomendación del Consejo, los determinarán y pagarán los Gobiernos interesados.
4. Los gastos que ocasionen las investigaciones conjuntas o los proyectos de desarrollo emprendidos en común de conformidad con las disposiciones del Artículo IV, párrafos (d) y (e), a menos que se disponga de fondos para ello de alguna otra manera, los determinarán y pagarán los Miembros en la forma y proporción que hayan mutuamente convenido. Los proyectos conjuntos se presentarán al Consejo de la Organización antes de ser llevados a la práctica. Las contribuciones para los proyectos conjuntos se abonarán a un fondo fiduelario que será constituido y administrado por la Organización de conformidad con el Reglamento Financiero y con las normas de gestión financiera de dicha Organización.
5. Los gastos que ocasione a los expertos invitados a titulo personal la asistencia a las reuniones del Consejo, de los comités o de los grupos de trabajo, previa aprobación del Director General, correrán a cargo de la Organización.
ARTICULO VIII
Enmiendas
El Consejo General de Pesca del Mediterráneo podrá decidir la modificación del presente Convenio por mayoría de dos tercios de todos sus Miembros; las enmiendas entrarán en vigor después de haber sido aprobadas por el Consejo de la Organización, salvo que este último considere conveniente someterlas a la aprobación de la Conferencia de la Organización. Las enmiendas surtirán efecto a contar de la fecha de la decisión del Consejo o de la Conferencia de la Organización, según proceda. No obstante, toda enmienda que entrañe nuevas obligaciones para los Miembros entrará en vigor respecto a cada uno de éstos, solamente a partir de la, aceptación de la misma por el Miembro en cuestión. Los instrumentos de aceptación de enmiendas que entrañen nuevas obligaciones se depositarán ante el Director General de la Organización, quien informará a todos los Miembros del Consejo General de Pesca del Mediterráneo, así como al Secretario General de las Naciones Unidas, de la recepción de las
notificaciones de aceptación y de la entrada en vigor de tales enmiendas. Los derechos y obligaciones de los Miembros del Consejo General de Pesca del Mediterráneo, que no hayan aceptado una enmienda que entrañe nuevas obligaciones, continuarán rigiéndose por las disposiciones del Convento anteriores a la enmienda en cuestión..
ARTICULO IX
Adhesión
1. El presente Convento quedará abierto a la adhesión de todos los Estados Miembros y Miembros Asociados de la Organización.
2. El Consejo, por mayoría de los dos tercios de sus componentes, podrá conceder el Ingreso en el mismo a todos los Estados que sean Miembros de las Naciones Unidas y que hayan presentado una solicitud de admisión, acompañada de una declaración que constituya un instrumento de adhesión en buena y debida forma al Convento en vigor en el momento de la admisión.
3. Los Miembros del Consejo que no sean Miembros ni Miembros Asociados de la Organización podrán participar en las actividades del Consejo, si asumen una parte proporcional de los gastos de la Secretaría, ftjada a la luz de las disposiciones pertinentes del Reglamento Financiero de la Organización.
4. La adhesión al presente Convento por un Estado Miembro o Miembro Asociado de la Organización se efectuará mediante el depósito de un instrumento de adhesión ante el Director General de la Organización y surtirá efecto a partir de la fecha en que reciba dicho Instrumento el Director General.
5. La adhesión al presente Convento por los Estados que no sean Miembros de la Organización se efectuará mediante el depósito de un instrumento de adhesión ante el Director General de la Organización. El ingreso en calidad de Miembro surtirá efecto a partir de la fecha en que el Consejo apruebe la solicitud de admisión, conforme a lo dispuesto en el párrafo 2 del presente Artículo.
6. El Director General de la Organización notificará a todos los Miembros del Consejo, a todos los Estados Miembros de la Organización y al Secretario General de las Naciones Unidas, todas las adhesiones que hayan entrado en vigor.
7. En el momento de su adhesión al presente Convento un Estado podrá formular reservas, las cuales surtirán efecto solamente después de que las hayan aprobado por unanimidad los Miembros del Consejo. El Director General de la Organización notificará inmediatamente a todos los miembros del Consejo las reservas formuladas. Se considerará que han aceptado la reservas en cuestión los miembros que no hayan contestado dentro de un plazo de tres meses a partir de la fecha en que les hubiera sido notificada dicha reserva. St la reserva fuere rechazada, el Estado que la hubiese formulado no pasará a ser parte del presente Convento.
ARTICULO X
Entrada en vigor
El presente Convento entrará en vigor a partir de la fecha en que ¡se reciba el quinto instrumento de adhesión.
ARTICULO XI
Aplicación territorial
Los Miembros del Consejo, en el momento de adherirse al presente Convento, deberán Indicar expresamente a qué territorios se extenderá su adhesión. En usencia de tal declaración, ¡se considerará que el presente Convento se aplica a todos los territorios de cuyas relaciones internacionales sea responsable el Estado en cuestión. A reserva de lo dispuesto en el Artículo. XII del Presente Convenio podrá modificarse la aplicación territorial mediante una declaración ulterior.
ARTICULO XII
Retirada
1. Todo Miembro, después de transcurridos dos años a partir de la fecha en que el presente Convento entró en vigor con respectó a dicho Miembro, podrá notificar su retirada del Consejo mediante comunicación escrita al Director General de la Organización, quien lo notificará a su vez inmediatamente a todos los Miembros del Consejo y a los Estados Miembros de la Organización. La retirada surtirá efecto tres meses después de la fecha de la recepción de la notificación por el Director General.
2. Todo Miembro del Consejo podrá notificar la retirada del presente Convento de uno o más de los territorios de cuyas relaciones internacionales sea responsable. Cuando un Miembro notifique su propia retirada del Consejo, deberá indicar los territorios a los que se aplica esta decisión. En ausencia de tal declaración, se considerará que la retirada se aplica a todos los territorios de cuyas relaciones internacionales sea responsable el Miembro del Consejo eh cuestión, a excepción de los Miembros Asociados.
3. Todo Miembro que notifique su retirada de la Organización se considerará retirado simultáneamente del Consejo y, asimismo, se considerará aplicable esta retirada a todos los territorios de cuyas relaciones internationales sea responsable el Miembro en cuestión, pero no se aplicará a los que sean Miembros Asociados de la Organización.
ARTICULO XIII
Interpretación del Convento y solución de controversias
Toda controversia relativa a la interpretación o aplicación del presente Convento que no pueda ser solucionada por el Consejo, se someterá a un Comité compuesto por miembros designados a razón de uno por cada parte en litigio y por un presidente independiente elegido por los miembros del Comité. Las recomendaciones del Comité, si bien no tendrán carácter preceptivo, constituirán la base para una nueva consideración, por las partes interesadas, de la cuestión que dio lugar al desacuerdo. Si con este procedimiento no se lograra resolver la controversia, ésta se someterá a la Corte Internacional de Justicia de conformidad con el Estatuto de la misma, a menos que las partes litigantes convengan en someterse a otro método de solución.
ARTICULO XIV
Caducidad
El presente Convento caducará automáticamente siempre que, como resultado de las retiradas, sea Inferior a cinco el número de Miembros del Consejo, a menos que los Miembros restantes decidan de otro modo por unanimidad.
ARTICULO XV
Autenticación y registro
El texto del presente Convento se redacté Inicialmente en Roma, el 24 de septiembre de 1949, en lengua francesa. Del presente Convento, en su forma enmendada el 22 de mayo de 1963 en el Primer período extraordinario de sesiones del Consejo General de Pesca del Mediterráneo, y una vez aprobado por el Consejo o la Conferencia de la Organización, según proceda, se autenticarán dos copias en los Idiomas español, inglés y francés mediante las firmas del Presidente de la Conferencia o del Consejo de la Organización y del Director General de ésta- Una de estas copias se depositará en los archivos de la Organización, y la otra se transmitirá al Secretario General de las Naciones Unidas para su registro. Además, el Director General certificará copias del presente Convento y transmitirá una copia a cada Estado Miembro de la Organización así como a los Estados no Miembros de la Organización que sean partes, o puedan serlo en lo futuro, en el presente Convento.
<section>m</section>
F. Agreement between the food and agriculture organization of the United Nations and the intergovernmental maritime consultative organization (IMCO)
PREAMBLE
Whereas the Constitution of the Food and Agriculture Organization (hereinafter referred to as FAO) provides that the Organization may enter into agreements with other international organizations with related activities in order to define methods of co-operation; and
Whereas the Convention of the Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization (hereinafter referred to an IMCO) provides that the Organization shall co-operate with any Specialized Agency of the United Nations in matters which may be the common concern of the Organization and of such specialized agency, and shall consider such matters and act with respect to them in accord with such Specialized Agency;
FAO and IMCO agree as follows:
ARTICLE I
Co-operation and consultation
FAO and IMCO agree that with a view to facilitating the effective attainment of the objectives set forth in the Constitution of FAO and the Convention of IMCO within the general framework established by the Charter of the United Nations, they will act in close co-operation with each other and will consult each other regularly in regard to matters of common interest.
ARTICLE II
Reciprocal representation
1. Representatives of FAO shall be invited to attend the meetings of the IMCO Assembly and to participate without vote in the deliberations of the Assembly and of its commissions and committees with respect to items on their agenda in which FAO has an interest.
2. Representatives of IMCO shall be invited to attend the meetings of the FAO Conference and to participate without vote in the deliberations of the Conference and of its committees with respect to items on their agenda in which IMCO has an Interest.
3. Representatives of FAO shall be invited to attend the meetings of the Council of IMCO and the
Maritime Safety Committee, their subcommittees or commissions, and to participate without vote in the deliberations thereof with respect to items on their agenda in which FAO has an interest.
4. Representatives of IMCO shall be invited to attend meetings of the FAO Council, Us committees or commissions, and to participate without vote in the deliberations thereof with respect to items on its agenda in which IMCO has an interest.
5. Appropriate arrangements shall be made by agreement from time to time for the reciprocal representation of FAO and IMCO at other meetings convened under their respective auspices which consider matters in which the other Organization has an interest.
ARTICLE III
FAO-IMCO Joint Committees
1. FAO and IMCO may refer to a joint commission or committee any question of common interest which it may appear desirable to refer to such a committee.
2. Any such joint commission or committee shall consist of Member Nations and Associate Members or of representatives designated by each Organization, the type of representation and number of members being decided by agreement between the two Organizations.
3. The United Nations and other specialized agencies may also be invited to attend the meetings of joint commissions and committees and to participate without vote in their deliberations.
4. The reports of any such joint commission or committee shall be communicated to the
Director-General of FAO and the Secretary -General of IMCO for submission to the appropriate body or bodies of the two Organizations.
5. Any such joint commission or committee shall regulate its own procedure.
ARTICLE IV
Exchange of information and documents
1. Subject to such arrangements as may be necessary for the safeguarding of confidential material, the fullest and promptest exchange of information and documents shall be made between FAO and IMCO.
2. The Director-General of FAO and the Secretary -General of IMCO, or their authorized representatives, shall, upon the request of either party, consult with each other regarding the provision by either Organization of such special information as may be of interest to the other.
ARTICLE V
Co-operation between Secretariats
The Secretariat of IMCO and the Secretariat of FAO shall maintain a close working relationship in accordance with such arrangements as may have been agreed upon from time to time by the Director-General of FAO and the Secretary -General of IMCO.
ARTICLE VI,
Administrative and technical co-operation
IMCO and FAO agree to consult each other from time to time regarding the most efficient use of personnel and resources and appropriate methods of avoiding the establishment and operation of competitive or overlapping facilities and service.
ARTICLE VII
Statistical services
In view of the desirability of maximum co-operation in the statistical field and of minimizing the burden placed on national governments and other organizations from which information may be collected, IMCO and FAO undertake to avoid undesirable duplication between them with respect to the collection, compilation and publication of statistics and to consult with each other on the most efficient use of information, resources and technical personnel in the field of statistics.
ARTICLE VIII
Personnel arrangements
FAO and IMCO agree that the measures to be taken by them, within the framework of the general arrangements for co-operation in regard to personnel matters to be made by the United Nations, will include:
(a) measures to avoid competition in the recruitment of their personnel; and
(b) measures to facilitate interchange of personnel on a temporary or permanent basis, in appropriate cases, in order to obtain the maximum benefit from their services, making due provision for the retention of seniority and pension rights.
ARTICLE IX
Financing of special services
If compliance with a request for assistance made by either Organization to the other would involve substantial expenditure for the Organization complying with the request, consultation shall take place with a view to determining the most equitable manner of meeting such expenditure.
ARTICLE X
Implementation of the agreement
1. The Director-General of FAO and the Secretary-General of IMCO may enter into such supplementary arrangements for the implementation of this Agreement as may be found desirable in the light of the operating experience of the two Organizations.
2. The liaison arrangements provided for in the foregoing articles of this Agreement shall apply as far as appropriate to the relations between such branch or regional offices as may be established by the two Organizations as well as between their central machinery.
ARTICLE XI
Notification to and registration by the United Nations
1. In accordance with their respective agreements with the United Nations, FAO and IMCO will inform the Economic and Social Council forthwith of the terms of the present Agreement.
2. On the coming into force of the present Agreement, in accordance with the provisions of Article ME, it will be communicated to the Secretary-General of the United Nations for filing and recording in pursuance of Article 10 of the Regulations to give effect to Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 14 December 1946.
ARTICLE XII
Revision and termination
1. This Agreement shall be subject to revision by agreement between FAO and IMCO.
2. The Agreement may be terminated by either party on 31 December of any year by notice given to the other party not later than 30 September of that year.
ARTICLE
Entry into force
This Agreement shall come into force on its approval by the Assembly of IMCO and by the FAO Council, subject to confirmation by the FAO Conference.
G. Agreement for the co-ordination of FAO and Inter-American development bank (IDB) activities
The Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (hereinafter called FAO) and the President of the Inter-American Development Bank (hereinafter called IDB),
CONSIDERING:
That among the basic objectives of the two organizations is that of promoting agricultural development in Latin America, as evidenced in the conclusions of the Eighth Regional Conference of FAO and in the deliberations of the Workshop on Agricultural Financing in Latin America, the latter sponsored by IDB, and both having been held in Viña del Mar, Chile; and
That the experience of co-operation between the two organizations has demonstrated the desirability of concluding an Agreement for the co-ordination and promotion of their activities in the field of financing the agricultural sector,
HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS:
ARTICLE I
Purpose
IDB and FAO agree by means of this Agreement to co-ordinate their activities in agricultural matters, the said activities being construed as those pertaining to agriculture in the strict sense, animal husbandry, forestry, fisheries and systems of conservation, processing, and marketing of, and trade in, products resulting from such activities as well as agricultural aspects of the economic integration of Latin America. When IDB shall require the assistance of an external agency for agricultural projects, that agency shall preferably be FAO, without prejudice, however, to the right of IDB to seek the collaboration of other public or private agencies, in given projects, in which case It will in due course inform FAO of such measures as It may have taken.
ARTICLE II
Co-ordination program
(a) IDG may request the collaboration of FAO in the following cases:
(1) identification, preparation and execution of agricultural projects for economic and social development in countries that are Members of both institutions;
(2) evaluation of such projects, in specific operations of IDB;
(3) training of technical personnel under IDB programs, as well as the holding of seminars, courses and surveys in the fields contemplated in Article I of this Agreement;
(4) study of the general economic or agricultural development of the countries which are Members of both institutions.
(b) FAO, in turn, may take the initiative in informing IDB of projects it deems suitable for the latter's consideration regarding the possibilities of financing in accordance with Its regulations and policies.
ARTICLE III
Procedure
In each case, the terms and conditions on which FAO and IDB make their contributions to a specific project, and the procedure to be followed in its execution, shall be the subject of agreement. In such cases, the personnel to be designated by FAO and IDB shall be selected by common agreement. When IDB and FAO shall have reached agreement with regard to a specific project they may by mutual accord request the participation of any other organization in such project.
ARTICLE IV
Liaison
IDB and FAO shall each designate liaison officers to be responsible for the co-ordination of activities pursuant to this Agreement.
ARTICLE V
Financing
The expenses arising from the execution of specific operations in application of Article II of this Agreement shall be shared between the parties concerned in such manner and proportion as they shall agree upon in advance in each particular case. The contribution of FAO shall consist of general overhead costs, including office space and other identifiable indirect expenditures including personnel for short-term missions. With regard to the contribution of IDB, the aforementioned prior agreement shall specify the expense for which it will be responsible.
ARTICLE VI
Duration of the Agreement
(a) This Agreement shall have an initial term of two years and shall be considered Implicitly extended for successive periods, likewise of two years, unless one of the parties expresses a desire to terminate it sixty days before the expiration of any such biennial periods.
(b) Either party may also terminate this Agreement in the course of such biennial periods if, It so notifies the other party six months in advance.
(c) It to understood that the termination of this Agreement shall not affect the completion of the specific projects already initiated within the period established for each of them in particular, pursuant to the stipulations of Article M.
ARTICLE VII
Amendments
The provisions set forth in this Agreement may be amended with the approval of both institutions.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the authorized representatives of the Inter-American Development Bank and of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations have signed this Agreement in two equally authentic copies in the city of Washington, District of Columbia, on the twenty-third day of July 1965.
H. Memorandum of understanding with respect to working arrangements between the food and agriculture organization of the United Nations and the international bank for reconstruction and development (IBRD) and the international development association (IDA)
FAO and the Bank have for many years been co-operating on an ad basis on matters of common concern. Now that the Bank intends to put more emphasis than hitherto on schemes for Improvement of agricultural production, which are of equal concern to FAO, this co-operation will have to be intensified. It accordingly appears desirable both to FAO and the Bank that working arrangements be agreed upon setting forth the principles to govern such co-operation.
These working arrangements, as agreed upon by the Director-General of FAO and the President of the Bank, subject to the approval specified in paragraph 7 hereof, are as follows:
1. The co-operative program
FAO and the Bank will co-operate together in the following fields:
(a) Assisting countries of common membership in the identification and preparation of agricultural projects of types which fall within the framework of the economic development objectives and general policies of the Bank and FAO and which the Bank to wining to consider for financing (including projects for agricultural education falling within FAO's field of responsibility).
(b) Appraising projects of the foregoing types.
(c) Providing end-use supervision of the execution and operation of Bank-financed projects.
(d) Arranging for technical assistance required for the implementation of Bank-financed projects.
Assistance to Member Governments in agricultural planning is recognized as an important foundation for investment programs in the long-term. Insofar as this type of activity Is carried out by FAO an part of its Regular or other programs, it to the sole responsibility of FAO. However, in cases agreed with the Bank where FAO carries out this type of activity at the request of the Bank or in co-operation with the Bank, the activity will be part of the co-operative program.
2. Allocation of functions within the co-operative program
(a) Assistance to Governments in identification and preparation of projects
(i) At FAO initiative
FAO will bring to the notice of the Bank projects which appear suitable for Bank financing arising from FAO's activities, whether under its Regular or other programs. The Bank will advise FAO whether such projects are prima fact suitable for consideration for financing, and if so, what further action, if any, needs to be taken in order to prepare such projects for appraisal. Moreover, where, in the course of its own activities, FAO wishes the assistance of the Bank in determining whether a project to likely to qualify for Bank or other external financing or what further steps are necessary to prepare it for appraisal, the Bank will provide such assistance, assuming staff resources permit, either by way of review of the project at Bank headquarters or by participating in the field work.
(ii) At Bank initiative
The general survey missions organized by the Bank may Include among their functions the identification of promising projects in various sectors. The Bank will normally look to FAO to provide, as part of the co-operative program, staff members or consultants to serve as advisers to such missions. These advisers will participate in defining priority fields and major projects for investment in agriculture in the framework of overall development objectives. Missions of this type will be briefed by both the Bank and FAO and both organizations will review and comment upon the draft reports of such missions. In addition to these general survey missions, the Bank periodically sends smaller missions to a Member Country to review the country's economic situation and to assess the possibilities for Bank financing. Such economic missions usually make a preliminary selection among projects submitted by the Government, and may sometimes suggest that the Government work up a
specific project for Bank consideration. The Bank will advise FAO of all such missions on which it Is proposed to include an agricultural member, and will normally arrange for such missions to consult with FAO with regard to agricultural investment priorities and possible projects. In agreed cases, FAO will provide, as part of the co-operative program, a staff member or consultant to serve as agricultural adviser to such a mission. Where, in the opinion of the Bank, a project not yet ready for appraisal is sufficiently promising to warrant further preparation, and the Government in question has requested assistance in such preparation, FAO will normally provide such assistance as part of the co-operative program.
(iii) General
In all work connected with the identification and preparation of projects falling under the co-operative program, FAO and the Bank will maintain continuing consultation in order that they may agree on a work program and on the priorities to be assigned to different projects, and in order to minimize the possibilities of substantive disagreement. The support of Headquarters facilities will at all times be given to Bank and FAO staff and consultants engaged in work under the co-operative program.
(b) Appraisal of projects
The Bank will be responsible for the appraisal of projects, upon the basis of which its financing decisions are made. However, at the request of the Bank, FAO will provide, as part of the co-operative program, staff members or consultants to serve as agricultural advisers on Bank appraisal missions.
(c) End-use supervision of bank-financed projects
The Bank will be responsible for the disbursement of funds and the end-use supervision of the construction and maintenance of physical facilities, and to this end will be responsible for such review as may be appropriate of the specifications, bids and awards of contracts, and for whatever Inspections of the project are necessary in this connection. FAO will, in cases agreed with the Bank assume responsibility as part of the co-operative program, to ascertain, both through field inspections and through review of periodic reports and to advise the Bank whether the agricultural objectives of the project are being achieved, and in particular whether the obligations undertaken by the borrower in this regard are being fulfilled. The results of FAO's end-use work in the agricultural aspects of Bank-financed projects will be made available to the Bank and, in the event that representations to the borrower should be necessary on agricultural matters, FAO and the Bank will
consult together on how they might beat be made.
(d) Technical assistance in project Implementation
In cases agreed with the Bank, FAO will provide or arrange for, and will exercise appropriate supervision over, technical assistance required for the direct implementation of a Bank-financed project.
3. Personnel
It is agreed that the co-operative program requires a team of specialized personnel of high caliber with the FAO Secretariat which can devote itself continuously to this work (hereafter referred to for purposes of this Memorandum as "FAO team"). The Director-General of FAO will therefore make provision for such a team to be established as an identifiable group within the FAO Secretariat. FAO and the Bank will agree from time to time on the appropriate size of the FAO team and on the types and classifications of positions to be included within the team, and the Director-General of FAO will consult with the Bank on the appointment of professional staff to the team.
The FAO team, although it will be devoted full time to work in connection with the co-operative program, will be an integral part of the FAO secretariat and will operate under the exclusive authority of the Director-General of FAO. Both FAO and the Bank agree that it is desirable that the hard core of the team should to the greatest possible extent be composed of existing FAO staff members. However, it to recognized that for a variety of reasons new staff and ad hoc consultants will be necessary, both in the initial phases of co-operation and as the program expands, although generally maximum care will be taken to secure continuity in employment. It is also recognized that it will be necessary and desirable from time to time to use FAO staff members outside the -team for purposes of the co-operative program.
In cases where FAO intends to appoint an outside consultant to serve as agricultural adviser to a Bank mission, or to provide technical assistance in the implementation of a Bank-financed project, it will consult with the Bank as to the person to be appointed.
4. Financial arrangements
(a) Subject to the qualifications set forth below, the direct costs of FAO in connection with agreed work under the Program, including salaries, allowances and other benefits and travel costs of the FAO team, of outside consultants and of other FAO staff members assigned to such work, will, until December 31, 1965, be shared equally by FAO and the Bank up to a ceiling figure to be fixed from time to time by agreement between the two organizations.
(b) The travel and subsistence expenses of FAO staff members and consultants, while serving as members of Bank appraisal, general survey or other missions, will be borne or provided for by the Bank.
(c) FAO will pay for invisible overhead costs, including space, and for identifiable indirect costs (except as provided in subparagraphs (d) and (e) involved in its participation in the co-operative program.
(d) The Bank will bear the cost of document reproduction and translation undertaken by FAO, in agreement with the Bank.
(e) The cost of technical assistance directly required for the implementation of Bank-financed projects, Including an amount for FAO's estimated administrative costs in arranging for such technical assistance in cases agreed with the - Bank, will be paid for out of the proceeds of the financing or will be otherwise met by the Bank. The amount for estimated administrative costs will be 12 percent of the direct cost of such technical assistance, except where technical assistance is provided under contract between FAO and some outside entity, in which event the amount will be fixed by agreement between FAO and the Bank.
(f) It is recognized that the calendar years 1964 and 1965, which comprise FAO's present budgetary biennium, are a transitional period during which FAO's contribution is limited by its existing budget. For those years, the agreed ceiling figure for purposes of subparagraph (a) above, to be shared equally by the two organizations, will be $400, 000 for the biennium. FAO's costs in excess of this amount will be met by the Bank, provided that FAO will not incur or commit itself to incur costs in excess of $800, 000 (the presently estimated cost of the co-operative program) during the biennium without the prior approval of the Bank.
(g) Continuation of the Program beyond December 31, 1965, will be subject to mutual agreement in the light of experience and to the decision of FAO's 1965 Conference. If the Program is continued the direct costs of FAO for agreed work under the Program as defined in subparagraph (a) shall be shared in the proportion of 25 percent by FAO and 75 percent by the Bank, subject to the qualifications set forth in subparagraphs (b), (c), (d) and (e).
(h) The Bank and FAO will agree on the procedures for payment of funds from the Bank to FAO, and for accounting to the Bank by FAO, in connection with the co-operative program, Including if possible provision for a working fund out of which the expenses of the program can be met.
5. Relations with other agencies
Where the Bank looks to any outside agency for assistance in connection with agricultural projects, that agency will normally be FAO. However, there may be cases where, because of the type of project involved or because of special circumstances, It would be appropriate and desirable for the Bank to look to some other agency, public or private, to perform some or all of the functions which FAO would ordinarily perform under these Working Arrangements. It is agreed that in all such cases the Bank will consult FAO on the action it proposes to take. It is also agreed that the Bank will not subject FAO's advice on agricultural matters within its competence and covered by the co-operative program to review by any outside agency.
6. Modification and termination
These Working Arrangements may be modified or supplemented at any time by mutual agreement between the two organizations. Each organization may, after reasonable notice, terminate the arrangements, provided that, If they are terminated by the Bank, the Bank will reimburse FAO for the financial consequences of cancelling personnel commitments entered into for purposes of the co-operative program.
7. Effectuation of the arrangements
The Working Arrangements will become operative on an interim basis when this Memorandum of Understanding Is signed by the Director-General of FAO and the President of the Bank, but the continuation thereof will be subject to the approval of the Boards of Governors in the case of the Bank and IDA, and of the Council in the case of FAO. It is contemplated that the necessary approvals will authorize payment by the Bank to FAO retroactively to I March 1964 of expenses incurred for purposes of the co-operative program which would have been eligible for payment If these Working Arrangements had been effective on that date.
