<title>Report of the Conference of FAO Fourteenth Session Rome, 4-23 November 1967</title>
<section>1</section>
I. FAO MEMBER NATIONS - as at 1 April 1968
Afghanistan
Algeria
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Barbados
Belgium
Bolivia
Botswana
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burma
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Central African Republic
Ceylon
Chad
Chile
Colombia
Congo (Brazzaville)
Congo, Dam Rap of the
Costa Rica
Cuba
Cyprus
Dahomey
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Gabon
Gambia, The
Germany, Fed Rep of
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Guinea
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Ivory Coast
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kenya
Korea, Rep. of
Kuwait
Laos
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Mali
Malta
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Morocco
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Pakistan
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Somali Republic
Spain
Sudan, The
Sweden Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunis
Turkey
Uganda
United Arab Republic
United Kingdom
United Stets of America
Upper Volta
Uruguay Venezuela
Viet-Nam, Rep. of
Yemen Arab Republic
Yugoslavia
Zambia
<section>2</section>
II. FAO ASSOCIATE MEMBERS - as at 1 April 1968
Bahrain
Qatar
<section>3</section>
III. MEMBERS OF FAO COUNCIL
Independent Chairman Maurice Gemayel
The composition of the Council until 31 December 1968 is as follows
Afghanistan^1
Australia^2
Brazil^2
Canada^1
Central African Republic^3
Chile^3
Columbia^1
Costa Rica^1
Ethiopia^2
France^2
Germany, Fed Rep of India^2
Indonesia^2
Israel^2
Ivory Coast^1
Japan^2
Kenya^1
Mali^1
Nepal^2
Pakistan^2
Peru^3
Philippines^2
Romania^2
Somali Republic^2
Sudan The^2
Sweden^2
Tunisia^1
Turkey^3
Uganda^2
United Arab Republic^3
United Kingdom^2
United States of America^1
Uruguay^2
Yugoslavia^1
The composition of the Council from 1 January 1969 is as follows
Algeria^4
Afghanistan^4
Australia^4
Belgium^4
Brazil^4
Canada^4
Central African Republic^3
Chile^2
Colombia^4
Costa Rio^4
Ethiopia^2
France^2
Germany, fed Rep of^3
India^3
Indonesia^2
Iraq^4
Japan^2
Mali^2
Nepal^3
Nigeria^4
Pakistan^2
Peru^3
Philippines^3
Poland^4
Romania^3
Somali Republic^2
Sweden^2
Turkey^3
Uganda^2
United Arab Republic^3
United Kingdom^2
United States of America^1
Uruguay^2
Zambia^1
Term of office until 31 December 1968
^2Term of office until conclusion of fifteenth session of the Conference, November 1968
^3Term of office until 31 December 1970
^4Term of office until conclusion of sixteenth session of the Conference, November 1917
© FAO 1968
Printed in Great Britain
<section>4</section>
IV. The late viscount Bruce of Melbourne
Report - Fourteenth Session of the Conference, 4 - 23 November 1967
1. The Conference paid tribute to the late Viscount Bruce of Melbourne, one of the founding fathers of FAO. Lord Bruce had been Chairman of the FAO Council from 1947 to 1951.
<section>5</section>
V. In memoriam
2. The Conference paid tribute to the staff members named below who died in the service of the Organization since the Thirteenth Session of the Conference.
Name
Title
Duty Station
ACHARYA, Pundi (India)
Information Officer
Rome, Italy
CASTALDI, Quirino (Italy)
Duplicating Equipment Operator
Rome, Italy
CLAYTON, William (U.K.)
Animal Production Officer
Belize, British Honduras
COLTMAN, Charles (U.S.A.)
Information Officer
Rome Italy
DRENNAN, Denis (Ireland)
Rural Institutions Officer
Rome, Italy
EINARSSON, Herman (Norway)
Fishery Officer
Aden, Federation of South Arabia
GROWER, M.D. (India)
Accounts Clerk
New Delhi, India
SILFVERSTOLPE, Lars (Sweden)
Budget Officer
Rome, Italy
SWEEDE, Ingerborg (Germany)
Home Economics Officer
Rome, Italy
AMARO, Laurent (France)
Fishery Officer
Dakar, Senegal
BOLTS, Johann (Germany)
Associate Expert
Baghdad, Iraq
BUTCHER, W. (U.K.)
Technical Officer
Rangoon, Burma
CURNUTT, Harris (U. S. A. )
Information Assistant
Rome, Italy
DI GREGORIO, Orazio (Italy)
Personnel Assistant
Rome, Italy
GOBERT, Olivier (France)
Chief, Fellowships and Training
Rome, Italy
GRADEY, Irene (Canada)
Clerk-Stenographer
Rome, Italy
HAGUE, Douglas (U.K. )
Animal Health Officer
Bridgetown, Barbados
LUND, Knut (Finland)
Forestry Officer
Colombo, Ceylon
MOHAMMAD, Ghulan (Pakistan)
Consultant
Rome, Italy
ROMANELLI, Nicoletta (Italy)
Stenographer
Rome, Italy
SADEK, Moussa (U.A.R.)
Technical Officer
Rome, Italy
TESSI, Juan (Argentina)
Agricultural Officer
Rome, Italy
UPWARD, George (Australia)
Animal Production Officer
Alexandria, U. A. R.
<section>6</section>
VI. His holiness Pope Paul VI
3. The Conference requested its Chairman to send on its behalf a message of solidarity to His Holiness Pope Paul VI, wishing him an early recovery from his illness and the surgical operation of 4 November 1967.
<section>7</section>
VII. McDougall memorial lecture
4. The fifth in the series of lectures given at regular Conference sessions in memory of Frank Lidgett McDougall, a founding father of the Organization, was delivered by Professor G. Ugo Papi of Italy.
<section>8</section>
VIII. Procedural matters
A. Appointment of the chairman, vice-chairman, general committee and credentials committee
B. Agenda of the session
C. Arrangements for the session
D. Establishment of commissions and provisional timetable for the session
E. Appointment of the chairman and vice-chairman of commissions, and of officers of the technical committees
F. Committee-of-the-whole on the review of the organization's general structure
G. Resolutions committee of the conference
H. Right of reply
I. Verbatim records
J. Admission of observers
K. Verification of credentials
L. Informal meeting of non-governmental organizations
A. Appointment of the chairman, vice-chairman, general committee and credentials committee
5. The Council and the Nominations Committee recommended, and the Conference approved the following appointments:
Chairman of the Conferences Jozef Winiewicz (Poland)
Vice-Chairman of the Conferences Mozart Gurgel Valente Jr. (Brazil)
Bruce Roy McKenzie (Kenya)
A. H. M. Shams-ud-Doha (Pakistan)
Members of the General Committee
Australia Lebanon
Chad United Kingdom
Colombia United States of America
France 
Members of the Credentials Committee
Dahomey Romania
Dominican Republic Somali Republic
El Salvador Tanzania
Italy Thailand
Nepal 
B. Agenda of the session
6. The Conference adopted the provisional Agenda circulated by the Council (C 67/1 - SECOND DRAFT), which included the additional items proposed by Member Nations and by the Council; these additions had been circulated 20 days in advance of the Conference Session, in accordance with Rule II-5 of the General Rules of the Organization, as document C 67/1-Add. 1.
C. Arrangements for the session
7. At its Forty-Eighth Session the Council had proposed the arrangements and tentative timetable for the Fourteenth Session of the Conference, which were circulated to Member Nations and Associate Members as document C 67/2. In the light of developments, the Council at its Forty-Ninth Session proposed some minor modifications and amplifications which were incorporated in a revised document C 67/LIM/15. The Conference adopted the arrangements and timetable proposed by the Council in these two documents, on the understanding that the timetable remained subject to modification in the light of the progress made.
D. Establishment of commissions and provisional timetable for the session
8. The Conference concurred with the Council's recommendations to establish the usual three Commissions to consider and report upon Parts I, II and m of the Agenda (see C 67/2, pares. 40-42). It also agreed to the revisions in the timetable proposed by the Council in C 67/LIM/15.
9. The Conference concurred with the recommendations of the Council that the Council's report on the review of statutory bodies (C 67/LIM/10) be first considered in Commission II, together with any views on this item which the General Rapporteur on the work of the Technical Committees might wish to transmit to the Commission. The Chairman of Commission II would forward the views and recommendations of Commission II to the Chairman of Commission m so that Commission m could take these into consideration when dealing with Item 29 of the Agenda. The consequential change in the timing of the discussions in Commission m had been taken into account in the revised timetable for the Conference Session submitted by the Council in C 67/LIM/15.
E. Appointment of the chairman and vice-chairman of commissions, and of officers of the technical committees
10. In accordance with the Rule VII-1, the Council had nominated the following Chairmen of the Commissions:
For Commission I N. El Ghorfi (Morocco)
For Commission II R.W. Phillips (United States of America)
For Commission III H. J. Scharmer (Federal Republic of Germany)
11. The Conference appointed the foregoing officers, and noted that the Council had appointed H. J. Kristensen (Denmark) General Rapporteur on the Work of the Technical Committees of the Conference.
12. The Conference further took into consideration the proposals of the General Committee in accordance with Rule XIII and General Rules of the Organization, and appointed:
M. Y. Qureshi (Pakistan) and M. Ristic (Yugoslavia)
Vice-Chairmen of Commission I
N. A. R. Reichart (Argentina) and J. Keutcha (Cameroon)
Vice-Chairmen of Commission II
J. Habtu (Ethiopia) and Y. Yano (Japan)
Vice-Chairmen of Commission III
13. The following were also appointed the officers of the Technical Committees:
Technical Committee on Agriculture
Chairman: Dr. A.B. Coronel (Philippines)
First Vice-Chairman: Mr. M. Y. Qureshi (Pakistan)
Second Vice-Chairman: Dr. Muhammed Hafiz Salim (Jordan)
Rapporteur: Mr. D.N.R. Webb (New Zealand)
Technical Committee on Forestry and Forest Products
Chairman: Sir Henry Beresford-Peirse (United Kingdom)
Vice-Chairmen: Mr. M.S. Hardjordarsono (Indonesia)
Mr. S.A. Aleem (Pakistan)
Rapporteur: Mr. M. L. S. B. Rukuba (Uganda)
Technical Committee on Information and Publications
Chairman: Dr. Octavian Fenesan (Romania)
First Vice-Chairman: Mr. M. Witcher (United States of America)
Second Vice-Chairman: H.E. Nor El-Ghorfi (Morocco)
Rapporteur: Mr. Siribongse Boon-Long (Thailand)
Technical Committee on Nutrition
Chairman: Dr. P.K. Kymal (India)
Vice-Chairman: Prof. P. Roine (Finland)
Rapporteur: Miss D. F. Hollingsworth (United Kingdom)
Technical Committee on Economics
Chairman: Mr. W.M. Oakley (Australia)
Vice-Chairman: Mr. J.C. Amoafo (Ghana)
Rapporteur: Mr. J. Chonchol (Chile)
Technical Committee on Fisheries
Chairman: Dr. G.N. Mitra (India)
First Vice-Chairman: Mr. J.V. Alves de Araujo (Brazil)
Second Vice-Chairman: U Tint Hlaing (Burma)
Rapporteur: Mr. J. Adjetey (Ghana)
F. Committee-of-the-whole on the review of the organization's general structure
14. The Conference concurred with the Council's recommendation that Item 6, "Review of the Organization's General Structure" be referred to a Committee-of-the-Whole which would report its findings to Commission I. The Conference appointed A. C. B. Maiden (Australia) Chairman of the Committee-of-the-Whole.
G. Resolutions committee of the conference
15. The Conference decided to establish a Resolutions Committee in accordance with the Council's proposals (C 67/2 Appendix IV, paragraphs 167-169). The Committee would comprise the Chairman of the Program Committee, M. Cépède, the Vice-Chairman of the Finance Committee, R. Gibb, and the Chairman of the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters, R. Rossow, together with the following four members of the General Committee:
Chad
Colombia
Lebanon
United Kingdom
16. The Conference appointed M. Cépède, Chairman of the Council's Program Committee, to be Chairman of the Resolutions Committee of the Conference.
17. The functions of the Resolutions Committee were to examine all draft resolutions whatever their origin before they were submitted to the Commissions or the Plenary of the Conference for approval, and where desirable revise or consolidate them, or recommend that the substance be incorporated in the text of the report.
18. The Conference agreed that in Commissions of the Conference, as well as in other bodies of the Organization, the number of resolutions should be kept to a minimum and that they be confined essentially to formal matters as follows:
(a) proposals of amendment of the Constitution, General Rules and Financial Regulations of the Organization;
(b) recommendations regarding the adoption of international conventions or agreements;
(c) establishment of commissions, committees and working parties of Member Nations and Associate Members or of individuals appointed in their personal capacity, and proposals regarding the statutes, terms of reference and reporting procedures of the foregoing bodies;
(d) convening of general, regional, technical or other conferences, consultations of ad hoc working parties, laying down their terms of reference and reporting procedures;
(e) recommendations or decisions involving commitments by the Organization or regarding certain financial matters such as Working Capital Fund, scale contributions, adoption of audited accounts;
(f) the adoption of the Program of Work and Budget for the ensuing biennium, covering the entire Program of Work and Budget for 1968-69. (It would therefore not be necessary for each Technical Committee to draft a separate resolution regarding the Program and Budget for the sector of work covered by the Committee concerned, although each Committee would be expected to include in its report an expression of views regarding the technical merits and balance of the Program).
19. The Resolutions Committee would be required to see that resolutions conformed with the above and also to draw attention to any constitutional, Program and budgetary aspects that needed to be taken into consideration in any draft resolutions proposed for adoption.
20. While the Resolutions Committee would examine all proposed resolutions in the light of its terms of reference, the Program of Work and Budget for the ensuing biennium was adopted by a single resolution and hence proposals already contained in that document did not require specific resolutions, except in so far as they varied from the original proposals. Similarly, certain statutory or formal resolutions would probably need very little change if any. Thus, the main work of the Resolutions Committee would concern resolutions which tend to alter the draft program or those which made recommendations to Governments.
21. The Resolutions Committee could not decide or amend, but merely recommend to the appropriate body what changes it considered should be made in the text. This it would do before approval by the body concerned. While this would normally mean that the Resolutions Committee should examine each draft resolution before discussion in the Commission or Plenary meeting, that is to say, between the time the resolution was moved from the floor and it was circulated in the working languages for debate, in a number of cases it would be evident that the resolution might not obtain the necessary support in the discussion. In such cases the Resolutions Committee might decide not to take time considering draft texts before the debate on the substance.
22. Accordingly, the Conference adopted the following system of operation for the Resolutions Committee:
(a) As soon as a resolution was proposed, the chairman of the body concerned would request the Secretariat to have it translated, brought to the attention of the Resolutions Committee and then circulated to the body where it would be discussed.
(b) The Resolutions Committee at that stage would choose between one of four alternatives, which it would indicate at the foot of the text prepared for distribution to the proposing body:
- If the text seems in order, the Committee would indicate this.
- If modifications or additions which did not alter the substance seemed necessary, the Committee would indicate them. These would in many cases concern constitutional, program or financial aspects.
- If the resolution did not cover a matter set out in pare. 18(a) to (f) above, the Resolutions Committee would suggest that the substance be incorporated into the narrative text of the Conference or Commission report.
- If there was doubt regarding reaching agreement on the substance of the resolution in the proposing body, the Resolutions Committee might request that the substance be debated by the proposing body, and that after this debate and the decision upon the substance, the draft resolution be returned to the Resolutions Committee for consideration.
23. In certain cases also, members of the Committee might be delegated to attend the debate where the resolution was discussed either to explain the Committee's views and reasons for any proposed changes, or to follow the debate so as to be able to inform the Resolutions Committee of the background when the text of the resolution comes before the Resolutions Committee.
24. The Resolutions Committee would not wish to delay the proceedings of the Conference. Since the texts of draft resolutions were to be circulated only after the Resolutions Committee had completed its examination, it would be necessary for the Committee to meet on the call of its Chairman.
25. Rule XI, paragraph 3, of the General Rules of the Organization required that formal proposals be introduced in writing, and should not be discussed or put to the vote until copies had been circulated to all delegations not later than the day preceding the meeting at which the proposal was to be adopted. The same rule, however, permitted the discussion and consideration of amendments to such proposals even though these amendments have not been circulated or had only been circulated on the same day. The Conference decided accordingly that to avoid the risk of additional delays in adoption of texts by the Commissions or Plenary any modifications which the Resolutions Committee might propose to resolutions should be treated as amendments under the foregoing proviso and considered, if necessary, on the day they were circulated by the Resolutions Committee.
H. Right of reply
26. The Conference recalled the decision of its previous sessions to the effect that, where a delegate wished to reply to criticism of his Government's policy he should preferably do so on the afternoon of the day on which such criticism had been voiced, after all those wishing to participate in the discussion had had an opportunity to do so. The Conference confirmed this arrangement.
I. Verbatim records
27. Under the FAO rules, verbatim records were kept of Conference plenary and commission meetings, and right of delegates to suggest corrections to the records was specifically mentioned (Rule XVIII-2).
28. "Corrections" could mean either the correction of mistakes and typing errors, or amendment by the delegate of a word or phrase he had actually used. In practice, amendments were accepted only to interventions made by members of the delegation requesting the amendment. Delegates were requested to submit corrections within 48 hours of circulation of the draft verbatim record concerned.
29. During the 1959 Conference Session, the number of heads of delegation wanting to speak in the opening general discussion had been greater than the timetable would permit, and a request was made for those who would agree to insert their statements in the record without delivering it in Plenary. In 1961 and since then this procedure had been formally adopted by the Conference at its Sessions.
30. There had been other occasions also when delegates had inserted in the verbatim records statements which had not been delivered. While the Conference saw no objection in principle to the insertion of statements in the record when time did not permit them to be delivered, it recognised the difficulties which might arise if no occasion were given to delegates to reply to such insertions.
31. The Conference therefore decided to continue to permit the insertion of such statements on condition that:
(a) The Conference, Commission or the Committee-of-the-Whole was informed by its Chairman that a statement not actually delivered, or a substantive addition to a statement that had been delivered, was being inserted in the record;
(b) the provisional verbatim record containing the additional statement was circulated at least three days before the closure of the Session; and
(c) delegations attending the Session were given an opportunity to avail themselves of the right of reply by making a declaration relating to the additional statement prior to the closure of the session.
J. Admission of observers
32. As was customary, the Director-General had provisionally invited the applicants for membership and Associate membership to be represented by observers until their admission to the Organization had been decided upon. The Conference confirmed the Director-General's action.
33. The Conference approved the list of international organizations to which the Director-General had extended a provisional invitation to send observers to this Session, and invited the representatives of such organizations to participate in the activities of the Conference in the capacity of observers.
K. Verification of credentials
34. The credentials of delegations of 115 Member Nations and three Associate Members, including those of newly-admitted Member Nations and Associate Members, were found in order. One Member Nation had not submitted credentials.
35. The credentials of the Delegation of the Holy See, Permanent Observer to FAO, were found satisfactory.
36. The names of the representatives of the international organizations attending the Conference, including the United Nations and Specialized Agencies, were duly deposited as prescribed by Rule m. 2 of the General Rules of the Organization.
37. The Conference requested that the various passages referring to credentials in the Basic Texts of the Organization, as well as the criteria established by previous sessions of the Credentials Committee, be clarified and integrated. Consequently, they are set out below, and the Conference recommended that they be specifically brought to the notice of the Member Governments in the letters of invitation to Conference sessions:
(a) Credentials should be in the form of letters bearing the signature of, or signed on behalf of, the Head of the State or Government or of the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Resolution 1/51).
(b) In accordance with the General Rules of the Organization (pare. 4 of Rule XXI) full powers given to a Government representative to sign conventions and agreements can be issued also by the minister of the department concerned, and this had been construed to cover credentials for Conference sessions.
(c) In the absence of credentials signed by the authorities listed in (a) and (b) above, a communication signed by the Ambassador of the country concerned and accredited to the Italian Government is considered a valid credential since the Ambassador represents the Head of the State (see (a) above). In the Ambassador's absence this faculty devolves on the Chargé d'Affaires. However, in such cases neither the Ambassador nor the Charge d'Affaires may themselves be included in the Delegation, whereas those persons listed in (a) and (b) above may also designate themselves as representatives.
(d) Notes Verbales and telegrams or cables are not considered valid credentials because not fully signed (decision of the Credentials Committee during the Twelfth Session of the FAO Conference, as set out in Document C 63/LIM/68, and confirmed by the Credentials Committee of the Thirteenth Session of the Conference, as set out in document C 65/LIM/40).
(e) Undated credentials are acceptable only if they contain a reference to representation of the country concerned at the current Conference session.
(f) Credentials should indicate which representatives are accredited as Delegates, as Alternates, Associates, Advisers (pare. 1 of Rule III).
L. Informal meeting of non-governmental organizations
38. An informal meeting of representatives of international non-governmental organizations admitted as observers to the Fourteenth Session of the Conference was convened on Monday 6 November 1967. The Forty-Ninth Session of the Council had nominated Mrs. G. van Beekhoff van Selms representing the Associated Country Women of the World, as Chairman. The meeting discussed possibilities of intensifying practical co-operation between FAO and non-governmental organizations.
<section>9</section>
IX. Major trends and policy questions in food and agriculture
A. Review of the organization's general structure
B. World situation and outlook
C. Indicative world plan for agricultural development (IWP)
D. Inter-agency study of multilateral food AID
E. Food production resources program
F. World food program
G. Freedom from hunger campaign
H. Skim milk powder in the world dairy economy
I. Article XI reports
A. Review of the organization's general structure
39. The discussion on this item was opened by the Director-General who referred to the origins and aims of the Review and to the procedure which had been followed. He also commented on the major areas of agreement and disagreement between the views expressed in the Report of the Review Team and his own. He concluded by saying that he felt that the material presently before the Conference on the subject was not enough to make possible the immediate implementation of an overall reorganization plan, but that considerably more study was necessary before such a plan could be worked out. In view of this, the Director-General expressed the view that the Council resolution was an adequate instrument for carrying out the study further permitting at the same time a certain degree of implementation during the biennium 1968/69 within the limits of the budget which the Conference adopted for that period.
40. The Conference agreed that the Review Team had done a very commendable job and also thanked the Director-General for his very valuable recommendations. While the Conference recognized that the work of the Review Team, of the Program and Finance Committees, the Council and the Director-General had produced a large amount of useful material, it agreed with the Council that the studies carried out so far on the question of the reorganization of FAO were not sufficient for it to reach a decision at this stage. Although the Conference agreed that the procedure proposed by the Council would be adequate, it felt nevertheless that the general debate on the subject which would be reflected in the verbatim records would be most appropriate in order to supply the Director-General, the ad hoc Committee on Organization, and the Council with the general feelings of -member countries on this question, and with certain guidelines and objectives. In this context, most delegations felt
that the work to be carried out under the procedure foreseen should use the Report of the Review Team as a starting point. However, other delegations felt that the recommendations of the Director-General should also be taken into regard but that in any event both could only be a skeleton on which to build on overall organization plan. The Conference agreed that whatever the basis used, those in charge of working out the plan should approach the matter in a pragmatic and flexible manner so as to permit adequate consideration of all the factors involved.
41. The Conference proceeded to a lively discussion of the issues involved in which representatives of 54 Member Nations expressed their views. Verbatim records of Member Nations views would be available for later use. The Conference fully agreed to proceed in accordance with the plan and timetable proposed by the Council.
42. There was full agreement to strengthen the FAO representation at the country level and the Conference decided that in cases where country representatives were needed they should be appointed as promptly as feasible within available financial resources. It was agreed that measures should be taken during the 1968/69 biennium to increase the number of country representatives both through the agreement which the Director-General had entered into with UNDP for the purpose of establishing senior agricultural advisers as well as by some redeployment of existing staff. Most delegations favored financing the country representatives, to the extent possible, through UNDP. However, some delegations felt that the appointment of FAO country representatives under the UNDP could lead to problems regarding lines of authority and therefore favored the appointment of FAO country representatives exclusively under the Regular Program. The question was raised whether the title of senior
agricultural adviser was the most appropriate.
43. The discussions regarding the functions and usefulness of regional offices were very frank. Many divergent and even opposite views were expressed. A number of delegations recommended that the present regional offices be abolished, while others suggested that new duties and functions be assigned to these offices and that they be strengthened. Many delegations expressed the view that the regional offices may not be needed in all areas and that the need for regional offices be separately considered in each case. It was generally agreed that there should be no implementation of budget increases proposed for regional offices until the plan of organization had been approved by the Council. The essential considerations in deciding on the structure in and for each region should be the political, economic, technical and social conditions of each region, and the requirements of relations with other regional organizations, particularly the United Nations Economic Commissions. There
was general agreement that these relations required substantial strengthening although the question was raised as to whether this strengthening could be best achieved through the regional offices, from Headquarters or through reinforced joint divisions with the Economic Commissions. The Conference agreed that the joint divisions with the Regional Economic Commissions should be continued and strengthened in accordance with proposals contained in the Program of Work and Budget for 1968-69. Under the circumstances the Conference felt that this matter required considerable further study and recommended that it should be approached in a pragmatic and flexible manner and that the solutions to be adopted need not necessarily have to be the same for all regions.
44. The Conference considered the idea of transforming all or part of the present technical regional staff into task forces which would be at the disposal of member countries for specific and concrete short-term missions such as the identification and preparation of Special Fund or investment projects, among others. This would provide for a more effective use of the outputted regional staff in relation to the requirements of Member Governments as regards the planning and timing of their activities. Several delegations felt that the proposal regarding task forces had considerable merits and deserved to be tried. It was suggested that such a trial could be evaluated after a certain period so that the results could be reviewed. Other delegations believed that the task forces were not the most effective manner of carrying out these functions.
45. Considering the important Development of FAO field activities under the different programs for which FAO is responsible, and the interrelations between the activities under the Regular Program and the field programs, the Conference examined the structure to be given to Headquarters first from the point of view of ensuring the most effective conduct of field operations. There was general agreement that in response to the Development requirements of Member Governments, FAO had become heavily involved in field operations and that this involvement should not only continue but required expansion.
46. Some delegations favored the Director-General's recommendations to establish a Department of Operational Policy and Co-ordination (OPCD) which would also provide the regional focus for field activities through regional desks and regional committees, while the technical divisions would retain responsibility for field operations. Other delegations, while agreeing with the essence of this approach, felt that the responsibility for the operation of multidisciplinary projects should be transferred to the OPCD. On the other hand, many delegations believed that neither of these solutions would reach the objectives of increasing the effectiveness of field operations and favored the proposal of the Review Team to establish an Operations Department on a regional basis which would replace regional offices and take over the operational functions presently vested in the technical divisions. With regard to this last approach, some delegations felt that it may nevertheless be necessary
to have a Director-General's representative in the regions. Whatever the solution to be adopted, due consideration should be given to the need to avoid drawing a complete dividing line between technical and operational activities and duplication of the type of staff in the Technical and Operational Departments. Some delegations did not favor the proliferation of staff and inter-departmental committees purely for liaison and coordination.
47. As regards the planning function, the Conference felt that the present situation was inadequate and that greater emphasis on this function as well as on evaluation was required. As to the way of achieving this, some delegations felt that there should be a small nucleus of high calibre economists, centrally located, who, while working in close co-ordination and in close association with the other economic, technical and social activities of FAO, would be in a position to approach planning and evaluation from an integrated point of view. Other delegations, however, favored the Review Team's proposals of concentrating all economic activities, including planning, in an Economic, Planning and Evaluation Department.
48. With regard to staff matters, the Conference placed the greatest emphasis on the ability of FAO to attract and retain staff of the highest calibre best adapted to the functions which will be expected of them under the new conditions. Within this general principle, there was the need for adequate personnel policy which took due account of career prospects without overlooking, however, the need for flexibility which could be achieved through short-term employment, in cooperation with Member Governments, universities, research institutes and consulting firms.
49. Many delegations favored the proposal of the Review Team concerning the establishment of a staff selection committee, although the composition of such a committee required further study. The Conference agreed that the recruitment of all FAO staff should be centralized as far as possible. Several delegations felt that a system of rotation between Headquarters and field staff should be studied.
50. The Conference agreed that FAO should improve and strengthen its relations with organizations working in similar or related fields, including of course those not belonging to the United Nations family. In this context special reference was made to UNCTAD, GATT and regional banks and trade associations.
51. While being of the view that ample flexibility and freedom of action should be given to the Director-General and to the ad hoc Committee on Organization, in the preparation of an overall reorganization plan, the Conference felt that the following guidelines and objectives which had emerged during discussions of Conference and Council should be taken into account in this exercise:
(a) What measures should be adopted to improve FAO's efficiency as a decisive instrument of Development;
(b) The way which the planning activities of FAO already started with the Indicative World Plan could best be geared to the enlarged and more effective operational functions of the Organization, and more particularly how a more precise focus could be given to the Plan and to such functions;
(c) The manner in which FAO's technical competence could be channeled better towards operational activities, thus fulfilling the aspiration of countries as regards assistance for the execution of urgent programmes, without imparing flexibility of operations and effective management, and increasing at the same time the opportunities for significant technical advance;
(d) How could FAO's economic activities be strengthened and brought to bear more effectively on FAO's field work, and how could greater consideration be given in such work to the institutional and organizational aspects;
(e) The ways in which a switch could be effected towards a still larger and more effectively conceived number of multidisciplinary projects, and the possibility of operating these projects in a better integrated and more centralized manner;
(f) As a consequence of the above, how could the problem of the regional structure be approached pragmatically, adapting it to the different situation prevailing in the various regions
(g) How could FAO contribute to a better co-ordination of international collaboration to accelerate the process of Development, assisting in an integrated manner in the solution of the vital aspects of a global Development strategy and a better and closer co-operation among the agencies of the United Nations family, and in so doing, take maximum advantage of the opportunities which the ever important bilateral programs and private efforts were continuously presenting;
(h) The extent to which authority can be delegated to departments, divisions, branches, regional and country representatives.
52. The Conference agreed that it was urgent to initiate, on the basis set out in paragraph 40 above, the reorganization of FAO and that insofar as possible these measures should not be postponed in their entirety until the Fifteenth Session of the Conference. In consequence, it recommended that those measures which could be taken within the limits of the budget adopted by the Conference for the biennium 1968/69 should be implemented as early as possible, provided that these measures do not prejudice the ultimate form of the overall structural organization or hinder the establishment of the new structure which would eventually be submitted to Council and Conference. In view of the special problems of fisheries which involve sea areas as well as land areas, some delegations felt that the ad hoc Committee and the Director-General may wish to consider also the comments and recommendations of the Committee on Fisheries with respect to the plan of organization. It further agreed
that the study of the organizational plans, which should also take into account the verbatim records of the Committee-of-the-Whole, should be carried out by the Director-General in consultation with an ad hoc Committee on Organization of the Council which should be representative of the seven FAO regions, and the members should consist of individuals who, where possible, normally serve as senior members of the delegations to FAO. The Conference further agreed that the Chairmen of the Program and Finance Committees should be associated with the work of the ad hoc Committee on Organization.
53. The Conference also agreed to delegate to the 1968 Session of the Council the review and approval of the detailed reorganization plan to be used by the Director-General as a basis of presentation of the Program of Work and Budget for 1970/71 to the Conference.
54. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 1/67
General Structure of the Food and Agriculture Organization
THE CONFERENCE
Recognizing that the world is faced with a growing crisis in its efforts to achieve and maintain a reasonable balance between a rapidly expanding population and the food supply;
Recognizing, also, that substantial improvements must be brought about in agricultural production, processing, distribution and utilization if the needs of the developing countries are to be adequately met;
Recognizing also the necessity for organizations of the United Nations family in the field of economic and social co-operation to adapt their activities, and consequently their structures, to the requirements of coordinated and integrated action towards Development, and in the case of FAO, also to new programs in particular those which may result from the Indicative World Plan;
Expresses its appreciation to the Review Team and to the Director-General for their report and recommendations (document CL 49/16);
Concurs in the need for organizational improvements in FAO so that it can be better able to meet its increasing responsibilities to the peoples of the world in the field of food and agriculture, particularly in the developing countries, and so that the Organization can continue to give increasingly efficient and practical assistance with qualified personnel having full understanding of the aspirations and the realities of those countries, as well as knowledge and competence in their respective fields;
Decides to move forward with the appointment of full-time Country Representatives chiefly financed from the UNDP, with overall responsibility for FAO programs within their respective countries;
Requests the Director-General within the approved budget for the biennium 1968/69 to proceed as rapidly as possible to expand the corps of Country Representatives in co-operation with the UNDP and to strengthen their effectiveness and responsibility in developing and carrying out the field programs in their respective countries;
Requests the Council to consult with the Director-General on the organizational adjustments to be made during the biennium 1968/69 and to be proposed for the biennium 1970/71; and for this purpose to appoint an ad hoc Committee on Organization to advise the Council in consultation with the Director-General on the implementation of this resolution. This ad hoc Committee should be representative of the seven FAO regions, and the members should consist of individuals who, where possible, normally serve as senior members of the delegations to FAO;
Requests the Director-General in consultation with the ad hoc Committee on Organization to take appropriate interim steps during the 1968/69 biennium within the approved level of the budget for that biennium to make organizational adjustments including, if necessary, a modest redeployment of staff:
(i) aimed at a more effective system of communication between the field and Headquarters so that decisions can be made more expeditiously and queries from the field can be handled more quickly,
(ii) in order that the operations of FAO in the field may be more efficiently conducted so as to provide more effective programming and managerial attention to country and regional projects and programs sponsored by FAO, including projects financed from UNDP and other sources, and
(iii) to consolidate general administrative and support functions, and to improve personnel administration;
Further requests the Director-General to develop in consultation with the ad hoc Committee on Organization a detailed reorganization plan for FAO for submission to the 1968 Session of the Council for its consideration;
Authorizes the Council to review and approve a reorganization plan sufficiently detailed to be used as the basis of presentation of the Program of Work and Budget for 1970/71;
Further requests the Director-General to report to the Fifteenth Session of the Conference on the organizational improvements made during the biennium 1968/69 and to present his budget for the biennium 1970/71 based upon the reorganization plan approved by the Council at its 1968 Session.
(Adopted 23.11.67)
B. World situation and outlook
Salient features in the world situation
Commodity problems
Nutrition in agriculture
Problems in fishery Development
FAO/industry co-operation
Salient features in the world situation
a) Food situation in developing countries
b) Agricultural export earnings
c) Report on the state of food and agriculture
55. The Conference discussed the world food and agriculture situation in the light of the Director-General's report on The State of Food and Agriculture 1967 (C 67/4) and a supplementary document on more recent developments (C 67/4 Sup. 1). It endorsed the overall analysis presented in these documents and noted that, while in some respects the situation had worsened since its Thirteenth Session two years ago, at the same time a number of developments gave grounds for some hope for the future.
a) Food situation in developing countries
56. In 1965, as a result of widespread bad weather, world food production had failed to increase for the first time since the Second World War. In the developing regions food production had actually declined in that year, not only in relation to population growth but also in absolute terms. While there had been a recovery in 1966, it was largely confined to the developed regions, and per caput food production in the developing regions had decreased still further.
57. The information so far available on agricultural production in 1967 indicated some improvement in the situation. In particular, the increase in production appeared to have been better distributed as between developed and developing countries. Nevertheless, it did not seem likely that the increase had been sufficient to bring a recovery in per caput food production in the developing countries as a whole. The Conference noted with concern that it would take an expansion of some 7 percent in 1967 in the total food production of these countries merely to regain their 1964 level of per caput production. To meet, in addition, the increased demand resulting from improvements in income would require an even larger increase, probably over 10 percent.
58. These overall trends were the sum of many widely different country situations. Some countries were finding their rapid population growth a serious problem and were promoting family planning measures to slow it down, while others were less concerned at the effects of rapid population growth. On the production side also, countries had met with varying degrees of success. In the 33 developing countries for which FAO calculated index numbers of agricultural production, the increase in food production between 1952-56 and 1963-65 had exceeded or kept pace with population growth in 23 cases. In 10 countries (or nearly a third of those for which there were data), food production had failed to keep pace with population during this period.
59. It was clear, from the increases that had occurred in consumer food prices and in food imports, that in many countries where production was ahead of population growth the margin had been too small to keep up with the increase in per caput demand resulting from higher incomes. The Conference requested the Director-General to devote further study to the relationship between population growth and food production, with a view to determining the reasons why some countries had succeeded in increasing their production so much faster than others.
60. Lagging food production in the developing countries had given rise to many difficulties in their general economic Development, but had not usually brought a decline in food consumption. Because of larger imports and smaller exports of food, trends in per caput food supplies had generally been more favorable than in per caput production in these countries. In considering these broad averages, however, it should also be remembered that in each country the available food supplies were unevenly distributed between the richer and poorer groups of the population.
61. The food imports of the developing countries had approximately doubled in little more than a decade. From being net exporters of food before the war, both the Far East and the Near East had had a rapidly rising net import in recent years, while the net exports of Africa and Latin America had tended to decline.
62. Food aid had cushioned the foreign exchange resources of the developing countries against the full effect of the increase in their food imports. However, the stocks of grain in North America and elsewhere, on which both food and aid programs and rising commercial imports had relied heavily, were lower in mid-1967 than in any year since 1953. Although a small increase in North American grain stocks was now expected by the end of the current season in mid-1968, they would still be only about half the peak level reached in 1961.
63. Food aid schemes and the world's grain reserves could therefore no longer depend on surpluses that had grown up by chance, if there were another season of widespread bad harvests like 1965. The need for planned production for this purpose had already been recognized in the increasing of the food-grain area in the United States. Recent studies had indicated that the combined production capacity of the developed countries would be sufficient for many years to come to meet any foreseeable level of food imports into the developing countries.
64. The Conference reaffirmed that, while food aid had been invaluable in emergencies and would continue to be essential for many years, in the long run it was mainly in the developing countries themselves that the world food problem had to be overcome. It therefore welcomed the signs that agricultural Development was beginning to achieve a new momentum in some of these countries. The crucial role of agriculture in general economic Development and the close interdependence of agriculture and industry were now increasingly recognized in economic planning.
65. Increased productivity was the key to the further expansion of agricultural production. One of the most encouraging features of the current situation was therefore the rapidity with which farmers in some developing countries were taking to the use of modern production requisites, such as fertilizers and improved seeds. High hopes were pinned to certain technological breakthroughs, particularly the new high-yielding fertilizer-responsive varieties of food-grains now being introduced, on the basis of which a number of developing countries hoped to reach self-sufficiency in food by the end of the decade. The Conference emphasized, however, that if these hopes were to be realized, and if the necessary sustained increases in production were to be achieved, many problems remained to be solved and action was needed on a wide front, especially in the institutional field.
66. In this connection, the Conference welcomed the increased attention being given in many developing countries to the provision of adequate incentives for farmers, and commended the study of this subject included in The State of Food and Agriculture 1967. It noted that this study was to be used as the main working document at a meeting to be held on the implementation of incentive measures in the Far East, which it was hoped would give rise to some more specific suggestions on the appropriate policy measures to be taken by governments in particular situations. The study would also provide a basis for practical recommendations in this field under the Indicative World Plan.
67. The Conference stressed the importance of guaranteed minimum prices and assured markets if producers were to be convinced that it would pay them to increase their production and sales. This was particularly necessary where they were beginning to use larger quantities of purchased inputs. Improvements were needed in many other fields as well, however, including land tenure, marketing and credit facilities, and provision for the trained manpower required for the necessary expansion of government services to farmers. Many delegates emphasized the role of agricultural processing industries.
68. Concerning agricultural credit, further consideration should be given to the role of the banking system in meeting the credit needs of small farmers, and to the need to develop unambiguous registers of land titles and mortgages if the problems of rural credit were to be solved. It was also suggested that the possibility should be explored of the establishment of a credit guarantee fund by governments and regional Development banks.
69. Fertilizer subsidies could be a valuable incentive measure at certain stages of Development. It was essential, however, that increasing technical efficiency in fertilizer production should be translated into lower prices, and the Conference requested the Director-General to devote further study to the prices of fertilizers and other inputs.
70. Attention was drawn to the role of crop and livestock insurance in agricultural Development, and the Conference welcomed the increasing attention given to this subject by the Director-General, including the collection of information on existing schemes for regular dissemination to Member Governments.
71. In some countries the very success that had been achieved in providing farmers with the necessary incentives and in speeding up agricultural Development had led to new problems. The Conference noted that a number of developing countries now had export surpluses of food-grains, which they found it difficult to dispose of in world markets and most costly to store. It was likely that more and more developing countries would find themselves in this position in the next few years.
72. The Conference therefore requested the Director-General to keep this emerging problem under close review, with a view to proposing solutions to it. It was noted in this regard that, if a developing country achieved an export surplus of food-grains, this did not necessarily mean that hunger and malnutrition had been overcome among its own population. Measures might therefore be explored to develop domestic markets, including the provision of food subsidies and other assistance for the poorer groups of the population.
b) Agricultural export earnings
73. Earnings from agricultural exports were the main source of the foreign exchange needed by developing countries to import capital goods for their Development and to meet their increasing food deficits. Although at the world level there had been some increase in agricultural export earnings in 1966, the share of the developing countries had declined further. Their earnings from agricultural exports dropped by 2 percent in 1966, mainly because of a fall of about 7 percent in the Far East. If allowance was made for the steady rise in the export unit values of manufactured goods, which gave a rough indication of the purchasing power of agricultural exports, the declines in 1966 were even larger. In fact, in these "real" terms the agricultural export earnings of the developing countries were actually smaller in 1966 than in 1955, more than a decade ago.
74. During 1967, the inroads of synthetics and the other long-term difficulties faced by agricultural products in world markets had been reinforced by the effects of the slower expansion of economic activity in most of the industrialized importing countries. Total earnings from agricultural exports were therefore almost certain to be lower in 1967 than the year before. Unit values of agricultural exports had now been falling since the middle of last year and averaged about 3 percent lower in the first three quarters of 1967 than in the same period in 1966.
75. These trends in international trade in agricultural products continued to give rise to serious concern. Both developed and developing countries were agreed that they constituted a major obstacle to the economic and social Development of the developing countries. They also caused grave difficulties for those developed countries that depended heavily on exports of agricultural products.
76. Reference was made to the need to pursue all possibilities for increasing trade among the developing countries themselves, without affecting the volume of trade with developed countries. The developed countries, however, were by far the largest markets for agricultural exports, and these countries were once again urged to do all in their power to give freer access to agricultural products from developing countries, by the removal of tariff and non-tariff barriers an, where feasible, by the establishment of special preferences.
77. With regard to the aim of many developing countries to attain self-sufficiency in basic foods, many delegates referred to the dangers of departing too far from a distribution of production based on comparative advantage. Many developing countries, however, held that they had no other choice in their agricultural Development, since policies of self-sufficiency in the developed countries (including the production of synthetics) prevented them from increasing their production of commodities for which they had a comparative advantage.
78. Although new international measures had been taken for a few commodities, progress toward the solution of the problems of international trade had in general been deplorably slow. This had been a failure of the first United Nations Development Decade. The GATT Kennedy Round of tariff negotiations had resulted mainly in improvements for industrial rather than agricultural products, and would chiefly benefit developed countries. It was significant that the Second Session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), to be held early in 1968, in New Delhi, had to deal with very largely the same problems as those faced at its first session four years ago. It was suggested that the results of the Kennedy Round should be thoroughly evaluated at the UNCTAD Session, and that a new round of tariff negotiations should be started as soon as possible. The attention of the Conference was drawn to the Charter of Algiers, agreed in October 1967 by the Ministerial
Meeting of the Group of 77, which set out the proposals of the developing countries for a new approach to trade problems at the second session of the UNCTAD.
79. The Conference emphasized that the world food problem could not be viewed in isolation, but only as part of the general problem of economic and social Development. It therefore welcomed the fact that the Second UNCTAD Session would be discussing the world food problem and its relation to trade and Development. It noted that the Director-General would be providing UNCTAD with documentation on this subject, including relevant extracts from the report of the Conference session.
80. The Conference stressed that, while the greatest assistance the developed countries could render to the developing countries was to provide a favorable economic climate for the trade that was essential for their Development, there was also a continued need for more direct assistance to these countries in the fuller use of their own resources. It noted with concern that such assistance was still far from sufficient, and that the net flow of official foreign assistance to developing countries had not increased much for several years. On the other hand, it was encouraged to learn from several delegates of the intention of their Governments to increase their assistance to 1 percent of the national income.
c) Report on the state of food and agriculture
81. While commending the Secretariat on the high standard of the annual reports on The State of Food and Agriculture, the Conference devoted some discussion to how the publication might be further improved. It expressed some concern that, because of the time inevitably taken up in translation, printing and distribution, the publication issued in October could contain data only up to mid-July. It noted that the possibility was being investigated of issuing a brief summary of the main features of the world food and agriculture situation as soon as the information became available in July. The inclusion of material derived from the reviews of the medium-term food outlook discussed at the Forty-Second Session of the Committee on Commodity Problems (CCP) would also help to make the publication more forward-looking. While the time factor made it impossible to check with governments in advance the material included in the review chapter of the report, the Conference suggested that
where feasible this practice might be followed with respect to the special chapters.
82. The preliminary index numbers of agricultural production frequently tended to be revised upward in subsequent years. The Conference was informed that every effort was being made to increase the accuracy of these index numbers, although this depended in large part on the prompt receipt of the necessary information from Member Countries.
83. The Conference welcomed a number of new features in the latest report, including sections on foreign aid and on production requisites, and the switch to a calendar year basis in the production data. It noted that three topics were at present under consideration, from which the two special chapters for the 1968 issue would be chosen:
(a) Raising agricultural productivity in developing countries;
(b) Improved storage and its contribution to world food supplies; and
(c) Planning for better family living.
Commodity problems
a) World commodity situation
b) Short-term action
c) Longer-term action
d) Synthetics
e) Export promotion
f) New study groups
g) Other CCP activities
h) Co-operation with UNCTAD
a) World commodity situation
84. The Conference noted that a number of tropical and sub-tropical products and agricultural raw materials, commodities on which most developing countries depended heavily for their foreign exchange earnings, had suffered considerable falls in prices since 1966. These price declines had particularly affected rubber, hard fibers, jute, wool, fats and oils, and tea, due to a variety of factors, including the pressure of heavy supplies, the slowing down of economic growth in some industrialized countries and growing competition from synthetics. At the same time, there was a critical shortage of rice, and the coffee situation was menaced by the existence of heavy stocks, although the International Coffee Agreement had ensured satisfactory returns to producers. Bananas, citrus fruit, wine, livestock products and grains faced problems of market outlets. Cocoa was one of the few tropical products whose price had increased during this period.
85. The Conference stressed the role of trade expansion as an instrument of economic growth for all countries. Despite some favorable developments as regards actual or prospective international action on a few individual commodities as mentioned below, the Conference considered that the world commodity situation and outlook continued to be unfavorable, particularly for developing exporting countries.
b) Short-term action
86. The Conference was convinced that many of the short-term commodity problems could be alleviated through closer international co-operation or through world commodity agreements. Commodity agreements, however, could not provide durable solutions unless there were parallel efforts to develop production efficiently, to diversify production where necessary, and to open new markets. In view of the special circumstances influencing individual commodity trade problems, there were great practical advantages in a commodity-by-commodity approach. This approach would help to achieve agreements which could operate effectively and command the widest support of Governments. The Conference considered that in the commodity analyses of FAO, and in the work of the CCP, high priority should be given to commodities for which international arrangements could be envisaged.
87. There were some hopeful signs of progress. The International Grains Arrangements, including a wheat agreement and a new international food aid scheme, had been drawn up and was now open for signature. The existing agreements on Olive Oil and Cotton Textiles had both been extended. Progress had been made in strengthening some aspects of the present Coffee Agreement, and in considering proposals for the negotiation of a new agreement. The outcome of the preparatory talks in UNCTAD on cocoa provided a better climate for the forthcoming International Cocoa Conference, while preparatory talks were continuing on sugar with the aid of a Joint Secretariat representing UNCTAD, FAO and the International Sugar Council. The Conference was informed of the initiatives of both the International Rubber Study Group and the Secretary-General of UNCTAD, following proposals made by rubber producing countries, as to the desirability of an international arrangement embracing both natural
rubber and synthetic rubber, to stabilize world prices at remunerative levels. It also noted that some developed countries had offered to accelerate Kennedy Round tariff cuts on commodities of special interest to developing exporting countries.
88. Important advances had been achieved through the eight commodity study groups established under CCP auspices. The Study Groups on Hard Fibers, and on Jute, Kenaf and Allied Fibers had agreed on informal international arrangements aiming at stabilizing world prices and trade The Study Group on Oilseeds, Oils and Fats was actively exploring the technical and economic feasibility of possible international arrangements and national measures, and had reached a preliminary consensus on objectives for future action. There had also been regular intergovernmental consultations on bananas, rice, tea, grains, citrus fruit and cocoa which had materially contributed to a better understanding of the fundamental commodity problems and had helped to reduce market instability.
89. The Conference strongly endorsed the activities of the Study Groups operating under the auspices of the CCP, and urged that governments make the fullest possible use of them in exploring or instituting remedial measures for commodity problems within their powers.
<section>a</section>
c) Longer-term action
90. The Conference agreed that it was important to assess the basic long-term trends as distinct from short-term influences. It noted that the Secretariat had prepared a comprehensive report of Projections for Agricultural Commodities to 1975 and 1985, which had been reviewed by the CCP and revised in the light of the comments made by governments, a major re-working being left for a later stage of the work on the Indicative World Plan.
91. According to the Study, which analysed separately a large number of commodities, the net volume of agricultural imports required from developing countries by the developed countries plus eastern Europe and the U. S. S. R. would, if present trends and policies continued, increase much more slowly in the period up to 1975 than in the nine-year period before 1961-63. This would be the case even with rapid economic growth in the importing zone. Some dynamic areas of import demand for many agricultural commodities over the next ten years were identified, such as southern Europe and Japan, and, perhaps a decade or so later, many developing countries also, but the absolute size of these markets was relatively small initially. The great potential import demand in the U. S. S. R. and eastern Europe, especially for tropical products, was recognized in the Study. Among individual commodities, only for coarse grains, meat and forest products did the Projections Study envisage a
satisfactory rate of increase in import demand in the high-income zone. Otherwise, the outlook for the developing countries, and some developed countries, to expand their exports of agricultural products to the high-income countries was not seen from the Study to be very promising bearing in mind the Development needs of the exporters.
92. Provided the assumptions and limitations of the Commodity Projections Study were borne in mind, the findings would be valuable to governments in their planning and policy formulation, and would help in identifying policy issues, both nationally and internationally. The Conference noted that the report would be made available at the Second Session of UNCTAD. The Conference considered that an understanding of the basic trends was a prerequisite to the longer-term solution of commodity problems. It agreed that a revised set of commodity projections should be published from time to time.
93. In the long run, the Conference emphasized, most developing countries could only achieve a faster rate of economic growth by accelerating the increase of agricultural production. This was required both in order to reduce dependence on food imports as well as, for some commodities, to provide adequate supplies for export. The technical backwardness of agriculture in developing countries was one of the main obstacles to the growth of production. This had aggravated the food problem, and in some cases it had also limited the ability of developing countries to take advantage of favourable opportunities in export markets. Also, expanding commercial imports of food represented a serious offset to export earnings. The Conference stressed the importance of measures in developing countries to promote the diversification of exports, to raise agricultural productivity, and to improve agricultural marketing systems; and considered that full use should be made of technical assistance
possibilities in these fields. At the same time, it recognized that for many commodities national measures in developing countries had to be accompanied by greater access to markets if a significant expansion of trade was to take place.
94. Delegates of developing countries recommended a program of action in international commodity policies based on the Charter of Algiers, and urged that the CCP should take these recommendations into account in its studies. Further consultations on the problems of access to markets, possibly within the GATT, were proposed. Some delegates pointed out, however, that consideration of the removal of tariff barriers and internal taxes should take full account of the possible effects on the economies of developing exporting countries which enjoy preferential trade arrangements in certain import markets for their major export products. The importance of allowing traditional exporting countries a due share in the growth of consumption in importing countries was also stressed. According to some delegates, it was necessary for high-income countries to avoid expanding their production of commodities such as oilseeds which directly competed with the exports of developing countries.
95. The Conference stressed the need to achieve a due balance in the Development of agriculture and industry. The growing contribution of processed and manufactured products to the trade of developing countries was noted, as well as the role in economic Development of new processing industries, including secondary and tertiary industries which were ancillary to agriculture. It was important for the Commodity Study Groups to continue to keep processing problems under review.
96. The Conference agreed that policies of diversification of agricultural production in the developing countries should be correlated with efforts towards closer economic integration on a regional basis. This could lead to a more rational use of resources and prevent a wasteful increase in competition for markets between developing countries. Some delegates stressed that markets for their present export commodities should first be organized since diversification would be more difficult in a situation of falling prices and export earnings. The Conference agreed that policies for production should be closely integrated with the assessment of trade prospects. International agencies lending assistance to developing countries for agricultural production or diversification should be careful to ascertain that there would be expansion of demand to match any additional production being promoted, so as to avoid a misallocation of resources. The Conference anticipated that the
analysis of such production problems, in the context of the assessment of world trade prospects, would be taken up in the Indicative World Plan for Agricultural Development.
97. The Conference noted the Director-General's intention to initiate, on a pilot basis, reviews of the medium-term food outlook which could provide early warning of the emergence of possible trade and marketing problems. These reviews would fill a gap in FAO's current outlook work, and could serve several purposes including the planning of technical assistance and other aid to agriculture, of production policies in exporting countries, and of food aid activities. Some delegates suggested that the preparation of pilot reviews for examination by the Study Groups on Grains and Rice might be useful in evolving appropriate methods and procedures.
98. The Conference agreed that where worldwide surplus productive capacity existed, moves should be made toward the management of supply and the rational organization of markets, particularly in commodity agreements; in this respect reference was made to the Coffee Agreement and the informal arrangements on jute and hard fibers. Some delegates stressed the need for the international financing of buffer stocks and diversification schemes, as envisaged in the Algiers Charter.
99. The problem of storage, and especially the reduction of storage losses, was an important related issue. The Conference noted that in addition to the technical assistance being extended to countries under UNDP, the economic problems of grain storage in developing countries were being examined by the Study Group on Grains with a view to the identification of possible projects for international financing. Some delegates proposed that the Study Group on Bananas should also examine the problems of preservation and transport.
d) Synthetics
100. Several delegates emphasized the increasing severity of the problems affecting agricultural commodities through competition from synthetic substitutes, especially for developing countries heavily dependent on export earnings from natural products. This underlined the need for basic studies of the impact of synthetics on natural products, and of the possibilities of developing new end-uses as a means of stimulating consumption of such products. Some delegates urged that research on synthetic products be directed to uses in which there was less competition with natural products.
101. The Conference recognized the FAO's long-standing interest and responsibilities in these fields and expressed its satisfaction at the progress being made in a number of major research studies initiated by the Study Groups on Hard Fibers and Jute as well as the report recently completed by the Study Group on Oils, Oilseeds and Fats. It also welcomed the assistance extended by FAO to UNCTAD in the preparation of documents and in the servicing of the Permanent Group on Synthetics.
102. At the same time, the Conference appreciated that there was a serious threat of competition to a very wide range of other agricultural commodities, including rubber, apparel fibers, hides and skins and some food commodities, which required continuing attention and study. It therefore recommended that FAO, in developing its general program of work for commodity studies, give as great attention as possible to the analysis of these problems, both with respect to the commodity coverage and the depth of treatment.
e) Export promotion
103. The Conference stressed the importance of promotional activities with regard to agricultural commodities in raw and processed form. It noted that activities of this kind were being brought into a new focus within the United Nations system of Agencies through the establishment of the United Nations Export Promotion Program, of which the proposed Joint UNCTAD/GATT Trade Centre would be a part.
f) New study groups
104. In discussing world meat problems the Conference noted that, apart from the general question of access to markets, meat exporting countries faced many other difficulties in international trade. Some developing countries possessed a significant production and export potential which was of importance in diversification and as a source of foreign exchange. There was a number of obstacles to an expansion of their export trade, both technical and economic, which required international study and co-operation.
105. Accordingly, the Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 2/67
Establishment of a Study Group on Meat and Poultry
THE CONFERENCE
Having taken note of the request of Ethiopia and other countries substantially interested in the production and consumption of and trade in livestock, meat, and poultry for the establishment of a CCP Study Group to consider questions of international trade in these commodities, with special reference to possible measures to facilitate the expansion of world trade;
Recognizing the importance of these commodities in international trade and their weight in the export earnings of a number of developed and developing countries as well as their significance for developing countries which aim to diversify their agricultural export;
Bearing in mind the procedures followed by FAO on these matters, in particular the criteria adopted by the CCP for the establishment of commodity study groups, and also the useful functions that can be performed by commodity study groups on which all interested Governments can be represented;
Invites the CCP Committee on Commodity Problems to consider, at its next session, the establishment of a Study Group on Meat and Poultry, and to take the necessary preparatory steps, in conjunction with the Director-General, for the organization of the work of that Group.
(Adopted 23.11.67)
106. The Conference was informed of the trade difficulties faced by some developing producing countries which depended on wine and other vineyard products as an important source of foreign exchange. Market outlets were limited by various trade barriers, including import tariffs, levies and quantitative import controls. Although efforts had been made in producing countries to adapt output to market trends by diversification to other vineyard products, such as grape juice, table grapes, etc., and partly even by uprooting, accumulation of large stocks could not be avoided. This, in turn, had created serious problems of finding sufficient storage space and storage management to handle the stocks, and especially to assure their financing.
107. In view of these difficulties and of the urgency of the problem, the Conference agreed that action was necessary, and adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 3/67
Establishment of a Study Group on Wine and Vine Products
THE CONFERENCE
Having noted the request of certain countries, in particular those interested in the production of wine and vine products and international trade in them, for the establishment of a study group on these commodities;
Recognizing the important part played by wine and vine products in international trade in agricultural commodities of certain developing countries, and the significant contribution that these make to the export earnings of these countries;
Taking into account the serious difficulties several of the developing producer countries are having in marketing their wine and vine products, the large stocks that have accumulated in certain countries, and the uncertainty of prices;
Recommends that the Director-General, in view of the urgency of the problems faced in this sector by certain of the developing countries, convene as soon as possible in liaison with the appropriate international bodies, in particular the International Vine and Wine Office, a special consultation on wine and vine products for the purpose of examining questions relating to the production, consumption and marketing of these commodities and of submitting its conclusions to the Forty-Third Session of the Committee on Commodity Problems which should go into the whole matter, including the possibility of setting up a study group on wine and vine products.
(Adopted 23.11. 67)
g) Other CCP activities
108. The Conference noted that food aid and surplus disposal had remained an important regular item on the agenda of the CCP, and that the Consultative Sub-Committee on Surplus Disposal continued to be the principal intergovernmental forum for reviewing food aid transactions. Some delegates considered that the problem of surplus butter stocks in a number of producing countries should be brought to the attention of the sub-committee as a matter of urgency. While stressing that food aid was essentially an interim rescue operation, the Conference recognized that food aid could be used effectively as an additional resource to promote agricultural Development in developing countries. It also noted that, providing financing arrangements could be made, multilateral food aid could provide an opportunity for surpluses which were tending to emerge in some developing countries to be mobilized for use in deficit developing countries. A step in this direction had been made in the new
International Grains Arrangement, and reference was made to the possibility of vegetable oils produced by developing countries being utilized in this way. The Conference noted with satisfaction the policy guidance given by the CCP to the participation by FAO in the Inter-Agency Study on Multilateral Food Aid being conducted under the auspices of General Assembly Resolution 2096 (XX).
109. Several delegates emphasized the great significance of the CCP for all Member Governments of the Organization, from both developing and developed countries, and felt that it would be desirable for CCP membership to be open to all members of the Organization. It was pointed out, however, that at the current session, the composition of the CCP was being enlarged from 30 to 34 members, with a revised system of voting to permit the Council when electing the CCP to give greater weight to the representation from developing regions. It was generally felt that this system should be given a trial for the next biennium.
h) Co-operation with UNCTAD
110. The Conference noted that throughout the past biennium the CCP had continued to maintain its interest in relationships between FAO and UNCTAD in the commodity field, and shared the satisfaction of the CCP that the close working relations initiated earlier had been consolidated. Thus there had been, in effect, joint secretariat servicing of the UNCTAD negotiations on cocoa and sugar, and of the Second Session of the FAO Study Group on Oilseeds, Oils and Fats. FAO was also developing its consultative role in the work of the UNCTAD Permanent Group on Synthetics. The Conference noted also that arrangements were being finalized for a jointly sponsored meeting of experts on promotional measures affecting primary agricultural products. Co-operation has also been extended by FAO to the UNCTAD Committee on Manufactures.
111. As at its Thirteenth Session, the Conference had reaffirmed that FAO was the competent agency for agriculture within the United Nations family. It recognized that the functions and work of CCP and UNCTAD bodies were complementary, and considered that the guidelines, in which the UNCTAD Committee on Commodities at its First Session had expressed its intention to rely as far as possible on the assistance of other international bodies competent in the commodity field in carrying out its program of work, had proved in practice during the past biennium to be a satisfactory basis for collaboration between FAO and UNCTAD.
112. The Conference agreed with the CCP that FAO should continue its close co-operation with UNCTAD, and continue to make available to UNCTAD its expertise and services in the preparation of documents needed by UNCTAD bodies on all matters within the responsibility of FAO. The Conference recognized that this co-operation represented a significant call upon the resources of the Secretariat, but felt that this was worthwhile in order to avoid duplication of effort and to ensure that the resources available to the two Organizations were used with the utmost effectiveness. The present framework and methods of co-operation, including joint secretariat servicing of meetings of common interest, were giving good results and should be continued.
113. The Conference also noted with satisfaction the reinforcement during the past biennium of the co-operation of FAO with GATT, and the autonomous commodity councils and groups. Through the close collaboration established with UNCTAD and with these bodies, which the CCP had done much to foster, the commodity analyses of FAO were being increasingly brought to bear where solutions were negotiated and decisions taken.
114. The Conference took note of the preparations under way for the Second UNCTAD Session, and adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 4/67
Second United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
THE CONFERENCE
Noting with concern the persistent decline in the terms of trade of agricultural commodities and its adverse effects on earnings of developing countries;
Recalling that present patterns of international trade generally result in a decline of the purchasing power of agricultural exporters, and that such patterns are not conducive to promoting the common welfare by speedy raising of levels of nutrition and standards of living of the people of developing countries;
Considering that the instability of world prices and the low level of the purchasing power of the developing countries are major bottlenecks which may seriously jeopardize the economic growth essential for the conquest of hunger and malnutrition;
Taking into consideration Resolutions 1785 (XVII) and 2206 (XXI) of the General Assembly of the United Nations;
Taking into consideration the Resolution 1/63 adopted by the Conference at its Twelfth Session and bearing in mind the concern expressed by the Forty-Second Session of the CCP for the preparation of the Second United Nations Conference on Trade and Development;
Welcomes the Second United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, which is to be held in New Delhi in February 1968;
Stresses the close link between problems of trade and Development and those of hunger and malnutrition;
Invites the governments which will participate in the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in dealing with the various items of its agenda and documents and proposals contributing to the aims of the Conference, to give consideration also to the Charter of Algiers, adopted at the ministerial meeting of the Group of 77 developing countries;
Recommends that governments of both developed and developing countries give full consideration to the study of international trade problems contained in the agenda of the Second United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, paying also particular attention to the study of trade and other policy measures designed to accelerate economic Development;
Requests that the Director-General give high priority to preparatory work for the Second United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, emphasizing the agricultural and food aspects of the items included in the agenda, and make available to the Conference all the FAO experience and technical knowledge;
Requests further the Director-General to continue, within the framework of the Program of Work adopted by the Conference, the study of methods to restore health to the markets and stabilize prices of agricultural commodities at equitable and remunerative levels, taking into account the study prepared by the International Monetary Fund in collaboration with the World Bank on prices of commodities.
(Adopted 23. 11. 67)
Nutrition in agriculture
115. The Conference agreed that close liaison between nutritionists and agriculturists was essential in the planning of food supplies and improved food production and consumption levels. The attainment of this liaison, however, was often hampered by the absence of the necessary technical units and of the organization and administrative framework in ministries of agriculture. It was felt that the creation of units responsible for food and nutrition in ministries of agriculture could help bring about the desired closer association between nutritionists and agriculturists, as had been achieved in a number of countries. Such units could collect information on the food and nutrition situation that was required as a basis for food production planning and overall economic and social planning. The Conference also recognized that machinery should be developed to ensure co-ordination between the activities of all ministries and departments dealing with human nutrition, including the
planning authorities.
116. The Conference, therefore, adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 5/67
Nutrition in Agriculture
THE CONFERENCE
Considering the growing seriousness of the world's food and nutrition situation, the need for formulating realistic food and nutrition policies according to the nutritional requirements of populations and the essential improvements required in food production, processing and distribution;
Appreciating the importance of the roles of nutrition services which may already exist in other ministries or departments, particularly in those of public health;
Recognizes the crucial roles that ministries of agriculture must play in the solutions to food and nutrition problems and; consequently,
Reiterates the recommendations of previous Conferences that national food and nutrition committees be established to improve the co-ordination of food and nutrition activities including home economics and food technological aspects;
Recommends Member Governments to make every effort to establish food and nutrition units in ministries of agriculture and to include human nutrition orientation in the curricula of agricultural personnel; and
Further recommends the Director-General of FAO to assist governments in establishing food and nutrition units in their ministries of agriculture and to give every possible assistance for the inclusion of human nutrition and, in particular, such subjects as food consumption, food economics, nutrition planning and nutrition in extension programs, in the training of agriculturists and other related specialists.
(Adopted 23.11. 67)
Problems in fishery Development
117. The Conference recognized that the rational utilization and Development of the oceans and inland waters in many cases raised unique problems of an international character. It was in the context of the urgency of finding solutions to some of these problems that the Conference, at its Thirteenth Session, had established the Committee on Fisheries and the Department of Fisheries. Many Delegations expressed disappointment that the resources available to the Department of Fisheries through the regular budget of the Organization were not to grow during 1968/69 at the rate envisaged for the Department by the Conference at its Thirteenth Session over the six year period 1966 through 1971, and urged that this rate of growth be restored, in order that the many urgent demands on the Department could be met.
118. The Conference had before it the Reports of the first two Sessions of the Committee on Fisheries, held in 1966 and 1967, and expressed its satisfaction with the manner in which it had approached its task, and the rapidity with which it had responded to problems presented to it; especially with the major steps it had taken to create machinery to deal with specific and urgent international fishery problems; for instance its recommendations leading to the creation by the FAO Council at its Forty-Eighth Session of the Indian Ocean Fishery Commission and the Fishery Committee for the Eastern Central Atlantic.
119. The Conference felt that further Development of the world's fisheries to keep up the rate of growth of the past decade would depend on the identification and utilization of under exploited or latent resources, and that this would require greatly increased inputs of fishery exploration and research, new products, marketing, economic studies and investment in fishing vessels and equipment. The Conference considered that the promotion of the necessary co-operative programmes for intensified exploration and rapid fish stock assessment was indispensable, and should be undertaken under the aegis of the international fishery bodies concerned, whether within the framework of FAO or outside it, with the active co-operation and assistance of the Department of Fisheries.
120. The Conference noted that the multilateral funding agencies, especially UNDP, were, in assisting the developing countries to strengthen their fishery activities, facilitating greatly their participation in the work of some of the international fishery bodies, and expressed the hope that such assistance would be continued and further expanded.
121. The Conference recognized, however, that many of these international bodies lack the financial and staff resources to put into effect large scale ocean fishery researches, particularly as in many cases their membership consisted very largely of developing countries. For FAO regional fishery bodies funds under the Regular Program were not intended for the active promotion, planning and execution of co-operative programmes by their members. The Conference, therefore, believed that the various multilateral funding agencies including the UNDP should support research and Development activities sponsored by regional fishery bodies directed towards increased exploitation of resources of fish and their more efficient utilization and effective management; the Conference accordingly recommended that the Committee on Fisheries undertake a more detailed study with a view to formulating recommendations in this regard. The Conference also considered that operations, research and
marketing studies should go forward simultaneously with the exploration and assessment of stocks.
122. Many delegations, including developing countries in every region, emphasized the particular importance of training and education in the field of fisheries, inadequacy of which almost everywhere was a major impediment to fishery Development. The Conference, therefore, in noting the Regular Program strengthening proposed in 1968/69 in this regard requested the Director-General to promote, with support from whatever sources of funds which might become available, a dynamic programme for the organization of such training at both regional and national level; the regional aspect was especially stressed for the Near East and African regions, where delegations emphasized the desirability of facilitating the training in national institutions of fishery workers from neighboring countries.
123. The Conference noted and accepted in principle a proposal by the Delegation of Argentina that the Director-General convene a conference of nations interested in the high seas fisheries of the Southwest Atlantic in the ensuing biennium, subject to the availability of funds, and requested the Director-General to consult the Government of Argentina and other nations concerned, and begin appropriate action.
124. The Conference also took note with appreciation of the special chapter on "The Management of Fishery Resources" in The State of Food and Agriculture 1967 and expressed its satisfaction with the presentation there of many interesting new ideas. The Conference, however, was not necessarily in agreement with all the statements made therein. One delegation drew the attention of the Conference to the difficulties of defining economic criteria for effective management of international fisheries, and considered that data on many stocks of fish unmentioned in the paper and the exploitation of new resources would need to be taken into account.
125. Other fields of work on which the Conference urged action by the Department of Fisheries included marine and fresh water pollution; coastal culture of fish and shellfish; the Development of speedier, cheaper and more direct methods of assessing fish resources; problems of handling and transport of fish and fish products; economic effects of subsidies especially in relation to small fishing fleets; and the supply of capital for investment in fishery Development.
126. The Conference took note of the UN General Assembly Resolution 2172 (XXI) concerning the Resources of the Sea, and of the discussions and consultations arising therefrom in which FAO was playing an important part and which to date seemed to be leading to satisfactory results.
127. The Conference was informed that, independent of the action arising from the UN Resolution, the UN General Assembly was at present engaged in discussions concerning the resources of the seabed in the course of which references have also been made to the principles governing the conservation of the living resources of the sea and other matters which were clearly within the constitutional responsibilities of FAO.
128. The Conference hoped that no steps would be taken that might adversely affect the effectiveness of FAO work in that field and that might lead to duplication of work and requested the Director-General to draw attention to these dangers where appropriate.
FAO/industry co-operation
129. The Conference appreciated the progress report of activities and achievements of the FAO/Industry Co-operative Program. Delegates from both industrialized and developing countries gave strong support to the Program which had been approved by the Thirteenth Session of the FAO Conference to help accelerate agro-allied industrial expansion in the developing countries through closer operation between FAO, industry and governments. The Conference recognised the Programme's important catalytic role in bringing together the managerial, technical and financial elements for new investments, as well as the Programme's co-operation with Governments in eliminating obstacles to investment. Delegates appreciated that the Program's activities focussed on implementation of FAO pre-investment work as well as investment, training, research, demonstration, and other projects proposed by industry and governments.
130. The Conference noted that the Programme had steadily expanded communications between FAO, industry and governments. Contact with these industries was maintained through individual consultations in Rome, at industry offices, and in the field; and through the meetings of the General and Executive Committees as well as industry working groups. This had facilitated the dissemination of annotated UNDP/FAO project lists as approved by the UNDP Governing Council, and of more detailed information on selected UNDP/FAO projects to members of the Program who were directly concerned, or to any other company which had shown interest in those projects during their execution.
131. Emphasis was also placed on the strong support which UNDP was providing especially to new arrangements whereby additional feasibility studies could be carried out by the Program through existing UNDP/FAO/Government working agreements, and with the co-operation of interested industries.
132. The Conference took note of the Program's steady growth and the present membership, which included senior executives of 46 major multinational companies from processing industries requiring raw materials derived from agriculture, including animal husbandry, forestry and fisheries; and industries supplying essential requisites for the Development of agriculture, such as seeds, chemicals, fertilizers, equipment, machinery, and packaging materials. Thus, through the Program, both FAO and Government had a unique chance of obtaining direct access to the decision makers - and some of the finest minds - in the world's leading agro-allied industries.
133. The Conference appreciated an example of action whereby the Program was instrumental in establishing a new food processing industry in Turkey, by helping to bring together foreign and local private and State capital, and foreign technical know-how in co-operation with a new UNDP/FAO project.
134. In discussing this progress report further, the Conference stressed that governments did not alone have sufficient means to meet the demand for accelerated agricultural production in a broader sense; that industry represented a vital part of the total resources available; and that the Program was playing an increasingly effective role in helping energize and activate these resources. The Conference also emphasized the importance of industry's role in channelling new technology to the developing countries. The fact was also stressed that, when multinational industries, which in fact the Program's members were, invested in developing countries, they brought market outlets with them. The Conference noted that industries were eligible to join the Program if the membership qualifications were met; no differentiation was made between private and public ownership. In addition, it was recognized that multinational corporations were increasingly entering joint ventures with
governments in establishing new agro-allied industries in developing countries.
135. The Conference Called for the expansion of Program activities in both the input and food production industries. In accordance with Resolution 5/65 of its Thirteenth Session, the Conference recognized the urgent need for establishing plants for manufacturing fertilizers, insecticides, pesticides, and other requisites in order to increase agricultural production more rapidly. FAO should therefore make increasing use of the Program to promote production resource demonstration schemes in co-operation with governments and industry, appropriately combining the integrated use of fertilizers, pesticides, and machinery.
136. In reply to questions about increased government co-operation, the Conference agreed that governments concerned should initiate and maintain policies that would make conditions for investment by industry as attractive as possible. In addition, governments could advance the Program by providing the most specific information available on priority agro-allied investment projects, thus guiding the Program's efforts towards the most important industrial projects. The Conference noted that the Program's expanding contacts would include area banks, new agro-business movements in developed countries, and bilateral agencies. It was explained that the Program had already established contact with UNIDO, and the Conference welcomed the co-operation of that new UN agency.
137. In conclusion, the Conference noted that this new action-oriented Program would expand the possibilities for governments to implement agro-allied industrial Development.
<section>b</section>
C. Indicative world plan for agricultural development (IWP)
138. The Conference had before it a Progress Report which (a) indicated the present status of the work (b) drew attention to the work program proposed for the 1968/69 biennium (c) reviewed some of the major methodological and organizational problems which had been encountered in the course of the work and the lines along which these were being dealt with, and (d) gave a preliminary indication of some major lines of emphasis emerging from the work so far.
139. The Conference also noted the Director-General's opening statement in which he placed great stress on (a) the importance of the contacts with Governments in the preparation of the Indicative Plan (b) the tentative nature of the provisional studies which would become available in 1968; and which would provide a basis for discussions, with governments of developed and developing countries, that should help materially in submitting a well considered Indicative World Plan to the 1969 Session of the Conference (c) the need for regarding the Indicative World Plan as a continuing activity which would be progressively improved, and (d) the necessity of continuing to take full advantage of the multidisciplinary approach which reflected the many facets of the Indicative World Plan and drew upon the wide range of expertise and accumulated knowledge in the Organization.
140. In his opening statement the Director-General drew attention to the fact that the Indicative Plan was one of the items singled out by the Program and Finance Committees as possibly requiring further budgetary increase in 1968/69 over and above the figures given in the Program of Work and Budget prepared when this undertaking was still in a very early stage. The Director-General stated that in the light of the present situation the Indicative Plan would require some supplementary financing from outside sources and/or savings if the necessary savings could be found; he emphasized, however, that any additional financing coming from savings would be made within the limits of the approved level of the budget.
141. The Conference noted that the importance of the Indicative World Plan had already been determined by the Thirteenth Session and expressed its continuing support of the objectives of the Plan as set out in the report of the Session.
142. Some delegations felt, however, that the work was on too ambitious a scale, particularly in relation to the time available. The view was expressed that the IWP was going into too much detail and it was felt that the Plan as undertaken could not be carried out by 1969 within the resources available to the Secretariat. Some delegations, while recognizing that the involvement of the subject matter Divisions in the work might have some benefits in promoting an interdisciplinary approach, expressed doubts as to whether this was the best way of going about producing an appropriate Plan.
143. On the other hand, some delegations considered that much had been accomplished, both in preparing a program which would be helpful to Member Governments and also in providing a focus for the work of FAO. Some delegations expressed their appreciation of the work so far carried out and hoped that eventually the IWP would provide more detailed guidance for their own countries. It was felt that the Indicative Plan on completion would give member countries a guide-line for their own planning and would make it easier for them to decide on the choices which they had to take with regard to the future. In the view of these delegations the work done under the Indicative Plan should also be an incentive and co-ordinating stimulus for the work of FAO and for the divisions of FAO that were involved in this type of work.
144. The Conference requested the incoming Director-General to review carefully the methodology and progress of the Indicative Plan, taking into account both the criticism and doubts expressed above by some delegations and the strong desire on the part of other countries that the work on the IWP should be carried forward with the same intensity of purpose and at as rapid a rate as possible.
145. The Conference was agreed that the value of the Indicative Plan would depend in great part on the extent to which the recommendations took due account of the integration of agriculture into the overall economy of the countries concerned, on the spirit of fruitful co-operation between the Organization and member countries and on the degree to which the Plan utilized the available information and on the extent to which it recognized and assisted the efforts of the developing countries to increase agricultural production. It therefore placed great emphasis on the importance of the fullest possible exchange of views with countries in the preparation of the Plan. Without this the Plan might be considered by some countries as an academic exercise. It welcomed the view of the Director-General that the main purpose of the provisional studies was to serve as a basis for such discussions and appreciated his intention to have extensive discussions with both developing and
developed countries, and also with other international organizations, on the basis of these provisional studies before deciding on the final scope and contents of the documents to be placed before the 1969 Session of the Conference.
146. Some delegations expressed the hope that the technical and financial facilities would be accorded to the Indicative Plan in order that contacts with national governments and international organizations could be as direct and frequent as possible. In this connection the Conference heard from member countries in the Near East, which had already had an opportunity for direct contact with FAO on the basis of the provisional study for that region, that they had found these contacts particularly useful and that the visits had contributed positively to the planning process within the countries as well as giving a better understanding of the Indicative Plan itself.
147. The Conference noted with interest the announcement by the Delegation of the Netherlands that the additional sum of $500,000 which had been made available by the Netherlands Government to the Secretary-General of the United Nations to further the preparation of a global Development strategy included $100,000 to be allocated to the FAO Indicative World Plan for Agricultural Development to strengthen its activities. It also noted that the Director-General had already indicated to ECOSOC that the Indicative Plan would be FAO's contribution to the United Nations proposed program of Development for the 1970's.
148. Several delegations emphasized that the Indicative Plan would be justified to the extent to which it made available a more profound analysis, notably at the regional and even country level, of what was required to accelerate the rate of economic growth. It could not be a useful and effective instrument unless it was based on a realistic study of the production possibilities. Since the solution to the world food problem must lie mainly in increasing agricultural production in developing countries themselves, the assessment of the policies and measures required to achieve the results would constitute an extremely important part of the Indicative Plan.
149. At the same time the Indicative Plan should bring out as clearly as possible the situation which would develop by 1975 and 1985 if policies and trends were not changed. This would give a better idea of what was required to obtain the objectives which might be proposed in the Indicative Plan. The Conference therefore noted with satisfaction in the document before it that the Plan was being developed on two assumptions, one bearing a close relationship to past trends and recent performance, but taking account of factors which could modify these; and a higher assumption which would require a greater effort and better performance than had so far been achieved in most countries.
150. In conjunction with the more optimistic assumption, the Conference placed importance on the need to discuss possible changes in national policies which, if made, might have important repercussions on the Development prospects of other countries. In particular it noted that future expansion of agricultural trade would depend to a significant extent on policy decisions both on the part of developed and developing countries.
151. In the course of the discussion several delegations touched on a number of specific points:
(a) The importance of having a base period for the Indicative Plan which was as up-to-date and representative as possible was emphasized, and it was pointed out that some of the projections seemed already to require revision consequent upon the Development of high yielding varieties of crops in several developing countries. At the same time it was recognized that the objectives which would be proposed under the Indicative Plan were not essentially an extrapolation of past trends, but would consist of proposals which it was judged could have a reasonable chance of being reached, provided the necessary policies were accepted and the necessary measures taken.
(b) One of the conditions for a realistic Indicative Plan was to recognize that some changes in price relationships between different products were both inevitable and necessary. This was an integral part of the planning process. The Conference was therefore pleased to see the reaffirmation by the Director-General that the approach to the Indicative Plan did not include the assumption of constant prices. It recognized that this necessarily led to further complications in the analysis, but it was essential for realism.
(c) Trade should not be treated as merely a residual between production and consumption. Trade policies should be recognized as having their own independent value in arriving at proposed objectives under the Indicative Plan.
(d) All delegations recognized the difficulties imposed by inadequate statistics, as well as many other difficulties inherent in any attempt to elaborate even an Indicative Plan at the world scale. The view was expressed, however, that these difficulties were not of such a nature that should discourage the Organization from pressing ahead with the Indicative Plan. Some delegations considered that the contribution which had already been made towards building up more consistent and reliable statistics was in itself of considerable value and that the methodology could be of value to them in their own national planning. It was also pointed out that the non-availability of adequate statistics on the U. S. S. R. and Mainland China greatly increased the difficulties of assessing food needs and production potentialities.
152. In taking cognizance of the Director-General's statement regarding the financial requirements of the work in the next biennium, a number of delegations expressed the hope that in view of the importance of the Indicative Plan for the work of the Organization, and the guidance which it was hoped it would give to member countries, financial considerations would, as far as possible, not be allowed to be a limiting factor in the progress of the Plan. Other delegations stressed the need to keep an appropriate balance between the Indicative Plan and other work of the Organization. The requirements of the former should not mean that it had a free hand to draw liberally through forced savings on resources needed for other activities of FAO.
D. Inter-agency study of multilateral food AID
153. The Conference heard statements by the representatives of the Director-General and of the Secretary-General of the United Nations describing the background of the inter-agency program of studies, its present stage, and the direction in which the studies might be continued.
154. The inter-agency study of multilateral food aid was an expression of the increasing preoccupation of the international community with the failure to solve the food problem of the developing world. The inter-agency study had been formally initiated in response to a request contained in UN General Assembly Resolution 2096 (XX) of December 1965, to "examine, with a view to suggesting various alternative types of action .... the means and policies which would be required for large-scale international action of a multilateral character, under the auspices of the United Nations system, for combating hunger effectively..." The possibility of modifying and expanding multilateral food aid operations had been discussed in several bodies, including UNCTAD, the Intergovernmental Committee of the WFP, the FAO Council and CCP and ECOSOC.
155. Subsequently an outline for the study, prepared by the Director-General of FAO in consultation with other agencies concerned, had been examined by CCP and approved as the basis for the study by ECOSOC and the United Nations General Assembly. Both CCP and ECOSOC, desiring to have the earliest possible benefit of any substantive findings that emerged from the study, had asked for progress reports. FAO had co-operated actively, in consultation with other agencies, in the preparation of the Secretary-General's progress report to ECOSOC.
156. The Conference took note of the discussion that had taken place on the basis of the Secretary-General's progress report at the forty-third session of ECOSOC (July-August 1967), where the Director-General's progress report to CCP had also been available.
157. Several delegations reaffirmed the views they had expressed in the forty-second session of the CCP. The Conference took note of the report of CCP on this subject and agreed that there was urgent need to continue the inter-agency program of studies.
158. In considering the nature of the food problem of the developing countries, the Conference stressed that food aid was an interim solution, necessary to give the food deficit developing countries time to build up their own capacity to produce food or import it commercially. It was to this latter objective that the efforts of the international community had to be primarily directed, so that in the longer term the relative importance of food aid might again decline. Some encouragement could be derived from the recent recovery in the level of food production in a number of developing countries, and the anticipated slight rise in stocks held by the main grain exporting countries. Yet it had to be kept in mind that a significant acceleration in the general rate of growth of food production in developing countries required a persistent effort on an unprecedented scale. It was necessary to remain on guard against any complacency, as the basic situation had not yet changed.
159. The Conference emphasized that food aid efforts had to be closely related to other aid for economic Development, including financial aid and food production resources aid. Some delegations stressed the need for food aid to improve nutritional levels, particularly with a view to raising the protein intake levels of the more vulnerable population groups. There was need for this even in countries where the calorie intake had reached a satisfactory level. Others emphasized the role of food aid in emergency situations, even for countries which in normal years were self-sufficient in basic foods. Related to this was the use of food aid to help build up national food reserves for emergencies and other purposes.
160. The Conference agreed that the time had come to examine further the possible institutional arrangements for multilateral food aid in the light of changed circumstance, including the negotiation of the Food Aid Convention under the International Grains Arrangement of 1967. This Convention had set a precedent for multilateral procurement of food aid supplies, financed by both exporters and importers, in the context of an international commercial agreement. The Conference endorsed the suggestion of CCP that the Director-General and the Secretary-General of the United Nations should carry forward their analysis of institutional arrangements for expanded multilateral food aid, aiming at the use of the existing institutions, in particular the World Food Program. In this connection the Conference drew attention to the need for such institutional arrangements to provide for a satisfactory integration of food aid in the context of promoting economic Development.
161. The Conference recognized that FAO had a significant role to play in such co-ordination. The Organization was already studying the long-term food needs of the developing countries. The Conference took note of the suggestion made in the CCP that FAO should act as a focal point for assembling, analyzing and distributing information on bilateral and multilateral food aid operations, and of the Director-General's intention to explore ways in which this suggestion could best be implemented, in consultation with the governments concerned.
162. The Conference felt that it would be appropriate for FAO, in view of its experience based on the work of the CCP, to contribute guidance for an inter-agency approach to food aid activities within the United Nations system. The Conference recognized that with the disappearance of large surplus stocks of grains, the operation of expanded food aid programs called for some forward planning, to provide an early warning system of the emergence of shortages or surpluses, and to ensure the availability of the food aid supplies that might be needed, in terms both of quantity and commodity composition.
163. Some delegates pointed out that some governments were considering the necessity of increased production for food aid programs. Other delegates felt that it was premature to talk in terms of planned surplus production for food aid, as existing stocks in many developed countries were still greater than their financial ability to make them available to developing countries. Attention was drawn to the difficulties that certain developing countries were experiencing in disposing of exportable surpluses which had emerged as a result of the success of their efforts to raise domestic food production. With suitable financing such surpluses could be made available as food aid to food deficit developing countries. It was also stressed by some delegates that any further international approach to procuring supplies for food aid, to be meaningful, must take into account the capacity of the low cost exporters, both developed and developing. These delegates emphasized that any
additional planned production for food aid should be limited to the assessed needs, and should not be permitted to give rise to a renewed accumulation of stocks.
164. In this connection the Conference took note of the ECOSOC debate on this subject and the suggestion that "a continuing appraisal and re-appraisal of the prospects of production, consumption and trade and possible requirements for food aid were essential." The Conference was informed of the Director-General's intention to start a pilot examination of ways in which regular medium term food outlook statements could best be prepared by the Organization and invited the CCP to consider definite proposals at its next session.
165. The Conference agreed that there was need for more examination of the relationships between food aid and other aid, as this important aspect had not yet been adequately covered in the progress reports. The Conference also agreed, as had been suggested by the Secretariat, that there was no need at the moment for further quantitative examination of the long-term food needs of the developing food deficit countries. Other subjects that were suggested by some delegations for possible further study included, in addition to those mentioned in the report of the Forty-Second session of CCP, the sources and levels of supplies for food aid; the impact of food aid activities on commercial markets of the products involved; individual country analysis of prospective food needs and food production potential, including the causes for differential growth rates in per caput food output and the period of time during which large scale food aid might be needed; terms and conditions of food
aid; and financial aspects of food aid operations.
E. Food production resources program
166. The Conference discussed the report of the Council (C 67/LIM/3 and C 67/LIM/3-Corr. 1) on the Study on Food Production Resources in Agricultural Development (C 67/41). It considered that the Study had drawn attention to the strategic role of production resources in increasing food production in the developing countries.
167. The Conference endorsed the conclusion in the Study that the utilization of these requisites should increase substantially if the current unsatisfactory trend in food production was to be reversed. In this connection, the Conference stressed that the efficient use of production resources necessitated simultaneous and co-ordinated improvements in the economic and social environment. Particular attention was drawn to the need for adequate credit facilities, extension services and farmer training schemes, improvements to land tenure and price policies which provided an incentive to producers to increase their utilization of these requisites. It was noted that the cost of these requisites in developing countries had been an inhibiting factor to the expansion of their utilization. The Conference suggested that the Director-General might undertake, in co-operation with the industries concerned, a study on the structure of requisite prices in developing countries.
168. The domestic manufacture of requisites, particularly of fertilizers, has been rising in the developing countries. The Conference re-affirmed that for those countries where it was economically justified the ultimate solution was domestic production on the required scale. Every encouragement should therefore be given to expanding the flow of investment capital for the manufacture of these production resources in the developing countries themselves. Imported supplies should not be a disincentive to the establishment of such manufacturing units.
169. The Conference recognized that aid in the form of production resources would continue to be needed if utilization on the required scale was to be achieved and agreed that there should be a substantial expansion in such aid. Most of such aid would be provided under bilateral assistance schemes. Developing countries should therefore implement measures to establish the pre-conditions for the effective use of production resources and should in their bilateral aid negotiations request aid in this form in greater volume. It was noted that as a result of the growing response of their farmers to high-yielding varieties of crops, several developing countries had already achieved this pre-condition and had indeed to face the problem of a fast growing demand for production resources, particularly of chemical fertilizers.
170. Some delegations expressed the view that since the fertilizer industry in some developed countries was operating below capacity it would be easier for some of these countries to increase aid in fertilizers than in some other forms.
171. Regarding multilateral activity in this field, there was a division of opinion on the proposed FAO Food Production Resources Program. Some countries favored the extension of multilateral aid programs and urged the setting up of such a program in FAO. Others, on the other hand, did not support the establishment of a new multilateral program and preferred instead to support the intensification of existing programs being operated by the various multilateral agencies as well as of bilateral assistance programs.
172. The Conference stressed the merits of improved co-ordination and integration in the field of food production resource aid between bilateral aid programs and multilateral agencies. The special competence and responsibility of FAO in this field and in agricultural Development generally was recognized. The Conference recommended that FAO cooperate with already established machinery such as the aid consortia and consultative groups. It also urged that, where necessary, special groups should be established within the existing machinery to discuss the problems of agricultural Development and aid to this sector. This would contribute to the formulation and implementation of a consistent and coherent policy in the whole field of agricultural Development and would also enhance the effectiveness of aid.
173. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 6/67
Food Production Resources
THE CONFERENCE
Considering that the massive increase required in food availability must in large measure come from substantial expansion in production within food deficient countries, which can most readily be achieved through the intensive use of material inputs and other measures leading to increased yields;
Welcomes the attention drawn to this question by the Director-General proposals for a Food Production Resources Program and the resulting study (C 67/41) prepared under the guidance of the ad hoc Committee;
Considers that the study is a valuable contribution to the analysis of the problems involved in increasing production, availability and effective utilization of food production resources in developing countries;
Recognizes that FAO is the international organization specifically enjoined by its Constitution to secure improvement in methods of agricultural production, is equipped to provide technical guidance and supervision, to draw attention to requirements, to assist in the identification and formulation of sound projects, to participate in the co-ordination of production resources aid, and to raise the absorptive capacity of the developing countries to use these production resources effectively;
Recommends that it is urgently desirable to take all appropriate measures to increase the flow to and utilization in developing countries of food production resources;
Invites:
(i) developing countries to re-examine their national Development plans with a view to intensifying the use of food production resources and creating conditions in which additional inputs can be most effectively applied while maintaining stability in domestic farm prices,
(ii) Member Governments to consider in close consultation with donor countries the greater use of bilateral aid for the provision of food production resources,
(iii) existing multilateral agencies to consider ways and means of promoting the greater use of multilateral aid to provide food production resources,
(iv) the Director-General to intensify FAO's efforts to secure improvements in methods of agricultural production, in co-operation with other multilateral organizations and where requested with bilateral donors, and to provide the necessary technical guidance and supervision to ensure that these requisites are used effectively,
(v) the developed countries to consider how they can immediately increase their contribution in the field of food production resources and to examine further the question of the establishment of a multilateral program such as the one suggested in the study.
(Adopted 23. 11. 67)
F. World food program
174. The Conference had before it a draft resolution submitted by the Forty-Eighth Session of the FAO Council regarding the establishment of a target of $200 million for the World Food Program for the period 1969-70. It noted that an identical resolution had been submitted by ECOSOC to the General Assembly.
175. The Conference received a statement from the Executive Director of the World Food Program reviewing its operations to date and drawing attention to the possible impact on the Program of certain important issues arising out of the new Food Aid Convention and possibly out of the Study on Multilateral Food Aid, or out of any future developments on food production resources.
176. It heard a statement on behalf of the Director-General on the discussions at the Twelfth Session of the Intergovernmental Committee of the World Food Program with particular reference to the handling and scope of emergency food aid, and on the co-ordination that would be required if the World Food Program were to be involved in the operation of any expanded food aid program.
177. A statement was also made on behalf of the Secretary-General of the United Nations conveying the continuing interest of the United Nations in the activities of the World Food Program, which covered a wide range of projects for economic and social Development.
178. The Conference noted with satisfaction that the Program was making an efficient contribution, through the use of food aid as capital, toward the economic Development of countries in many parts of the world, as well as providing emergency food relief.
179. It expressed the hope that contributions would be made available by both developed and developing countries at a level sufficient to meet the proposed target of $200 million for the period 1969/70. Several donor countries indicated that they were planning to announce substantially increased pledges at the forthcoming Pledging Conference, and hoped that other countries would do likewise.
180. The Conference noted that a few countries had already indicated their intention to channel through the WFP a part or all of their contribution under the Food Aid Convention. It expressed the hope that other participants in the Convention would give every consideration to making maximum use of the World Food Program, and that in all cases additional cash contributions would be made to the Program to cover transportation and administrative expenses.
181. The Conference noted that the practical issues connected with any WFP role in the implementation of the Food Convention would be reviewed by the Intergovernmental Committee. Broader questions of the role of other institutions and their co-operation with the WFP in operations based on any great increase in its resources, would be covered in the further analysis of institutional arrangements for expanded multilateral food aid being undertaken in the next stage of the Inter-Agency Study on Multilateral Food Aid.
182. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No.7/67
World Food Program
THE CONFERENCE
Recalling the provisions of Resolution 4/65 that the World Food Program is to be reviewed before each Pledging Conference and that, subject to the review so provided for, the next Pledging Conference "should be convened in 1967, at which time governments would be invited to pledge contributions for 1969 and 1970, with a view to reaching such target as may be recommended by the General Assembly and the Conference of the Food and Agriculture Organization";
Noting that a review of the Program was undertaken by the Intergovernmental Committee of the World Food Program at its Eleventh Session and by the Council at its Forty-Eighth Session;
Having considered resolution 5/48 of the Council, as well as the recommendation of the Intergovernmental Committee and the report of the Executive Director;
Recognizing the value of multilateral food aid both as a form of capital investment and for meeting food needs:
1. Establishes for the two years 1969 and 1970 a target for voluntary contributions of $200 million, of which not less than one third should be in cash and services, and urges States
Members of the United Nations and Member Nations and Associate Members of the Food and Agriculture Organization to make every effort to ensure the full attainment of the target;
2. Invites the Secretary-General of the United Nations, in co-operation with the Director-General of FAO, to convene a pledging conference at United Nations Headquarters early in January 1968;
3. Urges governments which have pledged contributions of commodities or services for the period 1966-68 to make every possible effort to carry over and make available for the period 1969-70 any portion of such pledges which may remain unused at the end of 1968 and to indicate their readiness to effect such a carryover when announcing pledges at the Third Pledging Conference;
4. Decides that the next following pledging conference, subject to the review provided for in Resolution 4/65, should be convened at the latest early in 1970, at which time governments would be invited to pledge contributions for 1971 and 1972 with a view to reaching such target as may be recommended by the General Assembly and the FAO Conference.
(Adopted 23.11.67)
G. Freedom from hunger campaign
Progress report on the campaign
International rice year
Collaboration with the united nations international year for human rights
Plans for the second world food congress
Progress report on the campaign
183. The Conference considered the progress of the FFHC as outlined in documents C 67/19., C 67/19 Add.1 and Add.2., C 67/19 Corr. 1. It also received the report and recommendations of the Third FFHC Conference held at FAO Headquarters from 30 October to 3 November 1967. (C 67/LIM/34)
184. The Co-ordinator of the FFHC presented the introductory statement on behalf of the Director-General referring to the achievement of the information and education programs in the early stages of the Campaign and the move in the second stage to the building up of National FFHC Committee and the beginnings of long-term private voluntary action to fight hunger. A major innovation of the Campaign had been this involvement of non-governmental bodies in Development programs and their investment in long-term projects.
185. The statement also drew particular attention to the Young World Appeal and to the Young World Food and Development Project, paid tribute to the vigorous response which had been received from young people, referred to the establishment of the FAO Industry Co-operative Program, to plans for the Second World Food Congress in 1969, and a draft Declaration of the Conference for the United Nation's International Year for Human Rights.
186. The Conference expressed appreciation for the progress of the Campaign and gave its full support to the program proposals outlined in the Director-General's introductory statement and report. It also welcomed evidence of the broadening of Campaign activities and expressed the hope that the Director-General would continue to encourage and strengthen Campaign initiatives. It was recognized that FFHC was important as a dynamic component of FAO's program and as a means of reinforcing government programs.
187. Delegates made frequent reference to the great value of the education and information work of the Campaign. It was agreed that their role in developed countries must be to keep the public continually aware of the need for greater assistance to developing countries. In developing countries the first task was to make people aware of the causes of malnutrition and under-Development so that the necessary skills for dealing with these problems might be introduced more rapidly, and to encourage voluntary activities and programs by the people aiming at increased production.
188. Several delegates said that they felt that the Co-ordinator should make a general survey of the progress of the Campaign and its problems in a number of developing countries in order to establish the right pattern for the Campaign to enlist the help which would ensure better success in Campaign activities. In this regard it was repeatedly stressed that effective national committees were essential as the focal point for Campaign activity. There were also several references to the importance of studying the best methods of developing Campaign activities on a Regional basis.
189. A number of speakers drew attention to the value of the many different kinds of contribution which non-governmental organizations had made to the Campaign and the importance of ensuring proper machinery for close cooperation between these non-governmental organizations and FFHC at both the international and the national level. The Conference recognized the importance of coordination of FFHC activities with other international programs such as UNCTAD, UNDO, Unesco, ILO and WHO.
190. The Conference welcomed particularly reports of the success of the Young World Appeal and agreed that its progress and activities ought to be progressively strengthened. Delegations stressed the critical need for increased emphasis on youth involvement as a contribution to national Development needs. The problems of providing education, training, employment and reasonable living standards for rural youth were stressed and the importance of Young World Appeal action in this context was generally recognized. It was also agreed that the Young World Appeal was important as a means of establishing working relationships between rural and urban youth, and of giving a production-orientated outlook to education in the developing countries.
191. The Conference emphasized the particular importance of providing support for small farmers. The need for increased inputs, particularly of small farm implements, seeds, fertilizers, insecticides, and similar items, was generally recognized and it was felt that this type of activity was particularly suitable for FFHC support.
192. The Conference welcomed the links which were established with industry through the FAO/ industry Cooperative Program and agreed that this type of operation could make a substantial contribution to meeting the needs of developing countries for greater investment, particularly in industries related to agriculture.
193. Several delegates expressed the view that the Report of the Third FFHC Conference offered excellent guidelines for the future operation of the Campaign
International rice year
194. The Conference received a final report (document C 67/20) on the activities carried out during the International Rice Year which had been declared during 1966 by the Director-General within the general framework of the Freedom from Hunger Campaign, in accordance with the request of the Conference at its Twelfth Session.
195. It noted that over 35 Member Governments had organized special activities, mainly designed to increase production. A series of technical publications had been issued and several films on rice produced, and there had also been a number of national and international technical meetings on rice problems. Several countries had arranged international fellowships for rice research workers. The Conference also noted that the FAO Secretariat had organized supporting activities in many fields.
196. The Conference was informed that the reports received from participating Member Governments indicated that the activities arranged as a contribution to the International Rice Year had acted as a stimulus to national programs for raising productivity and fostered the exchange of up-to-date knowledge of rice problems and the means to combat them.
<section>c</section>
Collaboration with the united nations international year for human rights
197. The Conference took note of document C 67/21 outlining steps being taken by the Director-General in connection with the International Year for Human Rights. It expressed its approval of these steps, noted in particular the importance of FAO's participation in the United Nations International Conference on Human Rights scheduled for April 1968, and expressed the hope that the Director-General would vigorously pursue actions to ensure both that FAO would emphasize man's right to freedom from hunger as well as the larger concerns embodied in the Universal Declaration.
198. Conference unanimously adopted the following Declaration:
DECLARATION
International Year for Human Rights
We the Representatives of Member Nations assembled in Rome at the Fourteenth Session of the Conference of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
CONSCIOUS of our responsibilities in accepting the mandate laid down in the Preamble of FAO's Constitution;
CONCERNED that, twenty years after the Universal Declaration of Human Rights proclaimed the right of everyone to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself and his family, hunger and malnutrition continue to take a heavy toll in human suffering and degradation in large areas of the world;
WELCOMING the designation of 1968 by the General Assembly of the United Nations as the International Year for Human Rights, thus providing a timely opportunity for reemphasizing the fundamental right of all mankind to freedom from hunger and want;
INVITING ATTENTION to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations in December 1966 which provides that the States Parties to the Covenant recognize the fundamental right of everyone to be free from hunger and specifies the measures to be taken by them, individually and through international co-operation, to give effect to this right;
RECOGNIZING that the primary task of this generation is to take up the challenge of eliminating hunger and want through an integrated Development of the resources of the land and the seas, and to this end, to make available much greater financial and material resources to the constructive goals of economic and social Development;
HEREBY DECLARE that the future of mankind and the peace of the world cannot be secure unless man's fundamental right to be free from hunger is universally realized; and further that the granting of this basic right will further the achievement of all other human rights defined in the Universal Declaration;
EMPHASIZE the urgent need for developing nations to intensify their efforts to mobilize their internal resources, to proceed to the necessary structural changes required to establish a stable balance between food production and population growth; for developed nations to share more generously their productive capacities and skills, and opportunities for trade; and for international organizations, voluntary agencies and humanitarian foundations to effectively concert their efforts to these ends;
REAFFIRM that, in planning to provide adequate food, clothing and shelter for the population, special attention should be given to the role of rural communities, particularly of rural youth, of women in the promotion of these plans, and to the food needs of children;
RECOGNIZE the contribution which the Second World Food Congress, now scheduled for 1969, can make to this cause by providing an opportunity to an important cross section of the world public to highlight the priorities for ensuring a more rapid rate of economic and social growth within an international framework, and
REQUEST all Member Nations of FAO to study the possibility of ratifying the International Covenant of Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and to undertake all necessary measures to achieve man's right to freedom from hunger and want.
(Adopted 23.11.67)
Plans for the second world food congress
199. The Conference discussed the plans for the Second World Food Congress in the light of the statement contained in Chapter II D of the Director-General's Program of Work and Budget for 1968-69 (C 67/3), and the proposal of the Director-General to the Forty-Ninth Session of the Council that the Congress be postponed until the early part of 1969. This postponement would permit the appropriate organs of FAO to examine the Indicative World Plan before it was presented to the Congress. The question was raised whether the Congress should not be further postponed, but it was generally agreed that, subject to review of the matter by the Director-General and the Council, it should be held during 1969 in order that the findings of the Congress could be presented to the Fifteenth Session of the FAO Conference.
200. The Conference underlined that the Indicative World Plan would be but one element of the program of the Second World Food Congress, and also that it would not be for the Congress to pass judgment on the Plan. This would be the responsibility of the Fifteenth Session of the FAO Conference. The Congress should rather concentrate on the implications of the Plan and the action which would need to be taken by governments, by industry and other groups, by individuals and by national and international organizations both in the developed and developing countries.
201. The Conference recommended that it be left to the Director-General, in consultation with the Council, to decide the time and place of the Congress. It underlined that provision should be made to ensure adequate participation from all Member Nations.
H. Skim milk powder in the world dairy economy
202. The Conference considered document 67/23 which concerned the utilization of skim milk powder in internationally assisted milk plants against the background of the world skim powder market. Delegates were satisfied with the study on the "Economic Impact of Dairy Development in Developing Countries" which gave an appraisal of the utility of milk plants, with regard to indigenous milk production and the improvement of nutritional standards.
203. Some delegates considered that the response to the questionnaires sent out by the Secretariat was inadequate for a sufficiently detailed examination of the relevant problems highlighted by the study.
204. Several delegates emphasized the importance of skim milk powder supplies to developing countries especially in stretching milk supplies for the improvement of protein intake of low income groups, and for improved utilization of plant capacity in milk schemes. Delegates stressed the necessity of promoting local milk production through improved cattle breeding, better production facilities, new milk plants and other appropriate measures. Skim milk powder would play not only an important role for improved utilization but also provide a stimulus to local milk production, until domestic milk supplies were sufficiently available.
205. The delegates considered the present situation on world markets for skim milk powder and noted that donations had declined, because of reduced production in the United States, while increased production in Europe has been matched by increased usage for livestock feeding in western Europe. The growing demand for skim milk powder in developing countries could not be met through commercial imports owing to their shortage of foreign currency. Some delegates claimed that the establishment of new milk plants in developing countries should be based on local milk production or alternatively that foreign exchange allocations for imports of skim milk powder should be assured.
206. Delegates considered various remedies to solve the present difficulties. Some delegates raised doubts as to the practical feasibility of substituting other foodstuff for skim milk powder in animal feeding, while others suggested that a study on this subject should be undertaken in collaboration with the countries concerned. Delegates suggested an expansion of World Food Program allocations of skim milk powder to milk plants associated with cattle Development projects within dairy Development schemes. Reference was also made to the desirability of channelling skim milk powder donations for welfare purposes through milk plants in order to produce low-priced toned milk. Improved organization and efficiency in the distribution of skim milk powder in developing countries would ensure more effective benefits from its provision as aid.
207. The Conference stressed that the problems of skim milk powder supplies to developing countries could not be treated separately from other dairy products. Problems of skim milk powder should be considered in the context of the critical situation on world dairy markets where inadequate supplies of skim milk powder for developing countries on special terms coincided with increased stocks of butter. The Conference noted the proposals being made in GATT for the resumption of negotiations on dairy products, and recognized that an agreement on dairy products might provide for food aid, along the lines of the International Grains Arrangement. The Conference considered that FAO should keep in close touch with GATT on this matter and that it should undertake a study of the possibilities of further utilizing all dairy products as food aid as a background to future negotiations. This study together with a report of developments in the field should be presented to the CCP at its
Forty-Third Session.
I. Article XI reports
208. The Conference recalled that at its Thirteenth Session it requested the Council to: investigate the value and utility of these national reports to the work of FAO and to other Member Nations; consider the most appropriate subject matter and format of these reports as well as the most useful method of preparing, circulating and using them; and to make recommendations to the Fourteenth Session of the Conference.
209. The Conference noted that the Forty-Sixth Session of the Council referred the matter to the Program Committee, which Committee discussed at length these reports with particular reference to the above points. The detailed comments and suggestions of the Program Committee regarding the format, the timing and the distribution of these reports for the future biennia, as endorsed by the Council at its Forty-Seventh Session, were presented in document C 67/24. While the Conference noted that there were arguments for and against the submission of such reports, it agreed that they could still be useful to FAO as well as to Member Nations if they contained analytical information on the food and agricultural situation in the countries, with an appraisal of both achievements and major problems faced by each country and the manner in which attempts were being made to solve such problems.
210. Regarding the contents of these reports the Conference agreed that the reports should consist of three parts: (i) a general section reviewing the main food and agricultural developments in the countries, which should be common to all such reports; (ii) specific sections like those of the special chapters of State of Food and Agriculture, providing analytical information on one or more important subjects suggested by FAO which might be included in the next issues of SOFA or could form the subject of discussions at the next session of the Conference; (iii) finally; there should be another part containing information to be provided at the discretion of the Governments on particular problems faced by them. These might include, for example, the plan, policies and programs, priorities in planning, any change in the food/population relation, and the measures taken concerning this trend and the results or failures of these efforts, etc.
211. The Conference agreed that in future these reports should be on a two-year, instead of the present three-year, basis. The Conference also endorsed the suggestion, that each country should submit at least a first provisional report, if necessary in mimeographed or typewritten form, to FAO by 31 March of each Conference year, so as to give the Secretariat time to consider it and use any information which it might contain as a basis for writing or supplementing any of the documents which might be presented to the Conference; and also that the copies in final version should necessarily have to be distributed among Member Nations by governments themselves. Additional copies might be made available during the Conference for reference use as required by delegations.
212. The Conference noted that the Council had agreed that this procedure be followed as an experimental measure for two biennia, after which the matter should again be considered by the Conference. The Conference approved the Guideline attached to document C 67/24 subject to the following two amendments:
(a) At the end of Section I (General Review of Food and Agricultural Developments), a new sub-section E. should be inserted reading as follows:
"E. The progress and problems of foreign trade in agricultural commodities and inputs.
i. analysis of problems and changes in the volume and value of exports and imports of agricultural commodities;
ii. analysis of changes in the volume and value of exports and imports of agricultural inputs - fertilizers, pesticides, machineries, etc.
iii. summary of progress and problems. "
(b) Section m should be redrafted to include in full (iii) of the Council's recommendations regarding the contents as referred to in pare. 210 above.
213. The Conference recommended that this experimental measure be followed with regard to 1967/68 biennium and that the results be reported further to its Fifteenth Session in 1969. m.
<section>d</section>
X. Activities and programs of the organization
A. Review of the work of the technical committees of the conference
B. Introduction
C. Major areas for concentration
D. Salient points in regard to the organization's activities
E. Review of FAO's field activities
F. Review of topics relating to the program of work and budget which were not covered by the technical committees: chapters I, II, IV, V, VI. A(i), VI. D, VI. E., VII, VIII, IX, X, XI
G. Inter-agency relations and consultations on matters of common interest
H. Program of work and budget 1968/69
A. Review of the work of the technical committees of the conference
B. Introduction
214. The Conference reviewed and, subject to the comments below, gave general approval to the activities of the Organization through the biennium 1966/67.
215. It then generally approved the technical content of the Program of Work proposed by the Director-General for 1968/69, as set out in document C 67/3 and Supplements. Particular adjustments and changes in emphasis which the Conference suggested, or decided should be introduced into this Program, are set out below as they relate to the various sectors of the Organization.
216. The Conference also had regard to possible longer-term developments in the several areas of work of the Organization, and recorded its views. In interpreting these views, account of course must be taken of the Conference's ultimate conclusions in regard to what organizational structure can best serve the future responsibilities of FAO.
217. The Conference noted the way in which the work on the Indicative World Plan for Agricultural Development had already begun to give direction to the activities of all sectors of the Organization, and was contributing to the integration of the regular and field programs. It also noted that the first draft of the World Soil Map at 1:5 million scale was expected to be ready in 1968 which in its turn should help show the way to higher agricultural production.
218. The other main trend distinguished was the extent to which the Organization's field programs were growing in comparison to Regular Program activities This must have a marked bearing on the scope and depth of the Organization's future work under the Regular Program.
219. The Conference expressed some apprehension that there was inadequate provision of travel funds for some sectors of the Organization in the 1968/69 Program of Work and Budget to enable staff outputted in the regions to respond quickly to requests for assistance from member countries and to permit senior headquarters officers to make frequent visits to developing countries to offer on-the-spot advice and become familiar with national problems.
220. The Conference singled out for special mention certain matters relating to the five major areas of activity which the Director-General had selected for concentration in 1968/69 (see C 67/3 and C 67/LIM/26).
C. Major areas for concentration
1. Integrated planning for agricultural development
2. Increasing productivity
3. Development of human resources and improvement of institutional framework
4. Investment assistance
5. Creating increased awareness of world food problems
1. Integrated planning for agricultural development
a) Improvement of agricultural statistics
b) 1970 World census of agriculture
a) Improvement of agricultural statistics
221. The Conference considered that there were two main aspects of the long-term endeavour of FAO for the Development of agricultural statistics. The first concerned the increasing rationalization of statistical work within the Organization and the second related to the work of promoting the collection of more and better data in member countries.
222. The aim of work concerned with the first aspect was to establish an integrated set of basic agricultural statistics which could be used uniformly by all units of the Organization and for all the different projects and studies the Organization undertook. A significant step forward had been taken in establishing such statistics for production and utilization for use in the Indicative World Plan and storing them on computer tape. The continuation of working arrangements with other users of the type established for the IWP, together with the installation of the computer in the Organization should expedite this process.
223. The establishment under the auspices of the ACC of a Sub-Committee on Statistical Activities for coordinating the statistical programs of different international agencies should also help.
224. The Conference considered that the establishment of a computerized data pool would facilitate fuller coordination of requests to member countries for statistical data required by the several sectors of the Organization, as instructed by the Thirteenth Session of the Conference. This would also help eliminate duplication in the compilation and processing of statistical data within the Organization. The Conference asked that the progress achieved during 1968/69 in this respect should be reported at its Fifteenth Session.
225. The Conference considered that adequate food consumption statistics were a basic necessity for the work of the Organization. It approved the steps proposed for extending the geographical coverage of the work on food balance sheets. The Conference noted that the available information on the distribution of food by the socio-economic groups within countries in relation to nutritional requirements was very inadequate. Such information, which was used for many purposes including the estimation of income elasticity of demand, could be obtained only through food consumption surveys. The Conference, therefore, urged that efforts to promote such surveys should be intensified along the lines of FAO's Program of Food Consumption Surveys.
226. With regard to the second aspect, namely that of improving agricultural statistics at the source, the Conference recognized the importance of both active promotion of field work for data collection in member countries and FAO help in building up national statistical sources. It asked governments to speed adoption of improved methodology and use of standardized concepts and definitions. Since in the ultimate analysis it rested with the countries themselves to accord appropriate priorities in their Development programs for work on the collection of basic statistics, the Conference recommended that member countries include statistical Development as an integral part of their economic Development plans, and that they make full use of the facilities offered by the UNDP and other international or bilateral aid programs, for the Development of statistics with appropriate priorities.
227. The Conference noted that it was planned to submit to governments the basic agricultural statistics which had been developed in the work for the IWP. The Conference recommended that governments consider these statistics with a view to possible revision of their national statistics.
b) 1970 World census of agriculture
228. The Conference was informed of the steps taken during 1966/67 for the promotion of the 1970 World Census of Agriculture. Regional adaptations of the world program were prepared for Africa, Far East, Near East, Europe and the Americas after appropriate consultations at regional meetings. The Conference noted that the promotion of the Census would remain a major concern of the Organization during 1968/69.
229. The Conference recommended that the Organization explore along with the Government concerned the possibility of continuing until 1970 the census training arrangements made in Washington and Paris. It noted with satisfaction that the United States Government would be happy to continue its co-operation in this connection. The Organization should explore the possibilities of further enlarging the program of census training in Africa and other developing regions.
230. The Conference recommended that full use should be made in the census training centres of the reports on the methodology and on the concepts and definitions followed in the 1960 census.
231. The Conference was informed about offers of equipment, fellowships and technical assistance experts which had been forthcoming under the auspices of the Census Fund. It noted with gratitude the offer of the Spanish Government to provide experts in census taking for Spanish-speaking countries. In addition, small amounts of cash contribution have been pledged under the Fund, mainly from the developing countries themselves. The Conference noted that the Organization proposed to ask the developing countries to use their cash contributions to finance the training centers organized by FAO. As for the offers in kind, FAO could act as central clearing house by bringing to the attention of the developing countries the offers for aid. At the same time, it would bring to the attention of the donor countries the needs of the developing countries.
232. At its last session, the Conference had requested the Director-General to set up a Committee of selected Member Nations to advise on the operations and administration of the Fund. The Conferences noted that, in view of the small size of the Fund, no budgetary provisions had as yet been made for the establishment of such a committee.
233. The Conference emphasized the need for a more timely preparation of the report of the 1970 World Census of Agriculture than had been possible in the case of the 1960 census. It recommended, therefore, that countries expedite the preparation of their national reports.
2. Increasing productivity
a) Increasing availability of food through reduction in losses
b) Pesticides
c) Evaluation, effective utilization and conservation of genetic resources
a) Increasing availability of food through reduction in losses
234. With reference to losses in crops and other agricultural products, the Conference recommended that:
(a) Continuing emphasis be placed on modern techniques to control crop diseases and pests, and that increased attention be given to the efficient use of pesticides, weed control, plant parasitic nematodes and grain-eating birds;
(b) On the basis of the recommendations of the Symposium on Crop Losses, held in Rome, October 1967, high priority be given to the Development of standard methods for the estimation of crop losses;
(c) Increased efforts be devoted to work designed to prevent both pre-harvest and post-harvest losses, particularly in respect to rodent control and storage pests;
(d) Special attention be given to the handling, drying and storage of farm products, methods of crop storage, and also to the design of suitable and cheap storage structures for tropical, semi-tropical and humid conditions, using local materials;
(e) An integrated approach to reduction of losses in crop products must take into account all aspects such as control of crop pests including insects, rodents and micro-organisms; engineering; transport; and processing techniques. Provision for continued co-ordination between the sectors of the Organization concerned with this problem must therefore be ensured;
(f) Full use be made of waste and surpluses for livestock production.
235. With regard to losses in livestock products, the Conference recommended that:
(a) Future programs lay greater emphasis on the establishment of adequate diagnostic services, since early diagnosis was the key to effective control and eradicating animal diseases;
(b) Disease control programs be expanded, with emphasis on the regional approach, and with inter-country cooperation wherever possible;
(c) Priority be given to the control of internal parasitism in livestock, as an important factor in reducing output; the Director-General should establish as soon as possible a Panel of Experts on Internal Parasites of Livestock, to advise the Director-General and Member Governments on all matters pertaining to the prophylaxis, treatment and control of parasitism;
(d) Special efforts be made to improve slaughter facilities as a means for preventing wastage of meat and other valuable livestock products; use should be made of by-products of abattoirs for productive purposes including vaccines.
b) Pesticides
236. The Conference recognized the importance of the availability of efficient pesticides in agricultural production. It requested that new publications should be prepared on fumigation and aerial spraying and that work on insects which had become resistant to insecticides should be given urgent attention (including biological control).
237. Because of possible health hazards the safe use of pesticides would continue to be a cause of great concern and must receive increased attention. The Conference suggested that an international meeting on the impact of pesticides on soil, water, animals and plants should be arranged in due course. The Conference recognized the role of the isotope and radiation techniques in studying the fate of pesticides in plant and animal products, and recommended that work in this field be given prominence.
c) Evaluation, effective utilization and conservation of genetic resources
238. The Conference regretted that, despite a strong recommendation by its Thirteenth Session for a vigorous and comprehensive action program, no significant increases were allocated for this purpose in the Program of Work and Budget for 1968/69. Satisfaction was, however, expressed with the work accomplished in 1966/67 with the means available, on which the co-operation of Member Governments and international or national organizations had fortunately had a multiplying effect.
239. Animal Genetic Resources. The Conference recognized that work in this field could be of importance to all member countries. It recommended that:
(a) FAO should prepare a catalogue indicating the physical and productive characteristics of existing breeds in developing countries under actual environmental conditions;
(b) Advanced countries should be encouraged to undertake research into techniques for the preservation, evaluation and handling of ova and semen, giving specific attention to practical aspects;
(c) FAO should increase collaboration with scientific institutions and animal production societies throughout the world;
(d) Member Nations should evaluate local types and breeds and perpetuate those having distinct potentialities.
240. Plant Genetic Resources. The Conference agreed that the Organization should act as a promotor and coordinator in this field although the actual work involved must necessarily be entrusted to scientific institutions in member countries. It saw problems in undertaking in developing countries the sort of work required because of the shortage of personnel and finance. The matter of how finance could be obtained to assist specialized scientific national institutions needed to be studied since this was difficult through normal channels.
241. The Conference felt that the Development of plant genetic resources programs involved complex problems and required such expensive and skilled servicing that, for the present, efforts should be concentrated on existing centers, so that an immediate impact could be obtained.
242. The recommendations of the FAO Technical Conference on Exploitation, Conservation and Utilization of Plant Gene Resources, 1967, should be considered as a basis for further action by the Organization in this field. The first task should be to continue its preparation of lists of available collections of genetic stocks which existed in many parts of the world. Action should be possible to arrange for the transfer to more secure locations of such stocks as were in danger of not being maintained in any country.
243. The Conference emphasized the importance of FAO's role in promoting and co-ordinating plant exploration expeditions and of establishing for the benefit of all Member Governments international germ plasm centers of wild and cultivated species. It urged Member Governments to evaluate and record the germ-plasm resources of their countries. They could do much on their own initiative and the longer they delayed, the greater the risk of valuable material being lost.
244. Forest Tree Genetic Resources The Conference requested the Director-General to take into account Recommendation No. 62 of document C 67/AG/FO/1, in formulating the Program of Work and Budget for 1970/71. It recognized that as Development proceeds in the less as in the more advanced areas of the world, the reserves of genetic variation stored in the natural forests have been or are being displaced on an increasing scale. Moreover, efforts to explore and collect forest genetic sources were, on a world scale, inadequate and inadequately concerted.
245. The Conference requested the Director-General to establish a panel of experts on Forest Gene Resources to help plan and co-ordinate FAO's efforts to explore, utilize and conserve the gene resources of forest trees and, in particular, help prepare a detailed short-term program and draft a long-term program for FAO's action in this field and to provide information to Member Governments. The Director-General should convene at least one session of the members of the Panel in the biennium 1968/69.
3. Development of human resources and improvement of institutional framework
a) Education and training
b) Increasing the production and use of Edible protein
c) Planning for better family living
a) Education and training
246. The Conference emphasized the importance of education and training in the promotion of efficient agriculture in all its aspects.
247. The Conference recognized that many developing countries were faced with serious difficulties in procuring materials required to promote the training of technical and scientific personnel, for lack of currencies of worldwide convertibility. It asked the FAO Council to study with the Director-General the several possibilities that there appeared to be for solving these difficulties, and present proposals for further consideration.
248. Discussing animal production and health, the Conference recommended that priority be given to education and training at all levels in all fields but with more emphasis on training at the intermediate or sub-professional field. As regards land and water use, the Conference recommended that particular emphasis should be given to on-the-spot training through field projects, seminars, training centres, manuals and other publications. Pilot projects, while constituting the first stage of productive investment, could also play a basic role in demonstration and training for instance in the use of fertilizers The Conference stressed the need to ensure that adequate attention was given to the collation and dissemination of research data and results, which needed to reach the farmer and must therefore be spread widely among those instructing him. The need for pasture and fodder training courses in Africa featured in the discussions on pastures, and the Conference noted with
approval that in 1968 the Organization would be assessing the educational and training needs of that region.
249. When examining the role of atomic energy in food and agriculture, the Conference urged the Organization to continue using advanced institutes for training and emphasized the necessity of having available an adequate number of fellowships.
250. Similar views were expressed during the discussions on Fisheries, Forestry, Nutrition, and Economics. The Conference concurred, therefore, with FAO organizing a World Conference on Agricultural Education and Training in 1969 where all facets could be properly treated, with full participation by other UN agencies concerned.
b) Increasing the production and use of Edible protein
251. The Conference considered that lack of edible protein was one of the most pressing problems in the world today. Its nature varied from country to country and region to region for ecological and other reasons, making it necessary to plan different approaches to its solution in individual situations.
252. The Conference welcomed the Report of the Advisory Committee on the Application of Science and Technology to Development (ACST), entitled "Increasing the Production and Use of Edible Protein" (E/4343), commended its specific proposals, and noted that this Report would be considered by the United Nations General Assembly at its current session. The Conference agreed with ACST in giving the highest priority to increasing protein production by conventional means but noted the emphasis in the report on non-conventional sources such as single cell proteins.
253. The Conference welcomed the ACST proposal to expand the scope and function of the WHO/FAO/ UNICEF Protein Advisory Group and to include persons competent in the production, processing, economics and marketing of foods which could narrow the protein gap. It expressed satisfaction that ECOSOC had requested the UN Agencies to review their present and proposed programs with a view to the possible reallocation of financial resources and reorientation of their programs towards closing the protein gap.
254. The Conference recognized that several sectors of the Organization were involved in solving the protein problem, and was glad to learn that close interdivisional co-operation and, indeed, integration of programs, had already been established on matters related, for instance, to plant breeding techniques, food habits, product Development, food promotion and commercialization and use in the home.
255. In view of the foregoing the Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 8/67
Increasing the Production and Use of Edible Protein
THE CONFERENCE
Noting that the protein gap is continuously growing and that the world is in a period of daily increasing protein crisis;
Appreciating the work so far accomplished by the Organization in assisting and advising on the Development, production and promotion of protein food products;
Recognizing the leading role of FAO, in co-operation with WHO and UNICEF, in the search and Development of protein-rich foods, both from conventional and non-conventional sources of raw material and the results thus achieved;
Noting with appreciation the report of the UN Advisory Committee on Science and Technology;
Being aware of Resolution 1257 (XLIII) of the UN Economic and Social Council of 2 August 1967;
Requests the Director-General of FAO to:
(i) promote all efforts to fill the protein gap, by maximum use of both conventional (meat, milk, eggs, fish and fish products, grain legumes, cereals) and the exploitation of new sources of proteins (flours from deflated oil seeds, algae, yeast, etc. ) and by enrichment of foodstuffs,
(ii) similarly encourage all efforts to expand the industrial production and commercialization of protein foods directed to the child and the family and at prices acceptable to needy groups of the population,
(iii) seek to enlarge the WHO/FAO/UNICEF Protein Advisory Group along the lines of the abovementioned resolution,
(iv) involve all appropriate sectors of the Organization in this joint endeavor,
(v) seek ways and means to support this activity and particularly the work of the WHO/FAO/ UNICEF Protein Advisory Group,
(vi) seek appropriate means for financing the Development of protein food production and utilization.
(Adopted 22.11. 67)
c) Planning for better family living
256. The Conference agreed on the need at the same time to increase food production and to educate families in better utilization of available foods. Delegations, however, expressed diverse opinions about the need to limit population growth in all parts of the world. Agreement was reached on the general nature of a program to be undertaken by the Organization, directed essentially towards the countries already heavily populated and where the food supplies cannot keep pace with population increase. The Conference understood that the nature of the program would be educational and that any field activities would be undertaken only on governmental request. The establishment of a unit within the Organization on "Planning for Better Family Living", was accordingly approved.
257. The Conference noted that economic and social Development was impeded in some countries by rapid population growth and that in Asia and the Far East some Governments had accepted that population control was vital to long-term Development and had already started successful programs.
258. The Conference recognized the need to help families achieve, through appropriate policies and programs, conditions that would increase well-being and would contribute to national Development. It also recognized that home economics and agriculture through their established extension programs, specialized programs for women and youth, and applied nutrition programs provided excellent channels through which to reach the family. It agreed that the education and training activities which support national programs to improve the levels of family living through better utilization of resources and improved nutrition were within the competence of FAO. The Conference stressed the need, however, to collaborate with the United Nations and its Specialized Agencies and with non-governmental bodies whose governing bodies had adopted policies and programs in the field of population stabilization.
259. The Conference suggested that for Asia and the Far East the possibility be explored of forming a working party on home economics to study this problem and assist with developing programs.
260. The Conference recommended that the Director-General increasingly involve the Organization in a study of the food/population dilemma. It also recommended that, on governmental request, FAO be prepared to provide assistance in the organization of educational programs aiming at helping populations in their search for well-balanced family life.
4. Investment assistance
a) FAO/IBRD co-operative program
b) Co-operation with area banks
a) FAO/IBRD co-operative program
261. The Conference reviewed the progress made in FAO's co-operative activities with the World Bank and noted that since the inception of the Program, the total amount of IBRD loans and IDA credits for projects identified, prepared or appraised with FAO assistance has been of the order of $330 million, and the pipeline of projects which await consideration for financing is well over this figure. In all, the Program has been involved in more than 120 agricultural projects in the fields of credit, area Development, irrigated farming, land settlement, co-operatives, livestock, commercial tropical crops, fisheries, forestry, storage, seeds, communications and agricultural education. Nearly 70 of these projects were developed directly by the Program and in the others it played a participant role. The varied composition of projects reflects the part that the Program has played in bringing about a diversification of the Bank's interest in lending towards agricultural projects.
262. Increasingly close working relations have been established between Bank staff and FAO staff working on the Cooperative Program which have led to a better appreciation by the Program staff of the Bank's working methods and criteria for appraisal of projects, and, in turn, greater familiarity with FAO operations on the part of the Bank. While the Program's major area of responsibility is to identify and help prepare projects which might be considered by the World Bank Group for financing, the Program staff has increasingly participated in the bank's economic review, appraisal and end-use supervision missions which has enabled more systematic follow-through of projects.
263. An important aspect of the work has been to follow up, on a much larger scale than hitherto, FAO field activities, especially UNDP projects, with the purpose of helping orient them to investment opportunities. To this end, arrangements within the Program to carry on close and continuous review of UNDP projects in consultation with subject-matter divisions have been streamlined and a series of reviews of Special Fund projects of potential interest to the Bank and the Program has been initiated under FAO auspices with Bank and UNDP participation. The first review in this series, held in June 1967, examined about 40 projects and agreement was reached on the next steps to be taken by subject-matter divisions of FAO, the Program and the Bank to follow them through towards early investment.
264. The Conference recognized the usefulness of the document on project outlines and the provisional draft of a descriptive brochure, and noted that the information and statistics, including a list of approved projects, given in these documents and in the Review of FAO's Field Work (C 67/26) reflected the position of both FAO and the Bank in these matters. Some delegates requested that everything should be done to expedite submission of reports of missions and follow-up actions.
265. The Conference noted the growth of the Program during the last biennium, and indicated that there was still scope for expansion of operations, especially in certain regions and countries, and hoped that the efforts to extend adequate assistance to Member Governments in the identification and preparation of projects would be intensified in the next biennium. It recognized that further expansion of the Program and of its budgetary resources as well as of possible lending by the Bank Group for agriculture would depend on the continued success of operations as well as on the level of replenishment of the resources of the International Development Association, negotiations on which were in progress. If these were successful, and if the Bank agreed, the Conference recognized that some further expansion of FAO activity under the Program within the biennium was desirable, provided the necessary savings could be found.
266. The Conference was informed that the activities and effectiveness of the Program were being periodically reviewed and evaluated jointly by FAO and the World Bank, and that in the course of such evaluation the FAO view in favor of increasing financial support for agricultural Development was taken into consideration. The Conference recorded its interest in being kept adequately informed of the progress of operations under the Program, and recommended that the way in which such reporting could best be done might be considered by the Council.
b) Co-operation with area banks
267. The Conference took note of the discussions being held with the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), with a view to concluding more systematic arrangements than those in force under the agreement concluded in 1965, and tacitly renewed in 1967. It emphasized the desirability of seeking in these negotiations ways and means of making FAO cooperation more effective in respect of IDB's operations in the field of agriculture. It also took note of the discussions going on with the Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI), and hoped that these would lead to the satisfactory conclusion of an agreement setting forth the ways in which FAO might best help this institution.
268. While the Conference noted that provision had been made in the Program of Work and Budget for co-operative activities with the different area banks, doubt was expressed as to whether the allocation made for this purpose was adequate. In this connection, it was noted that the expansion of FAO's activities with the financing institutions would require not only supervision arrangements at Headquarters for each area bank program, but also co-ordination of the different programs as well as overall coordination with the FAO/IBRD Program. The Conference authorized the Director-General to take early steps to establish adequate arrangements for such supervision and co-ordination at Headquarters and requested him to make proposals for a more long-term solution for examination by the ad hoc Committee on Organization.
5. Creating increased awareness of world food problems
a) The "FAO review"
269. The Conference noted that in accordance with the decision of its Thirteenth Session, a first issue of a FAO magazine had been produced under the title of "FAO Review". This review would absorb and replace the Freedom from Hunger Magazine, but it was not the intention of the Director-General that it should absorb other FAO periodicals having a high proportion of technical content and which had acquired considerable specialized readership.
270. Anxious to see the FAO Review successful and produced in accordance with the wishes expressed at its Thirteenth Session, the Conference considered how provision could best be made to ensure that the guidance and advice of Member Governments would be available to the Editorial Board of the magazine. After giving the matter much attention and having considered and rejected the possibility of setting up an advisory working party, the Conference recommended that the FAO Council should keep the magazine under review to ensure that it conformed to the precepts of the Conference.
271. To this end the Conference also recommended, in view of the need for the Council to be informed of the reactions of Member Governments, that the Director-General should circulate to them a questionnaire after the publication of the fourth issue, and should report to the Council on the comments so obtained.
272. The Conference stressed the importance of fair distribution, in keeping with the demands of different language groups, and that the principal aim of the FAO Review should be to open up and maintain a frank dialogue among Member Nations in different phases of Development.
273. In view of the importance and impact of various information activities, especially for the developing countries, and considering on the other hand the substantial workload connected with the Development of the new FAO Review, the Conference recommended that caution and flexibility should be exercised in implementing the Organization's public information work program in 1968/69.
274. The Conference was given information supplementary to that in C 67/3 on new posts and the use to be made of the receipts from the sale of publications. It noted that the additional posts required for the distribution of the FAO Review were located in the Publications Division, although the authorship and editorial work on the periodical was located in the Public Information Division. It agreed that it was undesirable to undertake the various activities related to the distribution of publications in different parts of the Organization.
275. The Conference endorsed the recommendation of the Council that the cost of additional print runs and reproduction of advertisements could be covered up to an amount of $43,740 from the estimated income of $120,400 accruing during the biennium from the sale of advertising and of the magazine to the Publications Revolving Fund, and that the employment of personnel to be paid from the income of advertisements and sales would be subject to prior approval by the Council. This was an interim measure, and the Conference expected the FAO Review to be fully budgeted under the Regular Program when sufficient experience had been gained realistically to estimate income from advertising and sales.
276. The Conference agreed that, within the limitations of the approved budget and specified number of personnel, the Director-General was free to deploy the magazine's staff in such manner as he judged to be most appropriate for its efficient operation.
<section>e</section>
D. Salient points in regard to the organization's activities
1. Agriculture
2. Fisheries
3. Nutrition
4. Forestry
5. Economic and social affairs
6. Information and publications
1. Agriculture
a) Animal production and health
b) Land and water development
c) Plant production and protection
d) Atomic energy in food and agriculture
a) Animal production and health
277. Animal Production. The Conference felt that the Organization's activities to define suitable livestock breeds and strains in relation to existing environmental and marketing conditions should be intensified, emphasis being given to the evaluation, conservation and utilization of animal genetic resources, . in which connection the need for increased studies on wildlife management was stressed. The Conference considered that any improvement of breeds and strains should be conducted only in association with improved management, feeding and hygiene.
278. The role of sheep and goat husbandry in marginal areas should not be confined to milk production. The potential of these animals as efficient meat producers needed also to be considered, but caution should be exercised to develop goat husbandry only on suitable areas.
279. As one of the means of relieving animal protein shortages, Member Governments should recognize the possibilities offered by the introduction of efficient modern techniques of poultry and pig production. The Conference stressed the need for the Development of regional facilities for research and training in this field. It considered that, under certain circumstances where supplies of feedstuffs could be assured, poultry numbers could be significantly increased.
280. Dairying. The Conference felt that further action was necessary to make better use of surplus sheep and goat milk, much of which at present is wasted. It noted that the Organization had established a panel of experts to study the utilization of sheep and goat milk.
281. The Conference expressed the view that the Development of a dairy industry and the planning of future milk plants should depend to a great extent on the results of economic studies. The Conference stressed the need for pilot dairy schemes in countries intending to develop a dairy industry.
282. Expressing satisfaction at the close collaboration which had existed with UNICEF, WFP and various bilateral aid programs, the Conference recommended even closer collaboration with bilateral aid programs in the future, especially in connection with various dairy training programs in the regions.
283. Payment for quality milk was important as this was the best incentive to good husbandry. For successful dairy production, the farmer must be assured of regular collection and sale of his product. Where collection was over long distances or under bad transport conditions, consideration should be given to chilling facilities.
284. The Conference considered that the use of imported dried skim milk in developing countries should be so planned as to avoid impeding the Development of a national dairy industry. It agreed, however, that the use of this milk product could be initially advantageous in augmenting local milk supplies.
285. Animal Health. While expressing satisfaction at the progress made in the control of rinderpest, the Conference urged that constant vigilance be exercised in areas which were now free from the disease. It noted that there had been outbreaks of rinderpest in the past biennium in countries which had been free of it for several years. Considering the progress which had been made in rinderpest control, the Director-General should explore the possibilities of producing a document to record the achievements.
286. The Conference urged that attention be given in certain countries to contagious bovine and caprine pleuropneumonia. It hoped that investigations which were being pursued would result in the production of cheaper and more effective vaccines suitable for widespread application where this disease is enzootic. More work should also be devoted to the problem of bovine cysticercosis, especially in Africa. The Conference noted that FAO maintained close liaison with WHO in the investigation of this and other zones.
287. The Conference recommended that increased attention be given to tsetse fly control in Africa Satisfactory economic control would enable livestock farming to be practiced on vast areas which are at present unfavorable because of the fly and the associated risk of trypanosomiasis. The program of the Joint FAO/IAEA Division would be helpful in this connection.
288. The prevention of the entry and spread of exotic diseases is vitally important. There was clear need to rationalize and harmonize sanitary regulations relating to the international movement of animals and animal products. FAO should, in close co-operation with the International Office of Epizootics (OIE), stimulate international action as a means towards encouraging safe trading in livestock and livestock products.
289. The effectiveness of buffer zones as a means of controlling the spread of animal disease should be recognized, although the Conference felt that the cost of establishment and maintenance might be a limiting factor. It recommended that surveys by FAO to establish their value should be carried out with the least possible delay.
290. In view of the role of wildlife in the spread of diseases, the Organization should extend investigations into the significance of wild animals as reservoirs of human and animal pathogens, in conjunction with studies on the relationship of wildlife to domestic animal production. It should also make widely known how pure water supplies could obviate spreading disease.
291. Because early diagnosis was the key to the control and eradication of animal disease, the Conference felt that FAO should assist member countries to the fullest extent possible in establishing adequate diagnostic services.
292. The Conference recommended that the control of major diseases should be approached on a regional basis wherever practicable.
b) Land and water development
293. The Conference noted the very considerable field programs developed in this field. In view of the importance of field programs in this sector and of the reciprocal influence of activities under the Regular and field programs, the Conference at this stage of FAO's organization recommended that the Organization pursue its present successful policy in regard to them, entailing: (a) integration of the technical and economic disciplines, with emphasis on the main limiting factors as the central theme; (b) securing that pre-investment surveys followed the sequence of an inventory of natural resources, overall planning, identification and study of specific projects and feasibility studies leading to financing and Development; and (c) placing increased emphasis on pilot projects which are essential to reduce risks in the Development of large-scale areas. Such pilot projects, while constituting the first stage of productive investment, could also play a basic role in
demonstration and training.
294. The Conference urged taking into account the recommendations of the first session of the Regional Commission for Land and Water Use in the Near East when planning and carrying out the program of work of the Organization in that region. It recommended that the second session of this Regional Commission should be organized during the course of the coming biennium if finances permitted.
295. Soils and Fertilizers. The Conference gave recognition to the value of soil surveys which provided essential information for a variety of Development projects. It stressed that soil surveys and their interpretation go hand in hand. It recognized the importance of proper treatment of soils in order to develop their potential, and in this connection agreed that due attention should be paid to soil physics.
296. The Conference, while emphasizing the importance of fertilizers to improve agriculture in the developing countries, considered that full benefit would often not be obtained without improved cropping practices. The introduction of fertilizers was a first step in the improvement of agricultural production.
297. Water Resources and their Use. The Conference recommended that at the request of governments, FAO continue to participate actively in the overall Development of international river basins. It noted that present work was limited to a few rivers in Africa.
298. Water conservation should continue to be regarded as a part of watershed hydrology. The Conference stressed the importance of the collection and interpretation of precipitation data in terms of agricultural use; the combined study and exploitation of surface and underground waters; and underground storage of surplus surface water.
299. Increased attention should be given to the investigation and Development of groundwater resources because several governments intend to seek further assistance from the Organization, particularly for the Development of arid and semi-arid areas.
300. Although recognizing that desalination and weather modification, in their application to agricultural production, could not be considered significant at present, the Organization should keep abreast of the latest developments in these and allied fields through interdivisional co-operation and liaison with other appropriate agencies.
301. Work conducted should be related to the objectives of the International Hydrological Decade.
302. Noting FAO's many field projects in hydraulic engineering, the Conference stressed the need to shorten, whenever possible, the survey and design phases, without jeopardizing technical soundness, in order to expedite the preparation of feasibility and economic studies and productive investment. The Conference also stressed the importance of improving existing irrigation networks and other water usage systems such as watering points for livestock where appropriate, in cooperation with WHO and other agencies.
303. The Conference thought that more emphasis should be placed on efficient control and use of water on the land, including conservation of rainfall, and pointed out that many schemes fell short of expectations because of inadequate land preparation, poor irrigation practices, lack of drainage and inability to apply inputs from lack of water. The disseminating of information on small-scale irrigation systems was also highly important. There was a need for greater economy in the use of water through advanced irrigation methods.
304. The Conference emphasized the need for efficient organizational arrangements and satisfactory water legislation, as these were critical factors in Development. A revised booklet on legislation should be issued in due course.
305. Land Use and Farm Management. The Conference stressed that the application of sound farm management principles was a crucial factor in raising farm productivity. It recommended that FAO should help to establish the most economic size of production units, bearing in mind management, technical, institutional and economic aspects. A continuing service required in the Organization in determining the obstacles to improved production, was the provision of a link between all the operating sectors concerned.
306. The Conference stressed the need for an integrated approach in watershed management and soil conservation problems arising from UNDP programs. It felt that the possibility of using marginal land on a sustained basis should, in co-operation with other sectors of the Organization, be assessed through appropriate technical and economic analysis at the local level.
307. Farm Power and Machinery. The Conference considered the introduction of powered machinery important wherever circumstances permitted. It felt that the Organization's program should continue to include hand tools and animal drawn equipment which for a long time would be of the utmost importance in many countries and everything possible should be done to develop them to the highest standard of efficiency. The Conference would welcome preparation of an appropriate handbook.
308. The Conference urged the Organization to assist governments in the establishment of training centers and mechanization schemes especially for developing countries and appropriate to both large and small holdings. In this connection the relative merits of local contractors' schemes should be taken into account. The Conference suggested that ways and means might be sought through the FAO/Industry Program to secure modification of machinery to suit local conditions.
309. Agricultural Industries and Services. The Conference stressed the importance of continued assistance to developing countries in processing of agricultural raw materials as an essential means of stimulating production, meeting consumer needs, preventing losses through spoilage, increasing export earnings and providing employment in areas of production. Such assistance should be properly integrated through close co-operation between units within the Organization and with other UN Specialized Agencies such as UNIDO having allied spheres of responsibility.
310. Longer-Term Developments. The Conference considered that increased emphasis should be laid in future on the following:
- Interpretation and correlation of soil and water resources surveys, in order to provide governments with background information for an increased tempo of Development;
- Soil physics; soil microbiology, soil organic matter and the use of organic waste; saline and alkaline soils; and soil conservation;
- Applied irrigation research; irrigation techniques, including irrigation by sprinkling, drainage, water logging control and the reclamation of peat soils; water conservation and watershed hydrology; and water administration and legislation;
- Integrated approach to land use through package programs; reclamation and improvement of marginal land; transformation of small traditional farms into market-oriented units; management of large-scale estates in developing countries; improved soil conservation and engineering practices;
- Development of rural electrification; agricultural processing industries; and the assessment and prevention of grain and pulses losses through engineering means between harvest and consumption.
c) Plant production and protection
311. Plant Production. The Conference stressed the importance of plant exploration, utilization and conservation work, and felt that this should be one of the major lines of activity of the Organization. The adequacy of the budgetary provision for 1968/69 was discussed and the Conference suggested that the Director-General consider making adjustments to allow an additional $25,000 to be made available in 1968/69 for this work, either within the total FAO budget or from other sources that may become available.
312. The feasibility of establishing regional seed multiplication and distribution centers serving countries with similar ecological conditions should be studied. The Conference considered that national seed improvement and production programs should also receive more support. The preparation of recommended lists of varieties of the main crops would be useful.
313. The Conference felt that more action should be taken by the Organization to ensure a free exchange of information on the evaluation and performance of new varieties and strains under different environmental conditions, and to organize adequate seed exchange programs within the existing seed exchange services.
314. The Conference urged that long-range training of local plant breeders should be continued. The supply of high quality seed of improved and adapted varieties should be given priority, including the making available of seed developed in successful breeding programs under similar ecological conditions, after the varieties had been successfully tested in the regions to which they were to be introduced. FAO should actively co-operate on agro-climatological work undertaken by WMO and Unesco.
315. More attention, the Conference felt, should be focussed on the breeding of maize, millet and sorghum varieties adapted to prevailing climatic conditions and responding best to economic fertilizer application. Adequate seed production and distribution programs of these crops should be developed. Attention should also continue to testing and comparing rice varieties whose good characteristics have been recognized by the International Rice Research Institute.
316. The Conference felt that greater stress should be placed in the 1968/69 program on wheat production in tropical countries and on raising the nutritive value of the main staple crops by selection and breeding.
317. The Conference also considered that fruit and vegetables coming from tropical and subtropical regions were of particular importance. It recommended that special attention be paid by the Organization to these crops and to vegetable production in general. The Organization should also expand work on bananas, plantains and dates, in view of their economic importance to many developing countries. Closer attention might also well be paid, through meetings and documents, to the results of work on hydroponic culture, recognizing the need for caution about this technique.
318. The Conference agreed that the Inter-Regional Olive Production Improvement Program in the Mediterranean Basin and the Near East should be continued. Work on olives might be extended to cover also certain Latin American countries.
319. The Conference, noting that the ICO/IBRD/FAO Coffee Study would be available towards the end of 1968, emphasized the importance of the work of the interdivisional group studying diversification possibilities in monocrop areas.
320. It considered that the 1968/69 program might well be adjusted to place increased emphasis on coconuts, oil palm and oilseeds in general, and sugar beet.
321. The Conference felt that a co-ordinated approach towards the integration of fodder production into certain systems of intensive cultivation in the tropics needed more emphasis in the Organization's program. The increased attention being given to the problems of nomadic grazers and to range improvement was welcomed. In this connection fire control and judicious stock watering policy needed study. Fodder conservation as hay or silage was of paramount importance in evening out fluctuations in food availability for animals and in maintaining production. It deserved continuing attention.
322. Plant Protection Considering the risk of disseminating pests and pathogens through the exchange of plant materials, the Conference fully endorsed the establishment of plant quarantine and post quarantine stations in strategic areas and recommended that the Organization provide adequate assistance for this purpose. It further recommended that plant quarantine training courses be organized.
323. Work on olive-tree pests and on the sun pest should continue as in the past. The Conference emphasized the importance of placing work on locust control on a permanent basis within the Organization. It recommended that as much as possible of this work should become a responsibility of the Regular Program.
324. The Conference felt that losses in plant production caused by nematodes, grain-eating birds and weeds should receive more attention, and that special training courses in nematode control should be arranged. Control of waterweeds, particularly water hyacinth, needed stronger action by FAO
325. The Conference felt that far greater consideration should be given to the dangers risked by farmers in handling pesticides and to the need to concentrate on the Development and use of chemicals of low toxicity. The panels of experts which deal with this important field should continue. Their work should be co-ordinated with that of other agencies concerned such as European Plant Protection Organization and a report to Member Governments be submitted as early as possible.
326. Longer-Term Developments. The Conference felt that the Organization should pay particular attention to integrated pest control, grassland Development, the Development of modern techniques for high value crops, agro-ecology, and the exploration of new plant resources.
327. In view of the great importance of increased animal production, the Conference recommended that work on pasture and fodder crops also be strengthened. It urged that the work of the panel on tropical grasslands should receive proper follow-up by means of seminars, international meetings and other operations.
328. The Conference considered work should be continued on fruit and vegetables whose importance to both rural and urban populations has already been stressed. It requested the Director-General to give consideration to setting up a Regional Commission for Horticultural Production in Africa. It recommended that a specialist on fruit and vegetable production should be included in the 1970/71 budget.
d) Atomic energy in food and agriculture
329. The Conference agreed that the joint FAO/IAEA activities had proven to be more successful than had at first been thought possible. The Conference expressed satisfaction with the emphasis that had been placed on problems of practical importance to developing countries and at the cooperation established with all sectors of FAO and national and international institutes. The Conference expressed particular satisfaction with the co-ordinated research programs which had been organized for the application of isotopes and radiation in studies of crop nutrition, irrigation, entomology, plant breeding, animal health and production and food preservation.
330. The Conference noted that the application of isotopes and irradiation while having certain limitations, is a tool that deserves continuing attention. There is a need to consider all known techniques whether they be nuclear or otherwise before determining a course to follow in solving problems.
331. The Conference noted the research that had contributed to the efficiency of fertilizer use in rice and maize and recommended that this type of work be extended to other crops and other geographical areas.
332. It observed that the use of the neutron moisture meter had already led to the Development of more efficient water use and recommended a continuation of work in this field.
333. The Conference stressed the great potential of the "sterile-male" technique as a method of insect control and recommended that research to apply this technique to other insects harmful to plants, animals and man, be encouraged. It should be integrated with other methods of control, and a prime requirement was sound ecological and biological studies.
334. The Conference drew attention to the importance of accurate assessment of pest damage and in this context advocated the use of radioactive labeling for measuring population density and movement.
335. Noting the attention drawn elsewhere in this report to the grave problems presented in Africa by the tsetse fly, the Conference expressed the hope that work could be expanded related to this insect.
336. The Conference noted the usefulness of induced mutation as a practical plant breeding technique for specific purposes, and recommended that this method be used particularly for the improvement of agronomic characters governed by single genes as a means of improving otherwise well adapted genotypes, and to break up close linkage, produce translocations for gene transfer, etc. It further recommended that work should be undertaken on the use of induced mutations in leguminous species because of their high protein content and value as food crops.
337. The Conference acknowledged the importance of the application of radiation in the production of vaccines against parasitic diseases in animals, but urged that continuous care be exercised to ensure the safety of the vaccines.
338. The Conference noted the progress being made in the application of atomic energy to food preservation and acknowledged the potential of this method of preservation. It urged that attention should continue to be given to wholesomeness and safety aspects; that appropriate legislation for irradiated foods should be encouraged; and information provided to Member Governments.
339. Longer-Term Developments. The Conference felt that over the long term the services to Member Governments in addition to the present area of activities should be expanded to cover intensification of the present projects and initiation of new projects involving the sterile-male technique; assisting Member Governments in drafting legislation on irradiated food; starting new projects involving induced mutations for protein quality and other agronomic characters; inclusion of other macronutrients and the micronutrients in the program involving isotopically labelled fertilizers; projects on trace element metabolism of animals; and assistance with isotope and radiation studies in fisheries, pastures and forestry.
2. Fisheries
a) Training in the field of fisheries
b) Regional consultative requirements
c) International action
d) Fishery resources and exploitation
e) Fishery economics and products
f) Longer-term developments
340. The Conference noted that the 1968/69 budget allocations did not provide for the rate of Development over three successive biennia visualized for the Department at the time of its Thirteenth Session. It recognized that the allocations by the Director-General were probably as realistic as they could be within the budget ceiling approved for the Organization as a whole, even though they would entail a loss of momentum and inadequate coverage of some areas of work. It accepted that among the effects of the slowing of momentum would be the absence of competence in certain important technological fields, such as marine engineering, which were envisaged in the original scheme and were needed for the balanced Development of the program, and that a number of posts could be filled only in 1969, thus delaying the implementation of urgent projects.
341. The Conference felt that there was some danger of overlap between the work of the Committee on Fisheries established under Article V of the Constitution and the Technical Committee of the Conference in the area that concerns the program of work of the Department of Fisheries. The Conference recognized the important function of the Article V Committee in proffering advice on the formulation of the program of work at an early stage of its Development, at its session in the inter-conference year. The detailed technical review of the program when formulated was the proper function of the Technical Committee itself. The problem could perhaps be resolved by the Article V Committee placing much greater emphasis on its program function in inter-Conference session years than in Conference years, but the Conference felt that it was not yet possible to come to firm conclusions so early in the life of the Article V Committee.
a) Training in the field of fisheries
342. The Conference again stressed the importance of training in all its aspects and at all levels, and pressed for faster action on the follow-up of recent surveys, and on the Development of training schemes supported by UNDP and other sources of funds. The importance of training instructors and supervisory staff was particularly emphasized, and the Conference urged that such training should be undertaken in developing countries and where possible on a regional basis. The Conference recognized that there were training elements in many different disciplines of Fisheries, but considered that all the work should have the same orientation and use a single methodology for ascertaining manpower training requirements.
b) Regional consultative requirements
343. The Conference noted a suggestion that consideration be given to the establishment of international consultative and coordinating arrangements for the investigation of marine resources in the Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico areas. While recognizing that the Organization should take the lead in fishery Development and research programs in these areas, FAO should co-operate with but not seek to supplant the related activities of other organizations. Arrangements for the Gulf area should, it was considered, emerge perhaps as a sub-committee, from the Indian Ocean Fishery Commission, since some resources in the area may already be in need of management based on international agreement.
c) International action
344. The Conference was aware that the Organization's support for its regional fishery bodies had been weak. It seemed still not strong enough. The Conference, therefore, called for more vigorous technical and organizational support of the regional fishery bodies. The Conference also urged that a balance be maintained between worldwide and regional treatment of matters which were the subject of technical conferences. Use of external sources of funds should increasingly be sought to facilitate the attendance of representatives of developing countries at meetings.
345. Noting the time scale involved in developing international action, the Conference was of the opinion that a long view on programming was necessary. Examples of the long period of time for concept, analysis, agreement and execution were cited for Atlantic tuna, hake and Indian Ocean tuna. During these periods the fishery situations for the regions and stocks concerned had worsened: lack of adequate secretariat resources contributed to these delays.
d) Fishery resources and exploitation
346. The Conference laid particular emphasis on the urgency of carrying out much more research on marine and inland water pollution; not only by gross pollutants such as oil but also by apparently more subtle agents. This would involve national and international action through international bodies, and the Conference welcomed the increasing activity of the European Inland Fishery Advisory Commission (EIFAC) in this matter.
347. The Conference emphasized the need for intensification of work on inland fisheries and fish culture; also on fishing vessels, methods and operations. It recognized the importance of the exploration of new marine and inland fishery resources, including stock assessment. Expansion of work in all these fields was needed, especially to support production and Development work under the UNDP and other field programs. The intention to convene or support conferences on marine pollution, food chains in the sea, and the mechanization of small craft, was endorsed.
348. The Conference gave recognition to the valuable services to fishery science and technology being rendered by the Advisory Committee for Marine Resources Research (ACMRR), and expressed the wish that the Advisory Committee itself should meet annually, as well as maintain its working parties. It suggested that, subject to availability of funds, a similar body be constituted to provide advice on the Development of inland fishery resources and fish culture. The provision was also urged of consultative machinery to cover multi-national inland waters.
349. The Conference also noted that the Inter-governmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC), under Unesco had recently decided to invite the co-operation of the Organization in support of certain meetings to be held during 1968/69; specifically meetings dealing with the marine resources of the Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico and of the Kuroshio Current area. The Conference recognized that these activities could not be provided for in the Organization's own program unless extrabudgetary funds became available and recommended that all possible collaboration be extended within the means available. Such collaboration with other activities of the IOC, and of other organizations concerned with marine science and technology should be carefully selective; the Organization must discharge its proper responsibilities but avoid undue diversion of limited resources to matters of lesser priority from a fisheries point of view.
350. The Conference endorsed the co-operation envisaged with the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES) in appraising the status of the resources off Northwest Africa. Other activities suggested for FAO support included exploration of bathy-benthic resources, in relation to the needs for exploiting species not at present utilized, as well as the promotion of research on the toxicity of fish.
351. The planned continuation of collaboration with ILO on matters of vocational training, and with ILO and the Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization (IMCO) on safety of fishing operations was noted with satisfaction.
e) Fishery economics and products
352. The Conference urged the Organization to undertake studies on investment criteria, not only with a view to facilitating foreign investment in developing countries but also to mobilizing the Development finance available within those countries themselves. The Conference considered that this should be a feature of the International Conference on Investment in Fisheries scheduled for 1969. The role of FAO vis a vis the IBRD and the area Development banks should also be studied in this context.
353. The Conference placed emphasis on processing, distribution and marketing, defects which were in many parts of the world limiting production. Fish, for instance, in many parts of Africa was not being distributed very far from the landing points on the sea or lake shores. The Conference recommended that, subject to the availability of funds, a symposium on these topics be organized in the African region in the 1968/69 biennium. More economic utilization was also stressed.
354. The Conference noted that many Member Governments needed assistance in drafting fishery legislation and in developing legislation codes. It therefore urged more collaborative work in this field with the Organization's Legislation Branch.
f) Longer-term developments
355. The Conference considered that a balance should be maintained between work on developing the exploitation of under-utilized stocks of fish, and arranging for the provision of the scientific and technical bases for the rational management of intensively exploited stocks. In this connection the Conference urged the Organization to keep in touch with ocean-use planning and investigation, and with the activities of other organizations working in related fields, especially those arising in reference to the UN General Assembly Resolution 2172; for instance the Inter-Governmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) under Unesco, and the World Weather Watch of WMO. The Organization should also develop its interest in international arrangements being made for the provision of marine environmental data.
356. The Conference agreed that over the long term more attention should be given to the utilization and even cultivation of fish resources in brackish and coastal marine waters. It also approved providing stronger regional research and training facilities, including training fishermen's instructors.
357. The Conference called for economic studies in the field of fisheries on costs, earnings and price factors; on the economics of catching, processing and marketing, especially as these apply in developing countries; and on the means used by governments to increase the rewards of fishing to their nationals, including restraints of foreign landings and subsidies. Work should continue also on fish and fish products inspection and quality control, products Development and fish products utilization technology.
358. The Conference noted the Director-General's proposal to replace the publication World Fisheries Abstracts by a review journal covering recent advances in the same subject fields, and asked the Council to review the matter through its Committee on Fisheries, putting up a detailed proposition to the Conference's next Session.
3. Nutrition
a) Education and training
b) Food technology
c) Home economics
d) Food consumption and planning
e) Group feeding
f) Changing emphasis in the work on nutrition
a) Education and training
359. The Conference strongly supported educational and training activities at all levels in nutrition, home economics and food technology and in particular drew attention to the need for such activities in the Near East and Africa. It recognized the need to develop more educational material, as well as the importance of using mass media in popular education. The Conference recommended that a proper place be given to nutritional considerations in the training of food technologists
360. The Conference welcomed a greater concentration of resources on the Development of permanent training centers instead of short meetings and seminars. There was a general feeling that greater emphasis should be given to instruction in French.
b) Food technology
361. The Conference endorsed the intensification of work on food technology, particularly that directed towards the Development of food industries through which indigenous food production can be more efficiently used and wastage avoided. This should be achieved by the Development of both capital-intensive industries and small industries. Such industries can be financed by the private sector, the State sector in whole or in part, or by co-operatives. The Conference considered that FAO could play a most useful role in assisting member countries in food industry Development, owing to its expert knowledge of food and nutrition and the related technologies in co-operation with other specialized agencies, in particular UNIDO.
c) Home economics
362. The Conference noted with satisfaction the expansion of home economics activities described in the 1968/69 Program of Work in all fields, particularly in those concerning the role of women in economic and social Development. It also noted the efforts being made to en rural youth in home economics and applied nutrition activities.
363. The Conference appreciated that other agencies in the UN family were closely involved in the Development of programs designed for women and considered that FAO should have the leading part in co-ordinating the Development of home economics programs in general and extension programs in particular. The ad hoc meetings being held between FAO, ILO, Unesco, WHO, and the UN Social Development Division to consider the respective roles of each agency in programs designed for women were noted with approval.
364. The Conference decided that the matter of a FAO working party in home economics for the African region should be referred to the next FAO Regional Conference for Africa.
d) Food consumption and planning
365. The Conference emphasized the need for statistically sound national food consumption surveys designed to provide bases for action programs to improve standards of living Such surveys should be combined when possible with the collection of information on related socio-economic factors and public health data, and might be supported by the UNDP. Regarding FAO's preparation of food composition tables, the Conference was in agreement that (a) priority should be given to the preparation of regional tables rather than a revision of international tables, and that (b) amino acid tables should be prepared separately from other nutrients.
<section>f</section>
e) Group feeding
366. The Conference approved the Organization's activities in the field of group feeding and feeding of workers in industry and agriculture, and welcomed the fact that many such projects were now supported by the UNDP or the World Food Program. In view of the need in many countries to increase agricultural productivity by increasing the working capacity of agricultural workers, the Conference especially commended feeding programs for agricultural labor. As it had done at previous sessions, the Conference stressed the food and nutritional problems related to rapid urbanization and approved the studies now being undertaken by the Organization.
f) Changing emphasis in the work on nutrition
367. The Conference recommended that the major emphasis in future programs should be in the following fields:
(a) The Development of food industries with special emphasis on the provision of protein foods for human use from conventional and unconventional sources.!/ This would include work related to quality control, food standards and food additives and also the prevention of food losses.
(b) Programs to further the role of women in general in social and economic Development through home economics activities, with special emphasis on making training available for women of developing countries.
(c) Studies of food consumption and food habits to provide bases for sound food production planning and the implementation of such planning through applied nutrition and home economics extension programs.
(d) Assistance to Governments in implementing the proposals made in the paper on "Nutrition in Agriculture" (C 67/13) and training personnel in nutrition, food technology and home economics.
(e) Studies of food problems related to urbanization and industrialization and assistance to governments in developing such programs in urban and pert-urban areas.
(f) Assistance to Governments and industries in programs to improve the feeding of industrial and agricultural workers.
(g) The preparation of handbooks, manuals and other documents; the preparation of aids to mass education in food and nutrition, including audio-visual and other approaches; and the Development of means whereby they can best be made available to developing counties.
368. In view of the importance and complexity of these subjects, the Conference urged the Director-General in formulating future programs of work to ensure a careful deployment of skills and resources to these tasks.
4. Forestry
a) Regional forestry commission
b) Administrative and institutional problems
c) Forest resources
d) Forest management
e) Forest industries
f) Wildlife management
g) Seventh world forestry congress
h) Longer-term developments
a) Regional forestry commission
369. The Conference commended to the attention of Member Governments and the Director-General the recommendations made by Regional Forestry Commissions and by the new FAO Committee on Forest Development in the Tropics at their sessions held in 1966/67.
370. The Conference felt that it was desirable for Regional Forestry Commissions to meet every two years if they were properly to discharge their functions, at times that would make it possible for their recommendations to be taken into account in the formulation of the Organization's next biennial Program of Work. However, the Director-General must be left with flexibility in regard to the timing of sessions.
b) Administrative and institutional problems
371. The Conference recommended that FAO continue working towards a systematically phased Development of forestry education institutions throughout the world, including schools for advanced studies. It noted that the studies already undertaken in this direction for Africa and the Southwest Pacific were to be extended to the Far East and Latin America. The Conference endorsed the recommendation of the FAO Advisory Committee on Forestry Education that FAO stimulate university to university relationships as a means of contributing to the Development of new forestry faculties and schools, particularly in developing countries. The Conference hoped that the Director-General would find means outside the regular program budget to help these countries to obtain the forestry literature and textbooks which they badly needed, especially for use at technical level schools. It approved the Development of methodologies to assist member countries in planning forestry education at all
levels, and suited to each country's economic, social and political environment.
372. The Conference emphasized the need for the Organization to continue studies on the effect of changing technical, economic and social conditions on forestry administrative structures, not confined to broad principles only but concerned also with problems of individual countries.
c) Forest resources
373. The Conference acknowledged the value of FAO's statistical and economics publications, in particular the study "Wood - World Trends and Prospects." It recommended that the Organization pay special attention to assisting member countries to improve national statistics so that the usefulness of economic analyses could be enhanced. Increased attention should also be given to cost analyses of forest production and harvesting.
374. Considering the basic importance of forest resources inventory work for planning of forest land-use and forest industries Development, the Conference welcomed the Organization's work toward the gradual standardization of methods, classification and presentation of results. It recommended that particular attention be paid to tropical forests where specialized techniques are required; training of personnel for the work involved should be promoted.
375. The Conference stressed the importance of forest products trade Development, drawing particular attention to the need for up-to-date forest products market intelligence and for regular dissemination to member countries of information on prices, transport costs and trade flows of forest products.
d) Forest management
376. Land in many countries is being subjected to a variety of increasing pressures; to Conference recommended, therefore, that the Organization and Member Government ensure that forestry is duly considered in land-use planning and in the formulation and implementation of land-use Development projects, particularly those assisted by UNDP funds. It emphasized the desirability of adopting the watershed as the unit for rational land-use Development, to the extent possible.
377. The Conference recommended that the Organization encourage in member countries a more dynamic approach to forest management, especially in those countries where the average size of enterprises is small. New techniques, shifts in demand for forest products and rising costs made this necessary. The Conference recommended that new techniques applicable to decision-making be studied. Improved efficiency and reduced costs may in some instances result, for example, from grouping enterprises and shortening rotations. The Conference noted with approval that a training center on management statistics, operational analyses and related subjects was proposed for 1969.
378. The Conference laid importance on the potentialities of using fertilizers in forestry as an afforestation and yield promotion technique. It urged the Director-General to promote research and active programs in this field, bearing in mind that food production had the priority claim on fertilizers.
379. The Conference appreciated that farm forestry was important in many member countries. It noted that many activities of the Organization, for instance, in regard to land use planning, structural improvement of forest holdings, forest products marketing, public relations, mechanization, establishment of shelterbelts and wood lots, contributed towards solving some of the problems of small-scale forestry. The Conference requested the Director-General to pay more specific attention to farm forestry in his programs, within the available resources, and promote farm forestry in developing countries.
380. The Conference considered that the store of knowledge on logging and transport already accumulated within FAO should be disseminated more widely, in particular the information contained in the documents of the FAO/ECE/ILO Committee on Forest Working Techniques and Training of Forest Workers.
381. The Conference recommended that the Organization investigate, in collaboration with IUFRO, the possibilities of setting up research institutes, either on a regional or subregional basis, for the systematic testing of logging methods and equipment adapted to the needs of developing countries.
e) Forest industries
382. The Conference, endorsing the principle of the integrated approach to forest and forest industry Development, reaffirmed that the main responsibility at international level for work on forest industries in developing countries rested with FAO. It noted with satisfaction the already existing close collaboration between FAO and the Regional UN Economic Commissions in this context and recommended that similar close collaboration be established with other agencies concerned, particularly with UNIDO.
383. The Conference noted the establishment of the FAO Committee on Wood-Based Panel Products complementing the Organization's Advisory Committee on Pulp and Paper and requested the Director-General to explore the possibility of holding the next session of this Committee in a developing region.
384. The Conference concurred with the Organization's program in the use of wood in building and construction, recognizing the role which wood can play in the Development of low-cost housing and the direct impact that the latter can have on raising living standards.
f) Wildlife management
385. The Conference approved the establishment of a new unit to promote activities related to wildlife management, national parks and recreation, recognizing that the management of wildlife habitats is an integral part of forest land management and intimately connected with problems of rural Development planning, particularly in areas where wildlife utilization constitutes a main source of animal protein.
g) Seventh world forestry congress
386. The Conference recorded its deep gratitude to the Government of Spain for acting as host to the Sixth World Forestry Congress in 1966. It considered that World Forestry Congresses had played an important role in furthering the Development of forestry on a world-wide scale. It foresaw an even greater role for such congresses in the future.
387. The Conference considered that it would be desirable to hold the next Congress in 1972. It endorsed the recommendation of the Sixth World Forestry Congress that the Director-General of FAO make an enquiry of all governments, members of the UN, FAO or other specialized agencies, as to whether they would be prepared to host the next Congress. In the light of the replies received, the FAO Council should make the choice of host country for the Seventh Congress. An early decision was desirable.
388. The Conference hoped that the Director-General would follow up his original enquiry and seek the further views of Member Governments about the conduct and content of the next Congress. The Conference felt that it was not appropriate to define now the precise role that FAO should play in this Congress. It acknowledged the responsibilities that lay with FAO for ensuring that the views of governments were taken into account, but felt that the future host country should have flexibility in deciding on the arrangements and organization of the Congress and the extent to which it needed to call upon the expertise of FAO.
h) Longer-term developments
389. The Conference recognized that the scope of forestry continued to become more complex and that forestry problems were accentuated by contradictory trends and inconsistencies. It recommended that future programs should stress the lines of work listed below which are elaborated in the Annex to document C 67/FO/9:
- An expanded worldwide program for the Development of tropical forests;
- Forestry education and training;
- Forest fire prevention and control;
- Arid-zone forestry;
- Wildlife management, recreation and national parks;
- Land-use planning;
- Linking fundamental research to practice in the field;
- Tree seed services and germ plasm centers;
- Forest industry survey missions and Development planning services;
- Institutional and management problems;
- Economic and marketing problems;
- Watershed management and forest influences.
5. Economic and social affairs
a) Special commodity studies
b) Joint divisions
c) Commodities
d) Economic analysis
e) Rural institutions and services
f) Statistics
a) Special commodity studies
390. The Conference was informed that a joint ICO/IBRD/FAO Coffee Study had occupied much time in the 1966-67 biennium. The two major aspects of the study, undertaken at the request of ICO, were the analysis of demand and analysis of supply conditions with special reference to the problems and possibilities of diversification of agricultural production in coffee-exporting countries. Preparations had also started on a paper based on some of the lessons drawn from the study for the Second Session of UNCTAD.
391. The Conference appreciated the importance of the joint Coffee Study and other studies concerning international commodity agreements and arrangements. Some delegations asked that the Organization undertake a study on cotton in the near future if circumstances permitted. In the view of the Conference, the program of special studies should be kept as flexible as possible.
b) Joint divisions
392. The Conference expressed the wish that it be provided at future sessions with a more comprehensive report on the activities of the Joint UN Economic Commission/FAO Agriculture Divisions. It also felt that the work of these joint divisions should be discussed at FAO Regional Conferences.
c) Commodities
393. Processed agricultural commodities. The Conference expressed support for the Organization's proposed program on processed agricultural commodities. There was some concern about the possibility of duplication of work on processing. The Conference was assured, however, that there would be a co-ordinated approach with other UN agencies as well as within the two sectors concerned, commodities and economic analysis.
394. The Conference requested the Organization to collaborate fully in the intergovernmental work on stabilization of rubber markets. Some delegations felt that FAO's work should be concentrated on commodities for which international agreements, or the removal of impediments to trade liberalization, could be envisaged.
395. The Conference considered that the Organization should continue to rely as far as possible on the independent commodity councils and study groups for basic information on commodities covered by them. At the same time, the Conference recognized that the Organization was required to undertake analysis on all commodities and had to be in a position to make its own informed judgment.
396. The Conference considered that the emphasis in the Organization's future work should lie on processed products, and on means of diversifying economies through the establishment of secondary or tertiary processing industries, rather than on the traditional raw materials. Some delegations also suggested study of the variations in comparative prices of raw materials and manufactured products as this was a major factor governing the terms of trade of developing countries. Others proposed that attention be given to the methods of determining desirable levels of national buffer stocks of commercial (non-food) crops.
397. The Conference endorsed the proposed program of work on synthetics. Competition from synthetics is increasingly affecting the agricultural sector, and continuing review and study of its impact constituted an essential element in the analysis of trends and outlook for agricultural commodities.
398. Future Commodity Work. The Conference considered that the Organization's principal function would continue to lie in providing analyses of the economic issues underlying commodity problems including those of processed products and in critical examinations of the alternative commodity policy choices. To maintain its competence and authority in commodity analysis, the Organization's basic studies should be maintained and further developed.
399. The Conference recognized that IWP work would fully occupy the sectors concerned during 1968/69, but considered that it should be possible in 1970 to undertake another trend-oriented commodity projections study reaching forward to 1980 and perhaps 1990. This would be in line with the request of the Committee on Commodity Problems for the periodic revision and updating of projections. The Conference appreciated that the substantive and administrative servicing of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies would remain a major function of the Organization.
400. The Conference considered that the Organization's staff specialized in commodity work would be increasingly absorbed in "back-stopping" functions which were already important in relation to the commodity work of UNCTAD, GATT, and autonomous councils. While at present this had to be met by adjusting the current program and re-assigning priorities, the Conference recognized that in the longer term it would necessarily encroach on the basic research activities of the Organization unless larger resources were made available, either additional or by adjustments in the programs in other parts of the Organization.
d) Economic analysis
401. The Conference considered that the 1967 issue of the State of Food and Agriculture had again proved useful, especially to developing countries. It suggested that, in order to make the data contained in it available more rapidly, a summary should be stencilled and distributed at least two months before the publication of the document itself.
402. The Conference endorsed the emphasis being given to increased agricultural inputs and gave specific support to carrying out a detailed study of problems in the marketing of fertilizers to small farmers in the developing countries and of the distributive factors effecting their use of fertilizer, and to the publication of a practical guide on fertilizer marketing.
403. The Conference endorsed the increased emphasis to be given to the economics of agricultural processing in respect to the role of these industries in agricultural and general economic Development and in respect to the marketing and planning aspects of the industry at the enterprise level. Possibilities of duplication within the Organization are already touched on in paragraph 396. The Conference was informed that the work would be effected through collaboration between several departments and divisions of the Organization. Certain projects in this field would serve a useful social purpose since they could provide protein which would otherwise because of price aspects not be easily available to those social and age groups most badly in need of it.
404. The Conference noted that another area of work to receive added attention was project formulation and appraisal, where the FAO/IBRD Co-operative Program would be collaborating. As the number of FAO Special Fund projects increased, there would need to be a considerable expansion of the Organization's continuing economic appraisal work intended to lead to greater investment in irrigation, livestock, food production resources, and other intensive agricultural programs. It was most important to participate in projects at an early stage in order to help ensure the most useful and efficient formulation of the projects, taking economic considerations into account and making possible an effective contribution to appraisal at a later stage. The Conference noted that a mimeographed text on project formulation and appraisal would soon be ready for use.
405. The Organization's training activities would be strengthened in 1968/69 by organizing intensive national courses. The inadequacy of training impeded progress not only in agriculture but in the vital related processing industries. The provision of experts and effective training in this field was essential for the formulation and appraisal of projects, especially those capable of attracting external finance.
406. The Conference requested that the implementation of the recommendation of its Thirteenth Session to the effect that the international course in agricultural planning should be placed on an annual basis. It noted that this might be possible if courses were made monolingual. The recently concluded agreement between FAO and the African Development Bank, if ratified, and similar arrangements with other regional banks, also might provide a supplementary source of funds for training courses.
407. The Conference noted that the agricultural marketing program would continue to place the main emphasis on advisory work and training and would also lead to the establishment of the two marketing commissions endorsed by its Thirteenth Session. The Conference emphasized the need for an intensification and expansion of the program on marketing organization and enterprises adapted to conditions in the developing countries.
408. Longer-Term Developments. The Conference considered that much more emphasis would have to be placed on the agricultural input sector and on agricultural planning; that the economic and planning aspects of agricultural Development projects should continue to expand; and that the Organization's responsibilities as regards project formulation and appraisal would almost certainly grow with the demand for investment in agricultural Development. Marketing and training should make an increasingly important contribution to the expansion and improvement of agricultural production.
409. The Conference urged the Organization to carry out studies on prices of agricultural machinery particularly tractors, associated and ancillary equipment, including spare parts, with a view to making arrangements with industry to stabilize and reduce their prices in the interests of agricultural production.
410. The Conference suggested that the necessary expansion of training could best be handled by the establishment of a permanent center for courses in planning, economics, statistics and marketing This institute could be financed either by FAO, or by FAO jointly with participating countries.
411. Some delegates felt that there was room for improvement in the presentation and interdivisional co-ordination of the various price statistics series issued by the Organization, and in the estimates of food production and consumption which were now presented only on a national average basis. There was need for fuller information on the effect of price policies on production and demand, in particular on the diet of the lower-income groups in developing countries. Several delegates emphasized the need to attach greater importance to local surveys and to planning and accounting at the farm, area and country level in which the farmer's various activities would be viewed as a whole.
e) Rural institutions and services
412. Education and Training The Conference expressed satisfaction with the increasing cooperation between FAO and Unesco in the literacy campaign which it hoped to see further extended.
413. The Conference drew attention to the great need for agricultural education and training of farm women who should play a vital role in rural Development in many developing countries. Group action among rural women and the sociological implications of their work to the rural community should also receive increased attention. The need for collaboration with nutritionists in this field was stressed.
414. The Conference noted the proposals for the Development of a program for rural youth, and stressed the need to provide not only technical instruction for employment opportunities but also social and cultural opportunities for the amenities of better living, if young people were to be induced to remain in rural areas. Extension services in member countries would have an increasingly important role to play in the future.
415. The Conference approved the encouragement of national and regional research programs expressly adapted to particular environments and the Organization was urged to provide leadership in research organization and co-ordination and to continue its work towards the organization of research on an ecological basis.
416. Agrarian Reform, Land Tenure and Settlement. The Conference noted with satisfaction the broad exchange of views which took place at the World Land Conference held at Rome in June 1966, and recommended that the Organization actively foster training and an increased exchange of information on agrarian reform. The Conference proposed that FAO substantially increase its efforts to assist Member Governments which wished to implement the recommendations of that meeting.
417. The Conference laid great stress on the importance of work on land tenure and settlement. It emphasized the value of land tenure improvement as an incentive to technological advance. Integrated institutional services and not merely redistribution of land were essential for the successful implementation of land reform programs. Some delegations expressed concern that land reform measures were too frequently given second place to technical improvements, the benefits of which would not become apparent in the absence of a proper agrarian structure. Examples were cited by delegates of the excellent improvement of agricultural productivity by proper agrarian structure and land settlement measures.
418. The Conference recommended that the work in this field should be further strengthened when funds permitted.
419. The Conference endorsed the recommendation of the 8th FAO Regional Conference for the Near East held in Khartoum in 1967 that a Near East Seminar on Land Settlement and Reform should be convened and urged the Director-General to give priority to this matter.
420. Co-operatives. The Conference attached considerable importance to the promotion of popular participation in self-help organizations including co-operatives and farmers' organizations among rural populations, and recommended collaboration in this area with organizations such as the International Co-operative Alliance (ICA) the International Federation of Agricultural Producers (IFAP) and the Afro-Asian Rural Reconstruction Organization (AARRO). It urged the Director-General to stimulate the interchange of information between member countries, and also undertake a comparative study on the subject.
421. The Conference urged the Director-General to investigate the possibilities of joint action involving FAO, ICA, IFAP and, possibly, ILO with the objective of co-ordinating and improving the availability of technical assistance and financial aid to agricultural co-operatives and co-operative processing in developing countries. It further asked the Director-General to undertake a study on guarantee funds for agricultural credit.
422. The Conference asked the Director-General to investigate the possibility of UNDP financing of regional or interregional training centres or seminars on co-operatives, credit and agrarian structure.
423. Administrative Organization. Stressing the importance of improving the organization and administration of agricultural ministries and Development agencies, the Conference recommenced the Organization to increase its efforts to assist Member Governments in arranging for national and international seminars and training courses on Development administration.
424. Future Lines of Activity. The Conference emphasized the pre-eminent importance of work on the Development of human resources in the general orientation of the programs of FAO. This aspect had particular relevance to the successful planning and implementation of rural Development projects. The Conference endorsed the continuation of a comprehensive and integrated approach to the broad institutional field as a necessary pre-requisite to agricultural Development. Given the inadequacy of national resources for a nation-wide approach, the Conference suggested that comprehensive and integrated projects should be implemented in selected, promising areas with proper manning, timing and financing and with consideration for the local environment. It recommended that all or most Development projects should be organized on a comprehensive and integrated basis. The Conference emphasized the importance of rural sociology in this context and urged that as circumstances permitted
further strengthening should be accorded this sector so that a proper understanding might be attained of the traditional and cultural factors and human attitudes and approaches contributing to rural Development problems. The Conference emphasized that technical improvements would make little impact unless they were supported by concurrent improvements in institutions and human resources, man being in fact the prime mover of progress.
425. The Conference therefore requested the Director-General to place increased emphasis in future programs on activities which contributed directly to improved wellbeing of rural people, including particularly education and training, co-operatives, agrarian reform, farm organization and rural leadership and the creation of opportunities for productive employment.
f) Statistics
426. The Conference noted the workload placed on the Organization in meeting the statistical requirements of the Indicative World Plan. This included compilation of data on production, trade and utilization of all primary agricultural products and products derived from them, up to the first stage of processing, in the form of production-utilization accounts, together with all the relevant technical conversion factors for each country.
427. The Conference recommended that the quarterly commodity international trade statistics should continue to be published in the Monthly Bulletin for Agricultural Economics and Statistics as no other Organization was publishing this information in the present form and detail. The Conference noted that future issues of the Trade Yearbook would give separate totals for the value of trade in agricultural commodities and agricultural requisites.
428. The Conference noted further that the preliminary estimates of the index numbers of agricultural production published in the annual issues of the State of Food and Agriculture had often been underestimated and had to be substantially revised when more data became available from the countries. The Conference recommended that the Organization explore ways and means of obtaining speedier information from countries, thus placing the index number calculations on a more up-to-date basis particularly now that computer facilities would be available.
429. The Conference noted that the Organization had not been yet in a position to undertake systematic work on national accounts in agriculture and related price statistics, beyond initiating work on standardization of concepts and methods through regional meetings. It recommended that this necessary part of Development work should be intensified.
6. Information and publications
a) Legislation branch
b) Documentation center
c) Library
d) Information
e) Publications
430. The Conference recommended the issue of a brochure indicating to all potential users the information and documentation facilities and other services including film library available in the various segments of the Organization.
a) Legislation branch
431. The Conference recommended that the work of the Legislation Branch should be more orientated towards giving technical advice, assisting member countries in the harmonization of legislation as appropriate, and generally making comparative analyses in pursuit of practical results. The typical aspects of this service and its activities which the Conference would like to see further developed, should be given special consideration.
b) Documentation center
432. The Conference noted with satisfaction that the Documentation Center, now attached for reasons of convenience to the Publications Division, had soon after it had been approved by the Thirteenth Session started to function effectively. The work included the indexing of current FAO documents and all earlier documents produced by the Organization. This involved the listing of thousands of FAO documents relating to the different aspects of the Organization's work.
433. While agreeing with the 1968/69 program of work proposed for the Documentation Center, the Conference emphasized that speed was of the essence, given the growing needs for the potential users. It recommended that efforts already undertaken with UNDP assistance towards promoting the creation of a network of specialized and national documentation centers should be pursued, in order to achieve completeness of information to users. For the future, the Documentation Center should expand and diversify its activities.
c) Library
434. The Conference noted that in 1968/69 it was proposed to augment the budget for Library Acquisition by about 30 percent. The Conference agreed that the Library must continue to grow and develop and adjust to the changing conditions in the world of information. Automation was to be studied carefully, in co-operation with other international organizations, for future implementation to the extent to which resources became available.
d) Information
435. The Conference noted that in recent months there had been a substantial increase in the number of press clippings from newspapers using FAO information issuances. It stressed the need to analyze the impact of FAO's information activities, and to assess their contribution to creating awareness of the world food problem and stimulating agricultural production. The Conference recommended that the interest for and use of FAO feature material be kept under constant review.
436. The Conference noted that a substantial expansion planned in the agricultural information sector was going to be achieved with help from UNDP and other sources outside the Regular Program. The Conference, therefore, requested that a full account of all activities in this field, irrespective of the sources of funds, be made available to its Fifteenth Session.
437. The Conference recommended that in planning future programs of work, the highest priority should be given to assisting developing countries in strengthening their agricultural information services. It stressed that these countries required such assistance to develop their mass communication media through the introduction of modern techniques for the benefit of their populations engaged in agriculture. For this purpose they also needed cheap transistorized radios, audio-visual and printing equipment as well as newsprint. The Conference hoped that the Director-General might obtain funds for these purposes from FFHC, from UNDP, industries associated with the Organization's work and other sources.
438. The Conference also recommended an improved output of factual information about the results of the work of FAO, WFP, FFHC, etc. Such information would be useful to governments in evaluating foreign aid. The significance of special FAO programs needed to be explained to the general public.
439. The Conference recommended that efforts be made to achieve a better balance in the language abilities of the Organization's information staff, for the production and distribution of information material in French and Spanish.
440. The Conference recommended that special consideration be given to developing inexpensive information devices which could be conveyed to farmers of developing countries and in particular to the possibilities of producing cheap projection equipment and relatively inexpensive agricultural training films. The Conference considered that films of this nature should best be produced in the environment where they were to be used. Private industry might be induced to prepare films serving the requirements of FAO and developing countries.
441. Although there was insufficient data in FAO to make an accurate and detailed comparison between the roles of radio and other media in reaching agricultural producer and processor groups in developing countries, the Conference agreed that for some time to come radio would remain the most effective mass medium for informing those groups about modern practices and techniques.
442. At the same time the Conference stressed the need to develop and apply all available media according to local conditions in each developing country. These media included the press, radio, television, films and filmstrips, slide sets and posters.
443. The Conference recommended that the potential of television should be studied and applied where practical, since it could eventually become the most suitable mass medium for training farmers and for the dissemination of agricultural information.
<section>g</section>
e) Publications
444. The Conference was interested to note that since 1958 outside agencies had translated a total of 62 FAO publications into 24 languages other than the three working languages, at no cost to FAO, and that the Director-General was proposing to the FAO Council that he should be authorized to expend small sums, within approved resources, to encourage the publication of such translations of FAO books. The question of the use of languages other than the working languages of FAO for the purposes of publications and information material is examined in paragraphs 648 to 658 below.
445. Internal and Contractual Translation Services The Conference expressed the view that a better quality of documents and a better distribution of workload in the translation sections could be achieved by having more original material prepared in the working languages other than English.
446. At its Thirteenth Session, the Conference recommended in paragraph 155 of its Report that the experiment begun in 1964 of increasing the amount of translation performed by the external translators be continued, and that the whole question be examined in 1967 in the light of a report to be prepared by the Director-General on the results of the experiment, including the questions of finance, the quality of translations and experience of other bodies with similar language problems. Such a report (document C 67/IN/2) was submitted to the Fourteenth Session of the Conference.
447. Several delegations expressed dissatisfaction with the quality of some material translated under contract. One delegate observed that the poor quality of some translations was sometimes attributable to the poor quality of expression in the original texts, and this involved broader questions about the editorial quality of much of the material issued by the Organization, which should receive greater attention. Quality of expression - whether in original writing or in translation required the co-operation of a specialist familiar with the subject matter and a generalist with the necessary linguistic ability.
448. The Conference noted from the Director-General's report that the total amount of work done by contract translators had gone up from 1. 8 million words in 1962 to 3.1 million in 1963, 3.6 million in 1964, 4.7 million in 1965, and 6.4 million in 1966, and would again rise in 1967. The Conference further noted that the direct cost of contract translations was about $20 per thousand words, while the cost of staff translation averaged $55. Thus, the 6.4 million words translated under contract in 1966 at a cost of some $127,000 would have cost about $360,500 if done by staff, the financial saving being approximately $233,500 during the year.
449. However, it appeared that the technical staff of the Organization had often expressed dissatisfaction with the results of contract translations and had had to spend considerable time revising them, so that the hidden costs of such revision probably brought the actual cost much nearer to that of staff translation. On the other hand, the Conference appreciated that there were obvious advantages in resorting to contract translation, such as the possibility of quickly increasing capacity when peak workloads occur. However, the work suitable for farming out needed to be carefully selected and it was necessary that contracts should not exceed the amount of work that can be handled by experienced freelancers whose work still needed to be checked and assessed by the translation sections. The list of translators employed should be examined from time to time and those whose work was unsatisfactory should be eliminated.
450. The Organization must maintain the principle of parity between its three working languages. In order to safeguard this principle, official documents in the three working languages must be as reliable and authoritative as the original version. Over one-third of all translation work was now being performed by contract translators. The Conference felt that this proportion should not be further increased. The Conference therefore recommended that, as soon as financial and budgetary conditions permitted, and in any event not later than in the 1970/71 Program of Work and Budget, the translation sections be strengthened by appointing additional revisers who would be able to improve external translations so that they could be issued with the full authority of the Organization, i. e. without the "Contract Translation" disclaimer which must now be prefixed to documents translated externally.
451. Documentation. The Conference considered that more realistic budgeting by the several units of the Organization appeared desirable in regard to documentation, since they seemed to produce more publishable material than could be issued. The capacity of the documents and publications services of the Organization should be properly geared to the needs of the subject-matter units, and improvements to this end appeared to be needed throughout the Organization. The budgeting process should result in realistic estimates, instead of arbitrary allocations. On the other hand, subject matter units should not plan to prepare more material than the Organization could afford to issue or to publish. Organization wide machinery should ensure a thorough review of FAO's publications program and policies, as well as the execution of such programs.
452. The Conference urged a stricter enforcement of the criteria already laid down within the Organization as to what should be published or issued. Together with the provision of adequate means to meet the approved programs for documentation and publications, this should go a long way towards achieving the necessary balance between requests and capacity, at the same time ensuring better control of quality through the screening process, and greater timeliness in issuance. Nevertheless, several delegations voiced regrets at the limited amount of documentation the Organization could issue, especially for training purposes.
E. Review of FAO's field activities
453. The Conference reviewed FAO's field activities during the past biennium on the basis of the Director-General's Accountability Report (C 67/26), which had been prepared in line with Conference Resolution 8/65. It commended the Director-General on the comprehensive coverage of the Organization's work in the field and the detailed information provided on program Development and trends, the results of individual projects and the critical review of operational procedures. It appreciated that due to lack of time and staff this first edition of the series of Accountability Reports could not comply with all the requirements of the above resolution.
454. The Conference noted that the Organization's field program had continued to grow at an accelerated pace during the 1966/67 biennium, during which it was estimated that over $100,000,000 had been spent on Development assistance projects. It noted in particular that the expenditure under the Special Fund Sector of the UNDP had risen at a faster rate than that of other assistance programs, and generally supported the trend reported under Special Fund Sector which was moving from mono disciplinary to integrated Development projects, which had more than doubled in the current biennium as compared to the period 1962-64.
455. A similar striking increase had taken place in the number of projects dealing with the production and marketing of animal proteins both in the field of fisheries and animal production. As regards the Technical Assistance Sector of UNDP, it was noted with appreciation that a revised programming procedure had been approved by ECOSOC which would give recipient countries a larger measure of authority and flexibility in developing this program in accordance with their individual needs.
456. The Conference was gratified to note that further progress had been made in arriving at improved co-operation with other agencies and programs concerned with Development assistance, particularly the UNDP, which provided the major share of FAO's extra-budgetary resources. It was stressed, however, that the Organization must maintain its role and competence as a Specialised Agency and thus continue to provide authoritative guidance and advice in inter-agency negotiations when questions of agricultural Development policy were being considered. Special emphasis was laid on the need for the closest possible co-ordination of project programming and implementation with multilateral and bilateral sources of assistance and of investment funds. Reference was also made in this connection to the role which private industry could play in developing agro-allied industries in developing countries through the intermediary of the FAO/Industry Co-operative Program.
457. The Conference agreed that, in order to assist countries to develop the most effective programs in the food and agricultural sector, FAO should ensure that planning for such programs was in accordance with the national plans for economic and social Development.
458. While recognising that the selection and planning of individual projects was clearly the responsibility of governments, the Conference noted that, in many instances, Governments had availed themselves of assistance from FAO in the planning of programs and the drawing up of specific project requests. In order to maximise the effects of Development aid and assure the allocation of scarce resources to projects of highest priority, the Conference urged that FAO encourage countries to plan long-range, carefully phased and integrated projects related to their overall economic and social needs and their respective capacities, rather than a series of fragmental and loosely related projects which were lacking such proper Development focus.
459. The Conference stressed the importance of the Organization being able to discharge efficiently its responsibilities in all phases of planning, implementing and following-up economic Development assistance programs. It therefore requested the Director-General and the ad hoc Committee on Organization to keep this in mind when considering a reorientation and reorganisation of the Organization's administrative structure.
460. The information provided on FAO's training programs as well as the whole policy of training in connection with Development assistance projects received detailed attention by the Conference. It was considered that the vast educational training and extension programs required to build up the staff necessary for initiating and carrying-out integrated national Development programs should be given a pre-eminent place in Development assistance. The Conference stressed the need for more training and extension programs tailored to the Development needs of the countries and for better timing of fellowships in relation to the local requirements of the programs and projects. The Conference also requested that the Director-General continue to give all possible assistance to Governments in their attempts to ensure the reabsorption of returning fellowship holders within national institutions, to ensure that the recipient countries received maximum benefit from the training program.
Importance was equally given to the need for greater flexibility in applying criteria for the selection of fellows, the tailoring of individual study programs to the educational level of available trainees and the fullest possible harmonization between the training facilities of host countries and the study requirements of fellows. Likewise, the usefulness of training centers and other group training activities was stressed, whether on a national, regional or international basis, provided that they responded to urgent local needs and were well planned and implemented.
461. The Conference welcomed the increasing participation of associate experts and volunteers in Development assistance programs, as a means of increasing the effectiveness of senior international personnel, and as a link with junior government officials in recipient countries. Associate experts, who were technically fully qualified, but still required international field experience, had generally given very satisfactory service. Several delegates stressed that the associate experts' scheme was one of the important sources for experienced staff which would be increasingly needed in the future years.
462. Some constructive criticism was voiced on Part II of the Accountability Report, which reviewed a number of field projects chosen from among the various Development programs operated by FAO all over the world. It was felt that the report was not entirely responsive to Conference Resolution 8/65, and that it gave little indication of efforts by FAO or by recipient governments to relate FAO's agricultural programs to national Development plans and overall economic priorities. However, it was agreed that the report was a good start and provided much useful information and analysis of problems which delegations should know about. While the Accountability Report provided, in the descriptive parts as well as in the appendices, information on the follow-up of individual projects, the Conference considered that a more analytical and systematic measurement of progress and concrete results of the assistance programs would be of particular significance both to developing and
developed countries. Further, the Conference urged that where projects had been less successful than was expected, their inclusion in the Report together with an analysis of the reasons for failure would be useful in the next issue.
463. As regards operational procedures used in the implementation of FAO's programs, the Conference noted that difficulties in negotiating plans of operation, such as problems of recruitment and clearance of personnel, negotiation of sub-contracts, the purchasing, transportation and customs clearance of equipment, etc., frequently led to delays in starting work in the field. It was appreciated, however, that certain improvements had already been made and that the Director-General, together with UNDP and with governments, was continuously striving to improve the effectiveness of operations in the planning, implementation and follow-up stage of projects. The discussions emphasized the need for further streamlining of procedures, clearer allocation of responsibilities at field level, and other suitable measures, which would help projects to "get off the ground" more quickly and provide the necessary flexibility during the operational stages. The Conference appreciated that in
many instances the Organization could only move ahead at the pace at which recipient Governments could provide the agreed counterpart facilities without which the project could never be fully successful.
464. The Conference recognised the importance of the human element in the Development process and accordingly gave particular attention to the questions of recruitment, personnel management and relations between international and national staff. It noted that both within FAO and at inter-agency level, continuous efforts were being made to improve the recruitment machinery, speed-up the placement of experts and intensify their servicing in the field. While such information was noted with appreciation, the Conference recommended that recruitment policy should be kept under careful review, in view of the indication that the field programs were expected to grow at an accelerated pace while highly qualified staff with overseas experience were becoming more scarce. In this connection, the Conference advocated closer collaboration with national institutes, universities, etc., as a potential source for trained manpower. Similarly, the useful contribution of consulting firms,
particularly in certain types of pre-investment projects, was emphasised.
465. The Conference recommended that, in assessing the qualifications of personnel, attention should be paid not only to academic qualifications but also to competence shown in analogous fields of work, since the value of experts depended on a combination of technical qualifications, practical experience and personal qualities. At the same time, as much as possible should be done to prepare them for their field work by means of language training and instruction in the customs of the country of their assignment.
466. The Conference further noted that the preparation of final reports on completed projects continued to present problems, as these were often submitted after considerable delays. It noted that various measures had been taken recently to alleviate this problem. One measure was the review of the Organization's work on reports by a management consultant firm. Another called for the preparation and submission of summary statements on major conclusions and recommendations of projects within one to three months after termination of field work, so as to allow governments to take urgent decisions on follow-up work.
467. In the light of the experience gained in reviewing the Director-General's Accountability Report, the Conference recommended that the next report should continue to contain three basic parts, the first dealing with program and policy trends and developments, the second providing an analytical review of individual projects in greater depth than had been possible so far, and the final section consisting of several special studies.
468. With regard to Part I, it was advocated that the Report could provide a considerably larger range of statistical data on all field programs including geographical and functional allocation of resources, personnel services, equipment, etc., both on the part of FAO and of recipient governments, if applicable. Greater emphasis should also be given to describing the co-ordination or relationship with those agencies and programs with which FAO was collaborating closely in the planning, execution and follow-up on its field programs, such as UNDP, IBRD, UNIDO and other UN agencies. Similarly, it was considered that more complete information could be provided on FAO's collaboration with bilateral Development agencies and similar bodies.
469. In Part II it was considered that the material on individual projects should be presented in a more concentrated and schematic manner, to allow the Conference to obtain a clearer picture of the setting of a project within a national Development plan, its priority, objectives, method of execution, problems encountered and results achieved. The Conference recognised however, that the evaluation of the impact of a given project on the economy of a recipient country was difficult to accomplish, as criteria and methodology for this type of evaluation were not sufficiently advanced. It further appreciated that material presented in such analytical form would not lend itself for use as public information material, as had been suggested by Program Committee and Council, but considered that the requirements of the Conference must take precedence over other possible uses of the document.
470. As regards Part m, the Conference recognised that the proposal of the Forty-Seventh Session of the Council concerning the preparations of country studies required further consideration by the Director-General and the Council. The next Accountability Report could not, therefore, contain the full range of information resulting from country studies originally proposed. The Conference proposed that the Director-General provide in Part m of the next Report a critical analysis of project preparation and implementation based on an evaluation of a representative random sample of projects and programs with wide geographic and subject-matter coverage.
471. In considering the organization and machinery for future Conference reviews of FAO field programs, the Conference recalled its decision in Resolution 8/65 concerning the review of the Accountability Report by the Program Committee, the Council, the Technical Committees, Commission II, or a special Committee thereof, if so required. It noted with regret that an adequate review of the field program by the Conference had not been possible at its Fourteenth Session due to limitation of time and other reasons. It was agreed that in future Sessions, the Technical Committees should continue to look at the technical aspects of the field programs, but noted that there was also need for a review of the overall policy and procedural questions which might be entrusted to a Committee-of-the-Whole or a Special Committee of Commission II on Development Assistance Programs. The Conference therefore requested the Council to continue to review the operation of the field programs, and to
analyze the next Accountability Report prior to the next session of the Conference. In addition, the Conference requested the Council to ensure that sufficient time would be allotted and suitable arrangements made for the next session of the Conference to enable it to review in depth the Accountability Report and the field program in general.
F. Review of topics relating to the program of work and budget which were not covered by the technical committees: chapters I, II, IV, V, VI. A(i), VI. D, VI. E., VII, VIII, IX, X, XI
Conference, council and other sessions (chapter I)
Immediate office of the director-general, including the office of internal audit and inspection (chapter II, A)
Program and budgetary service (chapter II, A)
Office of the co-ordinator, freedom from hunger campaign (chapter II, C)
World food congress (chapter II, D)
Indicative world plan for agricultural development (chapter II, E)
Department of administration and finance (chapter IV)
Common services (chapter V)
Office of the assistant director-general, technical department (chapter VI, A(i))
Co-operative programs with banks (chapter VI, D)
Fellowships (chapter VI, E)
Area liaison service (regional offices) (chapter VII)
Miscellaneous expenditure and contingencies (chapters VIII and IX)
Reserve (chapter X)
Miscellaneous income (chapter XI)
Conference, council and other sessions (chapter I)
472. The Conference approved the proposed Program of Work and Budget for this Chapter as set out in document C 67/3, noting that it was based on the assumption that the arrangements for the Conference in 1969, including the Technical Committees, would be substantially the same as in 1967. Several delegations questioned the need for the appointment of consultants for the Regional Conferences and whether the amount of $10,000 budgeted for this purpose might be available for reallocation. The Conference was informed that the main agenda item for the next round of Regional Conferences would be the Indicative World Plan and that consultants would not be used. The Conference was further informed that the regional conferences next year would be examined as a part of the general review of structure and that, if these conferences were no longer to debate technical issues, the need to engage special consultants for them might disappear. Mention was also made of the possible
replacement of the biennial European Regional Conference by annual sessions of the European Commission on Agriculture, but this was thought unlikely to lead to any sizeable savings.
Immediate office of the director-general, including the office of internal audit and inspection (chapter II, A)
473. The Conference approved the proposed Program of Work and Budget of the immediate Office of the Director-General, noting that there was no change in the proposed number of posts for the next biennium nor in any budgetary provisions, except for mandatory costs.
Program and budgetary service (chapter II, A)
474. The Conference approved the proposed Program of Work and Budget for this Service. The only major increase proposed was to finance the work of the Joint FAO/WHO Program of Food Standards (Codex Alimentarius) in an amount of $141,000, mainly to provide two new professional officers. The Conference drew attention to the public health aspects of the program and expressed the hope that WHO could participate more fully in it. The Conference considered that it would be of assistance to the Director-General if Member Nations of FAO and WHO were to express the same interest and support of the Program in the governing bodies of both Organizations. The Conference noted that the increase in the budgetary provision for documents included part of the cost of the new "Accountability Report on the Organization's Development Programs." It also noted that the apparent increase in the number of sessions was caused by the inclusion of all sessions of Codex Committees under the chairmanship
of the host governments, as recommended by the Program Committee at its Twelfth Session, even though the cost of such sessions were primarily borne by the respective host governments.
Office of the co-ordinator, freedom from hunger campaign (chapter II, C)
475. The Conference noted that, following the elimination of Chapter VIII of the previous budgets in which provision had been made for FFHC, the Co-ordinator's Office was shown as a special subchapter of Chapter II (Office of the Director-General) in C 67/3. The Conference approved the proposed program and budget for this Office.
476. The Conference questioned the item of $35,000 for contractual services, to provide subventions to non-governmental organizations for the commissioning of services for which they had special competence. The Conference was informed that this was a first experiment enabling the making of grants and contracts with the object of making wider use of the specialized knowledge and experience of non-governmental organizations. The Conference approved the proposal, but emphasized the need to proceed with this new activity by means of proper contractual arrangements. It was assured that only non-governmental organizations having formal status with FAO would take part in the scheme. The Conference requested the Council to keep this activity under review.
477. Regarding the provision of $32,000 for consultants, the Conference was informed that $20,000 of this amount had been originally included in the 1966/67 budget for the Division of Public Information, but that due to subsequent budgetary adjustments in 1966/67, this amount had been practically eliminated. The amount would be used to reinforce national FFHC campaigns, in particular to secure the services of outstanding persons in the fields of agriculture, education, etc.
478. As to the possibility of reducing the number of meetings, the Conference was informed that the list of proposed meetings in C 67/3-Sup. 1-Rev. 1 represented a compromise between funds likely to be available and requests for more frequent regional and sub-regional meetings by the national committees in all regions. The Conference was assured that, as far as possible, FFHC meetings would be held in conjunction with other FAO meetings so as to reduce costs; in the current biennium, the regional meetings - except for Europe - had successfully been held in conjunction with the Regional Conferences.
479. In view of the fact that the liaison officers for Africa, the Far East and Latin America had greatly facilitated the work of the Campaign in those Regions, several delegates stressed the need to appoint an FFHC liaison officer for the Near East region, although others expressed some reservation. The Conference was informed that the Director-General was aware of the repeated requests for this post but that his policy in preparing estimates for 1968/69 was not to propose any substantive change in regional structure until agreement had been reached on the Organization's general structure. In the meantime, one of the FFHC officers stationed in Rome took special responsibility for the Development of the Campaign in the Near East Region.
480. The Conference noted that FFHC project action depended in great measure on public support and the closest cooperation with voluntary and non-governmental bodies. To help ensure program Development along the most positive lines, the Conference recommended that the Director-General discuss with the FFHC Advisory Committee of Non-governmental Organizations the establishment of a subcommittee to meet with him periodically to discuss the FFHC action program and to advise him on its direction and policies. The results of such discussions should be made available to the Program Committee and to the Council.
481. The Conference drew attention to the general costs of administering FFHC field activities, and requested that particular attention be paid to the mounting overheads resulting from the large number of small scale projects.
World food congress (chapter II, D)
482. The Conference took note of the proposals made by the Director-General that the Congress would be postponed until the early part of 1969. The Director-General was still engaged in discussions regarding the site of the Congress, which were not expected to be concluded until after the Conference.
483. The budgetary provision was however based on the assumption that the total costs would be shared with the sponsoring Member Nation on much the same basis as for the First Congress in 1963. The amount now proposed would cover only the completion of FAO's preparations for the Congress and FAO's share of documentation costs, including a limited amount for a new series of Basic Studies.
The total costs of the Congress would depend upon the arrangements with the Host Government. It would very likely be necessary in any case to seek funds from external sources to help finance travel for delegates from developing countries. The Conference noted that no proposals could be made at this stage for possible savings under other items, should it be necessary to allocate additional funds for the Congress from the Regular Budget.
Indicative world plan for agricultural development (chapter II, E)
484. the conference heard from the director-general in his introductory statement on the program of work and budget 1968/69 that he had given the highest priority to the indicative world plan in the activities of the organization during the next biennium. the conference noted that of the $1.5 million expenditure proposed under one of the five major areas of concentration selected for 1968/69 - the integrated planning for agricultural Development - the amount of $1,175,000 was to carry on the work on the plan during 1968/69. in the 1966/67 biennium preliminary work on the plan was financed largely from savings obtained by deliberately delayed recruitment and other program adjustments which had had the approval of the council.
485. The Conference was informed that the staff proposed for 1968/69 were with few exceptions already working on the Plan. The present staff would be maintained at the present level through four months of 1968, and after that would be substantially reduced.
486. The Conference noted that the five professional staff required for posting to Technical Divisions were to co-ordinate work in sectors not previously oriented towards integrated planning, but which nevertheless had an important part to play in preparing the Plan. It was assured that close liaison was maintained between the Central Unit and the Divisions and that the location of specialized staff in the divisions and their differing grade levels were decided in accordance with the needs and circumstances of each Division.
487. The Conference approved the work proposed for 1968/69.
Department of administration and finance (chapter IV)
488. The Conference approved the proposals for this Department, expressing satisfaction at the endeavour to cope with the increasing load of administrative work without major staff increases.
Common services (chapter V)
489. The Conference approved the activities proposed for this Chapter.
490. The Conference noted that increases in the cost of these Services accounted for about $1,250,000, of which over $800,000 was directly attributable to the increasing workload of the Organization, including the establishment of computer services. The Conference was given detailed information concerning the budget estimates for equipment. Another important increase was a provision of $344,720 for additional premises which the Organization would probably be required to rent and maintain during the 1968/69 biennium, pending the provision of adequate facilities by the Italian Government to accommodate the increase in staff.
Office of the assistant director-general, technical department (chapter VI, A(i))
491. The Conference approved the proposed activities of the Office of the Assistant Director-General, Technical Department, as well as the budget which, except for certain mandatory increases, remained at about the same level as that of the current biennium.
Co-operative programs with banks (chapter VI, D)
492. The Conference took note of the adjustments in the amount of $150,000 approved by the Finance and Program Committees and the Council during 1966/67, following which FAO's share in the total budget of the FAO/IBRD Cooperative Program rose to $550,000. It approved the net increase of $75,000 proposed in the budget for 1968/69, which also included mandatory increases, and which raised the total budget of the Program for the next biennium to $2,500,000, covering an IBRD contribution of $1,875,000 and FAO's direct contribution to $625,000, but excluding a further contribution by FAO of $125,000 in respect of indirect operating expenses.
493. In view of the satisfactory Development of the Program and of its future potential importance, the Conference gave full support to the increase budgeted for the 1968/69 biennium and took note that, should the IBRD offer to raise its contribution, the Director-General would consider some further increase during the biennium provided of course the necessary savings could be found.
494. The Conference approved the proposed activities for 1968/69 for co-operation with area banks ($506,150) and the $50,000 proposed for indirect operating expenses to be furnished by FAO. It also noted that the Regular Program would provide additional indirect services for co-operation with these banks, in the form of time of regional outputted or other Regular Program staff which, valued in cash, would amount to an estimated $650,000 for the biennium.
495. In answer to questions on the steadily expanding staff of the Co-operative Program, the Conference recalled the insistence by the Bank's Board of Governors on being able to deal with a clearly identifiable unit within FAO of high calibre, and was assured that in the execution of missions there was no duplication by staff of this Program of any work already being done by the other divisions.
Fellowships (chapter VI, E)
496. The Conference noted and approved the proposed level of activities (of $150,000 for the André Mayer Fellowships. The amount was the same as that for each of the last two biennia, and was sufficient for the award of ten fellowships per year (for research and research training).
Area liaison service (regional offices) (chapter VII)
497. The Conference noted that, as FAO's overall structure including the regional Offices was under review, the Director-General had proposed only minor strengthening of administrative and clerical staff in the regional offices.
498. The Conference was informed that the provision of consultants' funds for the European Regional Office had been inadvertently omitted, and expressed the hope that ways could be found to restore this allocation during the coming biennium.
499. The Conference therefore approved the proposals contained in Chapter VII, noting that these were designed to maintain status quo while making it possible for the work to be carried out more expeditiously.
Miscellaneous expenditure and contingencies (chapters VIII and IX)
500. The Conference approved these items, which included under Chapter VIII an allocation of $120,000 as FAO's tentative share in the costs of the UN Inspection Unit. One delegation noted that this appeared to be based on total FAO expenditures in the UN family, rather than FAO's Regular Program expenditures. In its view the share of the cost of inspection of the FAO's Regular Program only should be charged to this Program, while the share of the cost of inspection of FAO's field programs should be borne by special allocations from those programs.
Reserve (chapter X)
501. The Conference noted that the Reserve in Chapter X had been distributed throughout the relevant chapters of the Budget, following the increase in General Service salaries which became effective in 1967, and that this had been endorsed by the Council at its Forty-Ninth Session. The Conference approved the use of any amounts which had been in the Reserve and which would not be needed for that purpose, to cover a portion of the expected deficit under the FAO contract with ENPDEP for medical services.
Miscellaneous income (chapter XI)
502. The Conference approved increases in certain items of the estimates of Miscellaneous Income as set out below.
(a) Interest on Investments and Bank Interest to read: $680,000
(b) Refunds of prior period's expenditure and lapse of prior period's accrued liabilities to read: $ 60,000
(c) Balance of Publications Revolving Fund to read: $100,000
(d) Contributions from New and Associate Members to read: $ 41,000
(e) Other to read: $220,000
Accordingly the Conference noted that the revised total estimate for Miscellaneous Income would be $1,131,000.
<section>h</section>
G. Inter-agency relations and consultations on matters of common interest
Matters rising out of ECOSOC and ACC discussions and the report of the ad hoc committee of experts to examine the finances of the united nations and the specialized agencies
FAO/UNICEF relations
FAO/UNESCO relations in the field of agricultural education
FAO/WHO food standards program (codex Alimentarius)
FAO/IBRD co-operative program
Matters rising out of ECOSOC and ACC discussions and the report of the ad hoc committee of experts to examine the finances of the united nations and the specialized agencies
503. The Conference reviewed the report of the Director-General on matters arising out of ECOSOC and the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination discussions during 1967 (document C 67/27), and generally endorsed the manner in which the Director-General was arranging FAO's contribution to matters of inter-agency cooperation.
504. The Conference received a report on the implementation of the recommendations of the ad hoc Committee of Experts to examine the finances of the United Nations and the Specialized Agencies. The Committee's recommendations covered a wide range of subjects, some calling for action by the organizations individually and some for joint action by them.
505. The Conference noted that the report of the ad hoc Committee of Experts (A/6343) had been placed before the Forty-Seventh Session of the Council immediately on receipt. Thereafter, as desired by the Council, the Program and Finance Committees had made a detailed review of the individual recommendations. The views and suggestions of these Committees about the manner in which the recommendations could be implemented by FAO, were set forth in paragraphs 52-82 of their joint report (CL 48/6), and were fully considered by the Council at its Forty-Eighth Session.
506. The Conference requested the Director-General to continue to implement under his own authority as soon as possible the recommendations of the ad hoc Committee on the lines suggested by the Program and Finance Committees, and authorized him to continue to co-operate in inter-agency consultations on the implementation of those recommendations requiring concerted action with other organizations. One delegation expressed doubts on the soundness of some of the proposals of the Committees. The Conference noted that the Director-General had stated, with reference to the recommendation in paragraph 26 of the Report of the ad hoc Committee of Experts, that it would not be difficult to give to the FAO Council preliminary and approximate indications of the budget estimates. The Conference agreed that information on these lines would meet with the requirements of the recommendation, and asked that it should be furnished to the Council at its October Session in the non-Conference
year.
507. The Conference also authorized the Director-General to arrange for the participation of FAO in the Joint Inspection Unit recommended by the ad hoc Committee of Experts as from 1 January 1968, on the basis of the conclusions reached at a joint meeting of the ECOSOC Committee for Program and Co-ordination and the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination (ACC) with respect to the modalities of the operation of this Unit.
508. The Conference noted that the Program and Finance Committee would submit proposals later to the Council on the procedures to be followed in the handling of reports of the Inspection Unit as far as FAO was concerned. The Conference authorized the Council to approve such proposals provisionally, pending formal acceptance by the Conference at its next Session.
509. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 9/67
Recommendations of the ad hoc Committee of Experts to Examine the Finances of the United Nations and the Specialized Agencies
THE CONFERENCE
Having reviewed the report of the Forty-Eighth Session of the Council on the developments concerning the recommendations of the ad hoc Committee of Experts to Examine the Finances of the United Nations and the Specialized Agencies; and
Having noted the approval of these recommendations by the United Nations General Assembly on 4 November 1966;
Noting that a considerable number of the recommendations either correspond to FAO's practice or could be placed into effect by the Director-General under his own authority, and that in some instances this would only be done after consultation among the United Nations and the Specialized Agencies;
Noting with appreciation the co-operation of the Director-General in the work of the ad hoc Committee and in the subsequent inter-agency consultations;
Requests the Director-General to continue to implement under his own authority, as soon as possible, the recommendations of the ad hoc Committee where feasible and applicable and to inform the Council of the progress made in implementing these recommendations;
Approves the participation by FAO in the Joint Inspection Unit; and
Requests the Director-General to continue to co-operate in inter-agency consultations on the implementation of those recommendations of the ad hoc Committee requiring concerted action with other organizations.
(Adopted 22.11. 67)
FAO/UNICEF relations
510. The Conference was informed of the continuing satisfactory progress in the Development of the joint FAO/UNICEF program.
511. The Conference noted that the Report of the Sixth Session of the FAO/UNICEF Joint Policy Committee had been accepted by the UNICEF Executive Board, and that the Council at its Forty-Eighth Session had taken note of the usefulness of the work of this Committee and of the great value of joint FAO/UNICEF activities to Member Nations.
512. The Conference noted that the FAO Council, at its Forty-Eighth Session, had decided that the FAO/UNICEF Joint Policy Committee should be continued for an indefinite period with the same terms of reference; that the Committee should normally be convened at intervals of about two years; that the FAO membership on the Committee should be augmented by the addition of one member; and that, in order to achieve better geographical representation, this additional member should be selected from African countries south of the Sahara.
513. The Conference also noted that there was a continuing need for FAO field experts on jointly-assisted projects and that, while a larger number of such experts was included in the UNDP/TA Program, UNICEF continued to contribute generously towards the costs of the Joint Program in providing funds to enable FAO to appoint field experts for jointly-aided projects.
514. The Conference welcomed the continuing close collaboration between FAO and UNICEF, and expressed the hope that the Joint Program would be still further developed.
FAO/UNESCO relations in the field of agricultural education
515. The Conference reviewed the state of relationships with Unesco in the field of agricultural education, in the light of the recommendations of the Forty-Ninth Session of the Council and a statement by the representative of Unesco regarding the debates on this subject at the Seventy-Seventh Session of the Unesco Executive Board.
516. The Conference expressed its deep concern at the inability to reach agreement over the problems of co-operation, and urged that efforts be continued at the secretariat level to achieve a solution. It noted that although full agreement on the mechanism for joint action might take time, there was no need to delay action to intensify co-operation in those fields of activities where a joint effort was obviously required. These included the use of mass media for farmers' education and training, adult education and literacy, and work among rural youth.
517. The Conference was concerned also at the apparent assumption that the solution lay in the creation of a joint division. While conceding that this might prove to be a necessary element in achieving satisfactory co-operation, the Conference urged that it should only be adopted as a last resort, after all other means had proved inadequate.
In this connection the Conference was informed that the Unesco Executive Board would review the situation in May/June 1968. The Conference agreed that the only suitable site for a joint division, if one were established, was Rome.
518. The Conference felt that the situation now needed guidance and decision at Government level. It accordingly approved the recommendations of the Forty-Ninth Council Session for an ad hoc Joint Intergovernmental Committee representing the two Agencies. The Conference invited the Council to make suitable arrangements for FAO participation in such a committee, to be set up after the May/June 1968 session of the Unesco Executive Board, with the object of reviewing the position reached in inter-Agency consultations and of agreeing on an effective pattern of cooperation for the future.
519. The Representative of Unesco informed the Conference that the Director-General of Unesco had been invited by Unesco's Executive Board at its Seventy-Seventh Session to inform the Conference of FAO that Unesco might usefully be associated on an equal footing with the preparation of the program for the World Conference on Agricultural Education and Training, proposed to be held in Rome in 1969, and of the working papers concerning items of the agenda coming within its competence.
520. The Representative of ILO reported the interest and willingness of his Organization also in co-operating in the World Conference on Agricultural Education and Training.
521. The Conference welcomed these expressions of interest, and was confident that practical arrangements for co-operation could be effected.
FAO/WHO food standards program (codex Alimentarius)
522. The Conference received a progress report on the work of the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Program and Codex Alimentarius Commission (C 67/30). It was noted that the workload falling on Member Governments and the FAO/WHO Secretariat was increasing rapidly as a result of the significant progress being made by the subsidiary bodies of the Commission in the Development of international food standards. The Conference, while stressing the importance of this work, urged that the Codex Alimentarius Commission should carefully examine its work priorities and endeavour to complete some of the work in hand before embarking on new subjects or proposing the establishment of any further subsidiary bodies. It also recommended the establishment of guidelines for use by the Commission in deciding on new work to be undertaken.
523. The Conference recommended that steps should be taken to integrate fully into the procedural framework established by the Codex Alimentarius Commission the Joint FAO/WHO Committee of Government Experts on the Code of Principles concerning Milk and Milk Products.
524. The Conference emphasized that membership of the Codex Alimentarius Commission did not involve Member Nations of FAO and WHO in any contributions additional to those they already made to the regular budgets of the two Organizations, and recommended that the Director-General should bring to the attention of Member Governments not yet members of the Codex Alimentarius Commission the advantages of membership of the Commission particularly in the fields of consumer protection, the promotion of international trade in foodstuffs, the removal of non-economic obstacles to international trade, and the Development of sound national food legislation.
FAO/IBRD co-operative program
Co-operation with area banks
FAO/UNIDO relations
525. The Conference recognized that General Assembly Resolution 2152 (XXI), which established the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, contained a special chapter on "Co-ordination and Co-operation with UN Bodies and other Organizations", as well as a clause that adequate arrangements were to be made by the Secretary-General of the United Nations for such co-ordination at the secretariat level.
526. The Conference was informed that the Director-General had pursued the matter of co-operation with UNIDO in appropriate forums, and that the ACC attached great importance to the working out of arrangements which would ensure harmonious working relations between the Specialized Agencies concerned and UNIDO.
527. In this connection, the Conference welcomed the efforts being made by the Director-General to arrange bilateral discussions between FAO and UNIDO to reach an agreement which would enable the two Organizations to pursue their respective activities in the industrial field without duplication of effort and with maximum co-operation in areas of common concern.
528. The Conference thought that it should not be difficult for these Organizations to avoid duplications and overlapping of their activities. Accordingly, while the Conference wished to see the proposed bilateral discussions resulting in a clear-cut demarcation of the respective roles and activities of the two Organizations with regard to areas of primary responsibility and initiative, it also looked forward to receiving proposals for joint action where appropriate in fields of common concern. The Conference believed that such timely action taken at this stage would be an insurance against any serious future jurisdictional conflicts of the type concerning FAO and Unesco in the field of agricultural education.
529. With the same objective in view, the Conference also called on the Director-General to bring to the attention of the Council any instances of duplication, particularly with respect of UNDP Special Fund projects and technical assistance activities, so that corrective measures could be taken at an early date by appropriate recommendations from the Council or the Conference to the Industrial Development Board of UNIDO. The Conference requested the Director-General to make available a detailed report to the next Council Session with regard to the outcome of the bilateral discussions with UNIDO.
H. Program of work and budget 1968/69
Appropriations for the biennium 1968/69
Publications revolving fund
Appropriations for the biennium 1968/69
530. The Conference discussed the Program of Work and Budget in the light of the Council recommendation that the Budget level should be $59,861,000, and that any changes to be made be accommodated within this figure.
531. Among views expressed were recommendations that greater emphasis be placed on FAO's work in the promotion of field activities than on the Headquarters Organization, and that the staff establishment should not be increased until the new structure had been agreed.
532. Some delegations expressed the view that the budget could be fixed at a somewhat lower level without in any way impairing the efficiency of the Organization, particularly if certain activities were re-assigned and if the number of high level posts was reduced. Other delegations felt that the budget level was low when set against the magnitude of the task that FAO had to perform in order to provide adequate assistance to Member Nations in solving their food and population problems. But the majority of those who spoke supported the Program of Work and Budget at the level presented, provided that any subsequent changes were accommodated within this figure.
533. Some delegations, looking ahead to succeeding biennia, found it difficult to accept that budgetary levels should continue to increase at a faster rate than that which applied to the growth of national income of member countries, but others felt that this was not an appropriate yardstick. Concern was expressed at the apparent tendency to increase the number of high level posts at the expense of those at lower levels.
534. The Conference reviewed various proposals for savings and also for considerable increases in certain areas of the Program of Work which had arisen from the Forty-Eighth and Forty-Ninth Sessions of the Council, from the Technical Committees and from the Commissions. It requested the Director-General to bear these in mind for implementation in the event of savings accruing during the coming biennium. In this connection, the Conference felt that high priority should be given, within the limit of available resources, to enable such redeployment of staff and strengthening of the corps of Country Representatives as was eventually decided in the light of the review of the structure and also to improve the machinery for co-operation with other international agencies. The Conference also approved the Council's recommendation that the proposed cut in travel funds of $100,000 should be used to promote the Junior Professional Training Program.
535. The Conference approved the following changes in the list of meetings contained in document C 67/3-Sup. 1-Rev. 1, and requested that the full revised list be circulated to Member Nations:
Freedom from Hunger Campaign
FH 822 "Panel of Experts on Young World Mobilization Appeal Youth Officers of FFHC Committees and n.g.o. 's" will be changed to "Young World Promotion Group" and held in 1968 instead of 1969.
FH 828 "Consultation with Youth Officers" will be changed to "Young World Promotion Group" (a second meeting in 1969). The category should be changed from "2" to "3" and attendance would be "Individuals selected in personal capacity. "
Second World Food Congress, to be held in 1969 instead of 1968.
Animal Production and Health Division
AN 823 The attendance should be changed to read: "MNs and AMs in Region, int. orgs, and some national institutions."
AN 882 The attendance should be changed from "Individual consultants selected by FAO" to "MNs and AMs, int. orgs. and some national institutions. "
536. The Conference requested the Council and the Program Committee to study further the manner in which national organizations should be invited to take part in meetings of the Organization.
537. The Conference agreed to support the Program of Work and Budget as presented by the Director-General and accordingly adopted unanimously the following resolution:
Resolution No. 10/67
Appropriations
THE CONFERENCE
Having discussed the Director-General's Program of Work and Budget and the conclusions of the Technical Committees and Commissions;
Approves the Program of Work proposed by the Director-General for 1968/69;
Resolves that for the financial period 1968/69:
1. Appropriations are voted for the following purposes:
Chapter I Conference and Council $ 574,300
Chapter II Office of the Director-General 5,117,600
Chapter III Department of Public Relations and Legal Affairs 9,093,100
Chapter IV Department of Administration and Finance 3,243,500
Chapter V Common Services 6,939,700
Chapter VI Technical and Economic Program 29,760,150
Chapter VII Area Liaison Service (Regional Offices) 4,333,550
Chapter VIII Miscellaneous Expenditure 449, 100
Chapter IX Contingencies 350,000
Total $59,861,000
2. The appropriations voted in paragraph 1 above should be financed by contributions from Member Nations and Associate Members after adjustment as provided in the Financial Regulations; for this purpose it is assumed that:
(a) The Administrative and Operational Servicing Costs accruing from UNDP/TA to the FAO Regular Program would be $1,944,945 for 1968 and approximately the same amount for 1969, totaling $3,890,000, and
(b) Miscellaneous Income is estimated at $1,131,000 for the financial period 1968/69, leaving an amount of $54,840,000 to be assessed against Member Nations.
3. The contributions from Member Nations and Associate Members in 1968 and 1969 should be paid in accordance with the Scale adopted by the Conference at its Fourteenth Session.
(Adopted 21.11.67)
Publications revolving fund
538. The Conference also adopted the following resolution with regard to the Publications Revolving Fund:
Resolution No. 11/67
Publications Revolving Fund
THE CONFERENCE
Approves the budget for the 1968/69 biennium for the Publications Revolving Fund as presented by the Director-General and contained in Annex XII to the 1968/69 Program of Work and Budget (document C 67/3) as revised, including an allocation not exceeding $50,000 for sales promotion purposes and an allocation not exceeding $120,400 for the Development of the FAO magazine;
Provided that the cost of additional print runs and reproduction of advertisements can be covered up to an amount of $43,740 from the income accruing during the biennium to the Publications Revolving Fund from the sale of and from advertising in the FAO magazine;
And provided further that the employment of personnel to be paid from the income of advertisement and sales will be subject to prior approval by the Council.
(Adopted 21.11.67)
<section>i</section>
XI. Constitutional, financial and administrative matters
A. Constitutional and legal matters
B. Financial matters
C. Administrative matters
A. Constitutional and legal matters
Amendments to the constitution
Procedure for election of council members
Amendment to rules XXVI and XXVII of the general rules, relative to membership in the program and finance committees
Amendment to rules XXIX-1 and XXX-1 of the general rules, relative to membership in the committee on commodity problems and committee on fisheries
Amendment to rule XXIX-9 of the general rules, relative to attendance by non-FAO nations at CCP consultations
Amendments to financial regulations
Statutory report on the status of conventions and agreements and amendments thereto
Relationship agreements with international organizations
Relations with international organizations and granting of consultative status to international non-governmental organizations
African convention for the conservation and management of wildlife
Membership of the FAO/UNICEF joint policy committee
Review of FAO commissions, committees, working parties and panels of experts established under articles V, VI and XIV of the constitution
Authority and terms of reference of regional conferences
Arrangements for future sessions of the conference
Use of languages other than FAO's present working languages
Amendments to the constitution
a) Amendment to article V-1, relative to the increase in the number of council seats
b) Amendment to article V-1, relative to alternates attending council sessions
c) Amendment to article V- 1 of the constitution relative to alternates attending council sessions
d) Amendment to article VI-1, relative to sea-area fishery commissions
a) Amendment to article V-1, relative to the increase in the number of council seats
539. The Conference, at its Thirteenth Session (1965), decided to increase the number of Council Seats from Twenty-Seven to Thirty-One and to that effect adopted amendments to Article V-1 of the Constitution and to Rule XXII-1(b) of the General Rules of the Organization. The Conference further
"...... requested that before its Fourteenth Session, the Council take measures to:
(a) Prepare for the Conference proposals to increase by three the number of Council members, one of these seats being allocated to the region of Asia and the Far East, the second to the European Region, and the third to the Near East Region;
(b) Draft the necessary amendment to the Constitution and instruct the Director-General to circulate it to Member Governments at least 120 days before the opening of the Conference Session, and also draft the consequential amendments to the General Rules of the Organization so that the increase in the number of Council seats could be effected at the Fourteenth Session. "
540. Pursuant to the Conference request, the Council considered at its Forty-Seventh Session (October 1966) the text of a draft amendment to Article V, paragraph 1 of the Constitution and a consequential amendment to Rule XXII-1(b) of the General Rules of the Organization which, in accordance with Article XX of the Constitution, were communicated by the Director-General by circular letter G/6-LE of 6 March 1967 to all Member Nations and Associate Members of the Organization.
541. In the light of the recommendation of the Council, the Conference decided to approve the text of the draft amendments, and accordingly adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 12/67
Increase in the Number of Council Seats
THE CONFERENCE
Recalling that it requested the Council, at its Thirteenth Session, to prepare proposals to increase by three the number of Council Members, and to draft a necessary amendment to the Constitution to be circulated by the Director-General to Member Governments at least 120 days before the opening of the Fourteenth Session of the Conference;
Having examined the draft amendment to Article V-1 of the Constitution and the consequential amendment to Rule XXII-1(b) of the General Rules of the Organization, recommended by the Council;
Adopts the following amendments to the Constitution and the General Rules of the Organization (underlined words to be added, /bracketed/ words to be deleted):
Article V-1 of the Constitution
"A Council of the Organization consisting of /thirty-on/thirty-four Member Nations shall be elected by the Conference"
Rule XXI-1 (b) of the General Rules of the Organization
"The Conference shall make such provisions as will ensure that the terms of office of /ten/ eleven members of the Council shall expire in each of two successive calendar years and /eleven/ twelve in the third calendar years. "
Reaffirms its decision, taken at the Thirteenth Session, that one of the Additional Council seats shall be allocated to the Region of Asia and the Far East, the second to the European Region, and the third to the Near East Region.
(Adopted 15.11. 67)
b) Amendment to article V-1, relative to alternates attending council sessions
542. The Director-General received from the Government of the United States of America, a formal proposal for the amendment of Article V, paragraph 1 of the Constitution; the purpose of the proposed amendment was to enable Members of the FAO Council to appoint more than one alternate to attend Council sessions.
543. In accordance with the provisions of Article XX, paragraphs 3 and 4 of the Constitution, the Director-General, by circular letter G/8-LE of 8 June 1967, informed all Member Nations and Associate Members of the Organization of the receipt of this proposal.
544. The Conference felt that the proposed amendment was desirable and would bring the provisions of Article V-1 in line with those of Article III-2 of the Constitution, and therefore, adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 13/67
c) Amendment to article V- 1 of the constitution relative to alternates attending council sessions
THE CONFERENCE
Having noted that the Government of the United States of America had presented a formal proposal for amendment of Article V, paragraph 1 of the Constitution which was intended to enable Members of the Council to appoint more than one alternate to attend Council sessions;
Recalling its Resolution No. 21/61 whereby it adopted a similar amendment to Article III, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, regarding the composition of Delegations to the Conference;
Considering that the proposed amendment would bring the provisions of Article V-1 in line with Article m-2 of the Constitution
Adopts the following amendment to Article V-1 of the Constitution:
(underlined words to be added, / bracketed / words to be deleted):
Article V-1 of the Constitution
"...Each Member of the Council may appoint / an alternate / alternates, associates and advisors to its representative..."
(Adopted 21.11. 67)
545. The Conference having noted that the Rules of Procedure of the Committee on Commodity Problems and the Committee on Fisheries provide that Member Nations of the Committees may appoint one alternate to their representatives on the Committees, recommended that these Committees consider the desirability of adopting a similar amendment to their Rules of Procedure with a view to enabling members to appoint more than one alternate.
d) Amendment to article VI-1, relative to sea-area fishery commissions
546. The Conference had before it the Report of the Forty-Eighth Session of the Council, including Resolution 3/48 which proposed that the Conference amend Article VI-1 of the Constitution of the Organization so as to allow the creation of commissions concerned with the fisheries of specific sea-areas, and which might be open to non-Member nations of FAO which are Members of the United Nations. It also had before it the report of the Eighteenth Session of the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters (CCLM), which had been requested by the Council to review the drafting of the proposed amendment, and to report its views to the Conference. The CCLM had come to the conclusion that the drafting of the proposed amendment truly reflected the intentions of the Council, and that therefore no change to the drafting as proposed was called for. However, it noted in its report that the functions of sea-area fishery commissions were exclusively advisory. The matter was introduced to
the Conference by the Chairman of the Committee on Fisheries where the proposal had originated, and by the Chairman of the CCLM.
547. In the full discussion which followed there was general agreement that it was desirable to make it possible for all nations concerned to co-operate actively in ensuring the conservation and rational harvesting of the valuable fishery resources of the world's oceans. Many delegations felt that the action proposed by the Council would be an essential and important step towards this purpose, and that therefore the proposed amendment to the Constitution should be adopted.
548. Other delegations considered the proposal of the Council to be defective, and some of them considered it unnecessary for a number of reasons. In their view it did not pay sufficient attention to the special interest of coastal states in the maintenance of the productivity of the living resources of the high seas adjacent to their territorial sea, placed too much stress on exploitation of the resources and too little on their conservation, and did not make it clear that the proposed sea-area commissions would be purely advisory in character. They considered the safeguards relating to the sovereign rights of nations regarding jurisdiction over the sea adjacent to their coasts which were contained in the proposed amendment as insufficient, and felt that the definition of sea-areas and the rights of members to the proposed commissions were not sufficiently clear. They saw a conflict of interests between developing countries, particularly those with sea coasts, and fully
developed countries with far-ranging fisheries, with the former having a superior interest in conservation and the latter in exploitation, and feared that the amendment would be to the detriment of the developing countries. They pointed out that Article VI and Article XIV of the Constitution already permitted the establishment of regional fishery commissions and that therefore there was no need to amend the Constitution. Some of these delegations considered that these matters were so complex and the whole question so important that it could not adequately be studied at the present Session of the Conference, and suggested that consideration of it should be deferred to the Fifteenth Session. The Conference also heard a statement by the observer from the Permanent Commission of the Conference for the South Pacific, supporting these views.
549. Other delegations did not think the criticisms voiced well-founded, and held the view that the urgency of the problems in world fisheries made it necessary to take the action proposed by the Council without delay. They included many developing countries who saw in the proposed action a means whereby their interests would be protected against excessive exploitation of fishery resources within their potential reach. Those in favor of the proposal also pointed out that the amendment would merely enable sea-area commissions to be established by the Conference or Council, but that action in each individual case would have to be taken with due regard for the technical requirements of each and for the wishes of Member Nations concerned.
550. Many delegations considered that it might be possible so to clarify the proposal of the Council as to meet the criticisms that had been made, and suggested that a working party should be set up to clarify the issues before the Conference and to prepare a draft resolution for its adoption which would be based on the report of the Council and on the discussions in the Conference, and which would incorporate on the one hand the amendment to the Constitution proposed by the Council, with such clarifications as might be necessary, and on the other hand further clarify the intent of the amendment to promote international collaboration in the conservation of fishery resources while at the same time safeguarding the sovereign rights of States. The suggestion to set up a working party found general acceptance, and the Conference accordingly established a working party consisting of the Delegations of Cuba, Ecuador, France, Pakistan, Peru, Poland, Senegal and the United States to
accomplish this task with the assistance of the Secretariat.
551. The working party which met under the Chairmanship of the delegate from France, carried out its task in a spirit of collaboration, elucidated a number of issues and introduced into the draft resolution which it prepared a number of clauses and amendments designed to meet certain objections that had been raised against the original proposal concerning its conceivable effects on the rights of Member Nations.
552. The resolution prepared by the working party was further amended as a result of consultations between delegations and of discussions designed to make it as generally acceptable as possible. However, when this resolution, which contained an amendment to the Constitution and therefore required a majority of more than half of the Member Nations of the Organization, was put to the vote, the results were as follows:
Number of votes cast: 60 Votes against: 14
Majority required: 59 Abstained: 14
Votes for: 46 Defective ballots: 0
The resolution was therefore not adopted.
553. Accordingly the second resolution, which contained consequential changes to the Financial Regulations and to the Basic Texts, was no more receivable as presented.
Procedure for election of council members
554. In the course of the election of Council members at the Thirteenth Session of the Conference, it was noted that under Rule XXI-9(a) of the General Rules of the Organization a secret ballot was necessary even if the number of candidates did not exceed the number of seats to be filled. The Conference, in order to save time on the voting for uncontested Council seats, suspended Rule XII-9(a) of the General Rules of the Organization so that such seats could be filled by clear general consent without the formality of a ballot. On this occasion, the Conference requested the Council to consider possibilities of amending Rule XII-9(a) so as to obviate the need of casting ballots for uncontested Council seats.
555. Having referred the question to the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters, the Council at its Forty-Seventh Session (October 1966) noted the reasons set forth in the Report of the CCLM (Document CL 47/21) in favor of leaving unchanged the procedure by secret ballot for the election of members of the Council and therefore endorsed the recommendation of the CCLM that no amendment should be made to Rule XII-9(a).
556. The Conference, having taken note of the recommendation of the CCLM, as endorsed by the Council, concurred with this recommendation and agreed that Rule X0-9(a) of the General Rules of the Organization should remain unchanged, since some loss of time at Conference sessions may be obviated by the improvement of physical and other arrangements.
Amendment to rules XXVI and XXVII of the general rules, relative to membership in the program and finance committees
557. When considering the situation created by the resignation of one member of the Program Committee and one member of the Finance Committee, who had been elected by the Forty-Sixth Session of the Council for a two-year period in accordance with Rules XXVI and XXVII of the General Rules of the Organization, the Forty-Seventh Session of the Council requested the CCLM to examine the desirability of amending the relevant provisions of the General Rules of the Organization. The purpose of such amendment was to provide that the Council should elect three instead of two alternates to both Committees in order that the number of members of these Committees should remain throughout any given biennium at a level which would enable the Committees to discharge their functions with the maximum effectiveness.
558. In addition, the Forty-Seventh Session of the Council requested the CCLM to study the appropriate manner of providing that alternates not replacing members at sessions of these Committees might follow their discussions even though they were not called upon to participate, provided that no additional expenses were involved for the Organization.
559. At its Forty-Eighth Session, the Council considered the Report of the Seventeenth Session of the CCLM and endorsed the CCLM recommendation that paragraphs 1 and 4 of Rule XXVI and paragraphs 1 and 4 of Rule XXVII of the General Rules of the Organization governing the election of members and alternates of the Program and Finance Committees and the attendance of alternates, be amended accordingly.
560. The Conference, having examined the draft amendments as proposed by the Seventeenth Session of the CCLM and endorsed by the Forty-Eighth Session of the Council (C 67/39) agreed in principle with the proposed amendments. However, at the Conference the view was expressed that alternates following the discussions of the Committees should be allowed to speak. The Conference therefore decided that such alternates would have the right to speak and to take part in the discussions, when invited to do so by the Chairmen of the respective Committees and with the concurrence of the Committees concerned.
561. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 14/67
Membership in Program and Finance Committees
THE CONFERENCE
Considering that in order to ensure that the number of members of the Program and Finance Committees should remain throughout any given biennium at a level which would enable the Committees to discharge their functions with the maximum effectiveness, it would be desirable to increase the number of alternates of both Committees from two to three;
Considering further that, provided no additional expenses are involved for the Organization it would be useful for alternates not replacing members at sessions of these Committees to follow the discussions of such Committees, even though they were not called upon to participate;
Having examined the draft amendments to Rules XXVI and XXVII of the General Rules of the Organization suggested by the Seventeenth Session of the CCLM and endorsed by the Council;
Decides to amend Rules XXVI and XXVII of the General Rules of the Organization to read as follows: (underlined words to be added, / bracketed/ words to be deleted)
Rule XXVI
1. The Program Committee provided for in paragraph 6 of Article V of the Constitution shall be composed of a Chairman, six other members, and a first, /and/ second and third alternate, all selected by the Council in a personal capacity from among qualified individuals who have shown a deep interest in the objectives of the Organization and who have participated in Conference and Council sessions and in other technical activities of the Organization. The Chairman, other members and alternates shall be elected for a period of two years at the session of the Council immediately following the regular session of the Conference. The Chairman and each other member and alternate of the Committee shall be a national of a different Member Nation. They shall be eligible for reappointment.
4. An alternate member shall be called upon to attend a Committee Session only when a member expects to be absent for the whole of that particular session. An alternate substituting for a member of the Committee shall have the same rights and privileges as a member. Providing no additional expenses (including those referred to in paragraph 9 of this Rule) are involved for the Organization, an alternate not substituting for a member may attend sessions of the Committee to follow the discussions but shall not have the right to speak nor to take part in the discussions, unless invited to do so by the Chairman with the concurrence of the Committee.
Rule XXVII
1. The Finance Committee provided for in paragraph 6 of Article V of the Constitution shall be composed of a Chairman, four other members, and a first / and / second and third alternate, all selected by the Council in a personal capacity from among individuals in the government service of Member Nations, for their special competence in finance and administration. The Chairman, other members and alternates shall be elected for a period of two years at the session of the Council immediately following the regular session of the Conference. The Chairman and each other member and alternate of the Committee shall be a national of a different Member Nation. They shall be eligible for reappointment.
4. An alternate member shall be called upon to attend a Committee session only when a member expects to be absent for the whole of that particular session. An alternate substituting for a member of the Committee shall have the same rights and privileges as a member. Providing no additional expenses (including those referred to in paragraph 9 of this Rule) are involved for the Organization, an alternate not substituting for a member may attend sessions of the Committee to follow the discussions but shall not have the right to speak nor to take part in the discussions. unless invited to do so by the Chairman with the concurrence of the Committee.
(Adopted 21.11. 67)
Amendment to rules XXIX-1 and XXX-1 of the general rules, relative to membership in the committee on commodity problems and committee on fisheries
a) Increase in membership of two committees
b) Method of balloting
a) Increase in membership of two committees
562. The Conference noted that the Council, taking into account the desire of a number of developing Member Nations, particularly from Africa, to participate in the work of the Committee on Commodity Problems (CCP) and the Committee on Fisheries (COFI), had recommended an increase in the membership of both Committees from 30 to 34 Member Nations.
563. The Conference accordingly adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 15/67
Membership of the Committee on Commodity Problems and of the Committee on Fisheries
THE CONFERENCE
Having noted paragraph 141 of the report of the Forty-Seventh Session of the Council and paragraphs 135 to 140 of the provisional report of the Forty-Eighth Session of the Council;
Acting in accordance with the provisions of Rule XXXIX of the General Rules of the Organization;
Decides to increase the membership of the Committee on Commodity Problems and of the Committee on Fisheries from 30 to 34 members;
Amends accordingly the first sentence of paragraph 1 of Rule XXIX of the General Rules of the Organization to read as follows:
"The Committee on Commodity Problems.... shall be composed of 34 Member Nations elected by the Council "
Also amends the first sentence of paragraph 1 of Rule XXX of the General Rules of the Organization to read as follows:
"The Committee on Fisheries.... shall be composed of not more than 34 Member Nations elected by the Council "
Recommends that the Council in electing the members of the aforementioned Committees should take into account the interest of developing nations in agricultural production and trade, and in fisheries resources and activities respectively.
(Adopted 21.11.67)
b) Method of balloting
564. It was however pointed out that this increase by itself would not necessarily achieve the purpose intended, i.e., the allocation of additional seats to developing Member Nations.
565. The Conference accordingly concurred with the Council's proposals regarding the method of balloting for these two Committees at the Fiftieth Session of the Council (to be held immediately after the Fourteenth Conference Session), with modifications in paragraphs (e), (g) and (h) below.
566. The system of balloting to be adopted, on a trial basis at that session will be as follows:
(a) The closing date for nomination of candidates for elections to the two Committees will be determined by the Chairman of the Council, i.e. two days before the opening of the Fiftieth Council Session;
(b) The list of the Member Nations validly nominated will be circulated to Council Members on the day before the Council Session;
(c) The names of all candidates validly nominated will be listed on the ballot paper;
(d) For the two Committees in question, Council Members will cast votes for only 30 seats in a first ballot (or in a first series of ballots, if in the initial ballot insufficient candidates received the majority required for election (Rule XII-12(a));
(e) A second ballot (or series of ballots) will be conducted to fill the remaining 4 seats, the candidates included on this second ballot paper being confined to those candidates nominated under the procedure set out in (a) above which are from the four FAO Regions of Africa, Asia and the Far East, Latin America and Near East, as defined for Council election purposes; bearing in mind also in this second ballot the criteria for selection of members of the two Committees as set out in Rules XXIX, paragraph 1 and XXX, paragraph 1 of the General Rules of the Organization.
(f) However, should less than four candidates from these four regions remain unallocated after the first ballot, then the candidates for the second ballot will include all the candidates which failed to be elected in the first ballot, irrespective of the region to which they are assigned;
(g) This system would be applied for the election of the two Committees at the Fiftieth Session of the Council in November 1967. At its Fifty-First Session (1968), the Council would reconsider the matter in the light of the experience at its Fiftieth Session, bearing in mind the alternatives which had been considered on the various occasions that this subject had been discussed in the two Committees concerned, in the Council itself, and in the Conference at its Fourteenth Session.
(h) In view of the special circumstances regarding fisheries problems, the Council will refer the matter also to the 1968 Session of the Committee on Fisheries, to be held prior to the Fifty-First Session of the Council, so that that Committee may report to the Council on any special aspects of the system of balloting which it considers the Council should take into consideration.
567. Certain delegations stated their opposition to this procedure taking into account its discriminatory and antidemocratic characteristics.
Amendment to rule XXIX-9 of the general rules, relative to attendance by non-FAO nations at CCP consultations
568. The Committee on Commodity Problems had noted in the Report of its Forty-First Session (CL 48/3, paragraph 150) that Rule XXIX-9 of the General Rules of the Organization, relating to the admission to CCP subsidiary bodies of Member States of the United Nations that are neither Member Nations nor Associate Members of FAO, was limited to Commodity Study Groups. The CCP felt that it would be desirable for an analogous provision to be incorporated in Rule XXIX in order to enable
Non-Member Nations of the Organization that were Members of the United Nations to attend consultations on individual commodities convened by the CCP and to participate fully at the discussions in such consultations with the right to vote and hold office.
569. At its Forty-Eighth Session, the Council agreed with the views of the CCP and accordingly recommended to the Conference for adoption an amendment to paragraph 9 of Rule XXIX of the General Rules of the Organization.
570. When the Conference considered the amendment recommended by the Council some delegates expressed doubts as to the desirability of extending to Commodity consultations an exceptional rule originally intended for Commodity Study Groups only: they felt that if countries wanted to participate in consultations on an equal footing with Member Nations, such countries should become members of the Organization and thus share all rights and obligations with other Member Nations. Other delegates whose countries had been represented at the sessions of the CCP or the Council, at which the proposed amendment was discussed, explained the reasons which had induced these bodies to recommend the amendment. It was pointed out in this connection that the effectiveness of international commodity consultations was sometimes contingent upon the participation of non-Member States and that in such cases their participation would be in the interests of the Organization and its Member Nations.
Certain delegates stressed that adequate safe-guards were provided by the authority vested in the Council to approve - or disapprove - the issuing of invitations to non-Member Nations.
571. Accordingly, the Conference concurred in the proposal submitted by the Council, and adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 16/67
Attendance of Non-Member Nations of the Organization at Consultations on Individual Commodities
THE CONFERENCE
Noting that the Committee on Commodity Problems in the report of its Forty-First Session expressed the view that it would be desirable to create a legal basis for inviting nations which, while not being Member Nations or Associate Members of the Organization are Members of the United Nations, to attend consultations on individual commodities and to participate in the discussions with the right to vote and to hold office;
Noting further that the Council, at its Forty-Eighth Session, endorsed the views of the Committee on Commodity Problems and recommended an amendment to Rule XXIX, paragraph 9, of the General Rules of the Organization;
Decides to amend Rule XXIX, paragraph 9, of the General Rules of the Organization to read as follows:
" The Council may admit to membership of Commodity Study Groups established by the Committee, nations which, while not Member Nations or Associate Members of the Organization, are Members of the United Nations. It may authorize the Director-General to invite at their request, nations which, while not Member Nations or Associate Members of the Organization, are Members of the United Nations, to attend consultations, convened under paragraph 1 (e) of Rule XXIV of the General Rules of the Organization, on individual commodities and participate in the discussions, with the right to vote and to hold office. Former Member Nations of the Organization that have withdrawn leaving arrears of contributions shall not be admitted to membership in Commodity Study Groups or attend consultations on individual commodities until such time as they have paid up all such arrears or the Conference has approved an arrangement for the settlement thereof, or unless the Council, in special
circumstances, decides otherwise with respect to such admission. "
(Adopted 21.11. 67)
572. As several delegates had expressed reservations with respect to the above amendment, the Conference recommended that the general question of membership of non-Member Nations who are Members of the United Nations in FAO subsidiary bodies, should be re-examined by the Council and those of its Committees to which the Council may decide to refer the matter.
Amendments to financial regulations
a) Financial regulation 4.1 (obligations against future budgetary periods)
b) Financial regulation 5.9 and basic texts, volume II, section VII
c) Financial Regulations 6. 9 and 7.1.
a) Financial regulation 4.1 (obligations against future budgetary periods)
573. The Conference noted that the Council at its Forty-Eighth Session when examining the External Auditor's Report on the accounts of the Organization's Regular Program for 1964-65, had been informed that it had been necessary for the Director-General to enter into commitments of an administrative nature which extend into future financial periods, before the Conference had voted the appropriations for such periods.
574. The Council while noting that the present text of Financial Regulation 4.1 authorises the Director-General to incur obligations against appropriations voted by the Conference, agreed that there is no legal basis for entering into commitments against budgets which have not yet been voted.
575. The Conference agreed with the Council that it is desirable for the efficient management of the Organization that the Director-General be authorised to enter into certain administrative commitments (leases for premises, contracts for office supplies and equipment and for cleaning of premises, insurance, etc. ), before the budgetary appropriations for the period to which such commitments relate, have been voted by the Conference.
576. The Conference approved the following amendment to the Financial Regulations (underlined words to be added):
Amendment to Financial Regulation IV
(a) re-number Financial Regulation 4.1 to read 4.1 (a)
(b) add a new Financial Regulation 4.1 (b) reading:
"4.1 (b) The Director-General may also incur obligations against future periods before appropriations are voted when such obligations are necessary for the continued effective functioning of the Organization. provided such obligations are restricted to administrative requirements of a continuing: nature not exceeding the scale of such requirements as authorised in the Budget of the current financial period. "
b) Financial regulation 5.9 and basic texts, volume II, section VII
577. The Conference noted that the Committee on Constitutional and legal Matters (CCLM), pursuant to a request made by the Council at its Forty-Eighth Session, had already considered the consequential amendments to the Basic Texts of the Organization which would be necessary if the amendment to Article VI-1 proposed by the Council were adopted. The CCLM had also availed itself of this opportunity to recommend further amendments to certain provisions in the Basic Texts. The need for these amendments had arisen because certain provisions had become obsolete on account of Commodity Study Groups no longer being covered by the principles applicable to Article VI Commissions and Committees since they were now subsidiary bodies of a standing committee of the Council provided for under Article V of the Constitution. Further amendments were also necessary to take into account the fact that non-Member Nations that were members of the United Nations could be admitted to membership in
subsidiary bodies of the Committee on Fisheries.
578. The Conference, having decided not to amend Article VI-1 of the Constitution nevertheless considered that it would be desirable to amend the Basic Texts to take into consideration the changed constitutional status of Commodity Study Groups and the possible membership of non-Member Nations of the Organization in subsidiary bodies of the Committee on Fisheries.
579. Accordingly, the Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 17/67
Amendment to Financial Regulations 5. 9 and to Basic Texts, Vol.II, Section VII, Entitled "Principles and Procedures which should Govern Conventions and Agreements Concluded under Articles XIV and XV of the Constitution, and Commissions and Committees Established under Article VI of the Constitution
THE CONFERENCE
Considering
1. That the Committee on Commodity Problems was no longer a body established under Article VI of the Constitution and that in 1957 it has been established under Article V, with the consequence that Commodity Study Groups provided for in Rule XXIX-9 of the General Rules of the Organization were no longer governed by the principles adopted by the Conference covering Article VI Commissions and Committees;
2. That at its Thirteenth Session it had created the Committee on Fisheries and that Rule XXX-10 of the General Rules of the Organization provides that non-Member Nations of the Organization that were members of the United Nations might be admitted to membership of subsidiary bodies of the Committee on Fisheries; and
3. The Report of the Eighteenth Session of the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters (CCLM);
Hereby Adopts the following amendments: (underlined words to be added, / bracketed / words to be deleted):
Amendment to Financial Regulation 5. 9.
"Non-Member Nations of the Organization that are members of commodity study groups; sub-committees, subsidiary working parties and study groups established by the Committee on Fisheries; or of bodies established by conventions or agreements concluded under Article XIV of the Constitution, shall contribute toward the expenses incurred by the Organization with respect to the activities of those groups or bodies in an amount determined by the Director-General except as otherwise decided by the Conference or the Council. "
Amendment to Basic Texts, Volume II, Section VII, paragraph 23
"Membership in the commissions and committees provided for in Article VI of the Constitution shall not be open to non-Member Nations of the Organization L except that such non-Member Nations as are Members of the United Nations may be admitted by the Council to membership in Commodity Study Groups. Former Member Nations of the Organization that have withdrawn leaving arrears of contributions shall not be admitted to membership in Commodity Study Groups until such time as they have paid up all such arrears or the Conference had approved an arrangement for the settlement thereof or unless the Council, in special circumstances, decides otherwise with respect to such admission"
Amendment to Basic Texts, Volume II, Section VII, paragraph 32 (iv)
"Non-Member Nations of the Organization that become members of / Commodity Study Groups or of / bodies established by conventions or agreements concluded under Article XIV of the Constitution shall / ordinarily / be required to contribute toward the expenses incurred by the Organization with respect to the activities of these / gropes or / bodies. "
(Adopted 23.11. 67)
c) Financial Regulations 6. 9 and 7.1.
(Publications Revolving Fund and FAO Magazine)
580. The Conference noted that the Council at its Forty-Seventh Session had agreed that the proceeds of sales of films and publications financed from extra budgetary funds (in particular those relating to Freedom from Hunger Campaign and World Food Program funds) may be credited back to such funds and that an amendment to Financial Regulation 6.9 was necessary to permit this.
581. The Council had also recalled the decision taken by the Conference at its Thirteenth Session that the further Development of the FAO magazine be financed through additional revenue from advertising in and subscription sales of that Magazine and noted that this also required an amendment to Financial Regulation 6.9 and a consequential amendment to Financial Regulation 7.1.
582. The Conference approved the following amendments to the Financial Regulations as recommended by the Council (underlined words to be added, / barracked / words to be deleted):
Amendment to Financial Regulation VI
FUNDS
6.9 There shall be established a Publications Revolving Fund to which shall be credited / all / the proceeds of sales of publications and films including the proceeds of sales of the FAO magazine and the revenue from advertising in that magazine, except that where extra-budgetary funds are used to finance films or publications, the proceeds of sales may be credited to such funds.
The Fund shall be used only for the following purposes:
(i) to meet the cost of reprinting those publications and re-issuing those films of the Organization for the sale of which there is a demand;
(ii) to promote within a maximum amount determined by the Conference, the sale of films and publications of the Organization / . /:
(iii) to promote within a maximum amount determined by the Conference, the Development of the FAO magazine
Any balance at the end of each financial period in excess of $10,000 as shown in the Audited Accounts of the Fund shall be transferred to Miscellaneous Income of the financial period during which the Audit is completed. "
Amendment to Financial Regulation VII
"OTHER INCOME
7.1 Contributions from Associate Members and all receipts other than:
(a) ........................
(b) ........................
(c)........................
(d)........................
(e) Revenue from advertising in the FAO magazine
shall be classed as Miscellaneous Income, for credit to the General Fund. Interest or other income ........................".
<section>j</section>
Statutory report on the status of conventions and agreements and amendments thereto
583. In accordance with paragraph 5 of Rule XXI of the General Rules of the Organization the Director-General shall report to the Conference whenever a convention, agreement, supplementary convention or agreement has, in accordance with its terms, come into force or ceased to be in force, or has been amended and the amendments come into force.
584. The Conference had before it the "Statutory Report on the Status of Conventions and Agreements and Amendments Thereto" (C 67/45), which was submitted in accordance with the above requirement.
585. The Conference also considered documents C 67/45-Sup. 1 and Sup. 2 regarding the amendment to Article IV of the "Convention placing the International Poplar Commission within the framework of FAO" which was adopted by the Second Special Session of the International Poplar Commission held on 30 October 1967.
586. The Conference approved the Statutory Report mentioned above and in conformity with the provisions of Article XII-3 of the Convention Placing the International Poplar Commission within the Framework of FAO adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 18/67
Amendment to Article IV of the Convention Placing the International Poplar Commission within the Framework of FAO
THE CONFERENCE
Considering the terms of Article IV of the Convention placing the International Poplar Commission within the framework of FAO, in accordance with which "each contracting Nation shall make provision, as soon as possible and to the best of its ability, for the establishment of a National Poplar Commission.... ";
Considering further that the Government of Canada, by Note Verbale of 29 December 1966 formally proposed an amendment to that provision, designed to enable the parties to the Convention to choose between the establishment of a National Poplar Commission and the designation of some other suitable national body to discharge the functions which would otherwise be incumbent on the National Poplar Commission;
Noting that the Convention, in accordance with Article XII, paragraphs 1 and 3 thereof, may be amended by the Commission by a two-thirds majority of its membership, and that amendments become effective only with the concurrence of the FAO Conference and as from the date of such concurrence;
Noting further that the International Poplar Commission at its Second Special Session held on 30 October 1967, adopted by the required two-thirds majority of its membership, the amendment to Article IV of the aforementioned Convention as proposed by the Government of Canada;
Approves the amendment to Article IV of the Convention as adopted by the Second Special Session of the International Poplar Commission, the text of which reads as follows: (words added are underlined)
" Each contracting Nation shall make provision as soon as possible and to the best of its ability, either for the establishment of a National Poplar Commission, or, if not possible, for the designation of some other suitable national body, and shall transmit a description of the competence and scope of the National Commission or other body and of any changes thereto, to the Director-General of the Organization who shall circulate this information to the other Member Nations of the Commission. Each contracting Nation shall communicate to the Director-General the publications of its National Commission or other body. "
(Adopted 21.11. 67)
587. The Conference suggested that the form of the English text of this amendment should be improved so as to conform to the French and Spanish texts, which were more precise. To this end, it recommended that the International Poplar Commission adopt an English text to read: "or, if this is not possible", and of such other body".
Relationship agreements with international organizations
a) Draft agreement between FAO and the organization of African unity (OAU)
b) Progress regarding relationship agreements with Area banks
a) Draft agreement between FAO and the organization of African unity (OAU)
588. The Conference noted with satisfaction that considerable progress had been made towards the conclusion of a formal agreement establishing relations between FAO and OAU. Being informed that agreement had been reached on all but one question, the Conference hoped that it would be possible for the formal agreement to be approved in the near future.
b) Progress regarding relationship agreements with Area banks
589. The Conference noted with satisfaction the progress made in establishing formal working relations with the African Development Bank and the Asian Development Bank, and also the stage reached in discussions which were under way with the Inter-American Development Bank and the Central American Bank of Economic Integration. The Conference expressed its strong support for co-operative activities with the area banks.
590. The Conference had before it the text of a Memorandum of Understanding Regarding Co-operation between FAO and the African Development Bank and a Note on Procedure for ad hoc Co-operative Action between FAO and the Asian Development Bank. These instruments had been approved by the Council at its Forty-Ninth Session, subject to confirmation by the Conference, in accordance with Rule XXIV-4(c) of the General Rules of the Organization. The Conference was advised that the agreements, while already being implemented on an ad hoc basis, were subject to adoption by the respective governing bodies of the African Development Bank and the Asian Development Bank.
591. The Conference decided to confirm these instruments, and adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 19/67
Arrangements with the African Development Bank and the Asian Development Bank
THE CONFERENCE
Considering the desirability of establishing close co-operation between the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and both the African Development Bank and the Asian Development Bank on matters of common concern;
Noting that the Forty-Ninth Session of the Council, acting in accordance with the provisions of Rule XXIV-4(c) of the General Rules of the Organization, had approved a Memorandum of Understanding Regarding Cooperation between FAO and the African Development Bank and a Note on Procedure for ad hoc Co-operative Action between FAO and the Asian Development Bank, subject to confirmation by the Conference;
Confirms the decision of the Forty-Ninth Session of the Council approving the above-mentioned instruments, the texts of which are reproduced as Appendices E and F hereto.
(Adopted 21.11.67)
Relations with international organizations and granting of consultative status to international non-governmental organizations
592. The Conference took note of the report (C 67/49), which the Director-General had submitted in accordance with the policy governing relations with international organizations, adopted at the Seventh Session of the Conference. It also noted that since the issue of the report, the International Society of Soil Science had been granted Specialized Consultative Status, and the European Committee of Sugar Manufacturers had been granted Liason Status.
African convention for the conservation and management of wildlife
593. The Conference learned that, following a recommendation of its 11th Session held in 1961, the ad hoc Working Party on Wildlife Management of the FAO African Forestry Commission had prepared, in consultation with interested African Member Nations, a draft African Convention for the Conservation and Management of Wildlife. At a session held at Fort-Lamy, Chad, in February 1967, this Working Party had evolved a procedure to be followed for the formal adoption of this convention as drafted.
594. The Conference was informed that earlier a Conference on Natural Resources, held in Lagos in 1964, under the sponsorship of Unesco and the UN Economic Commission for Africa, had recommended that the Organization for African Unity (OAU) entrust to the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN), assisted by Unesco and FAO, the preparation of a draft convention on all natural resources. In turn, the Council of Ministers of OAU, at its 9th Session in Kinshasa in September 1967, had expressed the desire for a single convention covering all natural resources.
595. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 20/67
African Convention for the Conservation and Management of Wildlife
THE CONFERENCE
Expresses its satisfaction with the draft Wildlife Convention drawn up by the African Forestry Commission's ad hoc Working Party on Wildlife Management, as meeting the urgent needs of member countries and particularly of the services in Africa responsible for the conservation and management of wildlife;
Requests the Director-General to transmit as soon as possible the text of this draft Convention to the Governments of Member Nations of Africa, inviting them to take it into account in revising their national legislation;
Considers that the finalization of a comprehensive Convention on the Conservation and Management of all natural resources will require very considerable time and, therefore;
Invites the Director-General of FAO to examine with Unesco, the Organization for African Unity (OAU), and the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) the possibility of formally presenting a single instrument to a diplomatic conference of African States, this instrument to include a protocol on the conservation and wise use of all natural resources and a detailed convention on the conservation and management of wildlife in Africa;
Authorizes the Director-General to call such a diplomatic conference jointly with the other interested organizations in the event of it being possible to draw up the said single instrument;
Invites the Director-General, further, to examine later with the organizations concerned the formulation of a similarly detailed convention on the conservation and management of other natural resources.
(Adopted 23.11. 67)
596. The Pakistan Delegation expressed the wish that a similar instrument be drawn up for South East Asia, including a convention for the conservation and management of wildlife and appropriate provisions to cover all other natural resources.
Membership of the FAO/UNICEF joint policy committee
597. In examining the Director-General's report on FAO/UNICEF relations (CL 48/11), the Council at its Forty-Eighth Session also considered the question whether it would be desirable for FAO to assume the cost of travel and subsistence allowances for one delegate of each member of the FAO/ UNICEF Joint Policy Committee appointed by FAO. In this connection, the Council noted that this practice had been followed by UNICEF.
598. The Council was cognizant of the fact that, according to paragraph 32 (ii) of the Principles governing conventions and agreements as well as bodies established under Article VI of the Constitution, the expenses of members of Article VI bodies attending sessions as government representatives were to be borne by the respective government. As this Principle had been adopted by the Conference, any departure therefrom would be subject to authorization by the Conference.
599. Since Members of the Council had expressed divergent opinions as to the action which might be recommended to the Conference, the Council decided that this question should be summitted to the Conference for consideration; it recommended, however, that if the Conference should grant an exception to the aforementioned principle in the case of the FAO/UNICEF Joint Policy Committee, it should be clearly specified that this exception should not be construed as a precedent.
600. In reply to the question from one delegate, it was stated that the costs referred to above were estimated at approximately US$5,000 for the biennium.
601. During the debate in the Conference, in the light of document C 67/42, several delegates expressed the opinion that it would not be desirable to allow for an exception from the Principles which were applicable to all Article VI Bodies, including bodies established jointly with other agencies; in this connection, one delegate suggested that FAO might explore possibilities of obtaining an alignment of UNICEF policy in this matter with the FAO Principles referred to above.
602. However, the majority of delegates who took part in the debate were in favor of granting an exception with a view to ensuring that members appointed by FAO to the FAO/UNICEF Joint Policy Committee should enjoy equal treatment with members appointed by UNICEF, and bearing in mind that the payment by the Organization of attendance cost of one delegate of each FAO-appointed member would result in a better representation at sessions, particularly from developing countries.
603. After having examined the various implications, the Conference decided to make an exception to the Principle referred to above with respect to the travel and subsistence allowances for one delegate of each Member of the FAO/UNICEF Joint Policy Committee appointed by FAO. In taking this decision, the Conference stressed however that this exception should not be construed as a precedent.
Review of FAO commissions, committees, working parties and panels of experts established under articles V, VI and XIV of the constitution
a) Request of the conference at its thirteenth session
b) Review by the technical committees of the conference
c) Criteria for the establishment of FAO commissions, committees, working parties and panels of experts
d) Sessions of FAO bodies - their number and length
e) Financial aspects in 1968/69
f) Documentation
g) Continuation of council's review
a) Request of the conference at its thirteenth session
604. At its Thirteenth Session (November - December 1965), the Conference had requested the Council to undertake over a four-year cycle the review of all FAO commissions, committees and working parties of governments and of experts, as well as panels of experts, to ensure that they are maintained only for the length of time required to accomplish their main purpose and avoid proliferation and duplication of functions.
605. The Conference had commented on the large number of FAO sessions which both delegates and staff had to prepare for and attend. The financial burden of sending delegations to sessions was another factor which governments had to take into consideration. At the same time the Conference noted with satisfaction the steps already taken by the Director-General to ensure that sessions of statutory bodies and ad hoc conferences and consultations were planned so as to render participation by governments and staff as effective as possible.
606. At its Forty-Seventh Session (October 1966) the Council had undertaken the first stage of this review, and requested the Director-General to provide the material necessary to conduct the second stage of the review at its Forty-Ninth Session (October 19673. At its Forty-Eighth Session (June 1967) the Council made some further recommendations concerning the conduct of the review.
607. The Council had also referred to the Technical Committees of the Conference a review of FAO statutory bodies and their functions, on the basis of documents CL 49/6 and CL 49/6-Sup. 1.
608. At its Forty-Ninth Session, accordingly, the Council deferred the detailed review of the achievements of the existing bodies and their proposed activities for 1968/69 in view of the fact that the reports of the Technical Committees thereon were not available at the time of the Council session.
b) Review by the technical committees of the conference
609. The Technical Committee did not have time to go into the matter in depth. For the most part they contented themselves with approving the activities of existing bodies and recommending their continuation.
610. The Conference recommended:
(a) The abolition of the Regional Fisheries Commission for Western Africa in view of the establishment of a FAO Fishery Committee for the Eastern Central Atlantic;
(b) The abolition of the Panel of Fishery Experts because there were sufficient alternative facilities for obtaining expert advice in the field of fisheries.
611. At the same time the Conference noted that the Committee on Fisheries had abolished the Working Party on the Rational Utilization of the Fishery Resources of the Indian Ocean, and changed the title of the FAO Panel of Experts on Fish Protein Concentrates for Human Consumption to FAO Panel of Experts on Fish Utilization.
612. The Conference noted that the European Forestry Commission at its Thirteenth Session had abolished its Working Party on Chestnut, and the Near East Forestry Commission at its Fifth Session had dissolved its Working Party on Watershed and Forest Range Management and Working Party on Forestry Education and Research.
c) Criteria for the establishment of FAO commissions, committees, working parties and panels of experts
613. The Conference declared itself concerned with the proliferation of FAO statutory bodies. The Conference accordingly drew attention to the alternative possibilities of convening ad hoc conferences and consultations under Article VI, paragraph 5, of the Constitution, where there was insufficient evidence of the need for a permanent body to deal with technical matters.
614. Where a permanent body seemed desirable, the Conference concurred with the proposal that the establishment of such bodies be given thorough consideration by the establishing organ under the following constitutional provisions:
(a) World-wide commissions or regional commissions of Member Nations - (Article VI-1; Article XIV)
(b) Committees and working parties of selected Member Nations - (Article VI-2)
(c) Committees of experts, working parties of experts, and panels of experts, comprising individuals selected in personal capacity - (Articles VI-2 and VI-4)
615. The function of the bodies described above is normally to permit an exchange of information between government delegates or experts and to tender advice to the Director-General who brings relevant issues to the attention of the Council and Conference. In the case of subsidiary bodies, they transmit their reports through the parent body.
616. In the light of the foregoing considerations, the Conference adopted the following criteria:
Criteria
Comments
(i) That there is an identifiable problem of sufficient importance in the subject matter field. If the problem is of a general nature, it can usually be handled by another body, such as a regional commission, the Council of the Conference (including technical Committees of the Conference).
(ii) That the problem or problems are of persistent character or of a recurring nature and one that requires continuing consultation between governments or by experts. If the problem is not persistent or is not likely to recur, the use of ad hoc conferences or consul consultations should be considered.
(iii) That there are insufficient existing machinery and facilities within or outside the Organization in the relevant area of work. Alternative solutions to the problem should first be considered e.g. by correspondence - by the secretariat - by use of consultants - by other existing bodies or panels of experts - by ad hoc conferences or consultations
(iv) That it is reasonable to believe that useful results can be achieved by consultation between governments or with experts. The type of action required will determine whether it is to be an intergovernmental or expert body.
(v) That the body proposed is so composed as to provide adequate opportunity to all those interested and those able to make an effective contribution to participate in the work of the body; and that there are reasonable prospects of active participation by the members of the body. Consideration should be given to the type of body to be established (worldwide, regional, selected governments, or experts appointed in a personal capacity) in the light of this criterion.
(vi) That the matters to be considered require the attention of specialists in the given field. If specialists in the given field are not available or are not likely to attend sessions, then a more general body could handle the matter (e. g. a regional commission, a regional conference, the Council or the Conference).
(vii) That the results of the work of the body will be of immediate or long-range benefit to a reasonable number of the interested Member Nations of the Organization. 
617. The same criteria should be kept in mind when establishing subsidiary bodies under Articles V, VI and XIV of the Constitution.
d) Sessions of FAO bodies - their number and length
618. The Conference noted that the Organization's Conference and Operations Branch and other related units were assuming the function of helping to keep down, within the Organization, the number of meetings planned and their duration. The need for such control had recently been again stressed by the UN ad hoc Committee of Fourteen. The Conference hoped that tighter controls would tend to dampen enthusiasm for new statutory bodies.
619. The Conference agreed with the conclusion of the Council that the term "dependent bodies" as employed by the UN ad hoc Committee could be appropriately construed as comprising, in the case of FAO, commissions, committees or working parties of Member Nations or experts established under Articles VI and XIV of the Constitution, as well as any subsidiary bodies established by them. The term would also comprise the sub committees, study groups, working parties, and other subsidiary bodies of the Committee on Commodity Problems and the Committee on Fisheries set up under Rules XXIX-9 and XXX-10 of the General Rules of the Organization.
620. The Conference noted that the request to convene additional sessions of bodies of Member Nations frequently emanated from the government delegates themselves and that accordingly it lay primarily with the Member Governments of such bodies, when briefing their delegates attending sessions of those bodies, to ensure that requests for unscheduled sessions were not made.
621. The Conference noted, however, that in the implementation of Resolution No. 21/67, a number of occasions might arise where unscheduled sessions would be desirable in the case of commodity study groups of the Committee on Commodity Problems, and in the cases of subsidiary bodies of the Committee on Fisheries and the Advisory Committee of Experts on Marine Resources Research. It therefore recognized that in convening previously unscheduled sessions of these bodies the Director-General might, subject to the availability of funds, need to make exceptions because of circumstances peculiar to these areas of work.
622. In the cases mentioned in paragraphs 620 and 621 above the chairman and the Director-General's representatives attending the sessions would be in a good position to intervene with respect to requests for such additional sessions. The Conference noted that this might well also be done in the case of panels of experts established under Article VI-4 of the Constitution, where a similar proliferation of sessions might occur.
623. As a further means of achieving the purposes of the recommendation, the Conference decided that in future the statutes of any new dependent bodies should include a provision regarding both the frequency and duration of their sessions and that this requirement should also apply to any subsidiary bodies which the dependent bodies might establish . Likewise, the Committee on Commodity Problems and the Committee on Fisheries should include similar provisions in the statutes of any new subsidiary bodies they might establish in future. Statutes of existing bodies should be amended accordingly as opportunity arises.
624. In the light of the foregoing considerations, the Conference adopted the following resolution, and decided that the text of the resolution be incorporated as an addendum into Volume II of the Basic Texts:
Resolution No. 21/67
Sessions of FAO Commissions, Committees and Working Parties and of their Subsidiary Bodies
THE CONFERENCE
Noting the recommendation of the United Nations' ad hoc Committee to Examine the Finances of the United Nations and Specialized Agencies, to the effect that no dependent body should be permitted to increase the number or length of its sessions already authorized without the specific approval of the organ which established it;
Considering that this recommendation, as regards its implementation with respect to FAO, should be construed as applying to commissions, committees and working parties of Member Nations and of experts established under Articles VI and XIV of the FAO Constitution, and their subsidiary bodies, as well as to subsidiary bodies of committees of the Council established under Article V;
Recognizing that a literal implementation of the aforementioned recommendation of the ad hoc Committee would result in serious practical difficulties;
Realizing however that the objectives of such recommendation can be achieved by the exercise of appropriate controls by the Conference and Council;
Aware that the procedures under which FAO operates require advance approval by the Conference of the Program of Work and Budget for the subsequent biennium and that the Program of Work and Budget for 1968/69 includes a complete list of sessions of statutory bodies and subsidiary bodies and of other conferences and consultations which the Director-General proposes for the biennium (C 67/3-Sup. 1-Rev. 1);
Decides that sessions of FAO bodies, other than those sessions listed in the Program of Work for the relevant biennium, should only be convened in exceptional circumstances;
Authorizes the Director-General to make such exceptions when in his view such action is necessary for the fulfillment of the Program of Work as approved by the Conference, subject however to such exceptions being reported to the session of the Council immediately following such action;
Invites Member Governments to draw the attention of their delegates attending sessions of bodies of Member Nations to the need to adhere to the schedule of sessions provided for in the approved Program of Work;
Decides that the terms of this Resolution shall apply equally to the convening of unscheduled sessions of panels of experts established under Article VI-4 of the Constitution;
Decides that in the case of new bodies to be established under Article VI or XIV of the Constitution, or subsidiary bodies established by the latter, a provision should be included in the Convention, Agreement, Statutes or Rules of Procedure, as appropriate, limiting the frequency and duration of sessions of such bodies; and that the statutes of existing bodies should be amended accordingly as opportunity arises;
Further decides that the Committee on Commodity Problems and the Committee on Fisheries should include similar limitations in the statutes of any new subsidiary bodies which they may establish; and that the statutes of existing subsidiary bodies be amended accordingly as opportunity arises;
Requests the Director-General to bring this Resolution to the attention of the chairmen and members of bodies of experts and, if necessary, also of intergovernmental bodies, in the event of any proposals formulated by them to convene unscheduled sessions.
(Adopted 21.11. 67)
e) Financial aspects in 1968/69
625. The Conference noted the explanation given by the Finance Committee to the Council (CL 49/14, paragraphs 6 to 11) and in particular its recommendation, after a full examination, not to propose a reduction in the financial provision for meetings in 1968/69. The Conference agreed that the total provisions proposed in relation to meetings for each Division should be presented in future budget documents as clearly and comprehensively as practicable.
f) Documentation
626. While the Conference considered the early release and wide distribution of technical reports from statutory bodies to be most important, it again drew attention to the views expressed elsewhere in this report, concerning planning documentation for statutory bodies in direct relation to the Organization's capacity for translating, processing and issuing such documentation.
g) Continuation of council's review
627. The Conference requested the Council to continue its systematic review of FAO's statutory bodies, taking account where appropriate of the views of the parent bodies of the abovementioned subsidiary organs. The Conference suggested this might, at least in part, be done at the same time as the Council carried out its periodic reviews of the activities of the several sectors of the Organization. The Council should also ensure that bodies which have accomplished their main purpose should not be maintained in existence, and that new bodies should not be established except after careful examination of such proposals in the light of the criteria adopted by the Conference.
628. The Conference also requested a more logical arrangement of the material appearing in the annual Directory of Statutory Bodies, and the incorporation into it of a review of the achievements and proposed activities of each of the bodies listed, based upon the material submitted in document CL 49/6, brought up to date and suitably expanded where necessary.
Authority and terms of reference of regional conferences
629. The historical evolution and the chain of Council and Conference directions, leading to the present status and terms of reference of Regional Conferences, as detailed in document C 67/43, were noted, and the Conference carefully examined the proposals put forward by the Director-General in respect of the approach that might be adopted for the 1968 series of Regional Conferences.
630. In regard to the former, the Conference stressed the growing importance of Regional Conferences as a forum for local examination of regional problems and requirements; the consequent need for a review of their authority and terms of reference in keeping with their major role in providing guidance to the Director-General for preparation of his overall proposals with respect to the program of work and budget; and the necessity of considering their future relationship with both regional FAO technical commissions and the Regional Economic Commissions of the United Nations, in making an essentially practical contribution to overall economic and social integration and Development.
631. However, on account of time limitation and in view of their close inter-relationship with the overall structure of the Organization, and with the review of the regional framework in particular, the Conference agreed that the authority and terms of reference of Regional Conferences should be given full attention by appropriate bodies existing or to be established by the Conference to study the details and implications of the reorganization of FAO's structure during the coming biennium.
632. The Conference agreed that the ad hoc Committee on Organization should carefully examine the reorganization of Regional Conferences within the framework of measures proposed for reorganization of the regional structure. It was on the basis of such guidance that the Director-General would prepare a revision of the authority and terms of reference of Regional Conferences for submission to the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters.
633. The Conference also noted the suggestion that due consideration be given to changing the name of the FAO Conference to the FAO General Assembly, so as to distinguish it from other general or regional conferences of the Organization.
634. The matter of suspension of future sessions of the European Regional Conference was raised. A substantial number of Member Nations consulted expressed themselves in favor of maintaining the European Regional Conference, and for that reason the Director-General was asked to schedule the next European Regional Conference in 1968.
635. Turning to the proposals contained in document C 67/43 Add. 1, the Conference noted with approval that these suggestions for reorientation were made as an interim measure to allow the 1968 series of Regional Conferences, including the European Regional Conference, to continue in helping the Director-General prepare his next Program of Work and Budget, pending re-examination of their authority and terms of reference, the results of which could only be considered by the Conference at its next session
636. The Conference agreed with the broad outlines proposed for the agenda of the next series of Regional Conferences. It noted the effort made to meet many of the criticisms on Regional Conference organization raised at the last series. Greater opportunity would be offered for examination in depth of the FAO activities and organizational arrangements in the region and for its adjustment in the light of the expressed needs of the countries of the region, and also problems common to two or more countries of the region requiring co-ordinated action and technical assistance and aid. Introduction of the IWP as a main theme was also approved as a means of orienting such short-term action within long-term objectives; and discussion of the Regional Studies of the IWP would constitute a useful preparatory stage for debate on this matter.
637. The Conference finally noted that the stage of preparation of agenda items for the 1968 Regional Conferences would permit informal discussion between delegations and the Regional Representatives before the close of the Fourteenth Session of the Conference.
Arrangements for future sessions of the conference
a) Role of the technical committees of the conference
b) Committee on fisheries
c) Organization of conference sessions
d) Procedure for the appointment of the director-general
a) Role of the technical committees of the conference
638. Under the General Rules of FAO the Conference is empowered to establish committees "for the consideration of the technical activities of the Organization" (XV-3). In this connection, the Conference recalled that it had become customary to establish six Technical Committees, to meet just prior to the subsequent session of the Conference, the convening and closing dates as well as their agenda being determined by the Council. In accordance with General Rule XV-3, the terms of reference of Technical Committees so established are as follows:
(a) Review the activities of the biennium coming to an end relating to the regular, technical assistance and other programs;
(b) Consider from a technical standpoint the different chapters of the draft Program of Work for the ensuing biennium;
(c) Consider the trends of the Program of Work beyond the ensuing biennium;
(d) Study such items as may be specifically referred to it by the Council.
639. The Conference also recalled that the Council had requested the General Rapporteur on the Work of the Technical Committees, in co-operation with the Rapporteurs of the six Technical Committees, to prepare a report on their experience in connection with the Fourteenth Session of the Conference. The Conference further recalled that the question of how the Technical Committees could best contribute to the work of the Conference had been considered on numerous occasions in both the Council and the Conference. Efforts had been made to ensure (i) that discussions in the Technical Committees and Commission II of the Conference did not duplicate each other, (ii) that the Technical Committees considered the work of the Organization from a technical standpoint while Commission II concentrated on the policy aspects and decisions required of the Conference, and (iii) that pressures arising from the specialized interests of various subject-matter groups should not create imbalances
in the Program of Work.
640. The Conference also recalled that, following a study of the problem by the Director-General in consultation with Member Governments, and consideration of the matter by the Council, the Conference, in its Thirteenth Session, had decided again to establish six Technical Committees to meet during the period immediately preceding the Conference, at dates fixed by the Council.
641. The Conference noted that substantial efforts had already been made by the Council and by earlier sessions of the Conference to find a satisfactory division of responsibilities between the Technical Committees and Commission II of the Conference; noted also the highly commendable efforts of the General Rapporteur on the Work of the Technical Committees to carry out his assignment within the present framework; agreed that a satisfactory framework had not yet been evolved; and requested the Council to re-study the matter with a view to again trying new approaches in methods of work and/or in the timing of the Technical Committee sessions, and their method of reporting to Commission II, and thus more nearly achieving the objective of a satisfactory division of functions and responsibilities between the Technical Committees on the one hand, and Commission II on the other.
642. The Conference decided again to establish in principle six Technical Committees, to meet if the Council should decide and at such times prior to the Fifteenth Session of the Conference as the Council should decide, as follows:
Technical Committee on Agriculture
Technical Committee on Economics and Social Affairs
Technical Committee on Fisheries
Technical Committee on Forestry
Technical Committee on Nutrition
Technical Committee on Publications, Public Relations and Legal Affairs.
The Conference also decided to delegate to the Council the authority to change the names of the Technical Committees in the event the re-organization of FAO's structure so requires and, notwithstanding General Rule XV, pare. 3, to determine whether they should meet.
643. The Conference requested the Council, in its review of the arrangements for the Fifteenth Session of the Conference, to schedule substantive items for consideration by the Commissions, to the maximum extent practicable, prior to the time Commission II is scheduled to review the related budgetary and financial aspects.
644. The Conference noted that some of the Technical Committees had expressed the view that present arrangements for them to evaluate the activities of the Organization were not wholly satisfactory and could be improved. For instance the information provided in document C 67/25 The Work of FAO in regard to 1966/67 was not entirely adequate for this purpose. It suggested, therefore, that another look be taken by the Council during 1968 at the form of the background documentation, so as to allow a thorough review of the work done in the biennium coming to an end under all programs. The Conference also felt that a review of future trends could only be effectively performed if Member Governments were to be provided, in addition to the customary material, with a paper in regard to each major field of activity of the Organization, far enough ahead of the session of the Conference. This paper should be of a nature to assist governments in evaluating together the 1968/69 work, the
1970/71 program, and future trends, including both the practicability and desirability of shifts in emphasis.
<section>k</section>
b) Committee on fisheries
645. The Conference noted that the Technical Committee had expressed some concern that there was danger of overlapping between the work of the Committee on Fisheries established under Article V of the Constitution and the Technical Committee of the Conference in the area that concerns the program of work of the Department of Fisheries. The important function of the Article V Committee was recognized, in offering advice on the formulation of the program of work at an early stage of its Development, at its session in the inter-conference year but the detailed technical review of the program when formulated was considered to be the proper function of the Technical Committee it self. The Conference thought that the problem could perhaps be resolved by the Article V Committee placing much greater emphasis on its program function in inter-Conference years than in Conference years, but felt that it was not yet possible to come to firm conclusions so early in the life of the Article
V Committee.
c) Organization of conference sessions
646. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 22/67
Organization of Conference Sessions
THE CONFERENCE
Considering that under present working arrangements it is unable to examine in detail even the most important questions appearing on its agenda, or to exert to the full its influence on the Organization's Program of Work, or, again, to give worthwhile emphasis, in its report, to the conclusions reached in its deliberations;
Invites the Council, in the light of experience at the Fourteenth Session of the Conference, to study as quickly as possible, but in any event not later than the Fifty-First Session of the Council, by procedures it deems most appropriate, and in collaboration with the Director-General such reforms as should be made in the organization of Conference sessions in order to permit the fullest examination of the basic problems on the agenda, the formulation of guidance to the Director-General and the adoption of a report fully reflecting the conclusions reached in the Conference's deliberations.
(Adopted 23.11.67)
d) Procedure for the appointment of the director-general
647. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 23/67
Procedure for the Appointment of the Director-General
THE CONFERENCE
Recognizing that the office of Director-General is that of chief administrative and executive head of FAO;
Recognizing further that the main purpose of the biennial session of the Conference is to determine the policy of this Organization and to exercise the constitutional and administrative functions conferred upon it, and that the Conference needs all the time available to accomplish these primary purposes effectively;
Noting that the present procedures for the election of the Director-General have become unwieldy and extremely time-consuming, and thus seriously detract from the ability of the Conference in an election year to perform effectively its primary functions;
Believing that it may be possible within the provisions of the Constitution and the General Rules of the Organization, to propose procedures for selecting the Director-General which would not pre-empt the time of the Conference in an election year as at the Fourteenth Session and thus limit the ability of the Conference to carry out its primary functions;
Recommends that an ad hoc committee be appointed by the Council to report directly to the Council, and the Council in turn to submit its report on the question of the procedures for the election of the Director-General to the Conference at its Fifteenth Session (1969), and to suggest an alternative to the present procedure and possibly to the timing of the election.
Use of languages other than FAO's present working languages
a) Introduction of Arabic as a limited working language
b) Introduction of German for interpretation in the general conferences as well as in the regional conferences for Europe
c) Other language services
648. The Conference considered the questions of the introduction of Arabic and German interpretation in FAO on the basis of a report from the Council arising from its Forty-Ninth Session (C 67/LIM/9), and of a general study on the aspects and implications of the introduction of additional languages in FAO (CL 49/8), together with five specific proposals presented by the Director-General, as follows:
(i) That Arabic be adopted as a limited working language in terms such as proposed by the Eighth Regional Conference for the Near East in 1967.
(ii) That facilities for interpretation from and into German be provided in future at plenary and commission meetings of the FAO biennial Conference as also at the plenary meetings of the Regional Conference for Europe.
(iii) That the Council should entrust the Program Committee with the task of initial and periodic review of the Organization's language policy and practice, including all future proposals for changes or additions in the light of the criteria suggested in paragraph 5.5 of the consultant's report. The review should specifically include the definition of the concept of "working language" for various purposes and the classification of conferences and sessions from the point of view of the use of languages.
(iv) That the Council should endorse the proposal that, within available resources, the Organization should be in a position to award token subsidies to encourage the publication of suitably selected FAO works in any language.
(v) That the Council should authorize the issue, within available resources, of some public information material in selected non-working languages, including Arabic and German. "
a) Introduction of Arabic as a limited working language
649. The Conference expressed almost unanimous support for the adoption of Arabic in the terms proposed by the Director-General in paragraph 648, sub-paragraph (i) above, on the basis of the following considerations. Arabic is the official language of fifteen Member Nations and two Associate Members, i. e. the largest group of users of any one language apart from the present three working languages. Its cultural value was unquestioned, and this would be the first non-European language to be used by FAO. Limited services in Arabic were already being provided in Unesco and in the ILO. The financial implications were limited to an amount of $16,000 to cover the cost of interpretation at the Ninth Regional Conference for the Near East and at the technical meetings scheduled to take place in the Near East Region in 1969, an expenditure which the Director-General expected to be able to absorb within the proposed Budget. With regard to the cost of Arabic interpretation at plenary
and commission meetings of the Fifteenth Session of the Conference, estimated at about $40,000, the Director-General proposed to initiate discussions with Arabic-speaking countries in order to consider ways and means of financing the expenditure.
650. Accordingly the Conference approved the adoption of Arabic as a limited working language and that it be used for interpretation in the FAO Conference Sessions, as well as the Near East regional and technical conferences as from the Ninth Near East Regional Conference and the Fifteenth Session of the FAO Conference. The Conference further requested the Director-General to study the necessary measures for translating into Arabic certain documents and publications of FAO within the agreed limits of a specific schedule.
b) Introduction of German for interpretation in the general conferences as well as in the regional conferences for Europe
651. The Conference noted that the proposal for the use of German was limited Reinterpretation at the FAO Conference sessions and conferences of Member Nations in the European Region, and did not involve the adoption of German as an official or working language, nor the presentation of documents in German The offer made by the Federal Republic of Germany defray two-thirds of the cost of these services, estimated at $75,000 for the 1968/69 biennium, was also noted.
652. In the subsequent discussion, it was emphasized that the justification for the use of the German language was based on its importance for communication in technical, scientific and economic matters, particularly in FAO's fields of work, on the wide audience of the German language beyond the frontiers of German-speaking countries, and on the considerable financial contribution of German-speaking countries to the budget of the Organization.
653. On the other hand a few delegations opposed the proposal for the introduction of German on various grounds. These delegations expressed the opinion that the importance of the German language for communication in technical and scientific fields and the size of the financial contribution of German speaking countries would not be the pertinent criteria which could justify the introduction of German interpretation at FAO conferences on the basis of the Report prepared by a competent consultant (CL 49/8). They also felt that other criteria mentioned in the report, such as the number of German speaking countries, would even be against the introduction of German interpretation, and that in their opinion proposals for additional languages are almost bound to proliferate with each new claim. Therefore, any decision in favor of a new language would tend to create a precedent leading to further claims.
654. The proposal was approved accordingly.
c) Other language services
655. A few delegations, while expressing reservations about the introduction of additional languages, did not wish to oppose the consensus of opinion reached for the Arabic language, as referred to in paragraph 650 above. The Conference agreed that the introduction of the Arabic language should not be taken as setting a precedent for the introduction of other languages. Moreover, the Conference was impressed by the likely hood that further claims might be pressed. The Conference therefore decided that the Council should entrust the Program Committee with the task of initial and periodic review of the Organization's language policy and practice, including all future proposals for changes or additions in the light of applicable criteria; such a review to include specifically the definition of the concepts of working language and official language for various purposes and classification of conferences and sessions from the point of view of the use of languages. In this Review,
the Conference recognized that the claim for the use of Portuguese in governmental meetings in the Latin American region would require serious consideration.
656. Four delegations felt that all or at least a major part of the cost of introducing further new languages should be borne by the countries having a primary interest in their introduction.
657. The Conference also agreed that, within available budgetary resources, the Director-General should be authorized to award token subsidies to assist in the publication of suitably selected FAO publications in languages other than FAO working languages.
658. Finally, the Conference agreed that the Council should authorize the issue, within available budgetary resources of some Public information material in selected non-working languages.
B. Financial matters
Audited accounts
Financial position of the organization
Scale of contributions 1968/69
Contributions and advances by new members nations and associate members
Reimbursement of withdrawals from the working capital fund
Audited accounts
a) Regular program and freedom from hunger campaign audited accounts for 1964/65
b) European commission for the control of foot-and-mouth disease audited accounts for 1965 and 1966
c) United nations development program special fund and technical assistance sectors
d) World food program audited accounts for 1965
(a) Regular Program and Freedom from Hunger Campaign, 1964/65
(b) European Commission for the Control of Foot-and-Mouth Disease, 1965 and 1966
(c) United Nations Development Program:
(i) Special Fund Sector, 1965 and 1966
(ii) Technical Assistance Sector, 1965 and 1966
(d) World Food Program, 1965
659. The Conference considered the above accounts and stressed the importance of the reports of the External Auditor. It called attention to the desirability of broadening the scope of audits in line with the Committee of Fourteen's recommendation that External Auditors make observations on administration and management as well as on financial matters.
660. It noted that the External Auditor's comments are limited largely to a citation of the scope of the work performed. It requested the Director-General to inform the External Auditor of the desire of the Conference to have future reports include more substantive comments which would enable Member Nations to benefit from the External Auditor's observations on the way in which the Organization's resources are used, as the External Auditor's knowledge of the Organization's operations and policies could provide a constructive addition to the information available to Member Nations.
661. The Conference approved the above accounts and the Reports of the External Auditor thereon as submitted by the Forty-Seventh, Forty-Eighth and Forty-Ninth Sessions of the Council, and adopted the following resolutions:
Resolution No. 24/67
a) Regular program and freedom from hunger campaign audited accounts for 1964/65
THE CONFERENCE
Having examined the audited accounts of the Regular Program and Freedom from Hunger Campaign for the financial period 1964/65 and the External Auditor's reports thereon,
Adopts the audited accounts for the above-mentioned period.
(Adopted 21.11.67)
Resolution No. 25/67
b) European commission for the control of foot-and-mouth disease audited accounts for 1965 and 1966
THE CONFERENCE
Having examined the audited accounts of the European Commission for the Control of Foot-and-Mouth Disease for the financial years 1965 and 1966,
Adopts the audited accounts for the financial years in question.
(Adopted 21.11.67)
Resolution No. 26/67
c) United nations development program special fund and technical assistance sectors
THE CONFERENCE
Having examined the audited accounts of the United Nations Development Program - Special Fund and Technical Assistance Sectors - for the financial years 1965 and 1966, and the External Auditor's reports thereon,
Adopts the audited accounts for the financial years in question.
(Adopted 21.11.67)
Resolution No. 27/67
d) World food program audited accounts for 1965
THE CONFERENCE
Having examined the audited accounts of the World Food Program for the financial year 1965 and the External Auditor's report thereon,
Adopts the audited accounts for the above-mentioned period.
(Adopted 21.11.67)
Financial position of the organization
662. The Conference noted the satisfactory rate of collection of the current year's assessments. However, noting also that some important amounts were still outstanding, it agreed that Member Nations should be encouraged to settle their obligations at an early date.
Scale of contributions 1968/69
663. The Conference examined the Scale of Contributions for 1968/69 as proposed by the Council at its Forty-Eighth Session, as amended at its Forty-Ninth Session, to take into account the admission of new Member Nations and Associate Members.
664. The Conference noted that, according to the decisions of the Eighth Session of the Conference, the Scale was based on the United Nations Scale of Assessments for the year 1967 as established at the Twenty-First Session of the General Assembly of the United Nations (United Nations General Assembly Documents, Twenty-First Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/6310) and Supplement No. 10A (A/6310/Add.1).
665. The Conference consequently adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 28/67
Scale of Contributions 1968/69
THE CONFERENCE
Having considered the reports of the Forty-Eighth and the Forty-Ninth Session of the Council;
Decides to adopt for use in 1968 and 1969 the Scale of Contributions set out in Appendix D which is derived from the United Nations Scale of Assessments for 1967.
(Adopted 21.11.67)
Contributions and advances by new members nations and associate members
a) Contributions
b) Advances
a) Contributions
666. In accordance with the provisions of Article XVIII. 3 of the Constitution Rule XIX. 3 of the General Rules of the Organization and Financial Regulation 5. 8, the Conference decided that the contribution to be paid by the newly-admitted Member Nations and Associate Members for the year 1967 would be as follows:
Member Nations
Barbados $ 2,400
Bulgaria $13,100
Hungary $42,900
Associate Members
Bahrain $ 1,400
Qatar $ 1,400
b) Advances
667. In accordance with Financial Regulations 6.2(b) (ii), the advances due to the Working Capital Fund by new Member Nations were as follows:
Barbados $ 1,800
Bulgaria $ 9,900
Hungary $32,400
Reimbursement of withdrawals from the working capital fund
668. The Conference noted that at its Forty-Seventh Session, the Council had authorised the withdrawal of an amount of $300,000 from the Working Capital Fund, to meet the costs in the 1966/67 biennium of such extra space as would be required as a consequence of the expansion of the Organization's programs. At the same Session the Council had also authorised the withdrawal of $125,000 to meet the additional costs of the ad hoc Review Committee of the Council established for the review of the Organization's General Structure.
669. At its Forty-Ninth Session, the Council had authorised a further withdrawal from the Working Capital Fund up to $30,000 to cover the excess of the ad hoc Committee's cost over the amount of $125,000 previously authorised to the extent that such additional costs could not be met from savings.
670. The Conference endorsed the Council's recommendations that notwithstanding the provisions of Financial Regulation 6.1(b),
(i) an amount of $425,000 of the cash surplus of the 1964/65 biennium,
(ii) an amount of up to $30,000 of the excess miscellaneous income for the 1966/67 biennium be used to reimburse the Working Capital Fund with the amounts withdrawn for the above purpose.
671. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 29/67
Reimbursement of Withdrawals from the Working Capital Fund
THE CONFERENCE
Noting that the Council at its Forty-Seventh Session authorised the withdrawal of an amount up to $425,000 from the Working Capital Fund, and at its Forty-Ninth Session authorised the withdrawal of up to $30,000, both amounts, totaling $455,000, to be used to meet unbudgeted expenditure resulting from:
(i) the need of additional accommodation during the 1966/67 biennium, and
(ii) the review of the General Structure of the Organization as arranged by the Council in accordance with Resolution 1 65 of the Thirteenth Session of the Conference;
Noting that, in accordance with Financial Regulation 6.5(b) advances made from the Working Capital Fund shall be reimbursed by such method as the Conference determines;
Further noting that the cash surplus in 1964/65 amounted to $591,665 and that the Council at its Forty-Seventh Session instructed the Director-General to withhold the distribution of an amount of $425,000 of that surplus pending a Conference decision;
Considering that the actual amount to be withdrawn from the Working Capital Fund may now amount to as much as $455,000; and
Noting that the Miscellaneous Income of the current biennium is expected to exceed substantially the estimated amount;
Decides that, notwithstanding Financial Regulation 6.1(b):
(i) an amount of $425,000 of the above-mentioned cash surplus shall be used to reimburse the Working Capital Fund, and
(ii) an amount of up to $30,000 of the excess Miscellaneous Income for the biennium 1966/67 may be used to reimburse the Working Capital Fund.
(Adopted 21.11. 67)
C. Administrative matters
Headquarters accommodation
672. The Conference was informed of the steps that had been taken by the Director-General to remedy the need for additional space at Headquarters in view of the delay in obtaining the transfer to the Organization of one further wing, building D, of the Headquarters buildings which is still occupied by the Ministry of Posts. The Conference was informed further that the appeal formulated by its Thirteenth Session and by the Council to speed up the release of building D had been transmitted to the Italian Government. The Conference noted that building D was not expected to be available until 1973 and that the Director-General was in contact with the Italian Government concerning other solutions to meet the present and future needs for additional space.
673. The Italian delegate reassured the Conference of the determination of the Italian Government to continue its undertaking to provide the required accommodation for the staff of the Organization and informed the Conference that the Italian Government was at present studying the acquisition of buildings and adjacent land that would meet the future requirements of the Organization.
674. The Conference expressed its gratitude for the co-operative attitude of the Italian Government and for its generosity in provision of accommodation.
675. One delegation, while concurring in the appreciation of the generosity of the Italian Government in this connection, expressed its concern at the rate of growth of staff.
<section>l</section>
XII. Membership elections and appointments
A. Admission of new member nations and associate members
B. Republic of Indonesia
C. Appointment of the director-general
D. Appointment of the independent chairman of the council
E. Election of council members
F. Appointment of the FAO staff pension committee
G. Vote of thanks to Dr. B. R. Sen
A. Admission of new member nations and associate members
Arrears of the Hungarian People's Republic
676. The Conference had before it:
(a) Applications for membership from:
Barbados
Bulgaria
Hungary
(b) Applications for associate membership on behalf of:
Bahrain
Qatar
677. All the above applications were submitted within the time limit prescribed by Rule XIX of the General Rules of the Organization. They contained or were supplemented by the formal instruments required under Article II of the Constitution and were thus found to be in order.
678. The Conference proceeded to a secret ballot on the five applications in accordance with Article 11-2 of the Constitution and Rule XII-9 of the General Rules of the Organization.
679. The results of the voting were as follows:
Number of ballot papers issued: 96
Admission of Barbados
1. Number of votes cast: 87
2. Majority required: 58
3. Votes for: 86
4. Votes against: 1
5. Abstentions: 8
6. Defective ballots: 1
Admission of Bulgaria
1. Number of votes cast: 87
2. Majority required: 58
3. Votes for: 85
4. Votes against: 2
5. Abstentions: 8
6. Defective ballots: 1
Admission of Hungary
1. Number of votes cast: 85
2. Majority required: 57
3. Votes for: 83
4. Votes against: 2
5. Abstentions: 10
6. Defective ballots: 1
Admission of Bahrain
1. Number of votes cast: 80
2. Majority required: 54
3. Votes for: 75
4. Votes against: 5
5. Abstentions: 14
6. Defective ballots: 2
Admission of Qatar
1. Number of votes cast: 83
2. Majority required: 56
3. Votes for: 81
4. Votes against: 2
5. Abstentions: 12
6. Defective ballots: 1
680. The Conference accordingly admitted Barbados, Bulgaria and Hungary as Members of the Organization, and Bahrain and Qatar as Associate Members.
Arrears of the Hungarian People's Republic
681. In connection with the membership of Hungary, the Conference noted the recommendation of the Council regarding the liquidation of the outstanding arrears of the contributions arising from the withdrawal of the country from FAO in 1951.
682. The Conference accordingly adopted the following resolution which had been prepared by the Finance Committee and the Council in regard to the liquidation of arrears:
Resolution No. 30/67
Arrears of the Hungarian People's Republic
THE CONFERENCE
Noting that the Hungarian People's Republic's arrears of contribution on readmission to the Organization amount to $88,886.40;
Decided:
(a) that the Hungarian People's Republic's arrears shall be settled through the payment of ten annual instalments of $8, 888.64 each. The first installment shall be paid in 1967;
(b) that the annual payment of the instalments referred to above shall constitute Miscellaneous Income and shall be considered as fulfillment of the Hungarian People's Republic's financial obligation to the Organization in respect of these arrears.
(Adopted 20.11.67)
B. Republic of Indonesia
683. At its Thirteenth Session, the Conference had taken note of the decision of Indonesia to withdraw from the Organization. At its Forty-Seventh Session (October 1966) the Council was informed that Indonesia had decided to continue membership. The Conference noted that Indonesia had paid its contribution due for 1966 as established by Resolution 31/65 of the Thirteenth Session of the Conference, as well as its contribution due for 1967, as established by Resolution 5/47 of the Forty-Seventh Session of the Council. The Conference also noted that the Council, at its Forty-Seventh Session, had recognized that consequent upon Indonesia's decision to continue membership, since Indonesia had not originally been included in the Scale of Contributions for 1966/67 as such, its credit in the Working Capital Fund had fallen short of the advance required from it, by $6,977. Accordingly by Resolution 6/47 the Council had decided that an additional amount of $6,977 from the
Miscellaneous Income for 1966/67 be applied to the Working Capital Fund for the credit of Indonesia. The Conference concurred with the Council's action.
C. Appointment of the director-general
684. The Conference, having considered the third Report of its General Committee (C 67/LIM/50) and documents C 67/LIM/18-Rev. 1 and C 67/LIM/18-Add.1, considered that the decision reached at its Twelfth Session in 1963 (paragraph 594 of the Report) prevented the Fourteenth Session from accepting the candidature of Dr. B. R. Sen.
685. Having proceeded to a series of ballots between the other three candidates, as a result of which A. H. Boerma received a majority of the votes cast, the Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 31/67
Appointment of the Director-General
THE CONFERENCE
Acting in conformity with Article VII-1 of the Constitution,
Having proceeded to a secret ballot as laid down in Rule XII of the General Rules of the Organization,
Declares that A. H. Boerma is appointed to the office of Director-General, for a period of four years, from 1 January 1968, the term of office expiring on 31 December 1971; and
Having considered the recommendations regarding the conditions of appointment of the Director-General submitted by the General Committee in accordance with Rules X-2(j) and XXXIII-1(b) of the General Rules of the Organization,
Resolves that the Director-General shall receive a gross annual salary of $43,000 ($28,100 net) per annum, payable in accordance with the rules governing salary payments to staff members of the Organization; that in addition he shall receive a representation allowance at the rate of $10,000 net per annum, payable half in United States dollars and half in Italian fire, and that he shall be entitled to all allowances and benefits accruing to staff members under the staff Regulations; and
Further resolves that the terms and conditions of service of the Director-General shall be governed by the relevant provisions of the Staff Regulations subject, however, to the provisions of the draft contract proposed by the General Committee and approved by the Conference, a copy of which has been signed by the Chairman of the Conference and by the Director-General elect.
(Adopted 23.11.67)
D. Appointment of the independent chairman of the council
686. Having proceeded to a secret ballot on the appointment of the single candidate for the Office of Independent Chairman of the Council, the Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution No. 32/67
Appointment of the Independent Chairman of the Council
THE CONFERENCE
Having proceeded to a secret ballot, in accordance with the provisions of Rule XII of the General Rules of the Organization,
Declares that G. Gemayel is appointed Independent Chairman of the Council for a period of two years, that is, until the end of the regular session of the Conference to be held in 1969; and
Having noted the recommendations submitted by the General Committee in conformity with Rule XXIII of the General Rules of the Organization,
Decides that the conditions of appointment, including the allowances attached to the office of the Independent Chairman of the Council, shall be as follows:
(i) An annual allowance of the equivalent of $6,250 to cover representation expenses and secretarial assistance in the Chairman's home station, on the understanding that the Director-General will provide secretarial assistance when the Chairman attends sessions of the Council or Conference. One half of the allowance shall be payable in U.S. dollars, the balance being payable, in whole or in part, in the currency of the home country of the Chairman, or in Italian fire, according to his desire.
(ii) A per diem allowance at the rate of $25.00 while the Chairman is absent from his home station on Council business, the allowance being reduced to $12.00 per diem while the Chairman is in travel status.
(iii) Travel expenses, including the above per diem allowance, shall be defrayed by the Organization, in conformity with its regulations and existing practices, when the Chairman attends sessions of the Council, of the Program and Finance Committees, of the Conference, or when he is invited by the Council or by the Director-General to travel for other purposes.
(Adopted 23.11.67)
E. Election of council members
687. By Resolution 12/67, the Conference had amended the Constitution and the General Rules of the Organization to increase by three the membership of the Council, bringing it to a total of 34 Member Nations. An additional seat for Asia and the Far East was allocated for the period November 1967 to December 1970, an additional seat for Europe for the period November 1967 to 31 December 1968 and an additional seat for the Near East from November 1967 to November 1969. As the European seat would fall vacant on 31 December 1968, an additional ballot would be necessary for the European Region for the period 1 January 1969 until November 1971 (Sixteenth Session of the Conference).
688. The Conference accordingly elected the following Member Nations for membership of the Council:
Period: November 1967 to 31 December 1968
Region and Seats Members
Europe (one) Israel
Period: November 1967 to November 1969
Near East (one) Somali Republic
Period: November 1967 to 31 December 1970
Africa (two) Central African Republic
Ethiopia
Asia and the Far East (four) Indonesia
Japan
Nepal
Philippines
Europe (three) Germany, Federal Republic of
Romania
Turkey
Latin America (two) Peru
Uruguay
Period: 1 January 1969 to November 1971
Africa (three) Algeria
Nigeria
Zambia
Europe (two) Belgium
Poland
Latin America (three) Brazil
Colombia
Costa Rica
Near East (two) Afghanistan
Iraq
North America (two) Canada
United States of America
F. Appointment of the FAO staff pension committee
689. In accordance with Article XX of the Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund the Conference reappointed:
Mr. Hussein Sadegh
Minister Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative of Iran to FAO
Imperial Embassy of Iran
Rome
Dr. Vittorio de Asarta
Secretary, Italian National FAO Committee
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Rome
Dr. A. S. Tuinman
Agricultural Attaché
Permanent Representative of the Netherlands to FAO
Royal Netherlands Embassy
Rome
as members of the FAO Staff Pension Committee, and:
Mr. Paul Byrnes
Office of International Administration
Bureau of International Organization Affairs
Department of State Washington D. C.
U.S.A.
Mr. J. G. McArthur
Counsellor
Embassy of New Zealand
Rome
Mr. M. I. K. Khalil
Agricultural Attaché and
Permanent Representative of Pakistan to FAO
Embassy of Pakistan
Rome
as alternate members for the period 1 January 1968 through 31 December 1969.
G. Vote of thanks to Dr. B. R. Sen
690. Resolution No. 33/67
Vote of thanks to Dr. B. R. Sen
THE CONFERENCE
Recognizing the eminent services rendered by Dr. B. R. Sen to the Organization in raising it to the standing it now enjoys by his exceptional energy, devotion to duty and great competence in Development questions;
Considering the unique contribution he has made in creating among the leaders and peoples of the world an understanding of the problems of hunger and malnutrition and of the imperative need to accelerate agricultural and general economic Development;
Noting that under Dr. Sen's leadership FAO has taken major steps toward solving those problems, as exemplified by the Freedom from Hunger Campaign, the World Food Program, and work on the Indicative World Plan;
Conveys to him its warmest thanks and congratulations for his magnificent achievements that will be lastingly remembered, and
Hopes that he may continue to serve the ideals for which FAO stands throughout the world.
THE CONFERENCE
Decides to have this resolution inscribed on parchment, signed by the Chairman of the Conference and presented to Dr. Sen.
THE CONFERENCE
Decides further to create a new permanent feature of FAO activity associated with the name of Dr. Sen and directed toward the goals that he served so well; and
Requests the Council to take action as appropriate to constitute such a permanent and continuing tribute to Dr. Sen.
(Adopted 22.11. 67)
<section>m</section>
XIII. Date and place of the fifteenth session of the conference
691. The Conference decided that its Fifteenth Session should be held in November 1969, in Rome.
<section>n</section>
XIV. APPENDICES
A. Agenda
B. List of delegates and observers
C. List of documents
D. Scale of contributions 1968/1969
E. Memorandum of understanding regarding cooperation between the African Development bank and the food and agriculture organization of the united nations
F. Note on procedure for ad hoc cooperative action between Asian Development bank and FAO
A. Agenda
INTRODUCTORY - PROCEDURE OF THE SESSION
1. Election of the Chairman and Vice-Chairmen
2. Appointment of the General Committee and Credentials Committee
3. Adoption of the Agenda
4. Arrangements for the Session and Allocation of Agenda Items
5. Admission of Observers to the Session
PART I - MAJOR TRENDS AND POLICY QUESTIONS IN FOOD AND AGRICULTURE
6. Review of the Organization's General Structure - Report of ad hoc Committee and Review Team
7. World Situation and Outlook
(a) Salient Features in the World Situation
(b) Commodity Problems
(c) Nutrition in Agriculture
(d) Problems in Fishery Development
(e) FAO/Industry Co-operation
8. Indicative World Plan for Agricultural Development
9. Inter-agency Study of Multilateral Food Aid
10. Food Production Resources Program
11. World Food Program
12. Freedom from Hunger Campaign
(a) Progress Report on the Campaign
(b) Final Report on International Rice Year
(c) Collaboration with United Nations International Year for Human Rights
(d) Plans for the Second World Food Congress
13. Skim Milk in the World Dairy Economy
14. Article XI Reports
PART II - ACTIVITIES AND PROGRAMS OF THE ORGANIZATION
15. Report of the General Rapporteur on the Work of the Technical Committees of the Conference
(a) Matters Requiring Formal Approval by the Conference
(b) Salient Points of the Technical Committee Reports (other than the formal matters dealt with in (a) above) which have a Bearing on the Program of Work and Budget for 1968/69.
(c) Considerations which Affect the Policies and Methods of the Organization as a Whole
16. Review of FAO's Field Activities
17. Review of the Topics Relating to the Program of Work and Budget which were not Covered by the Technical Committees (Chapters I, II, IV, V, VI. A (i), VI. D, VI. E, VII, VIII IX, 21, XI)
18. Inter-Agency Relations and Consultations on Matters of Common Interest
(a) Matters Arising out of ECOSOC and ACC Discussions, and the Report of the ad hoc Committee of Experts to Examine the Finances of the United Nations and the Specialized Agencies
(b) FAO/UNICEF Relations
(c) FAO/Unesco Relations in the Field of Agricultural Education
(d) FAO/WHO Food Standards Program (Codex Alimentarius)
(e) FAO/IBRD Co-operative Program
(f) Co-operation with Area Banks
(g) FAO/UNIDO Relations
(h) Other Inter-Agency Matters
19. Program of Work and Budget 1968/69
PART III - CONSTITUTIONAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS
A. Constitutions and Legal Matters
20. Amendments to the Constitution
(a) Amendment to Article V-1 Relative to the Increase in the Number of Council Seats
(b) Amendment to Article V-1 Relative to Alternates Attending Council Sessions
(c) Amendment to Article VI-1 Relative to Sea-Area Fishery Commissions
(d) Other Constitutional Amendments (if any)
21. Procedure for Election of Council Members
22. Amendment to Rules XXVI and XXVII of the General Rules Relative to Membership in Program and Finance Committees
23. Amendment to Rules XXIX-1 and XXX-1 of the General Rules, Relative to Membership in Committee on Commodity Problems and Committee on Fisheries
24. Amendment to Rule XXXIX-9 Relative to Attendance by Non-FAO Nations at CCP Consultations
25. Membership of Joint FAO/UNICEF Policy Committee
26. Authority and Terms of Reference of Regional Conferences
27. Use of Languages other than FAO's Present Working Languages
(a) Introduction of Arabic for Interpretation in the General Conferences as well as Near East Regional Conferences and Technical Meetings
(b) Introducing the Use of German for Interpretation in the General Conferences as well as the Regional Conferences for Europe
28. Statutory Report on Status of Conventions and Agreements and Amendments Thereto
29. Review of FAO Commissions, Committees, Working Parties and Panels of Experts Established under Articles V, VI and XIV of the Constitution
30. Statutes and Rules of Procedure of Article VI Bodies
31. Relationship Agreements with International Organizations
(a) Draft Agreement Between the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
(b) Progress Regarding Relationship Agreements with Area Banks
32. Relations with International Organizations and Granting of Consultative Status to International Non-governmental Organizations
33. Other Constitutional and Legal Matters
B. Financial and Administrative Matters
34. Audited Accounts
(a) Regular Program and FFHC, 1964/65
(b) European Commission for the Control of Foot-and-Mouth Disease, 1965 and 1966
(c) EPTA, 1965 and 1966
(d) UNSF, 1965 and 1966
(e) World Food Program, 1965 and 1966
35. Scale of Contributions 1968/69
36. Working Capital Fund - Withdrawals
37. Amendments to Financial Regulations
(a) Financial Regulations 6. 9 and 7.1 - Publications Revolving Fund and FAO Magazine
(b) Financial Regulation 4.1 (a) and (b) - Obligations against Future Budgetary Periods
38. Headquarters Accommodation
39. Other Financial and Administrative Matters
PART IV - APPOINTMENTS AND ELECTIONS
40. Applications for Membership and Associate Membership in the Organization
(a) Membership Barbados
Bulgaria
Hungary
(b) Associate Membership Bahrain
Qatar
41. Election of Council Members
42. Appointment of Director-General
43. Appointment of Independent Chairman of Council
44. Appointment of Representatives on Staff Pension Committee
PART V - OTHER MATTERS
45. Date and Place of Fifteenth Session of the Conference
46. Other Matters
<section>o</section>
B. List of delegates and observers
MEMBER NATIONS
AFGHANISTAN
Delegate
M. M. AKBER REZA, Minister of Agriculture and Irrigation, Kabul
Alternate
Mohammed Yasin MAYEL, Deputy Minister for Irrigation, Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation, Kabul
Associates
Mohammed AZEIM AMINI, First Secretary, Embassy of Afghanistan, Rome
Abdul MAJID, President of Planning Department, Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation Kabul
ALGERIA
Délégué
Messaoud AIT CHAALAL, Ambassadeur d'Algérie auprès du Gouvernement de la République d'Italie, Rome
Suppléant
Zouaoui REGGAM, Ingénieur en Chef au Ministère de l'Agriculture, Alger
Adjoints
Mouloud TIAB, Secrétaire au Ministère des Affaires Etrangères, Alger
Rabah DAKLI, Sous-Directeur des Forêts, Ministère de l'Agriculture et de la Réforme Afraire, Alger
Djilali MEDAHI, Sous-Directeur a la Direction des Etudes et de la Planification, Alger
Said ZITOUNE, Ingénieur des Services Agricoles, Ministère de l'Agriculture et de la Réforme Afraire, Alger
Mohamed KADRA, Ingénieur des Services Agricoles, Ministère de l'Agriculture et de la Réforme Agraire, Alger
Kouider CHACHOUA, Sous-Directeur de l'Office National des Pêches, Alger
Omar BENZITOUNI, Attaché au Ministère des Affaires Etrangères, Alger
Conseiller
Abdelmadjid FASLA, Secrétaire a l'Ambassade d'Algérie, Rome
Benaissa HAKKA, Directeur des Forêts et de la Défense et Restauration des Sols, Ministère de l'Agriculture, Alger
ARGENTINA
Delegado
Norberto A. R. REICHART, Subsecretario de Agricultura y Ganaderia, Buenos Aires
Suplentes
Esteban Arpad TAKACS, Administrador General de Bosques, Secretaria de Estado de Agricultura y Ganaderia, Buenos Aires
Carlos M. CORREA AVILA, Asesor del Gabinete del Ministro de Agricultura y Ganaderia, Buenos Aires
Adjuntos
Eduardo Luis RAMPERTI, Director General de Produccion y Fomento Agricola, Secretaria de Estado de Agricultura y Ganaderia, Buenos Aires
Mario P. F. ROSSINI, Director General de Economia Agropecuaria, Buenos Aires
Gregorio A. CARO, Subdirector General de Produccion y Fomento Ganadero, Secretaria de Agricultura y Ganaderia, Buenos Aires
Juan Manuel CORDINI, Director General de Pesca y Conservacion de la Fauna, Buenos Aires
Vicente C. BRUNINI, Consejero Agricola, Representante Permanente de la Republica Argentina ante la FAO, Roma
Alberto Alfredo R. SIGNANINI, Consejero Económico, Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO, Roma
Carlos Enrique FIRIPO Secretario Ejecutivo del Comité Nacional Argentino pare la FAO, Secreteria de Estado de Agricultura y Ganaderia, Buenos Aires
Italo Jose PERETTI, Primer Secretario, Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores y Culto, Buenos Aires
Rodolfo Juan TURAZZINI, Primer Secretario, Representante Permanente Suplente ante la FAO, Roma
AUSTRALIA
Delegate
A.C. B. MAIDEN, Secretary, Department of Primary Industry, Canberra
Alternate
J. M. HARVEY, Director-General, Queensland Department of Primary Industries, Brisbane
Associates
M. W. OAKLEY, First Assistant Secretary, Department of Primary Industry, Canberra
M. R. JACOBS, Director-General, Foresty and Timber Bureau, Canberra
G.A. HUMPHREY, Chief, Division of Fisheries and Oceanography, CSIRO, Sydney
J. R. GARDNER, Commercial Counsellor, Australian High Commission, Ottawa
F.W. TRUELOVE, First Secretary of the Australian Embassy in Athens, Athens
K.J. WHITE, Chief, Silviculture Division, Department of Forests, Papua and New Guinea, Konedobu
R. C. BOLDUAN, Agricultural Attaché, Australian Embassy, Rome
P. DAWES, Chief Medical Officer, Australian Embassy, Rome
Alternate
J.A. STAFFORD, Project Officer, Department of Primary Industry, Canberra
Adviser
J. R. A. McMILLAN, President, Australian Freedom from Hunger Campaign Committee, Sydney
AUSTRIA
Delegate
Karl SCHLEINZER, Minister of Agriculture and Forestry, Vienna
Alternate
Leopold DORFWIRTH, Director, Division of Foreign Relations, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Vienna
Associates
Hans SCHARATT, Senior Counsellor, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Vienna
Heins GERLITZ, Ministerialoberkommissär, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Vienna
Hermann REDL, Wirtschaftsoberkommissär, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Vienna
Karl HAAS, Permanent Representative of Austria to FAO, Rome
BARBADOS
Delegate
Arlington DA COSTA EDWARDS, Minister of Agriculture, Labour and National Insurance, Bridgetown
Adviser
James Cliviston KING, Deputy High Commissioner for Barbados in the U. K., London
BELGIUM
Délégué
Auguste de WINTER, Ministre des Relations économiques extérieures, Bruxelles
Suppléants
A. A. J. VAN BILSEN, Chef de Cabinet a la Coopération au Développement du Ministre des Affaires Etrangères, Bruxelles
Philippe d'OTREPPE de BOUVETTE, Président du Comité national beige de la FAO, Bruxelles
René VAN HAUWERMEIREN, Ministre Conseiller, Représentant Permanent de la Belgique auprès de la FAO, Rome
Conseillers
E. CLICHE ROUX, Directeur General, Administration des Eaux et Forêts, Bruxelles
R. DE SUTTER, Ingénieur en Chef, Directeur près de l'Institut Economique agricole, Bruxelles
A. HUBERT, Secrétaire du Comité national beige de la FAO, Bruxelles
R. HUYBENS, Conseiller-Adjoint au Ministère des Affaires Etrangères et du Commerce Extérieur, Bruxelles
G. MORLEGHEM, Conseiller au Cabinet du Ministre des Relations économiques extérieures, Bruxelles
A. REGNIER, Représentant Permanent-Adjoint de la Belgique auprès de la FAO, Rome
Charles WALHIN, Conseiller économique, Ministère des Affaires Etrangères, Bruxelles
BOLIVIA
Delegado
Walter RICO TORO, Primer Secretario, Embajada de Bolivia ante la Santa Sede, Roma
BOTSWANA
Delegate
T. T. TSHEKO, Minister of Agriculture, Gaberones
Alternate
G. WINSTANLEY, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Gaberones
Associates
Peter POSTUMUS, Deputy Director Veterinary Services and Tsetse Control, Gaberones
Kingaley BUTLER, Senior Agricultural Officer, Mahalapye
Hugh SQUIRE, Agricultural Economist, Lobatsi
BRAZIL
Delegate
Mozart Gurgel VALENTE, Jr., Ambassador of Brazil to the Government of the Republic Socialist Federative of Yougoslavia, Belgrad
Alternates
João CLEOFAS, Senator, Brasilia
José Monteiro de CASTRO, Deputy, Brasilia
Raymundo Bruno MARUSSIG, Secretary-General, Ministry of Agriculture, Brasilia
Paulo Padilha VIDAL, Minister Counsellor, Embassy of Brazil, Rome
Miss Marina de BARROS E VASCONCELLOS, First Secretary, Permanent Representative of Brazil to FAO, Embassy of Brazil, Rome
José M. Ruiz de GAMBOA, Head of the Office of International Affairs, Ministry of Agriculture, Brasilia
Advisers
Paolo NOBREGA, Director Biological Institute Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo
Luiz Reinaldo ZANON, Agriculture Planning Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Brasilia
Paulo Monteiro LIMA, First Secretary, Embassy of Brazil, Rome
Guy Marie de Castro BRANDAO, First Secretary, Embassy of Brazil, Rome
Julio Vicente Alves de ARAUJO, Technical Adviser of the Superintendency of Fisheries, Rio de Janeiro
BULGARIA
Délégué
Nicola PALAGACEV, Ministre de l'Agriculture, Sofia
Suppléants
Lambo TEOLOV, Ambassadeur de la République Populaire de Bulgarie auprès du Gouvernement de la République italienne, Rome
Ivan GARBUCEV, Directeur de l'Institut "N. Puscharov", Sofia
Adjoints
Velitchvo VELITCHKOV, Conseiller de la Commission de Coopération économique, scientifique et technique du Conseil des Ministres, Sofia
Ivan PETROV, Premier Secrétaire au Ministère des Affaires Etrangères, Sofia
Leon BERAHA, Premier Secrétaire de l'Ambassade de la République Populaire de Bulgarie, Rome
Conseiller
Kiril TANUSCEV, Conseiller au Ministère de l'Agriculture, Sofia
BURMA
Delegate
Tin SOE, Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture and Forest, Rangoon
Alternate
Khin MAUNG, Deputy Director of Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture and Forest, Rangoon
Associates
THAW, Director of Veterinary Services, Ministry of Agriculture and Forest, Rangoon
Maung GALE, Chief, Conservator of Forests, Ministry of Agriculture and Forest, Forest Department, Rangoon
Tint HLAING, Director of Fisheries, Ministry of Agriculture and Forest, Rangoon
BURUNDI
Délégué
Cyprien KIYUKU, Ministre de l'Agriculture et de l'Elevage, Bujumbura
Suppléant
Pascal KABURA, Directeur General au Ministère de l'Agriculture et de l'Elevage, Bujumbura
Adjoints
Théophile MUVIRA, Directeur du Département des Eaux et Forêts, Bujumbura
Luc SAHABO, Médecin vétérinaire du Laboratoire du Gouvernement, Bujumbura
CAMBODIA
Délégué
Kim Huon TAN, Directeur de Eaux, Forêts et Chasse, Phnom-Penh
Suppléant
Un MING, Directeur de l'Agriculture, Phnom-Penh
CAMEROON
Délégué
Jean KEUTCHA, Ministre de l'Agriculture, Yaoundé
Suppléant
Jean Baptiste YONKE, Directeur de l'Agriculture du Cameroun Oriental, Yaoundé
Adjoint
Pierre EPOH ADYANG, Chef du Service des Relations Extérieures, Ministère de l'Agriculture, Yaoundé
CANADA
Delegate
John J. GREENE, Minister of Agriculture, Ottawa
Alternates
S. B. WILLIAMS, Deputy Minister of Agriculture, Ottawa
A.W.H. NEEDLER, Deputy Minister of Fisheries, Ottawa
Associates
Russel Clayton HONEY, Member of Parliament, Ottawa
Herman LAVERDIERE, Member of Parliament, Ottawa
Frank SHEFRIN, Secretary, Canadian Interdepartmental FAO Committee, Ottawa
Herbert W. BEALL, Special Adviser to Deputy Minister of Forestry and Rural Development, Ottawa
Edgar MONAGLE, Chief, Nutrition Division, Department of National Health and Welfare, Ottawa
M.A. FOLEY, Chief Engineer, Industrial Development Service, Department of Fisheries, Ottawa
Peter A. FREYSENG, Commercial Secretary, Embassy of Canada, Rome
Jacques COUSINEAU, First Secretary, Embassy of Canada, Rome
Advisers
J. M. BENTLEY, President, Canadian Federation of Agriculture, Ottawa
Paul BABEY, President, Alberta Farmers' Union, Edmonton
E. MERCIER, Agricultural Adviser to the Cabinet of the Province of Quebec, Quebec
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Délégué
Louis ALAZOULA, Secrétaire d'Etat au Développement, Bangui
Suppléant
François BEYELE, Directeur de l'Agriculture, Ministère de l'Agriculture, Bangui
Adjoints
Roger CHICAL, Directeur adjoins de la Santé publique, Ministère de la Santé publique, Bangui
Raymond DAMANGO, Directeur adjoins des Eaux et Forêts Bangui
CEYLON
Delegate
M. D. BANDA, Minister of Agriculture and Food, Colombo
Alternates
H.W.G. WIJEKOON, Ambassador of Ceylon to the Government of the Republic of Italy, Rome
M.S. PERERA, Director of Agriculture, Colombo
Simplicius CRUSE, Counsellor, Embassy of Ceylon, Permanent Representative of Ceylon to FAO, Rome
L. N. De L. BANDARANAIKE, Director of Agricultural Development, Colombo
I. O. K. G. FERNANDO, Director of Fisheries, Colombo
CHAD
Délégué
Raymond NAIMBAYE, Ministre de l'Agriculture et de la Production animale, Fort-Lamy
Suppléants
Eugene BOURGADE, Fonctionnaire de Liaison FAO au Cabinet du Ministre de l'Agriculture et de la Production animale, Fort-Lamy
Victor ROUMBA, Directeur adjoins de l'Agriculture, Fort-Lamy
Conseillers
Paul LADUIE, Directeur de la Caisse de Stabilisation des Prix du Coton, Fort-Lamy
Ide Paul MICHON, Directeur du Service des Eaux et Forêts, Pêches et Chasses, Fort- Lamy
CHILE
Delegado
Hugo TRIVELLI, Ministro de Agricultura, Santiago
Alternos
Francisco A. PINTO, Embajador de Chile en Italia, Representante Permanente de Chile ante la FAO, Roma
Hernan SANTA CRUZ, Embajador de Chile ante la Oficina de las Naciones Unidas y los Organismos Internacionales en Ginebra,
Adjuntos
Enrique BERNSTEIN, Embajador de Chile en Francia, Paris
Daniel BARRIA, Ex Sub-Secretario de Agricultura, Embajador de Chile en Yugoslavia y Bulgaria, Belgrado
Jacques CHONCHOL, Vice-presidente del Instituto de Desarrollo Agropecuario, Santiago
Raul AGUIRRE, Director, Corporacion de Ventas de Salitre y Yodo de Chile, Londres
Hugo CUBILLOS, Consejero, Delegación Permanente de Chile ante los Organismos Internacionales, Ginebra
Carlos COSTA-NORA, Delegación Permanente de Chile, ante los Organismos Internacionales, Ginebra
Asesor
Señora Maria LLONA, Segunda Secretaria Embajada de Chile, Roma
Consejero
Alvaro MARFAN, Consejero Especial del Presidente de la República, Santiago
COLOMBIA
Delegado
Enrique BLAIR FABRIS, Ministro de Agricultura, Bogotá
Alterno
Enrique PENALOSA, Gerente del Instituto Colombiano de la Reforma Agraria (INCORA) Bogotá
Adjuntos
Gustavo GARCIA MORENO, Consejero, Embajada de Colombia, Representante Permanente de Colombia ante la FAO, Roma
Gonazalo BULA HOYOS, Cónsul General de Colombia, Amsterdam
CONGO (Brazzaville)
Délégué
Claude DA COSTA, Ministre de la Reconstruction de l'Agriculture et de l'Elevage, Brazzaville
Suppléant
Alphonse MALALOU, Attaché de Cabinet, Ministère de la Reconstruction, de l'Agriculture et de l'Elevage, Brazzaville
Conseiller
Augustin KOMBO, Directeur General des Services Agricoles et Zootechniques, Brazzaville
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO
Délégué
Jean-Joseph LITHO, Ministre de l'Agriculture, Kinshasa
Suppléant
Albert Oscar BOLELA, Ambassadeur de la République démocratique du Congo, Représentant permanent de la République démocratique du Congo auprès de la FAO, Rome
Conseiller
Léon GATHO, Médecin vétérinaire, Conseiller du Ministre, Kinshasa
Suppléants
Pierre LUMBALA, Chef de Service "Etudes et Politique agricole" du Ministère de l'Agriculture, Kinshasa
Etienne MBIANGANDU, Attaché agricole, Représentant permanent suppléant de la République démocratique du Congo auprès de la FAO, Rome
Adjoint
Justin KATONDI, Chef de Bureau a la Direction des Eaux et Forêts, Kinshasa
Conseiller
Pierre ANDRÉ, Directeur du Service vétérinaire, Ministère de l'Agriculture, Kinshasa
COSTA RICA
Delegado
Edgar RIVERA MARTIN, Director en el Ministerio de Agricultura y Ganaderia, San Jose
Alternos
Carlo DI MOTTOLA BALESTRA, Embajador, Representante Permanente de Costa Rica ante la FAO y ante la Oficina de la ONU en Ginebra, Ginebra
Gavino DI SUNI, Representante Permanente Alterno de Costa Rica ante la FAO, Roma
CUBA
Delegado
Carlos Rafael RODRIGUEZ, Ministro, Presidente de la Comisión Nacional de Colaboración Económica y Cientifico-Tecnica, La Habana
Alterno
Salvador VILASECA FORNES, Embajador de Cuba ante el Gobierno de Italia, Representante Permanente de Cuba ante la FAO, Roma
Adjuntos
Fernando LOPEZ MUINO, Representante Permanente Alterno de Cuba ante la FAO, Roma
Jesus LOPEZ CAMINO, Presidente del Instituto Nacional de Desarrollo y Aprovechamiento Forestales, La Habana
Jorge MANFUGAZ LAVIGNE, Funcionario de la Academia de Ciencias, La Habana
Angel PERNAS ALVAREZ, Jefe del Frente de Control del Grupo Económico del Instituto Nacional de Reforma Agraria, La Habana
John GAY RODRIGUEZ, Director del Laboratorio de Nutrición del Instituto Nacional de Higiene, La Habana
Ricardo HERNANDEZ SANCHEZ, Planificador de la Junta Central de Planificación, La Habana
Jose M. ANTE LO VIL LANUEVA , Jefe del Departamento de Organismos Especializados del Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores, La Habana
Vicente DIAZ SERRANO, Asesor Técnico del Instituto Nacional de Desarrollo y Aprovechamiento Forestales, La Habana
Orlando MUÑIZ ORTEGA, Secretario Científico del Centro de Investigaciones Pesqueras, La Habana
Pedro MORALES CARBALLO, Asesor Técnico del Instituto de Ganadería, La Habana
Señora Migda MARTINEZ ZAMORA, Funcionaria de la Comisión Nacional de Colaboración Económica y Cientifico-Tecnica, La Habana
Filiberto LOPEZ VEGA, Funcionario de la Comisión Nacional de Colaboración Económica y CientíficoTécnica, La Habana
Luis CASO ALONSO, Funcionario de la Comisión Nacional de Colaboración Económica y CientíficoTécnica, La Habana
CYPRUS
Delegate
John Chr. MOUSKOS, Director-General, Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Nicosia
Alternate
Rogeros MICHAELIDES, Director, Department of Agriculture, Nicosia
Associate
Theodosios CHRISTOU, Director of Agriculture Research Institute, Nicosia
DAHOMEY
Délégué
Issiakiu KOUTON, Ministre du Développement rural et de la cooperation, Porto-Novo
Suppléant
Virgile TEVOEDJRE, Charge d'Affaires du Dahomey a Washington, Washington
Etienne KOUDOGRO, Directeur de l'Enseignement agricole et de la recherché agronomique, Porto-Novo
Adjoint
Gabriel PADONOU, Directeur adjoins de l'Agriculture, Porto-Novo
Conseiller
Francis d'ALMEIDA, Secrétaire du Comité national pour la CMCF, Porto-Novo
DENMARK
Delegate
Maurits Christian Marinus THOMSEN, Minister for Agriculture, Copenhagen
Alternate
Hans Jorgen KRISTENSEN, Acting Counsellor, Ministry of Agriculture, Copenhagen
Associates
V. BRORSON, Deputy Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Copenhagen
H. FR0LUND, Director of the Government Forest Research Department, Copenhagen
H. NORMANN, Head of Department, Bureau of Statistics, Copenhagen
K. Gerhard OLSEN, Assistant Head of Department, Ministry of Agriculture, Copenhagen
C. Valentin HANSEN, Agricultural Counsellor, Royal Danish Embassy, Resident Representative of Denmark to FAO, Rome
B. LAIER, Head of Section, Ministry of Agriculture, Copenhagen
A. Vesten PEDERSEN, Head of Section Danish, Agricultural Council, Copenhagen
Jorgen PEDERSEN, Secretary-General, Federation of Danish Smallholders, Copenhagen
Advisers
Mrs. Hanne SONDERGAARD MADSEN, Inspector of Home Economics Education, Ministry of Education, Copenhagen
J. NORGAARD, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Fisheries, Copenhagen
Associate
V. VILLADSEN, Counsellor, Royal Danish Embassy, Rome
Adviser
Claus BRENOE, Head of Nutrition Section, Home Economics Council, Copenhagen
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Delegado
Pedro PADILLA TONOS, Ministro Plenipotenciario, Representante Permanente de la República Dominicana ante la FAO, Roma
ECUADOR
Delegado
Rafael Franco BARBA, Ministro de Agricultura, Quito
Suplentes
Gustave PEREZ CHIRIBOGA, Embajador ante el gobierno de la República Italiana, Roma
Gustavo RUALES VIEL, Cosejero de Embajada, Roma
EL SALVADOR
Delegado
Antonio SALAZAR, Embajador de El Salvador, Representante Permanente de El Salvador ante la FAO, Roma
Suplente
Jose Leonel ARGUELLO, Consejero, Embajada de El Salvador, Representante Permanente Suplente de El Salvador ante la FAO, Roma
ETHIOPIA
Delegate
Ghirmachew TEKLEHAWARIAT, Minister for Agriculture, Addis Ababa
Alternate
Johannes HABTU, Assistant Minister, Economic and Technical Assistance Office, Ministry of Agriculture, Addis Ababa
Associates
Amde WONDAFRASH, Assistant Minister, Animal Production Department, Addis Ababa
Woldemikael KELECHA, Assistant Minister, Forestry Department, Ministry of Agriculture, Addis Ababa
Zegeye ABERRU, Assistant Minister, Plant Production and Protection Department, Ministry of Agriculture, Addis Ababa
Woldearegay REDA, Director-General, Fisheries Department, Ministry of Agriculture, Addis Ababa
Assefa WOLDEGHIORGHIS, Assistant Director-General, Veterinary Department, Ministry of Agriculture, Addis Ababa
ETHIOPIA
Associates
Ayele YESHEWALUL, Manager, Livestock and Meat Board, Addis Ababa
Zewdu FELEKE, Chief, Technical Office, Ministry of Land Reform and Administration, Addis Ababa
FINLAND
Delegate
Lars LINDEMAN, Minister of Agriculture, Helsinki
Alternate
Eino SAARI, Chairman of the National FAO Committee of Finland, Helsinki
Associates
Nils WESTERMARCK, Professor of Agricultural Economics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki
Paavo ROINE, Professor of Nutrition Chemistry, University of Helsinki, Helsinki
Olli AUERO, Counsellor of Embassy, Embassy of Finland, Rome
Mrs. Elisabeth BEAURAIN-PIHKALA, Secretary-General of the National FAO Committee of Finland, Helsinki
Antti NIKKOLA, Economist, Agricultural Economist Research Institute, Helsinki
Pekka NISKANEN, Inspector of Fishing Economics at the Central Board of Agriculture, Helsinki
Holger MAURIA, Forest Officer, Forest Service, Helsinki
FRANCE
Délégué
Michel CEPEDE , Président du Comité Interministériel de l'Agriculture et de l'Alimentation, Paris
Suppléants
Bernard TOUSSAINT, Conseiller des Affaires Etrangères, Direction des Nations Unies et des Organisations Internationales, Paris
Henri JANTON, Contrôleur d'Etat au Ministère de l'Economie et des Finances, Paris
Jean de VAISSIERE, Inspecteur général de l'Agriculture, Paris
Gerard WEILL, Secrétaire général du Comité Interministériel de l'Agriculture et de l'Alimentation. Paris
Conseillers
André ANGLADETTE, Inspecteur général de la Recherché agronomique, Paris
Jean BIDAULT, Charge de mission au Secretariat d'Etat charge de la Cooperation Paris
Jacques BLANCHET, Administrateur civil au Ministère de l'Agriculture, Paris
Robert BOUQUIN, Directeur général adjoins du Bureau pour le développement et la production agricole, Paris
Francis BOUR, Directeur général de la Société d'aide technique et de Cooperation, Paris
Guy CAMUS, Directeur général de l'Office de la Recherché Scientifique et technique Outré-Mer, Paris
Alfred CHOLLET, Inspecteur général des Eaux et Forêts (Comité technique des forêts) Paris
Henri CORSON, Directeur des relations internationales au Ministère de l'Agriculture, Paris
Pierre COSSEVIN, Administrateur civil au Ministère de l'Economie et des Finances, Paris
Michel DELAIS, Directeur de recherché a l'Office de la recherché scientifique et technique Outré-Mer (Comité technique des pêches), Paris
M. GADELLE, Charge de Mission au Secretariat d'Etat a la Cooperation (Comité technique de l'Agriculture), Paris
Henri GALL, Charge de mission au Cabinet du Ministre de 'Agriculture
Hugues GOUNELLE, Professeur de médecine, Conseiller supérieur d'Hygiène publique (Comité technique de la nutrition), Paris
Xavier GOUYOU-BEAUCHAMPS, Chef de cabinet adjoins du Ministre de l'Agriculture, Paris
Jean-Luc GRANTER, Conseiller financier a l'Ambassade de France a Rome, Rome
Jean-Claude GUISSET, Secrétaire des Affaires Etrangères, Direction de la coopération technique, Paris
Michel HURIET, Conseiller des Affaires Etrangères, Représentant Permanent de la France auprès de l'O. A. A., Rome
Claude MOREAUX, Administrateur civil au Secretariat général de la Marine Marchande, Paris
Jean PAGOT, Directeur général de l'Institut d'élevage et de médecine vétérinaire tropicale Maisons-Alfort
Albert PAVEC, Secrétaire des Affaires Etrangères, Direction des Nations Unies et des Organisations Internationales, Paris
Philippe PROVOST, Sous-Directeur de l'Aménagement forestier au Ministère de l'Agriculture (Comité technique des forêts), Paris
Jean WOUTERS, Attaché agricole près l'Ambassade de France, Rome
Conseillers spéciaux pour les questions avant trait a la Campagne mondiale contre la faim
M. le Pasteur BEAUMONT, Vice-President du Comité français de la Campagne mondiale contre la faim, Paris
Edouard THIBAULT, Ancien Ministre, Délégué général du Comité français de la Campagne mondiale contre la faim, Paris
Mme Marie-Louise d'HARCOURT, Chargée de l'Information et de la propagande au Comité français de la Campagne mondiale contre la faim, Paris
Conseillers spéciaux, membres du Conseil Economique et Social (Paris)
Mme Jeanne PICARD, (Associations familiales)
Pierre MARTIN, (Agriculture)
Jean RAFFARIN, (Coopératives agricoles)
GABON
Délégué
Joseph ETOUGHE, Ministre de l'Agriculture, de l'Elevage, de l'Economie rurale et des Eaux et Forêts, Libreville
Suppléants
Paul KIKI, Directeur général de l'Office national de Commercialisation agricole, Libreville
Ange MBA, Directeur adjoins des Eaux et Forêts, Libreville
Conseiller
Emmanuel AKOGHE MBA, Chef de la Region agricole de l'Estuaire, Libreville
THE GAMBIA
Delegate
Amang S. KANYI, Minister of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Cape St. Mary
Alternate
L.J. MARENAH, Director of Agriculture, Cape St. Mary, Nr. Bathurst
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY
Delegate
Hermann HÖCHERL, Federal Minister of Food, Agriculture and Forestry, Bonn
Alternates
Udo HEIN, Steatesekretär, Federal Ministry for Economic Co-operation, Bonn
Fiedrich NONHOFF, Ministerialdirektor, Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry, Bonn
Kurt HÄFNER, Ministerialdirektor, Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry, Bonn
Werner LAMBY, Ministerialdirigent, Federal Ministry for Economic Co-operation, Bonn
Hans-Joachim SCHARMER, Leitender Ministerialrat, Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry, Bonn
Georg SCHUTZ, Regierungsdirektor, Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry, Bonn
Associates
Irene HAAS, Regierungsdirektorin, Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry, Bonn
Karl Heinrich GEBBERS, Regierungedirektor, Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry, Bonn
Enno MAMMEN, Regierungedirektor, Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry, Bonn
Gero MÖCKLINGHOFF, Regierungedirektor, Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry, Bonn
Felix KRUSEN, Regierungsdirektor, Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry, Bonn
Hans JANSSEN, Principal Administrator, Federal Ministry for Economic Co-operation, Bonn
Advisers
Kurt EISENKRAMER, Regierungedirektor, Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry, Bonn
Wilhelm RAUHUT, Regierungedirektor, Counsellor (Agricultural Affairs), Embassy of the Federal Republic of Germany, Rome
GHANA
Delegate
J. OFORI-TORTO, Commissioner for Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture, Accra
Alternate
M. A. RIBEIRO, Ambassador of Ghana to the Republic of Italy, Rome
Associates
A. K. ASEM, Principal Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Accra
J.G. AMOAFO, Chief Agricultural Economist, Ministry of Agriculture, Accra
John M.N. ADJETEY, Chief Fisheries Officer, Ministry of Agriculture, Accra
J. H. FRANÇOIS, Deputy Chief Conservator of Forest, Ministry of Forestry, Accra
Adviser
J. H. SACKEY, Counsellor, Embassy of Ghana, Rome
GREECE
Délégué
Jean GEROULANOS, President du Comité national grec de la FAO, Athènes
Suppléant
Jean RAFTOPOULOS, Directeur honoraire, Ministère de l'Agriculture, Athènes
Conseillers
Panus MARGAROPOULOS, Directeur au Ministère de l'Agriculture, Athènes
Georges GREGORIOU, Directeur au Ministère de l'Agriculture, Athènes
Constantin TSIBOURIS, Attaché agricole auprès de l'Ambassade Royale de Grèce, Ambassade de Grèce, Rome
GUATEMALA
Delegato
Roberto Rene AZURDIA PAIZ, Embajador de Guatemala ante el Gobierno de Italia, Representante Permanente de Guatemala ante la FAO, Roma
GUINEA
Délégué
Sikhé CAMARA, Ambassadeur de la République de Guinée auprès des Gouvernements de la République italienne et de la République fédérale d'Allemagne, Bonn
Suppléant
Cellou DIALLO, Directeur General de l'Agriculture, Conakry
GUYANA
Delegate
Robert J. JORDAN, Minister of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Georgetown
Advisers
Stephen A. ANGOY, Acting Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Georgetown
Ashton V. WAN-PING, Chief Agricultural Officer, Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Georgetown
HAITI
Délégué
Louis BLANCHET, Secrétaire d'Etat de l'Agriculture, des Ressources naturelles et du Développement rural, Port-au-Prince
HONDURAS
Delegado
Eugenio MATUTE CANIZALES, Embajador, Representante Permanente de la República Permanente de la República de Honduras ante la FAO, Roma
Alternos
Blas Humberto URSO, Ministro Consejero, Representante Permanente Alterno de la República de Honduras ante la FAO, Roma
Gracia Maria VALLONE GRANDOLINI, Secretaria de la Misión de la República de Honduras ante la FAO, Roma
HUNGARY
Delegate
Imre DIMEY, Minister of Agriculture and Food, Budapest
Alternate
Kálmán KAZARECZKI, Deputy Minister of Agriculture and Food, Budapest
Timbor LAJTI, Ambassador, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Budapest
András MADAS, Chief of Department, Central Planning Office, Budapest
Károly KARCSAI, Head of Section, Secretariat of the Commission for International Economic Relations, Budapest
Adviser
Jánus SZABO, Chief of Department, Office of the Council of Ministers, Budapest
Associates
Lászlo ENESE, Deputy Director, Research Institute for Agricultural Economics, Budapest
István OZORAI, Deputy Head of Department, Ministry of Agriculture and Food, Budapest
Gábor HIDVEGI, Senior Clerk, Ministry of Agriculture and Food, Budapest
Advisers
Miklos VILLANYI, Chief of Department, Ministry of Finance, Budapest
István HETENYI, Counsellor, Embassy of the Hungarian People's Republic, Rome
Lászlo SZÜCS, Commercial Counsellor, Embassy of the Hungarian People's Republic, Rome
Gábor GÖBÖLYÖS, Second Secretary Embassy of the Hungarian People's Republic, Rome
ICELAND
Delegate
Thorleifur THORLACIUS, Chief of Division, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Reykjavik
INDIA
Delegate
Jagjivan RAM, Minister for Food and Agriculture, New Delhi
Alternates
K. MATHIALAGAN, Minister of Food, Madras The Maharaja of Patiala, Patiala
A. L. DIAS, Secretary, Ministry of Food and Agriculture, New Delhi
J. C. MATHUR, Additional Secretary, Ministry of Food and Agriculture, New Delhi
J. S. MONGIA, Counsellor for Agriculture, Embassy of India, Permanent Representative of India to FAO, Rome
Advisers
Ram SARAN, Additional Economic and Statistical Adviser, Ministry of Food and Agriculture, New Delhi
P. K. KYMAL, Executive Director, Food and Nutrition Board, Ministry of Food and Agriculture, New Delhi
Hari SINGH, Inspector General of Forests, Ministry of Food and Agriculture, New Delhi
Amrik Singh CHEEMA, Agricultural Production Commissioner, Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Community Development and Co-operation, New Delhi
G. N. MITRA, Joint Commissioner, Fisheries, New Delhi
J. N. KAUL, Private Secretary to Minister for Food and Agriculture, New Delhi
INDONESIA
Delegate
SUTJIPTO, Minister for Agriculture, Djakarta
Alternates
ISKANDAR, Ambassador of the Republic of Indonesia to the Republic of Italy, Rome
AMIEN TJOKROSUSENO, Secretary-General, Department of Agriculture, Djakarta
Associates
V. SUSANTO, Senior Official, Department of Maritime Affairs, Djakarta
ADIWOSO ABUBAKAR, Counsellor (Economic Affairs), Embassy of Indonesia, Rome
SOEGENG AMAT, Agricultural Attaché, Embassy of Indonesia, Permanent Representative of the Republic of Indonesia to FAO, Rome
A. SAHULATA, Secretary to the Minister for Agriculture, Djakarta
P.S. SISWOPUTRANTO, Senior Offcial, Department of Agricultural Estates, Djakarta
M. S. HARDJODARSONO, Head, Directorate of Forest Utilization, Department of Agriculture, Djakarta
IRAN
Delegate
Hassan ZAHEDI, Minister of Agriculture, Teheran
Alternates
Abbas DAVATCHI, Dean of the Faculty of Agriculture of Karadj, Karadj
Mohamad KAZEMI, Member of Council of Plan Organization, Teheran
A.G. BAYANI, Undersecretary, Ministry of Water and Power, Teheran
Adviser
Hussein SADEGH, Minister Plenipotentiary for Agricultural Affairs, Permanent Representative of Iran to FAO, Rome
Associates
Mohammed B. BAYAT, Director of Agricultural Planning Group in Plan Organization, Teheran
H. HE DAYAT, Executive Director, Nutrition Institute
Irady SEPAHPOUR, Director-General Agricultural and Engineering Department, Ministry of Agriculture, Teheran
Bijan BAVANDI, Head of Information and Publications Department, Ministry of
Agriculture, Teheran
M. R. KOLEINI, Adviser to the Minister of Agriculture, Teheran
IRAQ
Delegate
Hassan KITTANI, Director-General of Forests and Afforestation, Baghdad
Alternate
Ali AL-RAWI, Director-General of Agriculture, Baghdad
Associates
Fakhri AL-QAISI, Permanent Representative of Iraq to FAO, Rome
Mahmoud Ibrahim AL-HAMED, Director, Fisheries Division, Ministry of Agriculture, Baghdad
Haidar AL-HAIDARI, Director, Division of Entomology and Plant Pathology, Baghdad
Tarik M. AL-WAHIEB, Veterinarian, Directorate General of Animal Resources and Veterinary Services, Baghdad
IRELAND
Delegate
J.C. NAGLE, Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Fisheries, Dublin
Alternates
M.J. BARRY, Deputy Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Fisheries, Dublin
H. SPAIN, Chief Inspector, Department of Agriculture and Fisheries, Dublin
Associates
J. ROWAN, Senior Inspector, Department of Agriculture and Fisheries, Dublin
S. P. CUFFE, Assistant Principal Officer, Department of Agriculture and Fisheries, Dublin
M. FLYNN, Counsellor, Embassy of Ireland, Rome
ISRAEL
Delegate
Chaim GVATI, Minister of Agriculture, Jerusalem
Alternates
Felix Dan MAAS, Director, Agricultural, Production and Extension Services, Ministry of Agriculture, Jerusalem
Shimon MAZE, Minister Plenipotentiary (Agrarian Affairs), Embassy of Israel, Permanent Representative of Israel to FAO, Rome
Simcha DINITZ, Minister Plenipotentiary, Embassy of Israel, Rome
Associates
Moshe KOLAR, Deputy Director, Forest Department, Haifa
Mrs. Mirian L. ROMAN, Director, Foreign Relations and Technical Assistance Bureau, Ministry of Agriculture, Jerusalem
Avshalom Aby KENETT, Counsellor, Economic Affairs, Embassy of Israel, Rome
ITALY
Délégué
Franco RESTIVO, Ministre de l'Agriculture et des Forêts, Rome
Suppléant
Ugo PAPI, Secrétaire général, Comité national italien de la FAO, Rome
Conseillers
Giancarlo CORRADINI, Conseiller de Legation, Direction générale, Affaires économiques Rome
Paolo ALBERTARIO, Conseiller d'Etat, Chef de la Direction pour la Communauté économique européenne, Rome
Michele BOTTALICO, Directeur général, Direction de l'Assainissement et mise en valeur des terres, Rome
Vitantonio PIZZIGALLO, Directeur général de l'Economie Forestière et des Forêts, Rome
Alessandro PISTELLA, Directeur général de l'Amélioration foncière, Rome
Bernardo DATO, Directeur général de l'Alimentation, Rome
Vittorio DE ASARTA, Secrétaire, Comité national italien de la FAO, Rome
Valerio BENVENUTI, Inspecteur général des Forêts, Rome
Alfonso FRONCILLO, Directeur de la Division des Forêts, Rome
Attilio CAPPARELLI, Inspecteur en chef, Directeur de l'Assainissement des Terres, Rome
Augusto FILONZI , Inspecteur en chef, Direction générale de l' Assainissement des Terres, Rome
Mario BIXIO, Inspecteur, Directeur général de l'Assainissement des Terres, Rome
Antonio FERONE, Comité national italien de la FAO, Rome
Lamberto TOZZI, Comité national italien de la FAO, Rome
Marcello SALOMONE, Comité national italien de la FAO, Rome
Mlle Francesca ZAFARANA, Attachée de presse, Comité national italien de la FAO, Rome
Mlle Elena MAMMONE, Comité national italien de la FAO, Rome
Mlle Rossana MIZZAU, Comité national italien de la FAO, Rome
Tommaso MANIERI, Comité national italien de la FAO, Rome
Curzio CANEVA, Comité national italien de la FAO, Rome
Raffaele CUSMAI, Directeur général des pêches, Rome
Gaetano MEGLIO, Rome
Alessandro OLIVA, Rome
Dario PELLEGRINI, Direction générale des Services vétérinaires, Rome
Francesco FONTANA, Direction générale des Services vétérinaires, Rome
Duilio MASSA, Direction générale des Services vétérinaires, Rome
Giovanni SACCO, Ministère des Finances, Rome
Gabriele de SANCTIS, Ministère des Finances, Rome
Mme Anna Maria RIMOALDI, Ministère de l'Agriculture, Rome
IVORY COAST
Délégué
Alexis Thierry LEBBE, Ministre de la Production animale, Abidjan
Adjoints
Charles AILLOT ABOUT, Ambassadeur de Côte-d'Ivoire a Rome, Représentant Permanent de Côte-d'Ivoire auprès de la FAO, Rome
Joseph AKA-ANGHUI, Directeur général du Développement agricole, Abidjan
Conseillers
Paul CHALUMEAU, Directeur général de la Production animale, Abidjan
André MAUD, Directeur des Eaux et Forêts et Chasses, Abidjan
Ibrahim TOURE, Secrétaire général du Comité National pour l'Alimentation, Abidjan
Garba DICOH, Directeur Adjoint des Pêches Maritimes, Abidjan
JAMAICA
Delegate
Probyn V. MARSH, Counsellor, Permanent Mission of Jamaica to the European Office of the United Nations, Geneva
JAPAN
Delegate
Toru OSAWA , Special Adviser to the Minister for Agriculture and Forestry, Tokyo
Alternates
Yasuo YANO, Minister, Embassy of Japan, Rome
Yoshihide UCHIMURA, Counsellor, Agricultural Economy Bureau, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Tokyo
Koichiro YAMAGUCHI, Counsellor, Embassy of Japan, Rome
Associates
Shozo TAKEGATA, Chief, International Co-operation Section, Agricultural Economy Bureau, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Tokyo
Akira ARIMATSU, First Secretary, Embassy of Japan, Permanent Representative of Japan to FAO, Rome
Keizo KIMURA, Chief, Specialized Agencies Section, United Nations Bureau, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Tokyo
Katsuyoshi YAMANO, First Secretary, Embassy of Japan, Rome
Yasuo GOTO, Second Secretary, Embassy of Japan, Brussels
Jiro HASHIGUCHI, Technical Official International Co-operation Section, Agricultural Economy Bureau, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Tokyo
Tetsuo WATANABE, Counsellor, Japan FAO Association, Tokyo
JORDAN
Delegate
Abdel Hamid SERAJ, Ambassador of Jordan to the Republic of Italy, Rome
Alternates
Sala JUM'A, Director-General, Department of Forest, Amman
Mohammad Hafez SALEM, Director, Agricultural Research Department, Ministry of Agriculture, Amman
KENYA
Delegate
Bruce Roy McKENZIE, Minister of Agriculture and Animal Husbandry, Nairobi
Alternates
Paul Samuel Thiong'o MIRIE, Director of Agriculture, Nairobi
Dawson Christian MLAMBA, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Husbandry, Nairobi
Ishmael Elijah MURIITHI, Director of Veterinary Services, Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Husbandry, Nairobi
Aloys Philip ACHIENG, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Tourism and Wildlife, Nairobi
Simon Denson GATHIUNI, Under-Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Husbandry, Nairobi
Associates
Joel Meshack OJAL, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Natural Resources
John Dalms Owvur ONYANGO, Conservator of Forests
John Yahuma WAWIYE, Conservator of Forests
Aaron Solomon OBURU, Fisheries Officer, Ministry of Tourism and Wildlife
Christian BONTE-FRIEDHEIM, Planning Officer, Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Husbandry
Adviser
William N. MBOTE, Fisheries Officer, Ministry of Tourism and Wildlife
KOREA (REPUBLIC OF)
Delegate
Yei Joon CHANG, Vice-Minister of Agriculture and Forestry, Seoul
Alternates
Kew Sung LEE, Minister, Embassy of Korea, Rome
Woo Suck HAHN, Chief, International Organization Section, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Seoul
Ju In SONG, Chief, Agriculture Economy Section, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Seoul
Associates
Young Jin KIM, Director-General, Office of Forestry, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Seoul
Suk Kyun KIM, Planning and Management Officer, Office of Forestry, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Seoul
Hee Un CHANG, Director, Production Bureau, Office of Fisheries, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Seoul
Hyung Soo KIM, First Secretary, Korean Embassy in Italy, Rome
Adviser
Mrs. Lee Heron I. KIM, Member of the Korea FAO Association
KUWAIT
Delegate
Khaled ALESSA ALSALEH, Minister of Public Works, Kuwait
Alternate
Yahia GHANNAM, Head of Agriculture Department, Department of Agriculture, Kuwait
Associates
Ali AL-GHANEM AL-JABER, Superintendent of the Agricultural Experimentation Farm, Ministry of Public Works, Kuwait
Hussein SELIM, Senior Fisheries Officer, Fisheries Division, Ministry of Public Works, Kuwait
LAOS
Délégué
Princesse Souvanna PHOUMA, Vientiane
Suppléant
Phouangkéo PHANARETH, Délégué Permanent du Laos auprès du Comité international du Mekong, Vientiane
Adjoints
Tiao Somsavath VONGKOTH, Directeur de l'Agriculture, Direction de l'Agriculture,
Vientiane
Boun Nong SIPHA, Sous-Directeur de Vulgarisation Agricole, Direction de l'Agriculture,
Vientiane
LEBANON
Délégué
Bahige MEZHER, Directeur General du Ministère de l'Agriculture, Beyrouth
Suppléants
Joseph HARAOUI, Directeur General, Institut de Recherches agronomiques, Beyrouth
Sultan HAIDAR, Directeur General de l'Office de la Production Animale, Ministère de l'Agriculture, Beyrouth
Malek BASBOUS, President du Plan Vert, Ministère de l'Agriculture, Beyrouth
Joseph K. CHAMI, Chef du Service des Projets et Programmes, Ministère de l'Agriculture, Beyrouth
Tannous KHALIL, Chef du Service des Relations Extérieures, Ministère de l'Agriculture, Beyrouth
LESOTHO
Delegate
Matete MAJARA, Minister of Agriculture, Co-operatives and Marketing, Maseru
Alternates
David Phatela MAKOAE, Permanent Secretary for Agriculture, Co-operative and Marketing, Maseru
Clement Mmusi Kitchener SEAPE, Agricultural Officer (Extension and Farmer training), Maseru
LIBERIA
Delegate
Antony J. MELTON, Special Assistant to the Secretary of Agriculture, Monrovia
Alternate
Julius E. COOPER, Dean, College of Agriculture and Forestry, University of Liberia, Monrovia
Associates
Anthony T. SAYEH, Chief of the Bureau of Forest and Wildlife Conservation, Department of Agriculture, Monrovia
James K. BEDELL, Deputy Director of Agricultural Extension Service, Department of Agriculture, Monrovia
LIBYA
Delegate
Mutawal SULEIMAN, Under-Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources, Tripoli
Alternate
Khairi SGAIER, Director of Planning and Agricultural Economics, Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Health, Tripoli
Associates
Mebrouk M. EL-HASSADI, Director of Water and Soil Conservation Department, Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources, Tripoli
Mohammed Badreddin MESSAUDI, Director of Forests, Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources, Tripoli
Ahmed Isam HAMZAH, Head of Training and Technical Relations Office, Tripoli
Isa BELKHEIR, Director, Technical Co-operation Department, Ministry of Planning and Development, Tripoli
Hameda ZLITNI, Counsellor, Embassy of the Kingdom of Libya, Rome
LUXEMBOURG
Délégué
Emile COILING, Depute, Ancien Ministre de l'Agriculture et de la Viticulture, Luxembourg
Suppléant
François BREMER, Vice-Consul, Ambassade du Luxembourg, Rome
Adjoint
Eugene WEYMERSKIRCH, Ministère de l'Agriculture et de la Viticulture, Luxembourg
MADAGASCAR
Délégué
Jean-Jacques NATAI, Ministre de l'Agriculture, de l'Expansion rurale et du Ravitaillement, Tananarive
Suppléant
Pierre ZAKA, Secrétaire d'Etat a l'Agriculture, a l'Expansion rurale et au Ravitaillement, Tananarive
Adjoint
Gabriel RANDRIAMBAHINY, Premier Conseiller aux Affaires Etrangères, Ministère d'Etat aux Affaires Etrangères, Tananarive
Charles ANDRIANTSITOHAINA, Directeur de Cabinet du Ministre de l'Agriculture, de l'Expansion rurale et du Ravitaillement, Tananarive
Georges RAMANANTSOAVINA, Directeur de la Production végétale, Ministère de l'Agriculture, de l'Expansion rurale et du Ravitaillement, Tananarive
Desire RAZAFINDRAKOTO, Vétérinaire Inspecteur, Chef du Service Vétérinaire, Ministère de l'Agriculture, de l'Expansion rurale et du Ravitaillement, Tananarive
Adjoints
Michel ADINE, Ingénieur Agronome, Secrétaire technique de la Commission nationale de liaison avec la FAO, Tananarive
Alfred BOTRALAHI, Charge d'Affaires, Ambassade de Madagascar, Rome
Alphonse RAKOTOMANAMPISON, Ingénieur des Eaux et Forêts, Tananarive
Raymond RAZAIIMBELO, Chef du Service des Produits a la Direction du Commerce, Tananarive
MALAWI
Delegate
Gomile WILANICHILAMBO KUMTUMANJI, Minister of Natural Resources, Bomba
Alternates
Robert James DEWAR, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Natural Resources, Bomba
J. M.A. MSEKA, Deputy High Commissioner for Malawi, London
Associates
Wadson Binnie DELEZA, Agricultural Officer, Ministry of Natural Resources, Bomba
Philip BANNISTER, Director Veterinary Services, Bomba
MALAYSIA
Delegate
Tuan Haji MOHD, Ghazali bin JAWI, Minister of Agriculture and Co-operatives, Kuala Lumpur
Alternates
Dato Syed Hasbim bin ABDULLAH, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture and Co-operatives, Kuala Lumpur
Tuan Syed Mahadzar bin SYED HUSSEIN, Principal Assistant Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture and Co-operatives, Kuala Lumpur
Inche Soong Min KONG, Director of Fisheries, Kuala Lumpur
Tuan Haji Basir bin ISMAIL, Director of Food Technology, Kuala Lumpur
Inche Ismail bin Haji ALI, Deputy Chief Conservator of Forest, Kuala Lumpur
Inche Osman bin Modh. NOOR, State Agriculture Officer, Trengganu
Y. M. Raja Muhd. Alias bin Raja Muhd ALI, Deputy Chairman, Federal Land Development Authority, Kuala Lumpur
Inche Abdul Fatah bin ZAKARIA, Malaysian Trade Commissioner, Vienna
Inche Mohd. Khalil bin YAA'KOB, First Secretary, Embassy of Malaysia, Rome
Min-King SOONG, Director of Fisheries, Ministry of Agriculture, Kuala Lumpur
MALI
Délégué
Salah NIARE, Secrétaire d'Etat a la Présidence, Charge de l'Economie Rurale, Bamako
Suppléant
Amadou Diadie BA, Ambassadeur de la République du Mali auprès des Gouvernements de la République italienne et de la République française, Paris
Adjoints
Zanga COULIBALY, Directeur de l'Institut d'Economie Rurale, Bamako
Benitieni FOFANA, Directeur de la Division de la Nutrition, Ministère de la Santé Publique et des Affaires Sociales, Bamako
Jean Djigui KEITA, Chef des Service de l'Agriculture, des Eaux et Forêts, Bamako
Salif SIDIBE, Directeur de Cabinet, Secrétaire d'Etat de l'Economie, Bamako
MALTA
Delegate
J. SPITERI, Minister of Trade, Industry and Agriculture, Valletta
Alternates
Anthony Saviour FARRUGGIA, Director of Agriculture and Fisheries, Valletta
I. MOSKOVITS, Counsellor (Agriculture) Embassy of Malta, Permanent Representative of Malta to FAO, Rome
W.C. SPITERI, Second Secretary, Embassy of Malta, Rome
Associates
J. ATTARD, Private Secretary to the Minister of Trade, Industry and Agriculture, Valletta
Charles GALEA ENPUQUEZ, Agricultural Economist, Valletta
Joseph FRENDO, Chief Fisheries Officer, Department of Fisheries, Valletta
Antony S. SPITERI, Agricultural Chemist, Department of Agriculture, Valletta
Saviour J. ZAMMIT, Principal Technical Officer, Department of Agriculture, Valletta
MAURITANIA
Délégué
Mohamed Ould AMAR, Ingénieur Agronome, Chef du Service de l'Agriculture, Nouakchott
MEXICO
Delegado
Noé PALOMARES, Subsecretario Forestal y de la Fauna, Secretaria de Agricultura y Ganadería, Mexico
Suplentes
Arturo LOPEZ DE ORTIGOSA, Ministro Consejero de la Embajada de Mexico, Representante Permanente Alterno de Mexico ante la FAO, Roma
Luis FERNANDEZ CALLEROS, Subdirector General de Agricultura, Secretaria de Agricultura y Ganadería, Mexico
Asesores
Juan Manuel GONZALEZ, Asesor Técnico de la Subsecretaría, Forestal y Fauna Secretaria de Agricultura y Ganadería, Mexico
Pedro SOLANA MARTAGON, Director del Instituto Nacional de Investigaciones Pecuarias, Secretaria de Agricultura y Ganadería, Mexico
Francisco RAMOS CANTORAL, Subdirector Asuntos Internacionales, Secretaria de Agricultura y Ganadería, Mexico
Juan Luis CIFUENTES LEMUS, Subdirector de Asuntos Biologicós Pesqueros, Dirección General de Pesca e Industrias Conexas, Mexico
Alejandro CERVANTES DELGADO, Subdirector de Asuntos Económicos Pesqueros, Ministerio de Industria y Comercio, México
MOROCCO
Délégué
Mohamed BARGACH, Ministre de l'Agriculture et de la Réforme agraire
Suppléants
Nor EL-GHORFI, Ambassadeur, Représentant Permanent du Maroc auprès de la FAO, Rome
Haddaoui Moulay RACHID, Directeur des Affaires Economiques et Juridiques, Ministère de l'Agriculture et de la Réforme Agraire, Rabat
Adjoint
FARAJ HUSSEIN, Directeur de la Recherche Agronomique, Ministère de l'Agriculture et de la Réforme Agraire, Rabat
Adjoints
Berrada ABDESLAM, Directeur des Eaux et Forêts et de la restauration des Sols, Ministère de l'Agriculture et de la Réforme Agraire, Rabat
Bennani HASSAN, Directeur des Interventions Agricoles, Rabat
Attar HAJ, Chef de la Division de l'Equipement a la Direction de la Mise en valeur, Rabat
Continue
<section>p</section>
List of delegates and observers
NEPAL
Delegate
Rajeswar DEVEKOTA, Minister for Land Reform, Food and Agriculture, Kathmandu
Alternate
Vishnu Prasad DHITAL, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Kathmandu
KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS
Delegates
P. J. LARDINOIS, Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries of the Netherlands, The Hague
R. L. JANKIE , Minister of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries of Surinam, Paramaribo
Alternates
J. A. P. FRANKE, Director-General for Food and Fisheries, Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, The Hague
M. J. L. DOLS, Cabinet Adviser to the Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries, The Hague
Alternative
J. E. van LEEUWEN, Deputy Director-General for Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, The Hague
Special Adviser
J. MEIJER, Director-General for International Co-operation, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, The Hague
Associates
G. P. TIGGELMAN, Director for Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries, Surinam, Paramaribo
Abe S. TUINMAN, Permanent Representative of the Kingdom of the Netherlands to FAO, The Royal Netherlands Embassy, Rome
F. PRONK, Deputy-Director, Foreign Agricultural Service, Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
F. DEELEMAN, Head Relations with International Organizations and Technical Assistance Branch, Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, The Hague
M. RIEM, Department for Agricultural Commerce and Industry, Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, The Hague
J. M. H. te FLIERHAAR, International Organizations Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, The Hague
Miss P. F. M. van der TOOT, Liaison Officer for FAO Affairs, Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, The Hague
Advisers
D.S. TUYNMAN, Member of the Second Chamber of the States General, The Hague
H. de BRUIN, Agricultural Attaché, Embassy of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, Tunis
J. S. KEYSER, Chairman of the Netherlands National FAO Committee, The Hague
H. Ph. HUFFNAGEL, Director, Department of Agricultural Research, Royal Tropical Institute, Amsterdam
Maarten L. de HEER, Senior Economist, Agricultural Board, The Hague
E. STEENBEEK, Deputy Agricultural Attaché, The Royal Netherlands Embassy, Rome
NEW ZEALAND
Delegate
David N. R. WEBB, Director-General of Agriculture, Wellington
Alternates
Noel Rowland WOODS, Agricultural Adviser to the New Zealand High Commission in London, London
J.G. McARTHUR, Counsellor, Embassy of New Zealand, Rome
Associates
W. J. FALCONER, Assistant Trade Commissioner, Second Secretary, Embassy of New Zealand, Rome
A.T. FOLEY, Principal Timber Officer, Wellington
NICARAGUA
Delegado
Ernesto MATAMOROS, Embajador de Nicaragua ante el Gobierno de Italia, Roma
Suplente
Bosco MATAMOROS, Agregado cultural, Embajada de Nicaragua, Roma
NIGER
Délégué
Ibra KABO, Ambassadeur Extraordinaire et Plénipotentiaire du Niger auprès des Gouvernements de la République française et de la République italienne, Paris
Suppléant
Adamou SOUNA, Directeur de l'Agriculture, Niamey
NIGERIA
Delegate
Alhaji Yahaya GUSAU, Federal Commissioner for Economic Development, Agriculture and Natural Resources, Lagos
Alternates
J. M. GARBA, Ambassador of the Federal Republic of Nigeria to the Republic of Italy, Rome
G.A. IGE, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Lagos
Advisers
E.O. BAYAGBONA, Deputy Director, Federal Fisheries Services, Lagos
R.B. ADEWUNMI, State Counsel, Federal Ministry of Justice, Lagos
B. S. OLORUNTOBA, Deputy Chief, Agricultural Officer, Ministry of Agriculture, Kaduna
E.O. OJURONGBE, Senior Assistant Chief, Agricultural Extension Services Officer, Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Ibadan
Mallam Inuwa MOHAMMED, Senior Assistant, Chief Veterinary Office, Northern Ministry of Animal and Forest Resources, Kaduna
E. O. OMOYELE, Senior Assistant Secretary, Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Lagos
Adeniran OSHUNNIYI, First Secretary, Embassy of Nigeria, Permanent Representative of Nigeria to FAO, Rome
J.A. EWEKA, Agricultural Attaché, Embassy of Nigeria, Rome
NORWAY
Delegate
Bjarne LYNGSTAD, Minister of Agriculture, Oslo
Alternate
John RINGEN, Director, Ministry of Agriculture, Chairman, FAO National Committee, Oslo
Advisers
Ragnar NICOLAYSEN, Professor, Director Institute for Nutrition Research, University of Oslo, Oslo
Per ROGSTAD, Director-General, Ministry of Fisheries, Oslo
Aslak LIDTVEIT, Director-General of Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture, Oslo
Reidar VOLLAN, Director-General of Veterinary Services, Ministry of Agriculture, Oslo
Hans Kristian SEIP, Director-General of Forestry, Ministry of Agriculture, Oslo
Olav BORGAN, Director, Federation of Agricultural Co-operative Associations, Oslo
Per Thee NAEVDAL, Counsellor, The Royal Norwegian Embassy, Permanent Representative of Norway to FAO, Rome
Arne LÖCHEN, Secretary-General, National Nutrition Council (FAO Committee), Oslo
PAKISTAN
Delegate
A. H. M. SHAMS-UD-DOHA, Minister of Agriculture and Works, Islamabad
Alternate
M. Yamin QURESHI, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture and Works, Islamabad
Associates
Syed Abdul ALEEM, Forestry Adviser, Ministry of Agriculture and Works, Islamabad
Ali MIAN MUMTAZ, Deputy Agricultural Development Commissioner, Ministry of Agriculture and Works, Islamabad
M. I. K. KHALIL, Agricultural Attaché, Embassy of Pakistan, Permanent Representative of Pakistan to FAO, Rome
PANAMA
Delegado
Bernardo OCAÑA, Director de Programación, Ministerio de Agricultura, Comercio e Industrias
Suplente
Jose M. WATSON, Primer Secretario, Embajada de Panama ante la Santa Sede, Roma
PARAGUAY
Delegado
Anibal FERNANDEZ, Primer Secretario, Embajada del Paraguay, Roma
PERU
Delegado
Edwin LETTS, Embajador en el Servicio Diplomático del Peru, Lima
Suplente
Manuel GONZALEZ-OLAECHEA, Consejero, Embajada del Peru, Representante Permanente del Peru ante la FAO, Roma
Asesor Técnico Jorge SANCHEZ, Director Técnico del Instituto del Mar del Peru, Lima
Adjunto
Julio MAC ERA DALL'ORSO, Agregado Cultural, Representante alterno del Peru ante la FAO, Roma
PHILIPPINES
Delegate
Dioscoro L. UMALI, Undersecretary, Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Manila
Alternates
Bartolome A. UMAYAM, Ambassador, Permanent Representative of the Republic of the Philippines to FAO, Rome
Agustin P. MANGILA, Ambassador, Assistant Secretary of Economic Affairs, Department of Foreign Affairs, Manila
Anacleto B. CORONEL, Director, Bureau of Animal Industry, Manila
Eliseo C. CARANDANG, Director, Bureau of Plant Industry, Manila
Andrés M. MANE, Commissioner, Fisheries Commission, Manila
Alternate
Juan L. UTLEG, Assistant Director of Forestry, Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Manila
Associates
Leonardo A. PAULINO, Acting Director, Bureau of Agriculture Economics, Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Manila
Edelwina C. LEGASPI, Professor, University of the Philippines, College of Agriculture, Manila
Mrs. Carmen A. MERCADO, Chief Nutritionist and Home Economist, Department of Education, Manila
Armando C. FERNANDEZ, Third Secretary, Vice-Consul, Embassy of the Republic of the Philippines, Rome
POLAND
Delegate
Jósef WINIEWICZ, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs, Warsaw
Alternates
Jósef OKUNIEWSKI, Deputy Minister of Agriculture, Warsaw
Wojciech CHABASINSKI, Ambassador, Permanent Representative of the Polish People's Republic to FAO, Rome
Stefan KROLIKOWSKI, Chairman, National FAO Committee of Poland, Warsaw
Associates
Wlodzimierz NATORF, Deputy Director of Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Warsaw
Witold ZAREMBA, Counsellor, Committee of the Economic Co-operation with Foreign Countries of the Council of Ministers, Warsaw
Jan SERWATOWSKI, Deputy Director of Department, Ministry of Foreign Trade, Warsaw
Andrzej KACALA, Director of Department, Ministry of Agriculture, Warsaw
Mrs. Krystyna PIOTROWSKA-HOCHFELD, Professor, School of Planning and Statistics, Warsaw
Czeslaw MUSZALSKI, Second Secretary of the Embassy of the Polish People's Republic, Deputy Resident Representative of Poland to FAO, Rome
Zbigniew KULCZYCKI, Department Director, Ministry of Forestry and Wood Working Industry, Warsaw
PORTUGAL
Delegate
Daniel DUARTE SILVA, Vice-President of National Commission of FAO, Lisbon
Alternates
Nataniel de CARVALHO COSTA, Permanent Representative of Portugal to FAO, Rome
Amaro DUARTE GUERREIRO, Director, National Institute of Statistics, Lisbon
Ruy de ARAUJO RIBEIRO, Director-General of Economics, Ministry of Overseas, Lisbon
Advisers
Antonio LOPES RIBEIRO, Director, Agriculture Extension Service, Ministry of Economics Lisbon
Vasco de ALBUQUERQUE QUINTANILHA, Chief of Afforestation Division, Lisbon
Jose CARVALHO CARDOSO, Sub-Director of National Research Agronomical Station, Oeiras, Oeiras
J. Emiliano da COSTA, Chief of Animal Production Division, Ministry of Economics, Lisbon
Ilidio I. GOMES BARBOSA, Senior Inspector of Economy, Ministry of Overseas, Lisbon
Jose Cristaváo HENRIQUES, Forest Technician, Ministry of Overseas, Lisbon
Ramiro G. ALMEIDA FERRÁO, Animal Production Technician, Ministry of Overseas, Lisbon
Augusto V. BOTELHO DE SOUSA, Director, Technical Committee on Fisheries, Lisbon
ROMANIA
Délégué
Nicolae GIOSAN, Ministre, President du Conseil supérieur de l'Agriculture, President du Comité national roumain de la FAO, Bucarest
Suppléant
David DAVIDESCU, Ministre adjoint, Vice-President du Conseil supérieur de l'Agriculture, Vice-President du Comité national roumain de la FAO, Bucarest
Adjoints
Ion MILESCO, Chef de la Section forestière du Secretariat général du Conseil des Ministres, Bucarest
Octavian FENESAN, Secrétaire du Comité national roumain de la FAO, Bucarest
Alexandru COVOR, Directeur général scientifique a l'Institut central des Recherches agricoles, Bucarest
Gheorghe BAJA, Directeur scientifique a l'Institut des Recherches agricoles, Bucarest
Ion Petre MADA, Chef du Service des Organisations internationales, Ministère des Affaires étrangères, Bucarest
Octavian RADULESCO, Deuxième Secrétaire, Ambassade de la République Socialiste de Roumanie, Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO, Rome
Gheorghe COSTAN, Rome
Nicolae PETRESCO, Directeur adjoins á l'Institut des Recherches pour l'Economie agraire, Bucarest
Virgil IORDANESCU, Chef de secteur á la Station des recherches scientifiques maritimes de Constantza, Constantza
RWANDA
Délégué
Jean NTIGURA, Directeur général a la Présidence de la République, Kigali
Suppléant
Protais ZIGARA-NYIRAZO, Conseiller a l'Ambassade du Rwanda auprès des Gouvernements de la République française et de la République italienne, Paris
SAUDI ARABIA
Delegate
Mohamed Bin ZARAAH, Deputy Minister, Water Affairs, Riyadh
Alternates
Ibrahim ABO-BITAIN, Technical Adviser to the Minister, Riyadh
Abdulmanan TORJOMAN, Director, Department of Agricultural Research and Development Riyadh
Associates
Asaad JAM JOUM, Director-General, Water Affairs, Jeddah
Hasan HAJARAH, Director-General Public Land Management, Ministry of Agriculture, Riyadh
Abdul MOHSEN ALSODAIPO, Director, General Training Department, Ministry of Agriculture, Riyadh
Galif OTKUN, Chief Geologist, Riyedh
Associate
Mohammed A.R. ALRAWAF, Director, Ministers Office, Riyadh
Adviser
Lindsey A. BROWN, Riyadh
SENEGAL
Délégué
Magatte LO, Ministre de l'Economie rurale, Dakar
Suppléants
André GUILLABERT, Ambassadeur du Senegal auprès du Gouvernement de la République Française, Paris
Thomas DIOP, Ambassadeur du Senegal auprès du Gouvernement de la République Italienne,
El Hadji MALICK FALL, Directeur de Cabinet au Ministère de l'économie rurale, Dakar
Adjoint Louis GUEYE, Ministre plénipotentiaire, Représentant permanent du Senegal auprès de la FAO, Rome
Conseillers
Bocar LY, Conseiller technique, Ministère de l'économie rurale, Dakar
Babacar DIOP, Adjoint au Directeur des Pêches, Dakar
Samba Cor SAR, Directeur général de la Société d'exploitation des ressources animales du Sénégal (SERAS), Dakar
Hamadou DIALLO, Adjoint au Directeur de l'élevage, Ministère de l'économie rurale, Dakar
Mme Marie Therese BASSE, Inspectrice médicale scolaire, Dakar
SIERRA LEONE
Delegate
J.A. WILSON, Sierra Leone High Commissioner, London
Alternate
C.A. BROWNE-MARKE, Deputy Secretary, Department of Trade, Industry and Agriculture,
Freetown
Adviser
Shiaka Alphan KAWA, General Manager, Rice Corporation, Freetown
Associate
Michael Edward Randolph THOMAS, Chief Veterinary Officer, Department of Trade Industry and Agriculture, Freetown
SOMALI REPUBLIC
Delegate
Ali Alio MOHAMED, Ministry of Agriculture, Mogadiscio
Alternates
Ali Hussen GURRA, Ambassador of the Somali Republic to the Republic of Italy, Roma
Abdalla FARAH HERSI, Senior Agricultural Adviser, Ministry of Agriculture, Mogadiscio
Associates
Mohamed HERSI BAHAL, Deputy General Manager, Agricultural Development Agency, Mogadiscio
Abdurrhman A. GURRA, Animal Health and Production, Divisional Officer, Ministry of Agriculture, Mogadiscio
SPAIN
Delegado
Adolfo DLAZ-AMBRONA, Ministro de Agricultura, Madrid
Suplentes
Ramon ESTERUELAS ROLANDO, Director General de Agricultura, Madrid
Enrique FONTANA CODINA, Comisario General de Abastecimientos y Transportes, Madrid
Electo GARCIA TEJEDOR, Director General de Organismos Especializados, Madrid
Miguel ECHEGARAY Y ROMEO, Presidente del Instituto Nacional de Investigaciones Agronómicas, Madrid
Adjuntos
Arturo CAMILLERI LAPEYRE, Vicesecretario General Técnico, Madrid
Domingo DIAZ AMBRONA, Jefe del Gabinete Técnico del Ministro de Agricultura, Madrid
Guillermo ESCARDO PEINADOR, Secretario General del Comité Nacional de la FAO, Madrid
Alfonso de BORBON Y DE CARALT, Secretario de Primera Clase de la Dirección de Organismos Especializados, Madrid
Francisco Javier GARCIA RAMOS e ITURRALDE, Agregado Agrónomo de la Embajada de España, Representante Permanente de Espana ante la FAO, Roma
Asesores
Faustino GARCIA LOZANO, Jefe de la Sección Hidráulica del Instituto de Investigaciones Agronómicas, Madrid
Antonio BERMEJO ZUAZUA, Coordinador General de Centros Regionales de Investigacion y Desarrollo Agrario, Instituto de Investigaciones Agronómicas, Madrid
Miguel BENLLOCH MARTINEZ, Ingeniero Agronomo, Madrid
Luis VILACLARA MIR, Subdirector General de Montes, Madrid
Mariano BRIONES LEDESMA, Subdirector General del Patrimonio Forestal, Madrid
Ricardo de RADA MARTINEZ, Jefe de la Sección de Relaciones Forestales, Madrid
Alejandro ALONSO MUÑOZ, Jefe de Sección de la Dirección General de Ganadería, Madrid
Carlos MARCOS AGUIAR, Delegado de Contrastación del Patrimonio de Biología Animal, Madrid
Federico BALBONTIN GUTIERREZ, Ingeniero Agronomo del Instituto Nacional de Colonización, Madrid
Angel M. MAQUEDA VALBUENA, Ingeniero Agronomo del Instituto Nacional de Colonización, Madrid
Miguel BUENO GOMEZ, Jefe del Departamento de Estudios de Concentración Parcelaria, Madrid
Olegario RODRIGUEZ-MARTIN, Biólogo Asesor de la Dirección General de Pesca, Madrid
Enrique BLANCO LIZ E LIE R. Jefe del Gabinete Técnico de Alimentatión de la Comisaría General de Abastecimientos, Madrid
SUDAN
Delegate
Musa Abdel KARIM, Permanent Under-Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture and Forests, Khartoum
Alternate
Khalid El Kheir OMER, Director, Forestry Department, Khartoum
Saleh Mohed Saleh GAHEEN, Assistant Director, Ministry of Animal Resources, Khartoum
Associate
Fadul IDRIS, Inspector, Ministry of Commerce, Khartoum
SWEDEN
Delegate
Eric HOLMQVIST, Minister of Agriculture, Stockholm
Alternates
Ivan ECKERSTEN, Permanent Under Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Stockholm
Claes SENNING, Head of Department, Ministry of Agriculture, Stockholm
Associates
Sven ALLARD, Ambassador, Permanent Representative of Sweden to FAO, Rome
Sven ANTBY, Member of Parliament, Stockholm
Paul GRABO, Swedish Farmers' Association, Stockholm
Harald HAAKANSSON, Managing Director, Federation of the Swedish Farmers' Association, Stockholm
Ulf HÄNNINGER, First Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Stockholm
Claes-Erik ODHNER, Swedish Trade Union, Stockholm
Advisers
B.O. KÄRRE, Chief, Division of Information and Documentation, Swedish International Development Authority, Stockholm
Ragnar HJORTH, Head of Division, National Board of Forestry, Stockholm
Folke RYDBO, Deputy Director, Swedish Forest Service, Stockholm
Gustav YTTERBORN, Director-General, National Board of Agriculture, Stockholm
Odd GULBRANDSEN, Professor of Agricultural Economics, Department of Agricultural Economics at the Agricultural University, Uppsala
Jöran HULT, Director of Fisheries, Fisheries Board, Göteborg
SWITZERLAND
Délégué
Jean de RHAM, Ambassadeur de Suisse auprès du Gouvernement de la République Italienne, Rome
Suppléant
Paul HOHL, Premier Chef de Section, Division de l'Agriculture, Department de l'Economie Publique, Secrétaire Comité National Suisse de la FAO, Berne
Adjoints
Anton HEGNER, Collaborateur diplomatique, Division des organisations internationales, Berne
Charles STEINHÄUSLIN, Collaborateur diplomatique, Service de la cooperation technique, Berne
Christian ZOGG, Premier Secrétaire, Ambassade de Suisse, Représentant Permanent de la Suisse auprès de la FAO, Rome
Conseillers
René JURI, Directeur de l'Union suisse des paysans, Brougg
Raymond JUNOD, Directeur de la Chambre vaudoise de l'Agriculture, Lausanne
SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC
Délégué
Ahmad M. ZOOBI, Secrétaire général du Ministère de l'Agriculture et de la Réforme agraire, Damas
Adjoints
Michel ABDALLAH, Directeur général adjoins du Department de la Réforme agraire, Damas
Nazir SARAKBI, Directeur du Cabinet de M. le Ministre de l'Agriculture et de la Réforme agraire, Damas
Hicham EL-AKHRASS, Directeur de l'Irrigation et de l'Agriculture au Ministère du Plan, Damas
TANZANIA
Delegate
D. N. M. BRYCESON, Minister for Agriculture and Co-operatives, Dar-es-Salaam
Alternate
Timothy APIYO, Assistant Director of Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture and Co-operatives, Dar-es-Salaam
Associates
Hussein Omari MONGI, Director of Training, Ministry of Agriculture and Co-operatives Dar-es-Salaam
Deogratias Kente LWEHABURA, Assistant Director Agronomy, Water Development and Irrigation , Dar-es-Salaam
Awinia MUSHI, Assistant Director of Agriculture, Dar-es-Salaam
THAILAND
Delegate
M. R. CHAKRATONG TONGYAI, Under-Secretary of State for Agriculture, Bangkok
Alternates
Somboon PALASTHIRA, Ambassador of the Kingdom of Thailand to the Government of the Republic of Italy, Rome
M. C. CHAKRABANDHU, Director-General of the Department of Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture, Bangkok
Associate
M. L. JUANJEUN KAMBHU, Director-General, Department of Economic Relations, Ministry of Economic Affairs, Bangkok
Associate and Adviser
Phimol JITTEMANA, Bureau of the Budget, Bangkok
Associates
Deb MENASVETA, Senior Technical Fisheries Officer, Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Agriculture, Bangkok
Miss Marasee LIMPANANDANA, Chief of Foreign Organizations Section, Foreign Agricultural Relations Division, Bangkok
TOGO
Délégué
Pierre ADOSSAMA, Ministre de l'Economie rurale, Lomé
Suppléant
Adolphe AKAKPO-VIZAH, Chef de Cabinet du Ministère de l'Economie rurale, Lomé
Adjoint
Peter Primus KLUGA-O'CLOO, Responsable des questions de Nutrition, Ministère de l'Economie rurale, Lomé
Adjoints
Antoine MEATCHI, Conseiller technique, Ministère de l'Economie rurale, Lomé
Abdou-Kérim BOUKARI, Inspecteur Vétérinaire, Chef du Service des pêches, Lomé
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
Delegate
Hamid MOHAMMED, First Secretary, High Commission for Trinidad and Tobago, London
TUNISIA
Délégué
Mohamed ESSAD BEN OSMAN, Sous-Secrétaire d'Etat a l'Agriculture, Tunis
Suppléants
Tahar HAOUET, Chef de la Division du Développement agricole, Tunis
Ali HEDDA, Ministre Plénipotentiaire, Représentant permanent de la Tunisie auprès de la FAO, Rome
Conseillers
Hamadi BEN SLIMANE, Chef de cabinet du Sous-Secrétaire d'Etat a l'Agriculture, Tunis
Mohamed JERRAYA, Chef de la Section des Etudes et Planification, Tunis
Jabeur EL ABRI, Administrateur a la Division du Développement agricole, Tunis
Comités techniques
Conseillers
Hafsia HAMDA, Directeur des Forêts, Sous-Secrétariat d'Etat a l'Agriculture, Tunis
Khled BEN AMMAR, Directeur de la Recherche et de la Formation des cadres, Tunis
Hedi EL FOURGI, Directeur de la Production animale, Sous-Secrétariat d'Etat a l'Agriculture, Tunis
Mohsen CHAARI, Chef du Service des Statistiques agricoles, Sous-Secrétariat d'Etat a l'Agriculture, Tunis
Mohammed DJERRAYA, Chef du Service, Sous-Secrétariat d'Etat a l'Agriculture, Tunis
Salah MIDAH, Chef de Service, Sous-Secrétariat d'Etat a l'Agriculture, Tunis
Mohammed Habib AOUNALLAH, Chef de Service, Sous-Secrétariat d'Etat a l'Agriculture, Tunis
Robert SAMAMA, Ingénieur en Chef, Division des Grands Travaux Hydrauliques, Sous-Secrétariat d'Etat a l'Agriculture, Tunis
Ebrahim DOUIK, Chef du Service des Pêches, Sous-Secrétariat d'Etat au Plan et a l'Economie rationale, Tunis
Slah-Eddine BENSAID, Chef de la Division de la Production agricole végétale, Sous-Secrétariat d'Etat a l'Agriculture, Tunis
Abdelmejid GARA, Chef de Division des Pêches, Sous-Secrétariat d'Etat a l'Agriculture, Tunis
Mohsey CHEBIL, Sous-Directeur, Sous-Secrétariat d'Etat a l'Agriculture, Tunis
Ahmed KHOUDJA, Chef de la Sous-Direction des Ressources hydrauliques
Mohamed GHEDIRA, Directeur général de l'Office de mise en valeur de la Vallée de la Medjerda
Tahar JAOUADI, Chef de la Section de la Nutrition
TURKEY
Delegate
Ruhi TUNAKAN, Under-Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture, Chairman of the FAO National Committee, Ankara
Alternates
Sitki COSKUN, Director-General, Department of International Economic Organizations, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ankara
Sencer ASENA, Counsellor, Embassy of Turkey, Permanent Representative of Turkey to FAO, Rome
Associates
Süleyman CESMEBASI, Commercial Counsellor, Embassy of Turkey, Rome
Ismail SENER, Head of the Directorate of Analysis and Marketing of Agricultural Products, Ministry of Agriculture, Ankara
Vecdet ERKUN, Head of Technical Advisory Board for Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture, Ankara
Advisers
Nazim ÇAKMAKÇI, Commercial Counsellor, Department of Foreign Trade, Ministry of Commerce, Ankara
Ömer ÖZEN, Général Directorate of Forestry, Ministry of Agriculture, Ankara
Ösman KARAGCÖZ, Général Directorate of Forestry, Ministry of Agriculture, Ankara
UGANDA
Delegates
John K. BABIIHA, Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda, Minister of Animal Industry, Game and Fisheries, Kampala
Aloysius Kabwa BALINDA, Deputy Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Co-operatives, Kampala
Alternate
Henry J. KOGODA, Deputy Commissioner of Veterinary Services and Animal Industry, Ministry of Animal Industry, Game and Fisheries, Kampala
Advisers
Gabriel K. BINAISA, Chairman, Dairy Industries Corporation, Ministry of Animal Industry, Game and Fisheries, Kampala
Patrick KUNYA, Assistant Commissioner of Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Coopératives, Entebbe
Martin L.S.B. RUKUBA, Chief, Conservator of Forests, Entebbe
John W. S. KASIRYE, Senior Medical Officer, Ministry of Health, Entebbe
S. N. SEMAKULA, Chief, Fisheries Department, Entebbe
John A. OKODOI, Assistant Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Co-operatives, Entebbe
Stephen EZEKIEL, Veterinary Officer, Kampala
UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC
Delegate
Sayed MAREI, Minister of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform, Cairo
Alternates
A.A. MOURSI, Under-Secretary of State, Ministry of Agriculture, Cairo
Hassan ABDULLAH, Director, Foreign Relations Department, Ministry of Agriculture, Cairo
Soliman MANSOUR, Under-Secretary of State, Ministry of Planning, Cairo
Ismail A. ABDOU, Director-General Nutrition Institute, Ministry of Health, Cairo
UNITED KINGDOM
Delegate
Reg. PRENTICE, Minister of Overseas Development, London
Alternate
W.A.C. MATHIESON, Under-Secretary, Ministry of Overseas Development, London
Associates
E. M. WEST, Assistant Secretary, Ministry of Overseas Development, London
A. A. W. LANDYMORE, Counselor for FAO Affairs, British Embassy, Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom to FAO, Rome
J. H. HOLROYD, Principal, Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, London
W.J.A. WILBERFORCE, Assistant Head, United Nations Department, Foreign Office, London
P.C. DUFF, Principal, Ministry of Overseas Development, London
Advisers
Sir Henry BERESFORD-PEIRSE, Director General, Forestry Commission, London
A. R. MELVILLE, Agricultural Adviser, Ministry of Overseas Development, London
A.T. BROOKE, Assistant Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland, London
Miss D. F. HOLLINGSWORTH, Principal Scientific Officer, Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, London
G.W. THOM, Principal, Ministry of Overseas Development, London
S.G. SAND FORD, Economic Adviser, Ministry of Overseas Development, London
J.W.T. COOPER, Special Assistant (Information), Ministry of Overseas Development, London
S.C. PENNOCK, Higher Executive Officer, Ministry of Overseas Development, London
Miss E. R. HIGGINS, Personal Assistant, Ministry of Overseas Development, London
Miss Rosemary MILLER, National Farmers' Union, London
F. ROBINSON, National Union of Agricultural Workers, London
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Delegate
The Honorable Dorothy H. JACOBSON, Assistant Secretary for International Affairs, Department of Agriculture, Washington, D. C .
Alternates
Ralph W. PHILLIPS, Director, International Organizations Staff, Office of Assistant Secretary for International Affairs, Department of Agriculture, Washington, D. C.
Robert ROSSOW, Counselor for FAO Affairs, Permanent Representative of the United States of America to FAO, Embassy of the United States of America, Rome
The Honorable Herbert J. WATERS, Assistant Administrator for War on Hunger Agency for International Development, Department of State, Washington, D. C.
Congressional
Adviser
The Honorable B. EVERETT JORDAN, United States Senate, Washington, D. C.
The Honorable Jack MILLER, United States Senate, Washington, D. C.
The Honorable Stephen M.YOUNG, United States Senate, Washington, D.C.
The Honorable Robert D. MATHIAS, United States House of Representatives, Washington, D. C.
The Honorable Paul JONES, United States House of Representatives, Washington, D. C.
Advisers
Merrill M. BLEVINS, First Secretary for FAO Affairs, Alternate Permanent Representative of the United States of America to FAO, Embassy of the United States of America, Rome
Burdick H. BRITTIN, Deputy Special Assistant for Fisheries and Wildlife to the Secretary of State, Department of State, Washington, D. C.
Paul J. BYRNES, Office of International Economic and Social Affairs, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State, Washington, D. C.
Wilbert M. CHAPMAN, Director, Van Camp Foundation, San Diego, California, San Diego, California
Edward P. CLIFF, Chief, Forest Service, Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.
Donald W. FISHIER, Assistant Director, European Regional Research Office, Agricultural Research Service, Department of Agriculture, Rome
Rulon GIBB, Director, Program Development Division, Foreign Agricultural Service, Department of Agriculture, Washington, D. C.
H. R. GLASCOCK, Jr., Executive Secretary, Society of American Foresters, Washington, D. C.
Kenneth A. HAINES, Associate Director, International Programs Division, Agricultural Research Service, Department of Agriculture, Washington, D. C.
John C. LYNN, Legislative Director, American Farm Bureau Federation, Washington, D. C.
Kenneth D. NADEN, Executive Vice-President, National Council of Farmer Co-operatives, Washington, D.C.
Jay I. NAMAN, President, Texas Farmers' Union, Waco, Texas
Richard REUTER, American Freedom-From-Hunger Foundation, Kraft Foods, Chicago, Illinois
William M. SABBAGH (Secretary of Delegation), Office of International Conferences, Department of State, Washington, D. C.
William M. TERRY, Assistant Director, Division of International Affairs, Bureau of Commercial Fisheries, Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of the Interior, Washington, D. C.
Robert C. TETRO, Agricultural Attaché, Embassy of the United States of America, Rome
Quentin M. WEST, Director, Foreign Regional Analysis Division, Economic Research Service, Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.
Robert K. WINTERS, Director, International Forestry Staff, Forest Service, Department of Agriculture, Washington, D. C.
Max L. WITCHER, International Organizations Staff, Office of Assistant Secretary for Department of Agriculture, Washington, D. C.
UPPER VOLTA
Délégué
Antoine DAKOURE, Ministre de l'Agriculture, de l'Elevage et des Eaux et Forêts, Ouagadougou
Suppléant
Léopold SIRY WANTISSE, Directeur de l'Agriculture, Ouagadougou
Conseillers
SIE SORY, Ingénieur des Travaux agricoles, Bobo-Dioulasso
Amidou COULIBALY, Docteur Vétérinaire, Ouagadougou
URUGUAY
Delegado
Mateo J. MAGARINOS de MELLO, Embajador, Representante Permanente del Uruguay ante los Organismos Europeos de las Naciones Unidas, Representante Permanente del Uruguay ante la FAO, Ginebra
Alternos
Carlos GIAMBRUNO, Ministro Consejero de la Embajada del Uruguay, Representante Permanente Alterno del Uruguay ante la FAO, Roma
Adolfo CASTELLS, Consejero de la Embajada del Uruguay, Roma
VENEZUELA
Delegado
Alejandro OSORIO, Ministro de Agricultura y Cría, Caracas
Suplentes
Antonio BRICENO LINARES, Embajador Extraordinario y Plenipotenciario de Venezuela, Representante permanente ante la FAO, Roma
Jose Luis PEÑALVER GOMEZ, Consejero Agrícola de la Embajada de Venezuela, Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO, Roma
Juan Bautista MARTINEZ, Jefe de Programación y Presupuesto, Instituto Agrario Nacional, Caracas
Hugo MARQUEZ MORENO, Consultor jurídico, Banco agrícola y Pecuario, Caracas
Antonio José VILLEGAS, Asesor del Ministerio de Agricultura y Cría, Caracas
Consejeros
Alberto BRUGNOLI CRUCIANI, Asesor de la Representación permanente ante la FAO, Roma
Francisco VARGAS MUÑOZ, Representante de la Federación Campesina en el Instituto Agrario Nacional, Caracas
Rafael VILORIA DIAZ, Jefe de la División de Bosques, Ministero de Agricultura y Cría, Caracas
VIET-NAM, REPUBLIC OF
Délégué
NGUYEN-VAN-HIEU, Ambassadeur de la République du Viet-Nam auprès du Gouvernement de la République d'Italie, Rome
Suppléant
DINH-VAN-PHUNG, Directeur des Affaires Agricoles au Ministère de l'Agriculture, Saigon
Adjoints
TRAN-VAN-TRI, Chef du Service des Pêches Maritimes, Saigon
VGUYEN-VAN-TAN, Directeur des Eaux et Forêts, Direction des Eaux et Forêts, Saigon
VU-THIEN-THAI, Directeur des Services Vétérinaires et de l'Elevage, Saigon
NGUYEN-THANH-HUY, Conseiller des Affaires Etrangères, Rome
YEMEN ARAB REPUBLIC
Delegate
Hashim Mohamed HUTHI, Minister Plenipotentiary of the Yemen Arab Republic to the Government of the Republic of Italy, Rome
Alternate
Tawfik Affif SOUSSA, Public Relations Officer, Rome
YUGOSLAVIA
Délégué
Jose INGOLIC, Député fédéral, Ancien Secrétaire fédéral de l'Agriculture, Belgrade
Suppléant
Milun IVANOVIC, Conseiller au Conseil exécutif fédéral, Belgrade
Adjoints
Milan RISTIC, Conseiller, Secrétariat d'Etat des Affaires étrangères, Belgrade
Vladimir DAMNJANOVIC, Secrétaire du Comité National de la FAO, Belgrade
Andra MARCOVIC, Premier Secrétaire, Secrétariat d'Etat des Affaires Etrangères, Belgrade
Conseiller
Nikola MANDIC, Ministre Conseiller, Ambassade de la République Socialiste Fédérative de Yougoslavie, Rome
ZAMBIA
Delegate
Munukayumbwa SIPALO, Minister of Agriculture, Lusaka
Alternate
E. I. L. WILLIMA, Undersecretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Lusaka
Advisers
D. H. LUZONGO, Deputy Director of Agriculture, Lusaka
E G. SAMPA, Assistant Secretary, Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism, Lusaka
ASSOCIATE MEMBERS
BAHRAIN
Delegates
Mohamed Mubarak AL-KHALIFAH, Director of Information Department, Manama
Ebrahim Hamed AL-KHALIFAH, Director of Agriculture Department, Manama
Associate
Mohamed Jabir AL-ANSARI, Senior Information Officer, Information Department, Manama
MAURITIUS
Delegate
Veerasamy RINGADOO, Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Port-Louis
Alternate
Lutchun PURMESSUR, Principal Assistant Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Port- Louis
QATAR
Delegate
Michel S. FARAH, Director of Agriculture, Doha
PERMANENT OBSERVERS FOR THE HOLY SEE
Permanent Observers
Right Rev. Monsignor L. G. LIGUTTI, Permanent Observer for the Holy See, Vatican City
Emilio BONOMELLI, Permanent Observer for the Holy See, Vatican City
Walter PERSEGATI, Secretary to the Permanent Observer for the Holy See, Rome
Maria GROOTHUIZEN, Liaison for Women's Work, Rome
REPRESENTATIVES OF UNITED NATIONS AND SPECIALIZED AGENCIES
UNITED NATIONS
Representatives
Martin HILL, Under-Secretary for International Agency Affairs, New York
A. DOLLINGER, Special Representative in Europe for Co-ordination and ACC Affairs Geneva
Erwin BAUMGARTERN, Director, United Nations Information Center, Rome
UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT
Representatives
E. M. CHOSSUDOVSKY, Assistant Director, Division for Conference Affairs and External Relations, Geneva
J. WAYNE, Economic Affairs Officer, Commodities Division, Geneva
UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM
Representative
Rafik ASHA, Senior Financial Adviser to the Administrator of UNDP, New York
UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSION FOR REFUGEES
Representative
E. G. LAPENNA. Acting Chief of Mission for Italy. Rome
UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN FUND
Representatives
J.V.E. GUIBBERT, Chief, Programme Service
Sir Herbert BROADLEY, Consultant
WORLD FOOD PROGRAM
Representative
A.H. BOERMA, Executive Director, Rome
INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANIZATION
Representatives
P. P. FANO, Director, Italian Branch of the International Labour Organization, Rome
Mrs. Vera SEMPRINI, Assistant to Director, ILO Branch Office, Rome
UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL , SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANIZATION
Representative
Miss Clara JAMES, Acting Chief, Division of Relations with International Organizations, Paris
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
Representative
Edouard DE MAEYER, Medical Officer, Geneva
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
Representatives
John D. MILLER, Special Representative in Europe
Arthur KARASZ, Deputy Special Representative Europe, Paris
J.J.C. EVANS, Assistant Director, Agriculture Projects Department, Paris
Peter REID, IBRD Liaison Officer to FAO, Rome
Martin PAIJMAS, IBRD Liaison Officer, Paris
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
Representative
Pierre A. SIMONET, Exchange and Trade, Relations Department, Washington, D. C.
INTERGOVERNMENTAL MARITIME CONSULTATIVE ORGANIZATION
Representative
E. C. V. GOAD, Deputy Secretary-General, London
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY
Representatives
Maurice FRIED, Director of the Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Atomic Energy in Food and Agriculture, Vienna
Peter B. VOSE, Assistant to Director, Joint FAO/IAEA Division, Vienna
Maurice de PROOST, Head, Food Preservation Section Joint FAO/IAEA Division, Vienna
Per-Göran KNUTSSON, Head, Animal Production and Health Section, Joint FAO/IAEA Division, Vienna
Hans BROESHART, Vienna
Harry E. GORESLINE, FAO/IAEA Division, Vienna
Bjorn SIGURBJORNSSON, Head, Plant Breeding and Genetics Section, Joint FAO/IAEA Division, Vienna
Yehia BARRADA, Joint FAO/IAEA Division, Vienna
D.A. LINDQUIST, Head, Insect Eradication and Pest Control Section, Joint FAO/IAEA Division, Vienna
GENERAL AGREEMENT ON TARIFFS AND TRADE
Representative
Gustaf HORTLING, Counsellor, Department of External Relations, Geneva
INTERGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS
ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
Observer
Douglas GUNESEKERA, Secretary, Manila
COMISION PERMANENTE DE LA CONFERENCIA DEL PACIFICO SUR
Observador
Enrique GARCIA SAYAN, Secretary Général, Lima
COMMONWEALTH AGRICULTURAL BUREAUX
Observer
W.A.C. MATHIESON, Member of the U.K. Delegation, acting also on behalf of CAB
COUNCIL OF EUROPE
Observateurs Commission de l'Agriculture
Louise HERKLOTZ, Membre du Bundeshaus, Bonn
Albert BROCHON, Membre du Conseil national suisse, Berne
Pierre BOURGOING, Membre de l'Assemblée nationale française, Paris
Robert HAURET, Membre de l'Assemblée nationale française, Paris
Pierre HORNECKER, Secrétaire de la Commission de l'Agriculture, Strasbourg
James JOHNSON, Member of Parliament, London
Josepf YVON, Membre du Sénat, Paris
Bjarne UNDHEIM, Member of Parliament, Oslo
J. BREWIS, Member of Parliament
Sforzino SFORZA, Deputy Clerk to the Consultative Assembly
Alfred BETHGE, Principal Administrative Officer, Strasbourg
INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
Observers
Rodrigo LLORENTE, Representative in Europe
Juan Carlos LANGLOIS Alternate Representatives in Europe Paris
INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION FOR AGRICULTURAL AND FOOD INDUSTRIES
Observer
Gerard WEILL, Secretary Général, Paris
INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION FOR NORTHWEST ATLANTIC FISHERIES
Observer
Burdick H. BRITTIN, Deputy Special Assistant for Fisheries and Wildlife to the Secretary of State, Washington
INTERNATIONAL OFFICE OF EPIZOOTICS
Observateurs
Armenio Eduardo FRANCA E SILVA, Secrétaire de la Commission de la peste porcine africaine de l'OIE, Lisbonne
René VITTOZ, Directeur, Office International des Epizooties, Paris
EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY
Observateur
Gian Valerio DAL PERO BERTINI, Chef de Division, Direction générale de l'Agriculture, Bruxelles
INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTE OF REFRIGERATION
Observateur
Michel ANQUEZ, Directeur adjoint, Paris
ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN
Observer
Louis DE LWART, Deputy Director, Deputy Director, OAS Office in Europe
INSTITUTO INTERAMERICANO DE CIENCIAS AGRICOLAS (IICA)
Observer
Rogelio COTO MONGE, Director of Official Relations, San Jose, Costa Rica
ORGANIZATION OF AFRICAN UNITY
Observateur
Cratien POGNON, Secrétaire général adjoint, Addis Ababa
AFRO-ASIAN RURAL RECONSTRUCTION ORGANIZATION
Observer
Kristian CHAND, Secretary Général, New Delhi
ORGANIZATION FOR ECONOMIC COOPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT
Observateur
André DEHEEGER-PZANNE, Chef de la Division des Marches agricoles, Département de l'Agriculture, Paris
OBSERVERS FROM NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS
ASSOCIATED COUNTRY WOMEN OF THE WORLD
Observers
Mrs. G. VAN BEEKHOFF VAN SELMS, Former President, Kerk-Avezaath
Mrs. M. BENCIVENGA. Rome
WORLD ASSOCIATION AGAINST HUNGER
Observer
Josue DE CASTRO, President, Paris
CATHOLIC INTERNATIONAL UNION FOR SOCIAL SERVICE
Observers
Sr. M. Herminia di JESU, Rome
Giuseppe RIZZO, Roma
COMMISSION OF THE CHURCHES ON INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
Observers
Rev. D. Alan KEIGHLEY, Liaison Officer with FAO, Rome
Richard M. FAGLEY, New York
EUROPEAN ASSOCIATION FOR ANIMAL PRODUCTION
Observers
C. J. M. RIJSSENBEEK, President, Rome
Hans PEDERSEN, Secretary Général, Rome
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF CATHOLIC MEN
Observateur
Emile INGLESSIS, Secrétaire général, Rome
INTERNATIONAL. CHAMBER OF COMMERCE.
Observateur
Loris CARRERI, Confédération générale de l'Agriculture italienne, Rome
Paolo VANNICOLA, Confédération générale de l'Agriculture italienne, Rome
Franco PERRILLO, Confédération générale de l'Agriculture italienne
INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION OF AGRICULTURAL ENGINEERING
Observateurs
Giuseppe STEFANELLI, President de l'Association italienne de Génie rural,
Directeur de l'Institut de Mécanique Agricole a l'Université de Florence
Sebastiano RIZZO, Directeur de l'Ecole de Mécanique Agricole de Capannelle, Bari
Corrado RICCI Directeur de l'Institut de Construction Rurale a l'Université de Bari
INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON IRRIGATION AND DRAINAGE
Observer
E. MOSONYI, Director, Karlsruhe
INTERNATIONAL CONFEDERATION OF AGRICULTURAL CREDIT
Observer
Luigi SELLA, Member of Central Committee
INTERNATIONAL CONFEDERATION OF FREE TRADE UNIONS
Observer
J. VANDERVEKEN, Bruxelles
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE OF CATHOLIC CHARITIES (CARITAS INTERNATIONALIS)
Observers
Carlo BAYER, Secretary Général, Rome
Othmar RINK, Assistant to Secretary Général, Rome
A. SALVIDIO, Rome
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATIVE ALLIANCE
Observers
Branko ZLATARIC, Agricultural Secretary, London
L. MALFETTANI, Chairman of the ICA Agricultural Committee, Rome
Filippo CORTESI, Rome
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC UNIONS
Observer
F.W.G. BAKER, Executive Secretary
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF WOMEN
Observers
Mrs. Luciana CORCOS, Resident Representative to FAO, Rome
Mrs. Jeanne WINTERINGHAM, Acting Liaison Officer, Rome
INTERNATIONAL DAIRY COMMITTEE
Observers
J. B. RITZEMA VAN IKEMA, Executive Chairman
E. STRAUSS, Secretary
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCERS
Observers
E. W. McCALLUM, President, Paris
Roger L. E. SAVARY, Secretary Général, Paris
M. VEILLET LAVALLEE, Officer, Paris
Eric ERICSSON, Liaison Officer with FAO, Paris
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF BEEKEEPERS' ASSOCIATIONS
Observer
Silvestro CANNAMELA, Secretary Général, Rome
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF CHRISTIAN TRADE UNIONS
Observateur
E. MACHIELSEN, Secrétaire général de la Fédération, Bruxelles
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF PLANTATION. AGRICULTURAL AND ALLIED WORKERS
Observer
J. VANDERVEKEN, Bruxelles
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION OF CONSUMERS' UNIONS
Observer
Miss Daphne GROSE, Chief Librarian, London
INTERNATIONAL RAYON AND SYNTHETIC FIBRES COMMITTEE
Observer
Giovanni BALELLA, Vice-President, Paris
INTERNATIONAL TECHNICAL TROPICAL TIMBER ASSOCIATION
Observateur
de GRUITER, Président de la Commission de Liaison de l'Association technique Internationale des Bois tropicaux avec la FAO, Nogent-sur-Marne, France
INTERNATIONAL UNION FOR CONSERVATION OF NATURE AND NATURAL RESOURCES
Observer
Harold J. COOLIDGE President
INTERNATIONAL UNION OF FAMILY ORGANIZATIONS
Observateur
Gino FILIPETTO, Représentant auprès de la FAO, Rome
INTERNATIONAL UNION OF FOREST RESEARCH ORGANIZATIONS
Observateurs
Alessandro DE PHILIPPIS, Professeur de Sylviculture, Florence
R. CATINOT, Directeur des Recherches forestières d'Outre-mer
R. WINTERS, U.S. Forest Service
INTERNATIONAL MOVEMENT OF CATHOLIC AGRICULTURAL AND RURAL YOUTH
Observer
Joseph GINESTI-RIERA, President, Louvain
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF MARGARINE ASSOCIATIONS
Observer
H. SEIBEL, President, The Hague
WOMEN'S INTERNATIONAL LEAGUE FOR PEACE AND FREEDOM
Observer
Gertrude BAER, International Representatives at UN/ILO/FAO, Member of the International Executive Committee Geneva
WORLD FEDERATION OF TRADE UNIONS
Observateurs
Giuseppe CASADEI, Représentant permanent de la Fédération auprès de la FAO, Prague
Mme Stana DRAGOI, Secrétaire de la Fédération
Umberto FORNARI, Secrétaire général de l'Union internationale des Syndicats des Travailleurs de l'Agriculture, des Forêts et des Plantations, Prague
Jan KABOUREK, Chef du Service économique et social de la Fédération, Prague
WORLD FEDERATION OF UNITED NATIONS ASSOCIATIONS
Observateur
Franco Alberto CASADIO, Secrétaire exécutif Genève
WORLD UNION OF CATHOLIC WOMEN'S ORGANIZATIONS
Observers
Miss Marie THOMPSON, Secretary Général
Miss Elena CUMELLA, Head of Secretariat for Latin America
René LEVEL. Secretary Paris
WORLD VETERINARY ASSOCIATION
Observer
Pietro SANSONETTI, Adviser, Veterinary Association, Rome
WORLD YOUNG WOMEN'S CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATION
Observers
Mrs. Alice ARNOLD, Consultant for Social and International Questions, YWCA, Geneva
Miss Mary Rossi, National Général Secretary, YWCA of Italy, Rome
<section>q</section>
C. List of documents
(Doc. N°)
(Title)
C 67/1 - FIRST DRAFT
Provisional Agenda of the Conference
C 67/1 - Add.1
Addenda to the Provisional Agenda of the Conference
C 67/1 - SECOND DRAFT
Provisional Agenda
C 67/1
Agenda
C 67/2
Arrangements for the Fourteenth Session of the Conference and Agenda of the Technical Committees of the Conference
C 67/3
Program of Work and Budget for 1968/69
C 67/3 - Sup. 1
Sessions of Statutory Bodies, Panels of Experts, and Conferences in 1968/69
C 67/3 - Sup. 1 - Rev. 1
Sessions of Statutory Bodies, Panels of Experts, and Conferences in 1968/69
C 67/3 - Sup. 2
Third Report on André Mayer Fellowships, 1967
C 67/3 - Sup. 3
Supplement to Program of Work and Budget 1968/69
C 67/3 - Sup. 3 - Rev. 1
Supplement to Program of Work and Budget 1968/69 - Consolidated Estimates
C 67/3 - Sup. 4
Annex X - Trust Funds
C 67/3 - Sup. 4 - Corr. 1
Annex X - Trust Funds (English version only)
C 67/3 - Sup. 5
Annex XI - Trust Funds under the Freedom from Hunger Campaign
C 67/4
The State of Food and Agriculture, 1967
C 67/4 - Sup. 1
Recent Developments in the World Food and Agriculture Situation
C 67/5
EPTA - Financial Reports and Statements for the year ended 31 December 1965
C 67/5 - Sup. 1
Financial Report and Statements for the year ended 31 December 1966 - UNDP (Technical Assistant Sector)
C 67/6
Freedom-from-Hunger Campaign - Financial Report and Statement 1964/65
C 67/7
European Commission for the Control of Foot and Mouth Disease - Financial Report and Statements for the period ended 31 December 1965
C 67/7 - Sup. 1
European Commission for the Control of Foot and Mouth Disease - Financial Report and Statements for the period ended 31 December 1966
C 67/8
Regular Program - Financial Report and Statements 1964/65
C 67/9
United Nations Special Fund - Financial Report and Statements for the Period ended 31 December 1965
C 67/9 - Sup. 1
United Nations Development Program (Special Fund Sector) - Financial Report and Statements for the Period ended 31 December 1966
C 67/10
World Food Program - Financial Report and Statements from Inception through 31 December 1965
C 67/10 - Sup. 1
World Food Program - Financial Report and Statements from Inception through 31 December 1966
C 67/10 - Sup. 1 - Corr. 1
World Food Program - Financial Report and Statements from Inception through 31 December 1966 (English version only)
C 67/11
Admission of Observers to the Session
C 67/11 - Rev. 1
Admission of Observers to the Session
C 67/12
Amendments to Financial Regulations
C 67/13
Nutrition in Agriculture
C 67/14
Technical Committees of the Conference - Provisional Timetable
C 67/15
Indicative World Plan for Agricultural Development - A Progress Report
C 67/19
Progress Report on the Freedom-from-Hunger Campaign - Report on Results Achieved and Future Orientation of the Freedom-from Hunger Campaign
C 67/19 - Corr. 1
Progress Report on the Freedom-from-Hunger Campaign - Report on Results Achieved and Future Orientation of the Freedom-from Hunger Campaign
C 67/19 - Add.1
Progress Report on the Freedom-from-Hunger Campaign
C 67/19 - Add. 2
Progress Report on the Freedom-from-Hunger Campaign - Report on Results Achieved and Future Orientation of the Freedom-from Hunger Campaign
C 67/20
Freedom-from-Hunger Campaign - Final Report on the International Rice Year - 1966
C 67/21
Collaboration with United Nations International Year for Human Rights
C 67/21 - Add.1
International Year for Human Rights - Draft Declaration for the FAO Conference
C 67/23
Skim Milk Powder in the World Dairy Economy
C 67/24
Article XI Reports
C 67/25
The Work of FAO 1966/67
C 67/26
Review of FAO's Field Activities - Accountability Report on Development Programs
C 67/27
Matters Arising out of ECOSOC and ACC Discussions and the Report of the ad hoc Committee of Experts to Examine the Finances of the United Nations and the Specialized Agencies
C 67/29
Amendment to Article VI-1 of the FAO Constitution Relating to Sea Area Fisheries Commissions
C 67/30
Report of the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Program (Codex Alimentarius)
C 67/31
FAO/IBRD Cooperative Program and Cooperation with Area Banks
C 67/35
Audited Accounts
C 67/36
Amendments to Article V-1 of the Constitution, Relative to Increase in Number of Council Seats and to Alternates Attending Council Sessions
C 67/38
Procedure for Election of Council Members
C 67/39
Membership of Program and Finance Committees, and Attendance by non-FAO Nations at CCP Consultations
C 67/41
Study on Food Production Resources in Agricultural Development
C 67/41 - Corr. 1
Study on Food Production Resources in Agricultural Development
C 67/42
Membership of FAO/UNICEF Joint Policy Committee
C 67/42 - Corr. 1
Membership of FAO/UNICEF Joint Policy Committee (Spanish version only)
C 67/43
Authority and Terms of Reference of Regional Conferences
C 67/43 - Add.1
Reorientation of Regional Conferences
C 67/44
Introduction of Arabic for Interpretation in the Général Conference as well as Near East Regional Conferences and Technical Meetings
C 67/45
Statutory Report of the Status of Conventions and Agreements and on Amendments Thereto
C 67/45 - Sup. 1
Amendment to Article IV of the Convention Placing the International Poplar Commission within the Framework of FAO
C 67/45 - Sup. 2
Report of the Second Special Session of the International Poplar Commission
C 67/46
FAO/Industry Cooperation
C 67/49
Relations with International Organizations (Excluding United Nations and Specialized Agencies) and Granting of Consultative Status
C 67/52
Scale of Contributions 1968/69
C 67/52 - Rev. 1
Scale of Contributions 1968/69
C 67/54
Headquarters Accommodation
C 67/56
Election of Council Members
C 67/59
Appointment of Representatives on Staff Pension Committee
Delegate Information Documents
C 67/INF/1
Excerpts from Regulations Governing Voting and Elections by the Conference
C 67/INF/2
Member Nations of FAO, Council Members, and Members of Council Committees
C 67/INF/3
Admission of New Members and Associate Members
C 67/INF/4
Nomination Form for Council Elections
C 67/INF/4 - Rev. 1
Nomination Form for Council Elections
C 67/INF/5
Checklist of Documents Dispatched as of 9 October 1967
C 67/INF/5 - Rev. 1
Checklist of Documents Dispatched as of 20 October 1967
C 67/INF/6
Provisional List of Delegates and Observers Attending the Fourteenth Conference Session
C 67/INF/7
Provisional Checklist of Conference Documents of Commission II
C 67/INF/8
Appointment of Director-General. Method of balloting.
C 67/LIM/1
Program of Work and Budget for 1968/69 - Draft Appropriations Resolution
C 67/LIM/1 - Rev. 1
Program of Work and Budget for 1968/69 - Draft Appropriations Resolution
C 67/LIM/2
1967 McDougall Memorial Lecture - Meeting the World Food Crisis
C 67/LIM/2 - Rev. 1
1967 McDougall Memorial Lecture - Meeting the World Food Crisis
C 67/LIM/3
Food Production Resources Program
C 67/LIM/3 - Corr. 1
Food Production Resources Program
C 67/LIM/4
Development of Natural Resources - Resources of the Sea
C 67/LIM/5
Action Arising out of the Eighteenth Session of the Finance Committee (October 1967)
C 67/LIM/6
Review of the Organization's Général Structure
C 67/LIM/8
Relationship Agreement between FAO and the Organization of African Unity (OAU) - Progress Regarding Cooperation Agreement with Area Banks
C 67/LIM/9
Use of Languages other than the FAO Working Languages - Introducing the Use of German Interpretation in the Général Conferences as well as the Regional Conferences for Europe
C 67/LIM/10
Review of FAO Statutory Bodies, and Number and Length of Sessions of FAO Subsidiary Bodies
C 67/LIM/11
FAO/UNESCO relations in the field of Agricultural Education
C 67/LIM/12
Sessions of FAO Subsidiary Bodies - Their Number and Length
C 67/LIM/13
Membership in Committee on Commodity Problems and Committee on Fisheries
C 67/LIM/14
Commodity Problems
C 67/LIM/15
Supplementary Arrangements for the Fourteenth Session of the Conference
C 67/LIM/16
Ad hoc Committee on the Organization's Général Structure Estimate and Coverage of Costs of the Review Team
C 67/LIM/17
Appointment of Independent Chairman of Council
C 67/LIM/18
Appointment of Director-General
C 67/LIM/18 - Rev. 1
Appointment of Director-General
C 67/LIM/18 - Add.1
Appointment of Director-General - Appendix I
C 67/LIM/19
Applications for Membership and Associate Membership in the Organization
C 67/LIM/20
Withdrawals from Working Capital Fund
C 67/LIM/21
Report of the Nominations Committee
C 67/LIM/22
Status of Contributions
C 67/LIM/23
First Report of the Général Committee - Organization of Conference Session
C 67/LIM/24
Report of the Général Rapporteur on the Work of the Technical Committees - Part I, II, m.
C 67/LIM/25
Arrangements with the Asian Development Bank and the African Development Bank
C 67/LIM/26
Fourteenth Session of the FAO Conference Commission II - Director-General's Statement introducing the Program of Work and Budget for 1968/69
C 67/LIM/27
First Report of the Chairman of the Credentials Committee
C 67/LIM/28
Terms of Reference of Working Party of Commission m on Amendment to Article VI-1 relative to sea-area commissions
C 67/LIM/29
Second Report of the Général Committee - Appointment of Vice Chairmen of Commissions
C 67/LIM/30
Establishment of a Revolving Fund for the Procurement of Educational, Technical, Scientific and Laboratory Material
C 67/LIM/31
Report of the Resolutions Committee
C 67/LIM/32
Report of the Resolutions Committee
C 67/LIM/33
Recommendations of the ad hoc Committee of Experts to Examine the Finances of the United Nations and the Specialized Agencies
C 67/LIM/34
Third Freedom From Hunger Campaign Conference
C 67/LIM/35
Report of the Resolutions Committee
C 67/LIM/36
Panel of Experts on Internal Parasites of Livestock
C 67/LIM/37
Nutrition in Agriculture
C 67/LIM/38
World Food Program
C 67/LIM/39
Program of Work and Budget for 1968/69 - Indicative World Plan
C 67/LIM/40
FAO Documentation Center
C 67/LIM/41
Program of Work and Budget for 1968/69 - Purchase of Equipment
C 67/LIM/42
Amendment of Article VI-1 of the Constitution with Regard to the Establishment of Sea-area Fishery Commissions
C 67/LIM/42 - Rev. 1
Amendment of Article VI-1 of the Constitution with Regard to the Establishment of Sea-area Fishery Commissions
C 67/LIM/42 - Rev. 1 - Corr. 1
Spanish version only
C 67/LIM/42 - Rev. 2
Amendment of Article VI-1 of the Constitution with Regard to the Establishment of Sea-area Fishery Commissions
C 67/LIM/43
Excerpts from Joint Report of Program and Finance Committees (CL 48/6)
C 67/LIM/44
Food Production Resources Program - Special Fund to Reduce Cost for Fertilizers
C 67/LIM/45
Review of the Organization's Général Structure
C 67/LIM/46
Report of Informal Meeting of International Nongovernmental Organizations
C 67/LIM/47
Report of the Resolutions Committee - Third Report of the Resolutions Committee to Commission III
C 67/LIM/48
Indicative World Plan for Agricultural Development
C 67/LIM/49
Review of FAO Commissions, Committees, Working Parties and Panels of Experts Established under Articles V, VI and XIV of the Constitution
C 67/LIM/50
Third Report of the Général Committee
C 67/LIM/51
Second Report of the Chairman of the Credentials Committee
C 67/LIM/52
Amendment to Draft Resolution Relative to Général Structure of the Food and Agriculture Organization (Document C 67/LIM/6)
C 67/LIM/53
Program of Work and Budget 1968/69 - Budgetary Adjustments
C 67/LIM/54
Fourth Report of the Général Committee
C 67/LIM/55
Fifth Report of the Général Committee
C 67/LIM/56
Report of the Resolutions Committee - Second Report of the Resolutions Committee to Commission I
C 67/LIM/57
Second United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
C 67/LIM/57 - Rev. 1
Second United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
C 67/LIM/58
Establishment of a CCP Study Group on Meat and Poultry
C 67/LIM/58 - Rev. 1
Establishment of a CCP Study Group on Meat and Poultry
C 67/LIM/59
Establishment of Study Group on Wine and Vine Products
C 67/LIM/59 - Rev. 1
Establishment of Study Group on Wine and Vine Products
C 67/LIM/60
Sixth Report of the Général Committee
C 67/LIM/61
Draft Resolution Submitted by the Delegations of Costa Rica and Uruguay - Amendment to Resolution on Sea-area Fishery Commissions (C 67/LIM/42)
C 67/LIM/62
Review of the Activities of the Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Atomic Energy in Agriculture
C 67/LIM/63
Seventh Report of the Général Committee - In Memoriam
C 67/LIM/64
Draft Report of the Committee-of-the-Whole to Commission I - Review of the Organization's Général Structure
C 67/LIM/65
Draft Resolution No/67 - Procedure for the appointment of the Director-General
C 67/LIM/66
International Year for Human Rights Draft Declaration for the FAO Conference
C 67/LIM/67
Recommendation of the Catholic International Union for Social Service (C. I. U. S. S. )
C 67/LIM/68
Organization of Conference Sessions
C 67/LIM/69
Third Report of the Chairman of the Credentials Committee
C 67/REP/1
Draft Report of Plenary - Part 1
C 67/REP/2
Draft Report of Commission m - Part 1 (Item 20(a))
C 67/REP/3
Draft Report of Commission II - Part 1
C 67/REP/4
Draft Report of Plenary - Part II
C 67/REP/4 - Corr. 1
Draft Report of Plenary - Part II
C 67/REP/5
Draft Report of Commission m - Part 2
C 67/REP/6
Draft Report of Commission m - Part 3
C 67/REP/7
Draft Report of Commission II - Part 2
C 67/REP/8
Draft Report of Commission II - Part 3
C 67/REP/9
Draft Report of Commission III - Part 4
C 67/REP/10
Draft Report of Commission II - Part 4
C 67/REP/11
Draft Report of Commission I - Part 1
C 67/REP/12
Draft Report of Commission II - Part 5
C 67/REP/12 - Add.1
Draft Report of Commission II - Part 5 (Addendum 1)
C 67/REP/13
Draft Report of Plenary - Part 3
C 67/REP/14
Draft Report of Plenary - Part 4
C 67/REP/15
Draft Report of Plenary - Part 5
C 67/REP/16 - Add.1
Draft Report of Commission I - Part 2 (Addendum 1)
C 67/REP/17 - Add.1
Draft Report of Commission m - Part 5 (Addendum 1)
C 67/REP/18
Draft Report of Plenary - Part 6
C 67/REP/19
Draft Report of Commission I - Part 3
C 67/REP/20
Draft Report of Plenary - Part 7
C 67/REP/21
Draft Report of Commission I - Part 4
C 67/REP/22
Draft Report of Plenary - Part 8
C 67/REP/23
Draft Report of Commission I - Part 5
C 67/REP/24
Draft Report of Plenary - Part 9
C 67/REP/25
Draft Report of Commission I - Part 6
C 67/REP/26
Draft Report of Commission I - Part 7
C 67/REP/27
Draft Report of Plenary - Part 10
C 67/REP/28
Draft Report of Plenary - Part 11
C 67/REP/29
Draft Report of Plenary - Part 12
C 67/REP/30
Draft Report of Plenary - Part 13
Verbatim Records
C 67/PV-1 to C 67/PV-23
Plenary Sessions
C 67/PV/I-1 to C 67/PV/I-13
Commission I
C 67/PV/II-1 to C 67/PV/II-17
Commission II
C 67/PV/III-1 to C 67/PV/III-15
Commission III
C 67/PV/CW/1 to C 67/PV/CW/5
Committee -of-the-Whole
Technical Committee Documents
Agriculture
C 67/AG/1
Importance of greater attention to the evaluation and effective utilization of animal and plant genetic resources
C 67/AG/1 - Add.1
Recommendations of the FAO Symposium on Crop Losses
C 67/AG/2
Increasing Food Availability through Reduction in Losses
C 67/AG/3
Statement of Director - Plant Production and Protection Division - Review of Activities of the 1966/67 biennium relating to the regular, technical Assistance and other programs
C 67/AG/4
Statement of Director - Plant Production and Protection Division - Consideration from a technical standpoint of Chapter VI. A (vi) of the draft Program of Work and Budget 1968/69
C 67/AG/5
Statement of Director - Plant Production and Protection Division - Trends in the program of work beyond 1968/69
C 67/AG/6
Statement of Director - Land and Water Development Division - Review of Activities of the 1966/67 biennium relating to the regular, technical assistance and other programs
C 67/AG/7
Statement of Director - Land and Water Development Division - Consideration from a technical standpoint of Chapter VI. A (iv) of the Draft Program of Work and Budget 1968/69
C 67/AG/8
Statement of Director - Land and Water Development Division - Trends in the Program of Work Beyond 1968/69
C 67/AG/9
Statement of Director - Animal Production and Health Division
C 67/AG/10
Statement of Director - Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Atomic Energy in Food and Agriculture
C 67/AG/11
Draft Report - Technical Committee on Agriculture - Part I, II, III, IV, V
C 67/AG/12
Final Report - Technical Committee on Agriculture
C 67/AG/FO/1
Technical Conference on Exploration, Utilization and Conservation of Plant Gene Resources
Economics
C 67/EC/1
Statement of Director - Statistics Division
C 67/EC/2
Statement of Director - Commodities Division
C 67/EC/3
Report of the Third Session of the Statistics Advisory Committee of Experts
C 67/EC/4
Statement of Director - Economic Analysis Division
C 67/EC/5
Introductory Statement by Director - Rural Institutions and Services Division
C 67/EC/6
Draft Report of Technical Committee on Economics
C 67/EC/7
Report of Technical Committee on Economics
C 67/EC/7 - Corr. 1
Report of Technical Committee on Economics
Fisheries
C 67/FI/1
Statement by Assistant Director-General - Department of Fisheries
C 67/FI/2
Statement of Director - Fishery Resources and Exploitation Division
C 67/FI/3
Statement of Director - Fishery Economics and Products Division
C 67/FI/4
Draft Report of Technical Committee on Fisheries
C 67/FI/5
Report of Technical Committee on Fisheries
C 67/FI/5 - Corr. 1
Report of Technical Committee on Fisheries
Forestry
C 67/FO/4
The Evaluation and Effective Utilization and Conservation of (Animal and) Plant Genetic Resources
C 67/FO/5
The Role of FAO in Future World Forestry Congresses
C 67/FO/6
Farm Forestry - Secretariat Note
C 67/FO/7
Statement of Director - Forestry and Forest Products Division
C 67/FO/8
Draft Report of the Technical Committee on Forestry
C 67/FO/9
Report of the Technical Committee on Forestry
Information and Publications
C 67/IN/1
The Role of Radio in Reaching Agricultural Producer and Processor Groups in Developing Countries, in Comparison with Television and Other Media
C 67/IN/2
Cost and Quality of Internal and Contractual Translation Services
C 67/IN/3
Summary of Introductory Statement by Director - Public Information Division
C 67/IN/4
Statement by Dr. E. Glesinger, Assistant Director-General, Public Relations and Legal Affairs
C 67/IN/5
Introductory Statement by Dr. E. Glesinger, Assistant Director General, Public Relations and Legal Affairs
C 67/IN/6
Introductory Statement by Dr. E. Glesinger, Assistant Director General, Public Relations and Legal Affairs - Constitutional Services
C 67/IN/7 - Part I
Draft Report - Technical Committee on Information and Publications
C 67/IN/7 - Part II
Draft Report - Technical Committee on Information and Publications
C 67/IN/7 - Part III
Draft Report - Technical Committee on Information and Publications
C 67/IN/7 - Part IV
Draft Report - Technical Committee on Information and Publications
C 67/IN/7 - Part III concl., Rev. 1, and Part IV, Rev. 1
Draft Report - Technical Committee on Information and Publications
C 67/IN/7 - Part V
Draft Report - Technical Committee on Information and Publications
C 67/IN/7 - Part VI
Draft Report - Technical Committee on Information and Publications
C 67/IN/8
Ad hoc Advisory Working Party on "FAO REVIEW"
C 67/IN/9 - Part I
Report of the Technical Committee on Information and Publications
C 67/IN/10
Report of the Technical Committee on Information and Publications
Nutrition
C 67/NU/1
Draft Report of the Technical Committee on Nutrition
C 67/NU/2
Report of the Technical Committee on Nutrition
<section>r</section>
D. Scale of contributions 1968/1969
Country
United Nations
FAO Scale
Scale 1967
Afghanistan 0.05 0.07 0.06
Algeria 0.10 0.13 0.13
Argentina 0.92 1.21 1.18
Australia 1.58 2.08 2.03
Austria 0.53 0.70 0. 68
Barbados^3 0.04 - 0.04
Belgium 1.15 1.51 1.48
Bolivia 0.04 0.04 0.04
Botswana^2 0.04 0.024^4 0.04
Brazil 0.95 1.25 1.22
Bulgaria 0.17 - 0.22
Burma 0.06 0.08 0.08
Burundi 0.04 0 04 0.04
Cambodia 0.04 0.04 0.04
Cameroon 0.04 0.04 0.04
Canada 3.17 4.17 4.07
Central African Republic 0.04 0.04 0.04
Ceylon 0.08 0.10 0.10
Chad 0.04 0.04 0.04
Chile 0.27 0.35 0.35
Colombia 0.23 0.30 0.30
Congo (Brazzaville) 0.04 0.04 0.04
Congo, Democratic Rep. of 0.05 0.07 0.06
Costa Rica 0.04 0.04 0.04
Cuba 0.20 0.26 0.26
Cyprus 0.04 0.04 0.04
Dahomey 0.04 0.04 0.04
Denmark 0.62 0.82 0.80
Dominican Republic 0.04 0.04 0.04
Ecuador 0.05 0.07 0.06
El Salvador 0.04 0.04 0.04
Ethiopia 0.04 0.04 0.04
Finland 0.43 0.57 0.55
France 6.09 8.01 7.82
Gabon 0.04 0.04 0.04
Gambia, The 0.04 0.04 0.04
Germany, Federal Republic of^5 7.41 9.74 9.51
Ghana 0.08 0.10 0.10
Greece 0.25 0.33 0.32
Guatemala 0.04 0.04 0.04
Guinea 0.04 0.04 0.04
Guyana^1 0.04 0.024^4 0.04
Haiti 0.04 0.04 0.04
Honduras 0.04 0.04 0.04
Hungary 0.56 - 0.72
Iceland 0.04 0.04 0.04
India 1.85 2.43 2.37
Indonesia 0.39 0.51^6 0.50
Iran 0.20 0.26 0.26
Iraq 0.08 0.10 0.10
Ireland 0.16 0.21 0.21
Israel 0.17 0.22 0.22
Italy 2.54 3.34 3.26
Ivory Coast 0.04 0.04 0.04
Jamaica 0.05 0.07 0.06
Japan 2.77 3.64 3.55
Jordan 0.04 0.04 0.04
Kenya 0.04 0.08 0.08
Korea^5 0.13 0.17 0.17
Kuwait 0.06 0.08 0.08
Laos 0.04 0.04 0.04
Lebanon 0.05 0.07 0.06
Lesotho^2 0 04 0.024^4 0.04
Liberia 0.04 0.04 0.04
Libya 0.04 0.04 0.04
Luxembourg 0.05 0.07 0.06
Madagascar 0.04 0.04 0.04
Malawi 0.04 0.04 0.04
Malaysia 0.12 0.16 0.15
Mali 0.04 0.04 0.04
Malta 0.04 0.04 0.04
Mauritania 0.04 0.04 0.04
Mexico 0.81 1.06 1.04
Morocco 0.11 0.14 0.14
Nepal 0.04 0.04 0.04
Netherlands 1.11 1.46 1.42
New Zealand 0.38 0.50 0.49
Nicaragua 0.04 0.04 0.04
Niger 0.04 0.04 0.04
Nigeria 0.17 0.22 0.22
Norway 0.44 0.58 0.56
Pakistan 0.37 0 49 0 47
Panama 0.04 0.04 0.04
Paraguay 0.04 0.04 0.04
Peru 0.09 0.12 0.12
Philippines 0.35 0.46 0.45
Poland 1.45 1.91 1.86
Portugal 0.15 0.20 0.19
Romania 0.35 0.46 0.45
Rwanda 004 0.04 0.04
Saudi Arabia 0.07 0.09 0.09
Senegal 0.04 0.04 0.04
Sierra Leone 0.04 0.04 0.04
Somali Republic 0.04 0.04 0.04
Spain 0.73 0.96 0.94
Sudan, The 0.06 0.08 0.08
Sweden 1.26 1.66 1.62
Switzerland^5 0.88 1.16 1.13
Syrian Arab Republic 0.05 0.07 0.06
Tanzania 0.04 0.04 0.04
Thailand 0.14 0.18 0.18
Togo 0.04 0.04 0.04
Trinidad and Tobago 0.04 0.04 0.04
Tunisia 0.05 0.07 0.06
Turkey 0.35 0.46 0.45
Uganda 0.04 0.04 0.04
United Arab Republic 0.23 0.30 0.30
United Kingdom 7.21 9.48 9. 25
United States of America 31.91 31.91 31.91
Upper Volta 0.04 0.04 0.04
Uruguay 0.10 0.13 0.13
Venezuela 0.50 0.66 0. 64
Viet-Nam^5 0.08 0.10 0.10
Yemen Arab Republic 0.04 0.04 0.04
Yugoslavia 0.36 0.47 0.46
Zambia 0.04 0.04 0.04
Associate Members
Bahrain - 0.024
Mauritius 0.024 0.024
Qatar - 0.024
^1 Admitted to UN Membership 20 September 1966
^2 Admitted to UN Membership 17 October 1966
^3 Admitted to UN Membership 9 December 1966
^4 Associate Members in the 1966/67 Scale of Contributions
^5 Not members of the United Nations. Their contributions are based on the percentage rates at which they contribute to certain UN activities
^6 The contributions for 1966 and 1967 accrued to Miscellaneous Income
E. Memorandum of understanding regarding cooperation between the African Development bank and the food and agriculture organization of the united nations
The African Development Bank (hereinafter referred to as "ADB") and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (hereinafter referred to as "FAO") have already been cooperating on matters of common concern. As the occasions on which this cooperation is desirable are steadily increasing and in view of the large area of common interest between the two organizations, the President of ADB and the Director-General of FAO, subject to the approval of the governing bodies of ADB and FAO, are agreed upon the following guidelines which set forth the principles upon which a systematic approach to cooperative efforts between their respective organizations may be based.
SECTION I. The Scope of Cooperation between ADB and FAO
ADB and FAO will cooperate in the following fields, in countries of common membership:
(a) Giving general assessments of the possibilities for agricultural Development as a basis for providing guidance for ADB with respect to its operations.
(b) Identifying projects which might be financed by ADB.
(c) Assisting governments in the preparation of projects which might be financed by ADB.
(d) Appraising projects referred to in (b) and (c) above.
(e) Providing end-use supervision of the execution and operation of ADB-financed projects.
(f) Arranging for technical assistance required for the implementation of ADB-financed projects.
SECTION II. Methods of Cooperation
1. ADB and FAO will keep each other informed of and where desirable consult with each other regarding activities of common interest.
2. ADB and FAO shall, to the extent permitted under their respective approved budgets, agree upon specific operations regarding which cooperation is desirable, and upon the extent and methods in which such cooperation shall be effected. ADB and FAO shall, to the maximum extent possible, assist each other in matters of common concern through the support of their respective Headquarters and field facilities.
3. Missions
(a) General Review Missions
General review missions organized by ADB may be required to give specific attention to the agricultural sector. FAO will, in agreed cases, cooperate in the preparation of such missions and/or provide the services of specialists to take part in them.
(b) Identification Missions
ADB and FAO shall agree on identification missions to examine in specific countries the possibility of formulating particular projects which might be eligible for lending operations.
(c) Preparation Missions
ADB may receive requests for loans requiring further preparation before they are considered. Similarly, as a result of identification missions, there may be need for further elaboration before such requests can be considered as a basis for loan operations. Where such preparation work is already at an advanced stage, FAO may cooperate with ADB in the undertaking of missions of limited duration. Where such preparation requires feasibility studies, ADB may request FAO to undertake or execute them as FAO may agree, ADB assuming the financing.
(d) Appraisal Missions
ADB will be responsible for the appraisal of projects upon the basis of which its financing decisions will be made. At the request of ADB, FAO may provide, as agreed, the services of FAO staff members or consultants to serve upon such appraisal missions.
(e) End-Use Supervision of ADB Projects
ADB will be responsible for the disbursement of funds and the end-use supervision of the construction and maintenance of physical facilities and to this end will be responsible for such review, as may be appropriate, of the specifications, bids and awards of contracts and for whatever inspections of the project are necessary in this connection. As may be agreed, FAO may provide the services of experts to participate in such supervision. FAO may, in the course of such supervision, advise ADB on the possibility of determining further phases in the implementation of the project and the desirability of preparing second-phase projects. ADB and FAO will consult each other on the results of such end-use supervision and the subsequent steps to be taken.
(f) Planning of Missions
ADB and FAO shall cooperate in planning the missions referred to in sub-paragraphs (a) to (e) above and may hold periodic review meetings in order to coordinate such planning as far ahead as feasible. In particular, ADB and FAO shall consult each other upon the terms of reference, composition, duration, reports and recommendations of each mission. As appropriate, ADB and FAO shall consult each other on the persons most suitable to take part in such missions.
4. Cooperation in Training
(a) ADB and FAO will endeavour, jointly or by assisting each other, to foster the growth of African expertise by associating African experts with missions set up under the scope and functions of this Memorandum of Understanding.
(b) ADB and FAO will cooperate in the Organization of seminars, study-tours, and other types of technical training facilities to promote African expertise in the fields of food and agriculture.
5. Assistance in Project Implementation
As may be agreed in each case, and upon the request of the government concerned, FAO shall provide or arrange for technical assistance in the implementation of projects financed by ADB. Such assistance shall be furnished in accordance with paragraph 2(d) (iii) of Section III of this Memorandum of Understanding.
6. ADB/FAO Desk at ADB Headquarters
In order to facilitate the implementation of cooperative efforts, the Director-General of FAO will appoint suitable staff to be stationed in Abidjan who will work in cooperation with counterpart staff appointed by ADB and with other members of ADB staff. The FAO staff referred to above will maintain liaison with ADB regarding matters of common interest; assist ADB in reviewing projects; and participate, as appropriate and as agreed between ADB and FAO, in missions referred to in paragraph 3 above. In addition, such FAO staff in Abidjan and their ADB counterparts will be kept continuously informed of studies undertaken or planned by FAO for Africa and will also be advised of agricultural plans and problems of the African countries insofar as these are likely to affect the operations of ADB.
SECTION III. Financial Arrangements
1. Obligations of FAO
(a) FAO shall inform ADB at the beginning of each biennium of the provisions in its current approved biennial budget for cooperative activities with ADB covered by this Memorandum of Understanding.
(b) FAO shall, within the limits set by its biennial budget and as agreed with ADB, contribute to the cooperative activities by providing for service on missions of professional staff stationed at Headquarters or outputted in the field, or additional staff specifically recruited for the cooperative activities.
(c) FAO shall, within the limits set by its biennial budget, assign staff to the ADB/FAO desk referred to in paragraph 6 of Section II above.
(d) FAO shall bear the following expenses arising from cooperative activities with ADB.
(i) FAO shall bear the cost of the salaries and allowances of its staff assigned to the ADB/FAO desk.
(ii) Whenever FAO staff take part in missions FAO shall bear the costs involved, except costs for international and local travel and subsistence costs as provided in paragraph 2(d) (i) below.
(iii) FAO will bear the invisible overhead costs and identifiable indirect costs arising from cooperative activities with ADB, except as provided in paragraph 2(d) (iii) and (d) (iv) below.
2. Obligations of ADB
(a) ADB shall contribute to the cooperative activities by providing professional personnel matching at least the staff supplied by FAO under paragraph 1(b) of this Section.
(b) ADB shall appoint counterpart staff to match the staff assigned to the ADB/FAO desk.
(c) ADB shall provide office space for the FAO staff assigned to the ADB/FAO desk.
(d) ADB shall bear the following expenses arising from cooperative activities with FAO:
(i) The cost of international and local travel and subsistence costs of FAO staff, including FAO staff assigned to the ADB/FAO desk, when taking part in missions envisaged in paragraph 3(a) to (e) of Section II above.
(ii) The cost of secretarial staff and office space to service the FAO staff assigned to the ADB/FAO desk.
(iii) The cost of technical assistance directly required for the implementation of ADB-financed projects as provided for in paragraph 5 of Section II above, including an amount covering FAO's estimated administrative costs in arranging for such assistance. The amount covering such administrative costs shall be the equivalent of 12 percent of the direct cost of the assistance, except where assistance is provided under contract between FAO and some outside entity, in which event the amount will be fixed by agreement between FAO and ADB.
(iv) ADB will bear the cost of the production of documents and of translation undertaken by FAO in agreement with ADB.
SECTION IV. Miscellaneous provisions
1. Termination
ADB or FAO may, upon six month's written notice to the other party, terminate this Memorandum of Understanding.
2. Entry into force
This Memorandum of Understanding shall, after approval by the Board of Directors and ratification by the Board of Governors of ADB, and approval by the FAO Council, subject to confirmation by the FAO Conference, enter into force on the date on which it will have been signed by the President of ADB and the Director-General of FAO.
ANNEX I
In accordance with Section m, paragraph 1, of this Memorandum of Understanding the maximum contribution by FAO to cooperative activities with ADB for the biennium 1968/69 shall be, subject to approval of the relevant provisions of the budget by the FAO Conference, as follows:
1. Under Section m, paragraph 1(b), services of FAO staff up to a maximum of eight man-years.
2. Under Section m, paragraph 1(c), FAO assignment of two staff members to the ADB/FAO desk.
F. Note on procedure for ad hoc cooperative action between Asian Development bank and FAO
I. General
1. At this early stage, when the scope and nature of the Asian Development Bank's (ADB's) agricultural operations - as well as the dimensions and nature of financial resources therefor - still have to be defined, it is premature to propose any general agreement to the ADB's Board of Governors for ADB cooperation with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). At the same time, there has been need for FAO participation in the current survey of Asian agriculture being sponsored by the ADB and there are indications that ADB and FAO may have occasion in selected instances to cooperate in missions to the developing members of the ADB and in other ways. This memorandum is intended to permit expeditions and flexible implementation in those instances where the ADB and FAO agree that some combination of personnel in a mission or other cooperation is desirable.
2. It is the intention of the ADB and FAO that the two organizations will keep each other informed of operations of mutual interest and likely to involve joint participation in missions.
3. It is understood also that final decisions with respect to use of the ADB's resources must rest with the ADB.
4. The contents of this memorandum will not prejudice cooperation by either organization with other entities on the types of operation outlined in this memorandum.
5. It is recognized that this memorandum is of an interim nature and that review of its contents from time to time is desirable. It is envisaged that a meeting will take place around June 1968 for this purpose.
II. Areas of Possible Cooperation
6. FAO and ADB have already cooperated within the framework of the Regional Agricultural Survey undertaken as a basis for ADB's operations. It is envisaged that they may cooperate in the future in the identification of projects which might be considered for financing by ADB; in carrying out of feasibility studies and in assisting governments to prepare further such projects; in the appraisal of projects presented to ADB for financing; and in the review of progress of projects financed by ADB.
7. There may in addition be scope for cooperation between FAO and ADB in fields not specifically itemized above, such as general studies and technical assistance for the preparation, financing and execution of Development projects and programs; such cases will not be covered in the scope of the arrangements indicated below and will have to be the subject of specific consultation as and when they arise.
III. Joint Participation in Missions
8. Cooperation in missions will be decided on a case-by-case basis. Where an ADB-FAO cooperative mission is deemed appropriate, the following assignment of responsibility will normally apply.
Responsibility as here used involves responsibility for leadership, administrative arrangements, organization of missions, terms of reference, staffing and reports.
Initiation of action for cooperation in missions may be by ADB or FAO as indicated hereunder; the implementation thereof will require concurrence of both parties.
(a) Country missions will be the responsibility of ADB; the ADB may seek FAO participation where deemed appropriate.
(b) The organization of cooperative project identification and project preparation missions can be initiated by either the ADB or FAO with such assignment of responsibility and on such terms as ADB and FAO may in each specific case agree.
(c) Project appraisal missions following submission of loan applications will be the responsibility of ADB; the ADB may seek FAO participation where deemed appropriate.
(d) Reviews of projects already financed by ADB will be an ADB responsibility; the ADB may seek FAO participation where deemed appropriate.
(e) Responsibility for other missions connected to activities referred to in paragraph 7 will be decided on a case-by-case basis.
9. In all missions undertaken in cooperation and without prejudice to responsibility as indicated above, there will be consultation between the two organizations on staffing, terms of reference, composition and duration, reporting, and recommendations.
IV. Personnel
10. In the circumstances indicated in Para. 1, the procedures outlined here do not provide for arrangements for FAO personnel to be employed for, and assigned to, cooperative operations on a continuous basis; however, it is evident that the success of cooperative operations will be enhanced the greater the continuity of the staff engaged in these operations. This will, therefore, require advance planning to the maximum extent possible by both institutions, and periodic meetings and consultations.
V. Terms Applicable to ADB-FAO Cooperation in Cases Where Such Cooperation is Deemed Appropriate
11. The FAO has indicated that cost sharing in respect of FAO expenses in any cooperative mission would have to take into account the following items of initial expense in the FAO:
(a) salaries of FAO staff engaged in missions either recruited for the purpose by FAO or of staff detailed from FAO;
(b) cost of travel and subsistence of the FAO team members;
(c) cost of coordination within the FAO framework;
(d) cost of secretarial assistance;
(e) overhead costs, direct or indirect;
(f) cost of document preparation and translation.
12. Within the limits of present budgetary arrangements, the order of total expenditure on the types of cooperation action contemplated above may not probably exceed a ceiling of $500,000 from now to the close of the biennium 1968-1969. Within this ceiling and during this period, arrangements for sharing expenses of cooperation will be according to the following terms:
(a) Except as specified in paragraphs 13 and 14, the direct expense of FAO personnel, including salaries, allowances and other benefits, engaged in cooperative missions led by either the ADB or FAO will be shared equally by FAO and the ADB, respectively. In addition, ADB will pay ten percent of this direct expense towards the costs of FAO's coordination, secretarial assistance, and overheads.
(b) The cost of travel, and subsistence expenses of FAO personnel while serving as members of cooperative missions led by the ADB will be borne or provided for by the ADB at ADB rates.
(c) The cost of travel, and subsistence expenses of FAO personnel while serving as members of cooperative missions led by the FAO will be provided for by FAO at FAO rates and will be shared equally with the ADB.
(d) The cost of any special document reproduction and translation undertaken by FAO at the request of ADB will be borne by ADB.
13. When a particular project preparation by a cooperative mission involves continuous work in the field of more than ten man months by FAO personnel, ADB will pay or provide for all direct expenses of FAO services (salaries, allowances, subsistence and other expenses except travel) in excess of this quantity (adding ten percent of the direct expenses to share in FAO's administrative expenses).
14. In cases of FAO cooperation in fields referred to under Sec. II, Para. I, the above terms will not apply, and cost sharing on an ad hoc basis will be arranged.
VI. Entry into Effect
15. These proposals will enter into effect following approval by the ADB Board of Directors and the FAO Council.
ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION
COUNCIL STANDING COMMITTEES
24 November 1967-November 1969
PROGRAM COMMITTEE
Chairman
Michel Cépède (France)
Members
G. Bula Hoyos (Colombia)
H. J. Kristensen (Denmark)
J. C Mathur (India)
R. W. Phillips (United States of America)
Y. Qureshi (Pakistan)
E. M. West (United Kingdom)
First Alternate
A. Davatchi (Iran)
Second Alternate
Mme M.-T. Basse (Senegal)
Third Alternate
S. Krolikowski (Poland)
FINANCE COMMITTEE
Chairman
I. C. Nagle (Ireland)
Members
C. M. R. Correa Avila(Argentina)
V. P. Dhital (Nepal)
R. Gibb (United States of America)
M. Ristic (Yugoslavia)
First Alternate
A. M. R. van Hauwermeiren (Belgium)
Second Alternate
M. Y. Mayel (Afghanistan)
Third Alternate
A. Löchen (Norway)
COMMITTEE ON COMMODITY PROBLEMS
Algeria
Argentina
Australia
Brazil
Cameroon
Canada
Ceylon
Chad
Dominican Republic
France
Germany, Fed. Rep. of
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Kenya
Lebanon
Malaysia
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Nigeria
Pakistan
Senegal
Spain
Sudan, The
Sweden
Switzerland
Thailand
Tunisia
United Kingdom
United States of America
COMMITTEE ON FISHERIES
Argentina
Australia
Cameroon
Canada
Ceylon
Chad
Chile
Costa Rica
Denmark
France
Germany, Fed. Rep. of
India
Indonesia
Iran
Italy
Japan
Kenya
Kuwait
Malaysia
Mexico
Morocco
Nigeria
Norway
Pakistan
Peru
Poland
Senegal
Spain
Tanzania
Tunisia
Uganda
United Kingdom
United States of America
Uruguay
COMMITTEE ON CONSTITUTIONAL AND LEGAL MATTERS
Australia
France
Morocco
Pakistan
United Kingdom
United States of America
Uruguay
OTHER COMMITTEES
FAO/UN INTERGOVERNMENTAL COMMITTEE OF THE WORLD FOOD PROGRAM
The composition of the IGC until 31 December 1968 is as follows:
^*Argentina^1
Australia^3
Brazil^1
^*Canada^1
^*Colombia^2
Denmark^1
^*France^3
^*Germany, Fed. Rep. of^3
Ghana^1
^*India^1
Ireland^2
^*Jamaica^3
^*Korea, Rep. of^1
^*Netherlands^2
^*New Zealand^2
^*Nigeria^2
Pakistan^3
Peru^3
Sweden^2
Tunisia^2
Turkey^1
United Arab Republic^2
United Kingdom^3
^*United States of America^1
^1 Term of office until 31 December 1968
^2 Term of office until 31 December 1969
^3 Term of office until 31 December 1970
^* Elected by FAO Council
AD HOC COMMITTEE ON ORGANIZATION
Australia
Cameroon
Chile
Germany, Fed. Rep. of
India
United Arab Republic
United States of America
AD HOC COMMITTEE ON PROCEDURE FOR THE APPOINTMENT OF THE DIRECTOR GENERAL
Australia
Brazil
Canada
Ethiopia
France
Philippines
Sudan, The
OFFICERS OF THE TECHNICAL COMMITTEES OF THE CONFERENCE
(FOURTEENTH SESSION)
TECHNICAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
Chairman
A. B. Coronel (Philippines)
First Vice-Chairman
M. Y. Quereshi (Pakistan)
Second Vice-Chairman
Muhammed Hsfiz Salim (Jordan)
TECHNICAL COMMITTEE ON ECONOMICS
Chairman
W. M. Oakley (Australia)
Vice-Chairman
J. C. Amoafo (Ghana)
TECHNICAL COMMITTES ON FISHERIES
Chairman
G. N. Mitra (India)
First Vice-Chairman
J. V. Alves de Araujo (Brazil)
Second Vice-Chairman
U Tint Hlsing (Burma)
TECHNICAL COMMITTEES ON FORESTRY AND FOREST PRODUCTS
Chairman
Sir. Henry Beresford-Peirse (United Kingdom)
Vice-Chairman
M. S. Hardjordarsone (Indonesia)
S. A. Aleem (Pakistan)
TECHNICAL COMMITTEES ON INFORMATION AND PUBLICATIONS
Chairman
Octavian Feneson (Romania)
First Vice-Chairman
M. Wicher (United States)
Second Vice-Chairman
Nor El-Ghorfi (Marocos)
TECHNICAL COMMITTEES ON NUTRITION
Chairman
P. K. Kymal (Indonesia)
Vice-Chairman
P. Roine (Finland)
