Forestry Outlook Studies in Africa (FOSA).
E.M. Shumba Please note that the views expressed in this paper reflect those of the authors and should not be attributed to any of the institutions. This paper has been minimally edited for clarity and style.
December 2001.
A Brief on the Forestry Outlook Study1.
E.M. Shumba Acting General Manager Forestry Commission PO Box HG 139, Highlands Harare, Zimbabwe Tel: 263-4-49 30 87 36; Fax: 263-4-49 7070 frchigh@internet.co.zw.
The following are options that can enhance the contribution of the forestry sector to sustainable development in Zimbabwe. This is achieved by addressing the internal and external pressures being brought to bear on the sector during the next twenty years. Depletion of indigenous forests About 60% of Zimbabwe is under various forest types while some heavily populated districts have less than 30% cover. It is estimated that some 0.6% of the country's indigenous forests are lost to agricultural expansion and other household uses such as energy supply, construction and food. In fact the current demand for commercial indigenous hardwoods cannot be met from the local resource alone. To address the problem of indigenous forest depletion the following recommendations are made:.
Increasing the role and contribution of exotic plantations.
Exotic plantations will increasingly become important ion future as timber processing companies thrive to complement the declining indigenous timber resource for their operations. However, since the area available for expanding large scale exotic timber production is limited, there is tremendous scope to engage communal and resettlement area farmers in exotic timber productions contract to large timber processing companies through outgrower schemes. This process has already started.
Recognising and supporting the increasing importance of trees outside forests.
With the expansion of the agricultural frontier into traditional forest areas, trees outside forests are increasingly becoming important for the provision of timber and non-timber forest products and services at the local level. To address this problem, there is need to aggressively promote agroforestry and afforestation initiatives with emphasis on protected niches such as areas around the homestead, gardens and fields. The success of such moves will largely depend on adding value to non timber forest products and on improving their marketability in order to improve their competitive edge as a profitable land use system. It must, however, be noted that there is very limited data on the extent and state of these forests due to lack of information. Developing such a data base should be an important entry point.
Development of alternative energy sources.
Sizeable portions of indigenous forest areas are cut to meet household energy needs especially in the communal and resettlement areas. To reduce this over dependence on woodfuels there is need to intensify research into the development of alternative and appropriate technologies such as solar energy which has largely remained untapped.
1 FOSA website available at: http://www.fao.org/forestry/FON/FONS/outlook/Africa/AFRhom-e.stm.
The communal land tenure system The communal land tenure system that operates in communal and resettlement areas is a disincentive to long term investment in natural resources such as forests largely due to lack of individual accountability on the resource. The situation has been exacerbated by the erosion of powers of the traditional leaders who used to oversee the observance of certain environmentally friendly resource management and utilisation regimes. As a way of addressing the communal land tenure problem, emphasis should be placed on building and capacitating local level institutions so that the community as a whole can take collective responsibility over the communally owned resources. In this regard, the concept of Resource User Groups will have to be strengthened and expanded. Once established, such groups are trained in leadership skills, by-law information and technical aspects of forestry. Such skills and instruments are then locally used to manage, protect and sustainably utilise the forest resource for the benefit of both the community and ecosystem. The concept of Resource User Groups is already being implemented in some districts. This is going a long way into strengthening the enforcement of existing legislation which has hitherto been rather weak. Reduced government support for sustainable forest management The economic reform programmes being implemented by government have led to a reduction in the financial and human resources being allocated to statutory agencies who regulate and advise on the management and utilisation of natural resources. Such a trend is likely to persist. To address this problem, the following recommendations are made:.
The Forestry Commission, the state forest authority, should be restructured into a leaner and more efficient regulator and advisor in the forestry sector. This aspect is addressed later. Communities, especially those in the communal and resettlement areas should be given incentives for effective participation in the protection and management of forest resources. This can be achieved by promoting activities that increase rural incomes from forest resources. These include the establishment of pole treatment tanks, beekeeping, craft production and the processing and commercialisation of indigenous fruits. Communities can be enticed into these ventures by the provision of a low interest revolving fund which can be administered at the village or district levels. The revolving fund concept is already being developed as a substitute to the support fund that used to be given to communities in earlier reafforestation programmes. However, in order to legally operationalise this recommendation, there is need to revisit and amend the Communal Lands Forest Produce Act that restricts the exploitation of forest produce by communal and resettlement area inhabitants to "own use" and prohibits the sale or supply of any forest produce to any other person. The Resource User Group concept highlighted earlier can then be used as a vehicle to protect and sustainably utilise the resource. The private sector should be asked to fund specific aspects of plantation forestry development in which it derives a direct benefit. This has already started in research but needs strengthening. The Forestry Commission should forge strategic alliances with relevant government and non government organisations operating at various levels in order to minimise duplication and reduce costs. The forestry sector should develop a strategy for accessing financial resources from forestry related international conventions and agreements to which Zimbabwe is a signatory.
Shifting from the protectionist approach to gazetted forest area management Biodiversity conservation in the 800,000 ha of gazetted indigenous forest areas in the country is being threatened by neighbouring communal area inhabitants who illegally occupy or obtain timber and non timber forest products from them. To address this problem, plans are under way to replace the colonial protectionist approach to conserving these forests to one which considers communities living on the "forest edge" as partners in their conservation, management and utilisation. This is being pursued through the development of resource and benefit sharing models and a new policy that reflects this positive shift is being finalised. In addition to benefiting communities such a policy, once implemented, will reduce the cost of protecting and managing gazetted forest areas as such responsibilities will be eventually shared with the beneficiaries. Forest resource assessment and evaluation The forestry industry contributes 3% to the country's Gross Domestic Product. However, this does not include benefits derived by the nation and communities from various timber and non timber forest products and services that are not captured in the national accounts despite their increasing importance in rural welfare. This is exacerbated by the lack of comprehensive information on the indigenous forest resource base. For example, no information exists on timber volumes by species and age class. Furthermore, the forests are not classified by the dominant species. Such information is critical for the identification and subsequent economic evaluation of various timber and non timber products and services that flow from the forests. In view of the above, the following is recommended:  An evaluation of the biophysical status and economic value of forest resources. The latter helps to establish the true contribution of forests to the national economy and can be used to lobby for more public sector support into the sector in future. On the other hand, biophysical assessments can assist in establishing the relative contribution of the country's forests to carbon sequestration and to the ecosystem in general.  Given the increasing importance of non timber forest products and services, there is need to raise their profile and improve their contribution to rural incomes through value addition and the commercialisation of the resultant products. Expanding the formal timber market The local timber market for exotics is likely to remain depressed for the foreseeable future. Consequently, in order to improve viability in this sector there is need to place emphasis on value addition for the export market to generate the much needed foreign exchange. To achieve this there is need to invest in new product development and to upgrade the manufacturing and processing capacities of timber companies. The export market drive will also promote sustainable forest management by entrenching the certification process which has already been initiated in some indigenous forest areas and exotic plantation estates. Capacity enhancement in the forestry sector Given the increasing demands that will come to bear on the forestry sector during the next 20 years, there is need to enhance the resource base and product quality through appropriate research and human resource development initiatives as follows:.
Given the long gestation period and large fixed costs associated with most tree related research 4.
initiatives, there is need to forge strategic alliances with other regional and international research institutions and networks. Furthermore, there is need to establish criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management at various operational levels as a basis for monitoring progress. In the area of formal training, it is recognised that the country's forestry colleges cannot survive from the local market alone given the small related size of the country's forestry industry. To this end, there will be need to aggressively market these excellent training facilities throughout the Southern African Development Community (SADC) region. Getting an affiliate status with a renowned university can greatly improve the attractiveness of the training offered at these colleges regionally.
Apart from the formal training offered by the colleges, there is need for capacity building, through in service training, in order to tackle the new challenges facing the forestry sector. These include the current thinking to consider communities as partners in forestry development (through the devolution of authority and management responsibilities) as opposed to the "command and control approach". Creation of an enabling institutional framework for forestry development The hiving off of trading activities from the regulatory and developmental functions of the state forest authority will enable the new Zimbabwe Forestry Commission to become only a referee and not a player in the forestry sector. Such a development, which is nearing completion, will help the Commission concentrate on vision setting and (through a National Forest Programme) the creation of a conducive environment for the forestry sector to thrive. Furthermore, a streamlined state forest authority with a broadened revenue base will be able to competently translate and implement provisions of forestry related international conventions to which Zimbabwe is a signatory. The leaner organisation will have to work very closely with local level institutions such as Resource User Groups (described earlier) and relevant government and non governmental organisations reduce transaction costs and duplication. With respect to wildlife, the imminent conversion of the Department of National Parks and Wildlife Management into a Statutory Fund will help to boost revenue receipts for wildlife conservation, management and sustainable use. In addition, it will help the department to recruit and retain experienced and qualified personnel.
1 1.1 Background.
INTRODUCTION.
Zimbabwe is a landlocked country covering some 39 million hectares of land. It lies between 150 40" and 220 30" south and 250 15" and 330 05" East latitudes. Although well within the tropics, the country's climate is sub-tropical being moderated by altitude. Eighty percent of the land is above 600 metres, while the remainder is below this height. An outstanding feature of the country's landscape is the central plateau known as the highveld which is about 650km long and 30km wide. On either side of this is the middleveld which is between 600 and 1 200 metres above sea level. The lowveld is below 600 metres. Rainfall is the major climatic factor that influences the performance of sectors such as agriculture, forestry, wildlife and aquatic life in Zimbabwe. The rainy season stretches from November to March while the dry cool season is between May and August. Frost is not uncommon during the winter season while October and November are the hottest months. Annual rainfall varies from an average of below 400 mm in the low lying areas to 900mm over the central watershed and 1 500mm in parts of the eastern highlands. Recommended land use systems in these areas are:  Afforestation, agriculture and intensive livestock production in the high rainfall areas,  Intensive cropping and pasture production in the medium rainfall areas; and  Livestock and game ranching in the low rainfall areas. About 70% of the country's soils are derived from granite and are often sandy, light textured and of limited inherent agricultural potential (Grant, 1981). There is, however, a significant development of soils with a heavier clay content in various parts of the country. The extreme west of the country has large tracts of deep Kalahari sandy soils which have very low agricultural potential. 1.2 Forestry Resources.
Zimbabwe is characterised by savanna woodlands interspersed with open grassed drainage lines or dambos. Impended drainage gives rise to limited areas of open grassland and a few patches of subtropical forests occur in the eastern districts. Although forests provide a wide range of timber and non timber forest products and services to the majority of Zimbabwe's population, they are being lost at an alarming rate. It is estimated that about 70,000 ha of the country's forests are lost to agriculture each year. Furthermore, although some 66% of Zimbabwe is still covered by woody vegetation, the cover in some heavily populated districts such as Chivi now stand at only 30%. There is also a strong relationship between the amount of vegetation cover and the land tenure system across the country. 1.3 The Land Tenure Systems in Zimbabwe.
The land holding rights and obligations in Zimbabwe find their expression in the country's four main systems of land tenure, namely the freehold (private), state land, communal and leasehold (resettlement) systems. The tenure systems impact and shape the property rights and natural resource access regimes that exist in the country. With the exception of the resettlement tenure system, the other three systems are largely part of the country's colonial heritage. The freehold tenure system is prevalent in the commercial farming sector which consists of large scale and small scale commercial farmers and occupy about 32% of the country's land area of 39 million ha. This sector is characterised by individual land ownership. The registered land owner has exclusive property rights and full control and responsibility over the land and everything attached to it except to the extent that ownership and exclusive control over the land and some natural resources may be 6.
limited by statutory provisions. Such limitations relate to changes in land use, controls over public water courses, felling of indigenous timber resources and controls on wildlife. It is often argued that freehold tenure provides land owners with incentives to conserve and improve the natural resource base. The communal land tenure system is governed by the Communal Lands Act and is applicable to 42% of Zimbabwe's land area, where approximately 66% of the country's population resides. According to the Communal Lands Act, all communal land is vested in the State President who has powers to permit its occupation and utilisation in accordance with the Act. Communal Area inhabitants thus have usufructuary rights over communal land. Rural District Councils, on the other hand, have a dispensation to allocate land to qualified persons on behalf of the State. Resettlement areas cover 10% of the country and are a product of the post independence period targeted at relieving population pressure in communal areas and have no title. It is often argued that the communal land tenure system is a disincentive to long term investment in agriculture and other key natural resources such as forests. Consequently, the highest rates of deforestation occur in the communal and resettlement areas. To address the land tenure related problems, government set up a Land Tenure Commission in 1994 to among other things, review the current land tenure systems and make appropriate recommendations (Land Tenure Commission Report, 1995). However, some of the key recommendations related to the communal land tenure system have not yet been implemented. The State set aside 15% of the country as gazetted/protected forests (2%) and national parks (13%). These offer good examples of in situ conservation and sustainable use of Zimbabwe's biological heritage. A summary of Zimbabwe's land tenure systems are given in Figure 1, while Table 1.1 shows the distribution of the country's agricultural land by farming sector and natural region (NR). Overall, only 19% of Zimbabwe's farmland is in NRs I and II and almost 63% of this high potential land is in the large scale commercial sector. This land distribution pattern shows that:  in general, Zimbabwe has limited agricultural potential; and  the large scale commercial areas have an inherently higher agricultural potential than the other three farming sectors. However, the bulk of the country's population resides in the latter sectors. This has contributed to the high levels of land degradation and poverty especially in communal areas. It is against the foregoing background of a skewed land distribution pattern in favour of large scale commercial farmers who number about 4,500 compared to over one million communal area farm households that the government has embarked on the fast track land resettlement programme. The programme will see the resettlement of about 150,000 land hungry Zimbabweans on about 5 million ha of land to be acquired from the large scale commercial farming sector by government. These settlers will naturally open up forest areas for agricultural purposes.
Distribution of Zimbabwe's agricultural land by farming sector and Natural Region (NR) Farming sector Communal (000 ha) I & II III IV V Total 1,410 2,820 7,340 4,780 16,350 Large scale commercial (000 ha) 3,890 2,410 2,430 2,490 11,220 Small scale commercial (000 ha) 250 530 500 100 1,380 Resettlement areas (000 ha) 620 1,240 810 620 3,290.
Natural Regions are largely based on annual rainfall (in mm) as follows: NR I, over 1000; NR II, 800-1000; NR III, 650 - 800; NR IV, 450 - 650; and NR V, less than 450 (Vincent and Thomas, 1960) Source: Zimbabwe Agriculture Sector Memorandum, 1994.
Table 1.2 gives estimates of wood stocks of indigenous forests and woodlands by land tenure category in the country. Of the total estimated wood stock of 636 million tonnes, 42%, 40% and 16% are found on the wildlife estate, commercial farming areas and communal areas respectively. It must be noted that despite having the largest land area, communal lands have the least wood stock levels compared to the other two sectors. This is attributed to rampant deforestation that occurs in the former sector.
Land tenure category Communal land Resettlement areas Commercial farming land Wildlife estate Gazetted forest areas Total.
These timber volume figures suggest that the country's forests store and sequestrate considerable amounts of carbon. Consequently, there is scope for the country to use this global carbon sink function to access financial resources from the Kyoto protocol and invest them in forest conservation, management and afforestation programmes. 1.4 Current national reafforestation efforts.
As indicated in Section 1.3 deforestation is a major problem in the communal and resettlement areas than in the other farming sectors and land use systems. It is against this background that the Forestry Commission (a parastatal under the Ministry of Environment and Tourism) in collaboration with various government departments and Non Governmental Organisations (NGOs), has been spearheading rural afforestation since 1983. The first rural afforestation programme (RAP 1) which ran from 1983-1989 was based on a perceived fuelwood crisis in the communal areas where over 65% of the country's population resides. RAP 1 was targeted at afforesting these areas using fast growing exotic trees in order to relieve pressure on indigenous woodlands. The programme focused on the establishment of individual and communal 8.
woodlots supported by 73 central nurseries for seedling production. Through RAP 1, eucalyptus seedling production and planting increased from 0.2 million in 1982/83 to 4.2 million in 1989/90. However, post establishment survival rates were generally low due to livestock and termite damage; water stress; and poor post establishment-management and protection. It later became apparent that the concept of "centralised nurseries" during RAP 1 was very expensive and that the emphasis on eucalyptus did not give beneficiaries interested in multi-purpose tree species much choice. This led to a shift in emphasis during the second phase of the rural afforestation programme (RAP II) which ran from 1990-1998. This phase broadened its content from eucalyptus woodlots alone to include agroforestry and indigenous woodland management with emphasis on poverty alleviation and food security. Some of the major achievements of RAP II were the diversification of the nursery product mix from 100% eucalyptus to about 85% with the remainder consisting of exotic fruit trees and indigenous tree species. There was also a marked increase in seedling production from 3.2 million in 1990/91 to 9 million in 1998. Seedling survival rate was around 67%. About 1,470 agroforestry sites were also established during this period. With respect to woodlands, 803 sites measuring a total of 64,000 ha were set aside for deliberate management. Since 1999, the rural afforestation programme is being implemented within the context of the Agricultural Services Support Programme (ASSP). The ASSP recognises the link between agriculture and forestry in communal area land use systems and within the livelihood of rural people. The programme has the following objectives:  To increase the quantity and quality of tree and forest resources through tree planting and woodland management. Specific activities being undertaken include awareness campaigns, training workshops, field days and the production of extension materials such as posters and pamphlets.  To increase rural incomes from timber and non timber forest products through the promotion of forest based enterprises. Activities undertaken include the establishment of pole treatment tanks, beekeeping, craft production and the processing of indigenous fruits.  To build local level capacity for the sustainable management and utilisation of tree and forest resources. Activities undertaken include the establishment and training of natural resource user groups in leadership, by-law formulation and in technical aspects of forestry. Since the launch of the ASSP in 1999, some ten million seedlings have been produced; 501 woodland management sites have been identified and deliberately managed; and 1134 agroforestry sites have been established. Key statistics on the achievement of RAP II and the ASSP are presented in Table.
Despite the highlighted successes, a number of constraints are being faced within the rural afforestation programme. They include:  Low seedling survival largely due to lack of water. To minimise this problem, emphasis is being placed on locating tree planting sites near water points such as gardens and boreholes.  Tree damage by livestock due to lack of protection. This is being minimised by concentrating tree planting in niches that have some measure of protection such as areas around the homestead, field boundaries and in gardens. Ways of assisting communities access funds (e.g. through a revolving fund) to purchase fencing materials and other necessities are being explored. During RAPs I and II, a support fund was set up for such purposes. However, apart from being seen as buttressing dependency, the provision of such a fund has proved to be very expensive.  Open access to woodlands which makes it difficult to implement sustainable management and utilisation regimes. To address this problem, emphasis is being placed on building and capacitating local level institutions so that communities as a whole can take collective responsibility over the communally owned resource.  Limited markets for the resultant forest based products such as exotic and indigenous fruit trees, honey and craft work. To reduce this problem, ways of directly linking the affected communities 9.
to appropriate markets are being explored.
International agreements and national environmental policy frameworks.
Zimbabwe is a signatory to several important international and national policy frameworks for sustainable natural resource use, the majority of which emerged from the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) held in Rio de Janeiro in 1992. These include the Convention on Biodiversity, the Convention to Combat Desertification, the Montreal Protocol and the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of wild fauna and flora (CITES). Regarding the implementation of the country's obligations to some of these conventions, the following has been done:  A national Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan document has been produced in line with the requirements of the Convention on Biological Diversity.  A national communication on the Climate Change Convention has been produced.  A National Action Plan on the Desertification Convention is now in place. However, despite the foregoing progress, the country has not yet benefited from funds from either the Global Environment Facility (GEF) or the Kyoto Protocol to implement specific forestry projects emanating from these initiatives. In fact the national desertification fund created by government some two years ago still lies empty. Given that public sector funding into the forestry sector will continue to decline in the future, there is need to put in place strategies that enable the country to access funds from forestry related conventions to which it is a signatory. Other international initiatives in which the country is now going into, albeit to a limited scale are: the development of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management; and forest certification with emphasis on the export market. In 1987 the country prepared a National Conservation Strategy based on the World Conservation Strategy. The main objective was to ensure that natural resources are used on a sustained yield basis. The strategy document has become a useful reference guide book for sustainable development in Zimbabwe. Significant progress has also been made in the area of environment policy and planning since 1997. In late 1992, the Ministry of Environment and Tourism held a national conference to merge national and global (post Rio) environmental and development priorities. The conference report contained a matrix of issues, objectives and responsible agencies, which upon reflection indicates that most of the objectives have been addressed. For example, the Ministry of Environment and Tourism has developed a National Environment Impact Assessment policy. The Ministry is also leading a law reform process 10.
to deal with problems associated with the administration of at least 18 pieces of legislation on the environment which are housed in nine different ministries and departments. In this regard, an Environmental Management Bill will be tabled in Parliament in early 2001. Furthermore, the country has adopted the District Environment Action Plan process (DEAP), in order to integrate environmental conservation issues into the planning process at the local level. 1.6 Objectives and format of the country outlook paper.
This country outlook paper aims to provide a concise account of the general direction of the development of Zimbabwe's forestry sector up to the year 2020. It is based on a critical assessment of internal and external factors that drive change in the sector. The paper highlights options available to the Government of Zimbabwe with respect to enhancing the contribution of the sector to sustainable development. It will provide a key input into the development of sub-regional and regional forestry outlook reports for Africa whose presentation is being coordinated by the Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO). More importantly, these outlook studies will serve as a basis for priority setting for financial assistance in the forestry sector by donor agencies, national governments and the private sector. Chapter 2 of the paper discusses internal and external factors that impact on Zimbabwe's forestry sector. They include population growth; social and cultural issues, poverty; the macroeconomic environment; policy and institutional issues; energy use; and infrastuctural and technological developments. A visualisation of the nature of the forestry sector in 2020 based on issues raised in Chapter 2 and changes that are required to achieve the desired state are given in Chapter.
Chapter 4 presents a summary of the key findings and recommendations of the assessment. 1.7 Methodology followed.
A team of seven national experts under the leadership of the National Focal Point was assembled to prepare the country paper. Five of the experts were drawn from the public sector and one each from the private and non governmental organisation (NGO) sectors. To initiate the process, the National Focal Point held a meeting with the team whose objectives were to:  Explain the Forestry Outlook Study for Africa (FOSA) project in general and the preparation of the country paper in particular; and,  Agree on responsibilities for team members and develop a work plan for the preparation of the country paper. The following work plan was agreed upon and implemented:  Literature reviews, consultations and report writing as per agreed country paper format were undertaken. Team members were assigned specific topics based on their comparative advantage. Individual submissions were then amalgamated by the National Focal Point. A consolidated report was sent to team members for review and comments.
A one day workshop for the team was held to brain storm on the consolidated paper with emphasis on the conclusions and recommendations made. The National Focal Point subsequently incorporated these inputs into the final draft country paper.
In addition, the country paper preparation process greatly benefited from outputs of an international consultancy that was commissioned between October and November 2000. The objective of the consultancy was to make recommendations on the restructuring of the State Activities wing of the 11.
Forestry Commission, the state forest authority, with respect to its new mandate, organisational structure and revenue base. The consultancy team interacted with a wide range of stakeholders who included; Forestry Commission personnel at all levels; the private sector; relevant government and non governmental organisations; representatives of the donor community; and independent experts from the forestry, environment and finance fields.
THE CHANGE DRIVERS.
Zimbabwe is undergoing a number of social, economic, political and technological changes that have a bearing on the country's forest resources. Some of these changes are presented in this chapter. 2.1 2.1.1 Socio-economic factors Population.
According to census records, Zimbabwe's human population was 10.4 million in 1992 and was estimated at 12.2 million in 1997, given an annual growth rate of 2.5% per annum. Declining mortality rates have been largely credited for the rapid increase in the country's population over the years although the effect of the Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) pandemic on population growth still remains to be seen. The 1997 male to female population ratio was 1:1.05 with 47% of the people being under 15 years of age. Such a growing population structure poses great challenges to the country's biodiversity as the demand for natural resources continues to increase. This is worsened by the fact that about 66% of the country's population lives in rural areas where because of poverty, people tend to rely on natural resources such as forests for their survival. Furthermore, there are more people per unit area in the wetter (e.g. NRI & II) than the drier areas (NR III to V) of the country (Table 2.1). This has led to greater exploitation of natural resources through the opening of large tracts of land for cultivation and increased demand on forest goods and services in the former areas. The opening up of forest land for agricultural expansion is in fact the major reason for the loss of the country's forest biodiversity as an estimated 70,000 ha of forest land is lost to agriculture each year. Consequently, it is now difficult to find pristine miombo woodlands on the central watershed of Zimbabwe as most have disappeared to give way to cropping and grazing land. Similar negative impacts of population concentrations on natural resources are evident in areas around urban and rural service centres. The rampant land degradation that results from such activities are contributing to the siltation of the country's major water sources such as the Save River. Projections into the next two decades indicate that these trends are likely to continue with an automatic increase in the demand for forest resources and enhanced land degradation.
Mutasa Goromonzi Chegutu Tsholotsho Chiredzi Gwanda Source: Shumba et al, 1998.
I II II IV V V.
Social and cultural issues.
Zimbabwe's population is diverse. About 98% of the population consists of indigenous Africans, while the remainder is mostly made up of whites and coloureds. The indigenous inhabitants are mostly of Shona and Ndebele origin. The rural to urban push in search of employment opportunities has led to the migration of the male population to urban centres leaving their families in the rural areas. Such an arrangement guarantees the family social security in the event of loss of a job or retirement. This "dual economy" system gives indigenous people the right to a piece of land in the communal area even if they are gainfully employed elsewhere. Such an arrangement is said to sometimes lead to serious competition for limited resources as more people may claim pieces of land for cultivation and grazing rights for security and not for productive purposes. Families are patrilineal among the dominant population groups. In the event of a marriage, men pay a bride price to the family of the prospective wife. This gives the man uxorial rights to the woman for as long as the couple is married. Furthermore, the traditional land tenure system does not allow women to own land. These factors tend to affect the status of women in society. However, this situation is now changing as the crucial role of women in various spheres of economic life including natural resource management and utilisation is being recognised. Some of the traditional values that have assisted in the sustainable use of natural resources in Zimbabwe include the following:  Traditional rules and regulations that forbid the cutting of fruit trees and other "sacred" tree species for uses such as fuelwood and construction; and,  The use of one side and position of a tree to harvest roots or bark for traditional medicines. This deterred people from exploiting the same tree before it had sufficiently regenerated. Unfortunately some of the above conservation sensitive traditional beliefs and customs are breaking down. 2.1.3 Poverty.
As is the case in most developing countries, Zimbabwe has high poverty levels. The definition of poverty considers the ability of a household or individual to meet basic needs of food, clothing, education, health, transport and shelter. Results of a 1995 poverty assessment study conducted in the country are depicted in Table.
According to the study, 62% of the country's households are poor with 46% of them living in absolute poverty as they can hardly afford basic food requirements. Furthermore, the majority of such poor households are headed by women. The table also shows that:  Poverty is more prevalent in rural areas where 72% of the households are poor compared to 46% in the urban areas.  Within the rural areas poverty is more widespread in communal areas (where 81% of the households are poor) followed by the small scale commercial farms and resettlement areas (68%) and large scale commercial farms (51%) in that order.
It is important to note that 93% of the study sample indicated that poverty levels are on the increase. Given the foregoing high poverty levels in the country, people are venturing into unsustainable livelihood strategies such as cultivation of marginal areas and tree cutting for timber and non timber products. These activities are contributing to increased environmental degradation and have become part of the poverty cycle whereby people are unable to take proper care of the environment.
Source: Ministry of Public Service, Labour and Social Welfare Development Fund, 1996.
Macroeconomic environment.
Zimbabwe's per capita income in 1996 was US$ 718 2 based on a Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and foreign exchange. The dominant sectors and their contribution to GDP in 1996 were as follows: manufacturing, 17%; agriculture and fishing, 15%; forestry, 3%; and distribution, hotels and restaurants (which include tourism), 18%. Zimbabwe's economy has been undergoing some changes since 1991 due to the implementation of Z$ 85.5 billion (in nominal terms) and a population of 11.9 million people. However, in real terms, the GDP per capita has declined from US$ 271 in 1980 to US$ 201 in 1996 largely due to high inflation and the depreciation of the Zimbabwe dollar. The country's economy depends heavily on natural resources for generating employment, income of economic reform programmes, namely; the Economic Structural Adjustment Programme, ESAP (19911995) and the Zimbabwe Programme of Reform for Economic and Social Transformation, ZIMPREST (1996-1999).
The seven major policy objectives of these economic reform programmes were:  trade and investment liberalisation;  removal of trade restrictions;  deregulation of financial and labour markets;  removal of price controls;  attainment of a 5% annual growth in GDP;  reduction in the national budget deficit; and,  reform of public enterprises and the rationalisation of the civil service.
2 This figure is significantly higher than previous estimates by the World Bank, World Resources Institute and the Food & Agriculture Organisation. The reason is that in recently released national statistics by the Central Statical Office, estimates of GDP from the informal sector were included. This has increased the official GDP figures by almost 60% over previous values.
While the first four objectives were largely met, the last three have been more difficult to achieve due to a number of constraints. These include persistent droughts, government's assumption of parastatal debts, delayed disbursement of external financial support for the reform programmes and increased expenditure on issues such as the AIDS pandemic. Furthermore, the economic structural adjustment programmes have put considerable pressure on biological resources as more people turn to them in response to declining real incomes from the fiscal and monetary policy changes. Table 2.3 shows that most of the key macroeconomic indicators in the economy have performed badly between 1995 and 1999. Key features include a shrinking GDP; reduced growth of the dominant productive sectors namely agriculture, manufacturing, mining and tourism; a growing external debt burden; and high inflation. This trend has continued to worsen up to now. It is against the foregoing sombre background that government launched the 18 months Millennium Economic Recovery Programme in February, 2000. The programme seeks to achieve the following broad objectives:  consolidate fiscal policies;  accelerate and complete the public enterprise reform;  stabilise prices at lower levels;  lower interest rates;  stabilise the value of the Zimbabwe dollar and resolve the foreign currency crisis;  deepen financial sector reforms;  stimulate the growth of the productive sector;  build confidence;  protect vulnerable social groups; and,  establish accountable implementation and monitoring institutions. The objectives are aimed at removing the fundamental causes of inflation and to restore macroeconomic stability in order to create an economic environment that is conducive to low interest rates, sustainable investment capabilities, stable real incomes and poverty mitigation. If properly implemented the programme will, among other things, have the following impacts:  Boost the performance of the agricultural, manufacturing, mining and tourism sectors which failed to respond to previous economic reforms.  Reduce poverty levels in both the rural and urban areas and thus reduce the over reliance on natural resources such as forests for survival.  Increase financial resources to statutory agencies who regulate the utilisation of natural resources.
Trends in the key macroeconomic indicators in the Zimbabwean economy: 1995-1999 1995 - 1.0 2.8 - 7.3 -11.5 5.3 5.5 22.6 55.0 31.6 1996 8.5 3.3 19.4 4.6 - 2.4 6.8 21.4 50.9 30.1 1997 2.6 2.7 2.6 2.5 -2.0 2.3 18.8 72.3 28.5 1998 1.5 4.9 -2.7 0.4 0.9 31.7 61.5 36.2 1999* 0.5 3.5 -7.5 -2.5 3.5 58.3 59.6 49.1.
Real growth in GDP (%) Population growth (%) Agricultural growth (%) Manufacturing growth (%) Mining growth (%) Tourism growth (%) Inflation (%) External debt (% of GDP) Commercial Bank base lending rate (%) * Figures for 1999 are estimates Source: Central Statistics Office, 1999 Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe, 1999.
Policy and institutional issues Policy frameworks.
The Forest Act and the Communal Lands Forest Produce Act (CLFPA) are the principal pieces of legislation that govern the exploitation and protection of forest and woodland resources in Zimbabwe. This is achieved through the establishment of conditions for and regulation of the magnitude to which forest produce may be utilised. Despite post independence amendments, the two Acts largely retain the colonial approach to natural resource management. On the other hand the Parks and Wildlife Act (PWLA) is the principal piece of legislation regulating the conservation and utilisation of wildlife resources of the country. The Communal Lands Forest Produce Act As is evident from its title, the CLFPA finds its application in the communal areas which were assigned for African occupation. This Act imposes a rather strict regulatory framework which is highly state interventionist as it vests the administration of exploitation of all communal area forest produce with the Minister. However, a range of authorities are provided for, and these cover licences, agreements and permits. Exploitation of forest produce by communal area inhabitants is restricted to "own use" and the sale or supply of any forest produce to any other person is prohibited. Consequently, the CLFPA effectively removes the management of natural forest resources from the inhabitants of its area of application. Firstly, the Minister is vested with the authority to exploit the forest resource on behalf of the State. In cases where a forest falls within the jurisdiction of a local authority, control over the resources therein lies with the appropriate Rural District Council, which has the right to grant concessions to outsiders to utilise forest products for commercial purposes. However, the limitation of the right for inhabitants to exploit forest produce for "own use" prevents local level initiatives for the sharing or exchange of resources and fails to acknowledge the centrality of woodland resources within the rural economy. The Forest Act While the Forest Act seeks to be broad in its coverage of forest resources throughout the country, it finds is primary focus on State forests and on forest resources occurring on lands, most of which comprise the predominantly white large scale commercial farming sector.
The controls of the Forest Act over private forests are less strict and provides a somewhat self regulatory control mechanism for the management of private forest resources by their owners. The Forest Act prima facie prohibits the harvesting, injury or destruction of any indigenous trees or timber from private forests and forest produce from any State land except in terms of a valid timber permit issued with the consent of the appropriate authority for the land. It has been argued that security of tenure and flexibility in the provisions of the Forest Act have contributed to good forest biodiversity conservation on privately owned land. The Forest Act provides for the establishment of demarcated forest areas and establishes a Commission to serve as the State authority mandated with the dual responsibility of providing policy advice to the Minister responsible for the administration of the Act and of performing regulatory functions. The regulatory functions deal with the control, management and exploitation of State forests, plantations and forest nurseries belonging to the State and any other land as may be required by the State for forestry purposes. In line with the provisions of the Forest Act, government gazetted 800,000 ha of indigenous forests in the fragile Kalahari sands of western Zimbabwe in the 1940s. However, biodiversity conservation in these forest areas is being threatened by neighbouring communal area inhabitants who illegally settle or obtain timber and non timber forest products from them. Plans are now underway to replace the colonial protectionist approach to conserving these forests to one which considers communities living on the "forest edge" as partners in the conservation, management and utilisation of the forests through resource and benefit sharing arrangements. The Parks and Wildlife Act (PWLA) The Parks and Wildlife Act (PWLA) sets out six types of protected areas which may be established, namely national parks, safari areas, sanctuaries, botanical gardens, botanical reserves and recreational parks; each with a specific objective. Currently the Parks and Wildlife Estate constitutes 13% of the total land mass of the country. The purposes of these parks include the preservation and protection of the natural landscape, scenery of wildlife and plants and the natural ecological stability of wildlife and plant communities found therein with the ultimate objective being public enjoyment; education and inspiration. All human activities in the parks are prohibited except as provided in a permit, licence or other authorisation issued by the responsible authority. Appropriate authority status for wildlife in communal areas is granted to Rural District Councils (RDCs) to exploit wild animals and plants on behalf of the communities they serve. The government of Zimbabwe regards wildlife utilisation as a viable, legitimate and sustainable land use system; which may be most appropriate in agriculturally marginal areas. This is partly because wildlife makes better use of available vegetation compared to livestock and has many marketable uses apart from the provision of game meat. Furthermore, the local wildlife industry has a comparative advantage in world markets due to the presence of unique large mammals and high ecological diversity. Consequently, in 1975 the government took a bold positive step in the area of wildlife conservation by putting provisions in the PWLA which allowed the "custodial ownership" of wildlife by private landholders. The fact that land owners could benefit from the use of wildlife on their land encouraged them to invest in wildlife management by establishing game ranches. In addition, the PWLA was further amended to give appropriate authority status to RDCs so that they could manage and benefit from wildlife within the communal areas. This saw the inception of the Communal Area Management Programme for Indigenous Resources (CAMPFIRE) programme and 33 of the country's 55 RDCs are participating in this programme. As a result of CAMPFIRE, communities now perceive wildlife as an asset with value and not merely posing a threat to life, property, crops and domestic stock. On average, 17.
CAMPFIRE projects in Zimbabwe generate over Z$ 25 million annually, 90% of which comes from the hunting of elephants, buffalo, sable, antelope, etc. In addition to income directly accruing to participating households, local communities have put up schools, grinding mills, electric fences and sales depots using revenue from the CAMPFIRE programme. 2.3.2 Institutional arrangements.
The Ministry of Environment and Tourism through its line departments (the Forestry Commission, the Department of Natural Resources and the Department of National Parks and Wildlife Management) is the major player in forest biodiversity management. Other sectors such as agriculture, construction and water have both direct and indirect impacts on forest resources. The Forestry Commission, in its capacity as the State forest authority, is responsible for the in situ and ex situ conservation of forest biodiversity and the Department of National Parks and Wildlife Management is in charge of the wildlife component. The Department of Natural Resources is responsible for regulating and enforcing broader environmental issues, while the Department of Rural and Urban Planning formulates local by-laws for resource conservation with the involvement of Rural District Councils, who are closer to the natural resources. A number of other government and non governmental organisations are also involved in various aspects of forest management albeit to varying degrees. Given the complementary roles played by these institutions in the maintenance of forest biodiversity the need for cross sectoral linkages cannot be over emphasised. The Forestry Commission's operations are guided by the Forest Act of 1948 which gives it authority to protect forests and woodlands and to govern the exploitation of forest resources. The Commission interacts with other government departments and a plethora of NGOs in the performance of its tasks. However, despite the complementarity of its work with that of NGOs, there is considerable mistrust among these players. The Natural Resources Act of 1942 governs the functions of the department of Natural Resources and covers all natural resources including forests, water, soil, air and minerals. The department's functions generally involve monitoring, regulation and enforcement of rules on environmental conservation. However, the distinction between its regulatory functions and those of the Forestry Commission in forestry matters is unclear. The Department of National Parks and Wildlife Management is responsible for managing the country's parks which contain a large part of the country's forest biodiversity. However, vegetation resources in National Parks are largely viewed as "food" for the animals, with their conservation being accorded a subordinate role. This is worsened by the lack of joint planning between the Department and the Forestry Commission on forest conservation matters. Although forests provide crop nutrients through leaf litter and regulate waterflow and infiltration, the role of trees and woodlands in agriculture is not clearly articulated in Zimbabwe's agricultural policy. This has contributed to the rather poor positive linkages between agriculture and forestry. 2.4 Changes in energy use.
According to Table 2.4, nearly half of Zimbabwe's energy requirements are supplied by the traditional energy sector (in the form of fuelwood and charcoal). On the consumption side, 51% of this energy is utilised in the household sector. A 1997 survey revealed that 90% of rural households depend on woodfuels for their daily cooking as well as for water and space heating at an average annual 18.
consumption of 4 tonnes per household. About 15% of this fuelwood is purchased from rural markets and not directly gathered from the forest areas. On the other hand, use of household fuels in the urban and peri-urban areas is mixed between kerosene, electricity and fuelwood with 80% of the latter being purchased.
Natural forests and woodlands are the major source of fuelwood for rural and low income urban households. In urban areas, most of the wood sold by vendors is from indigenous woodlands that are within 100km of the urban centre. Experiences with fuel substitution in the country have been mixed. The rising costs of electricity and kerosene in urban areas are forcing poor households to revert to and depend on fuelwood. On the other hand, the use of solar panels has been limited to institutions and middle and high income families, largely due to the high costs of purchasing and installing the solar panels and the cooking stoves and other end use equipment. Notwithstanding, solar energy holds promise if ways of lowering the cost of the solar systems are found. Solar systems are particularly suitable for powering solar lamps, refrigerators, radios and televisions. With respect to coal, there are currently some technological limitations to its use as a household fuel as it is generally not user friendly and not readily available in rural areas. About 45% of the country's electricity is imported and 84% of urban households have access to this energy source compared to only 7% in the rural areas. Because a significant proportion of the electricity is imported, it is expensive and beyond the reach of most poor households. The same situation applies to petroleum fuels which are also imported. Given the current foreign currency shortage and the devaluation of the local currency, the cost of these energy sources is likely to rise further and hence became more inaccessible to the poor. The latter are then forced to increase their dependence on fuelwood. The foregoing increasing dependence on fuelwood is contributing to increased deforestation. It is estimated that the country's natural forests and woodlands are being depleted at a rate of 0.6% per annum due to agricultural expansion, overgrazing, forest fires, over exploitation of timber and the cutting of trees for wood fuels and construction. However, afforestation efforts aimed at improving fuelwood supply have had minimal impact hence natural woodlands have remained the major fuelwood source. This has led to the emphasis on woodland management as a strategy to increase woody biomass in recent years. However, this has had limited success due to lack of clarity on land use 19.
policies, insecurity of tenure, rapid population growth, conflicting stakeholder interests and inadequate silvicultural information. As these issues are being addressed, there is need to intensify research to develop appropriate technologies in the use of alternative fuels such as coal and solar energy. 2.5 2.5.1 Infrastructural and technological developments Infrastructural developments.
As is the case in other developing countries, Zimbabwe continues to prioritise infrastructure development for economic growth than biodiversity conservation per se. Consequently, the rapid population growth and the related urbanisation is exerting pressure on habitats and eco-systems surrounding cities, towns and rural service centres through the provision of infrastructural services such as houses, factories and roads. This is confounded by the drive to attract foreign investment with tourism, agriculture and mining being the most lucrative sectors. Such investments result in infrastructural developments that can crowd out various biological species from their habitats. For example, unless developments in the Victoria Falls area are controlled, they could destroy the ecosystem on which the very existence of the tourism industry depends. As a way of minimising the adverse effects of infrastructural development on the environment, government has instituted an Environmental Impact Assessment policy. Under this policy, projects with potentially adverse environmental effects are prescribed, making them subject to environmental audits. 2.5.2 Technological changes.
Although forestry research in Zimbabwe has been evolving since the 1930s, formal research only started in 1948. Early work focused on indigenous forests in the demarcated areas of the western part of the country which consists of commercial timber species on the fragile Kalahari sands. The impetus for the research was the need to sustainably manage and utilise the valuable tree species in particular and to conserve the fragile ecosystem in general. As the demand for timber increased, considerable pressure was placed on the slow growing indigenous tree species resulting in the need for research on fast growing exotic tree species for plantation development. This led to the establishment, in the 1960s and 1970s, of a series of forest stations in the eastern part of the country and the sourcing, evaluation and subsequent improvement of pine and eucalyptus germplasm for production under Zimbabwean climatic and edaphic conditions. Such research has had a significant impact on plantation forestry development in the country and, through sales of high quality seed abroad. For example, during the 1930s and 1940s, eucalypts produced an annual timber increment of 12m3/ha compared to 0.5m3 from indigenous woodlands. However, due to research and development efforts, these figures now average 25m3/ha and 0.9m3, respectively. A number of organisations are involved in forest and forest related research in Zimbabwe. For example, the Forestry Commission initiated an exotic plantation tree improvement programme in 1958. This programme reduced the rotation age of pines from 33 to 25 years and significantly increased stem form. These achievements have increased the productivity of industrial pine plantations both locally and internationally. Similar work is now being extended to indigenous trees especially fruit trees that have considerable commercial value (e.g. Uapaca and Zizyphus) which have hitherto been neglected. Other tree related research being conducted by various local institutions includes the ecology and management of indigenous trees, screening of multipurpose-purpose tree species for agroforestry systems, forest resource evaluations and the development forest resource sharing models between state authorities and communities living "on the edge" of gazetted forests.
Efforts to encourage tree planting in communal areas for uses such as fuel wood and fruit supply have had some impact on the country's regreening efforts. For example, the Forestry Commission has been implementing the rural afforestation programme since 1983. Seedling production was identified as a key activity during the first phase of the programme and resulted in the establishment of 78 centralised nurseries of eucalyptus seedlings which were then distributed and sold to interested farmers, communities, schools and local authorities. However, the concept of "centralised nurseries" proved expensive and the nurseries were handed over to interested local groups and individuals in the second phase of the programme. Local communities were then asked to establish their own "satellite nurseries" in which they would raise seedlings of their choice. This resulted in the diversification of the seedling mix from eucalyptus alone to include fruit and indigenous tree species. Such efforts have helped to increase the woody vegetation cover in the country. There is considerable potential of using biotechnology in forestry development. For example, micropropagation techniques which facilitate the rapid multiplication of planting material can help alleviate the problem of limited availability of tree seedlings. Micro propagation of orchids and other woodland products such as mushrooms is being carried out at Africa University in response to a survey that showed a decline in the biodiversity of traditional mushrooms in line with decreases in symbiotic indigenous forest tree species. The remaining local mushroom varieties are being collected and propagated using water hyacinth, maize cobs and other local compounds as substrates. 3 FORESTRY SECTOR IN 2020.
This section visualises the situation that is most likely to develop in the forestry sector during the next two decades due to the impact of the change drivers presented in chapter.
3.1 State of forests and plantations.
Table 3.1 shows areas under various land uses in Zimbabwe. According to this table, 66% of the country's land area is under various forest types compared to 27% which is under cultivation. The heaviest concentrations of forests occur in the gazetted state forest areas, national parks areas, the eastern highlands and the large scale commercial farms. On the other hand the woody vegetation cover in most communal areas is low and variable with heavily populated districts such as Mutasa and Chivi having only 26% and 30% cover respectively. Exotic plantations occupy about 156,000 ha of land of which over 90% is in the eastern districts. Also found in the latter areas are the unique tropical rain forests that occupy some 11,500 ha.
Areas under various land use systems in Zimbabwe Area (000 ha) 11.5 155.8 25,771.4 1,893.9 10,738.1 139.1 379.4 39,089.2 % of total 0.03 0.40 65.92 4.85 27.47 0.36 0.97 100.00.
Tropical rain forest Cities Rock outcrops and water bodies Source: Forestry Commission 1996.
Indigenous forests outside gazetted areas.
The predominant woodland types found in Zimbabwe are the miombo, mopane, teak, acacia and terminalia/combretum. Although these woodlands occupy a significant proportion of the country (two thirds) no information exists on the available timber volumes by species and age class. Furthermore, the available inventory data does not classify these forests by dominant species, which could help identify the various timber and non timber products and services flowing from them. Although no accurate figures on deforestation exist due to inadequate forestry change data, it is estimated that about 0.6% of Zimbabwe's forests are lost each year (FAO, 1997) largely due to agricultural expansion which accounts for about 70,000 ha per year. In fact it is now difficult to find pristine miombo woodlands on the central watershed of Zimbabwe as most have disappeared to give way to cropping and grazing land. This situation will worsen as the rising human population will continue to expand the agricultural frontier into marginal areas and cut trees for fuelwood and other purposes. In addition, the current land reform programme will see more forest areas being turned into cropping as the plan to resettle about 150,000 families on 5 million ha of land from the large scale commercial farms is implemented. 3.1.2 Indigenous trees within the gazetted areas.
The country degazetted 800,000 ha of indigenous forests in western Zimbabwe in the 1950s. These areas are managed by the Forestry Commission on behalf of government. The need to conserve and protect these forests arises from the fact that they are located on ecologically fragile soils, the Kalahari sands. Consequently, any indiscriminate cutting of trees in these areas can easily turn them into deserts and drastically reduce the number and range of animal species present. In addition, the forests "house" commercial indigenous timber species such as Baikea plurijuga (teak), Pterocarpus angolensis (mukwa) and Guibourtia coleosperma (mchibi). Uncontrolled exploitation of these valuable tree species can result in loss of biodiversity. In order to promote the local processing industry and to reduce illegal harvesting, the export of timber "in the round" was banned. Furthermore, in line with international market demands, the certification of some indigenous forest areas with commercially exploitable timber in both the gazetted forest areas and in communal areas is being actively considered. This trend is likely to increase in future. In their quest for agricultural land, some people (especially the rural poor) have been illegally moving into demarcated forest areas giving rise to the problem of illegal settlers (commonly referred to as squatters). This has contributed to the following:  Uncontrolled and unplanned cultivation of land involving the cutting down of trees and clearing forests resulting in land degradation.  Rampant soil erosion caused by over grazing, removal of forests for construction and agricultural purposes and forest fires which are used as methods of hunting and land preparation.  Poaching of forest products such as timber and wildlife. The foregoing has invariably resulted in land use conflicts between the squatters and the legitimate land owners, the Forestry Commission. The former consider their settlements legitimate since the land issue has always been at the centre of the political economy of Zimbabwe and was the strongest single justification put forward in support of the armed struggle that brought national independence to the country in 1980. On the other hand, the Forestry Commission's mandate of sustainably managing these forest areas is made difficult by the squatters' presence hence it has responded by prosecuting and evicting them in some cases. Such contradictions have highlighted the need to explore concepts such as "co-existence" and "resource sharing" as ways that can satisfy the expectations of the two parties.
Exotic plantations.
Table 3.2 shows that the area under exotic plantations was rather stagnant from the late 1980s to the mid 1990s. This has been largely attributed to persistent drought and a rather subdued demand for timber products during that period. According to the table, approximately 72% of the plantation area is under pines which are predominantly in the eastern districts, whilst some 15% and 13% of the area is planted to eucalyptus and wattle, respectively. All the wattle is grown in the eastern districts while eucalyptus is more widely distributed throughout the country. With respect to exotic plantation ownership, about 42% belong to the State (through the Forestry Commission); 54% to private companies and the remainder to small private growers who include cooperatives. Zimbabwe's exotic plantations are managed for different timber products. About 70% of the plantation area is managed for sawlog products, 9% for poles and 14% for pulpwood.
Source: Research and Development Annual report, 1997.
Table 3.3 shows the age distribution by area of exotic plantations. Some 47% of the pine area had trees less than ten years old and 15% had trees between 21 and 25 years in 1992/93. This difference in area could be partly attributed to the national liberation war years (1970s) when very little planting was done. On the other hand the presence of over age trees (+30 years) reflects an over supply of timber in the market at that time. Given that the domestic timber market has been depressed for some time and that it is likely to remain so for the foreseeable future, emphasis will be on the production of value added products for the export market. The need to capture the international has reinforced the requirement for sustainable forest management practices in exotic plantations. This has led a number of forestry companies to apply for certification under the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) and this trend will continue in future. It is important to note that exotic plantations will become increasingly important in future as timber processing companies will have to complement the declining indigenous timber resource. Given the area available for expanding large scale exotic timber production is limited, there is tremendous scope to engage communal or resettlement area farmers in exotic timber production on a contract basis with the large timber processing companies through outgrower schemes.
26-30 30+ Total.
Source: Research & Development Report; 1997.
Trees outside forests.
Trees outside forests are those found outside the three traditional situations namely, indigenous trees outside and inside gazetted forest and wildlife areas; and exotic trees in plantation forest areas (see sections 3.1.1 to 3.1.3). With the expansion of the agricultural frontier into traditional forest areas, trees outside forests are increasingly becoming important for the provision of timber and non timber forest products at the local level. However, there is very limited data on the state of these forests due to lack of national level data on the assessment of these trees. Notwithstanding, these trees have been widely promoted through some of the following national initiatives.  Tree planting through programmes such as the Rural Afforestation programme initiated by the Forestry Commission in 1983. This programme has seen the establishment of exotic woodlots and the planting of both exotic and indigenous tree species in areas that are protected against livestock damage and have access to water, such as areas around the homestead, gardens and fields.  Agroforestry initiatives that aim to integrate both exotic and indigenous trees into agriculture in various land use niches. This is in recognition of the fact that agriculture will continue to have priority over trees in all future land use plans. 3.1.5 Non timber forest products.
The bulk of the country's indigenous forests have limited timber production potential and hence they have low economic value. This is largely why these forests are currently considered as a "reserve land" for agricultural expansion. Notwithstanding, communal and resettlement area dwellers are increasingly becoming heavily dependant on a wide range of non timber forest products for food, shelter and income. However, the contribution of such products to the national economy has not been quantified in economic terms. There is considerable scope for improving the contribution of non timber forest products to rural incomes through value addition and the commercialisation of the resultant products. Such a move would also help increase the competitive edge of forests as a worthwhile land use system. Some of the non timber forest products and services whose demand will increase include the following:  Agroforestry products. The production and utilisation of trees on farmland and grazing areas plays an important role in the local production systems and are directly linked to agricultural production through the transfer of leaf litter, plant nutrients; the provision of fodder and browse; and the supply of construction poles and timber.  Household food security through the direct provision of products such as fruits, honey, roots and insects (e.g. mopane worms). Some employment and income is also being generated from the woodcraft industry. However, this component has been adversely affected by the current slump in the tourism industry but is likely to pick up in future.  Fuelwood supply, especially in the highly populated areas.  Use as traditional medicines. A significant proportion of the population can no longer afford modern medicines which are also not readily available in some cases. As some important medicinal plants are becoming rare due to deforestation and over exploitation, some traditional healers have resorted to planting them in niches outside traditional forest areas.
State of the forest industries Exotic plantations.
Exotic plantation forestry in Zimbabwe is largely based on pines and eucalyptus. The industry is highly vertically integrated into timber production, processing, packaging and marketing. It employs about 16,000 people and contributes some 3% to the Gross Domestic Product. The sector has seen some considerable investment in saw milling and value adding capacity during the last decade. Table 3.4 shows the trends in roundwood utilisation in the industry. There has been a considerable increase in the utilisation of most of the products over the last 20 years. The last four years have also seen the emergence of small private sawmills to cater for the lower end of the market. This has filled the niche left by large companies who are abandoning small mills in favour of the big ones. This has led to a proliferation of small bush mills without kilns. Exotic plantations provide roundwood input for 13 large and 28 small sawmills; six pole treatment plants; two veneer and plywood producers; one particle board and fibreboard factory; two paper and product manufacturers; one wattle extract factory; one charcoal producer; and one match factory.
The wood supply and demand picture in exotic plantations is mixed (Arnold et al, 1993). Average annual timber consumption in the sector was 656,000 m3 between 1987 and 1990 and 541 333 m3 between 1989 and 1991. However, the actual volume of roundwood harvested compared to that consumed is somewhat clouded by fibre imports as 51% of the fibre requirements for pulp and paper products and reconstituted panel products are imported. Furthermore, chips from sawlog production are used to manufacture pulp and paper and reconstituted panel products. When the most optimistic wood supply scenario of low economic growth, expanded plantation areas and high yields is used, no timber deficits are projected for both pine and eucalyptus up to the year 2020. The most pessimistic scenario of high economic growth, no expansion of plantation areas and low growth and yield would result in serious wood supply deficits over the same period. However, the most likely scenario lies between the two extremes.
Indigenous forests.
Commercial timber production from indigenous forests is mainly based on Pterocarpus angolensis and Baikiaea plurijinga. The total demand for roundwood in 1989/90 was approximately 50,000 m3, while the 1991/92 supply of high value hardwoods from concessions in western Zimbabwe was less than 22,000 m3. This means that the current demand for commercial hardwoods cannot be met from the local resource alone. This situation will definitely worsen in the future. Apart from commercial timber, the country's natural forests generate a wide range of other products that include: fuelwood for charcoal, small artisinal crafts, fodder, fruits, honey, mushrooms, insects, bark for rope, medicines, leaf litter and gum. Services provided by these woodlands include: watershed conservation; carbon fixation; and the provision of windbreaks, shade, soil stability and wildlife habitat. No exact economic value has been established for these goods and services, but specific studies can produce some point estimates. For example, a modified contingent valuation study that estimated the mean direct and indirect values of a range of timber and non-timber products in miombo woodlands gave an average value of Z$ 200/ha per year (Campbell, et al, 1991). Based on this figure (and mindful of many caveats about extrapolating the very specific Campbell results), the total stock value of indigenous woodlands (21 million ha) can be estimated at Z$ 4.2 billion per year. The increasing human population and the limited growth in other economic sectors will continue to put considerable pressure on forests to provide the above functions in the future. This is largely because such products will continue to be sourced at much lower cost than their substitutes (such as imported liquid fuels). 3.3 3.3.1 Conservation of forest biodiversity Cost of biodiversity conservation.
The costs of current biodiversity conservation measures are important in determining future strategic directions. In a limited sense, current expenditures are a measure of the value placed by decision makers on biodiversity conservation. However, such expenditures are limited by income. Consequently, current expenditures alone could significantly underestimate the value of biodiversity conservation to the country. Notwithstanding, information on current expenditures can be useful in determining costs and resource requirements of future strategies and actions to improve biodiversity conservation. Where resources are limited, trade-offs can be better appraised between biodiversity conservation (and the values generated) and other options for public expenditures. Long term biodiversity conservation in Zimbabwe is undertaken by the government through various departments. Table 3.5 shows that government's budget allocation to key departments involved with some aspects of forest biodiversity conservation and management increased from Z$ 171 million in 1987/88 to Z$ 801 million in 1997/98. This represents a 36% budget increase over the eleven year period in nominal terms. However, when inflation is accounted for, it becomes apparent that government expenditure levels on biodiversity conservation fell by 49% from Z$ 276 million in 1987/88 to about Z$ 137 million in 1996/97. Given the thrust of the national economic reform programme this trend is likely to continue into the future. The net effect is to reduce the state machinery's capacity to implement forest biodiversity conservation programmes. Apart from central government, a number of local and international non governmental organisations (NGOs) and land owners are actively involved in financing biodiversity conservation in Zimbabwe. However, no comprehensive data base containing summaries of in-country expenditures by NGO exists. In addition, it is difficult to identify the budget components that go directly into biodiversity conservation. Notwithstanding, NGOs and the private sector are expected to play an increasing role 26.
in this area in future.
Government department 88/8 9 14.5 5.0 19.2 89/9 0 18.0 6.5 25.7 90/9 1 19.3 8.3 31.1.
Real expenditures are deflated by the Gross Domestic Product index, 1990 = 100 to account for inflation. Nominal expenditures were also deflected by the CPI index with little differences in results. Source: Central Statistical Office, 1997.
Economic incentives for forest conservation.
Given the reducing government budget allocations to biodiversity conservation, the need to consider various economic incentives cannot be overemphasised. Direct incentives include cash incentives, such as fines to deter timber poaching or improper harvesting methods; compensation for damage to community forests from wildlife or development projects; compensation to people living adjacent to state forests who are excluded from using the woodlands; and subsidies for forest management such as free seedlings. With respect to communal forests, the Communal Land Forest Produce Act allows communal area inhabitants to exploit timber for personal use within certain limits free of charge, while licences are issued for commercial exploitation of the forest resource. Where forest damage occurs, costs of 27.
ameliorating the damage may be imposed by the State. For example, the maximum fine for improper conservation under the Natural Resources Act is Z$ 1,000. However, such provisions are fairly broad and do not appear to neither deter poor conservation practices, nor encourage sound resource management in communal areas. Direct subsidies in the form of free or low cost seedlings is a common practice in Zimbabwe. In 1983, the Forestry Commission initiated the Rural Afforestation Programme to boost the production of tree seedlings (through central nurseries) for distribution at little or no cost to schools, communities, farmers and local authorities (Remme, 1995). This programme was later decentralised to the local level in 1989. These efforts and those of NGOs, have contributed to tree planting initiatives in communal areas. Other indirect incentives include subsidies that shift rural people from woodfuel to alternative fuel sources such as solar technology for cooking purposes; and the promotion of community development programmes that are tied to improved conservation practices. All these efforts should be strengthened in future. 3.4 3.4.1 Institutional framework for forestry Separation of regulatory and enterprise functions of the Forestry Commission.
The current mandate of the Forestry Commission is derived from the Forest Act of 1948 which provides for state authority and trading functions. The former is funded from government grants, own revenue and donors while the latter is self financing. In line with the country's economic reform programmes, the Forestry Commission is now working on the separation of its two functions. This has been made possible by the amendment of the Forest Act in March 1999 which now allows the organisation to form companies. To this end the trading function will be incorporated into the forestry company of Zimbabwe which was registered under the Companies Act in May, 2000. It is anticipated that the commercialisation and subsequent privatisation of the company will take about 18 months. The company will have a 125 year land lease and its share holding will include a strategic partner who will inject some capital and expertise to retool and come up with a more economically viable organisation. Given that the Forestry Commission is the largest exotic plantation forestry owner in the country, the Forestry Company of Zimbabwe will be a dominant player in the forestry industry. Apart from creating the much needed employment, the company will contribute towards poverty alleviation by promoting outgrower schemes for communal and resettlement area farmers. Under such schemes, farmers neighbouring forest estates will be contracted to grow timber which will then be purchased and processed by the contracting companies. This hiving off of trading activities from the regulatory and developmental functions enable the new Forestry Commission to be only a referee and not a player in the forestry sector. Such a development will help the Commission to concentrate on vision setting and the creation of a conducive environment for the forestry sector to thrive in. 3.4.2 The new Forestry Commission.
In October, 2000, the Forestry Commission recruited an international consultancy to undertake the following:  Review the mandate of the State authority wing (new Forestry Commission) in relation to other players in the forestry and environment fields;  Analyse the current organisational structure and human resource base and recommend a leaner and more efficient structure and human resource profile.  Review the current sources of funding for the organisation and propose alternative and sustainable financing arrangements to fulfil its mandate.
Some of the key findings and recommendations from the consultancy were that:  The new Forestry Commission should retain the current regulatory, management and capacity enhancement functions being performed by the State forest authority. However, in order to reduce transaction costs, team work and collaboration with other government agencies and non governmental organisations including the private sector should be strengthened. Furthermore, the participation of local communities in the planning, implementation and evaluation of forest projects and programmes should be emphasised. These three functions are elaborated below:.
The regulatory function involves the promotion of the sustainable development of forest resources and the optimisation of their contribution to social and economic development of the nation by setting appropriate standards and enforcing legislation on sustainable forest management. Activities under this function should be clearly articulated in the National Forest Programme which is not yet in place. This will involve the setting up of criteria and indicators for the latter. The State authority wing of the current Forestry Commission has four technical divisions (viz: Forestry Extension Services, Indigenous Resources, Research and Development and Forestry Colleges); support services departments (finance, human resources and corporate planning) and a safari operation. The key functions of these divisions are as follows:  The Forestry Extension Services Division provides an advisory and regulatory service on all forestry related matters in the country with emphasis on sound environmental management and improved rural welfare.  The Indigenous Resources Division manages and protects 800,000 ha of gazetted indigenous forests located on the fragile Kalahari sands of western Zimbabwe. This is done for the benefit of the ecosystem and the nation as a whole.  The Research and Development Division is responsible for generating appropriate technologies for the exotic plantations (pines and eucalyptus) and indigenous forests. Such technologies are aimed at enhancing the contribution of the forestry sector to the national Gross Domestic Product and at improving rural livelihoods and incomes on a sustained basis.  The Ngamo Safaris Division is responsible for the sustainable utilisation of the biodiversity on gazetted forest areas through hunting safaris and photographic operations. The former has been performing reasonably well while the latter has been making losses largely due to very low occupancy rates.  The Forestry Colleges offer forestry and industrial oriented skills to the forestry sector through certificate and diploma level training in forestry (from the Zimbabwe College of Forestry) and Wood technology and Saw doctoring (from the Forest Industries Training Centre, FITC). The latter was established as a Southern African Development Community (SADC) regional project in 1992 and was then handed over to the Government of Zimbabwe in 1998. FITC also runs a demonstration plant for training and income generation. However, the plant's capacity to generate revenue is limited by its structural configuration which is skewed towards training. Consequently, it has been operating at a loss.
The foregoing divisions and units have an employee complement of 776. In order to reduce the salary and wage bill and to streamline operations it is recommended that the four technical divisions be reduced to two, namely:  The Conservation and Extension Division combining the current Divisions of Indigenous Resources and Forestry Extension Services; and,  The Research, Development and Training Division combining the current divisions of Research 29.
and Development and Forestry Colleges. The two new divisions will be headed by Deputy General Managers. It is further recommended that:  Ngamo Safaris Division be incorporated into a company (wholly owned by the new Forestry Commission) in order to increase its revenue generation capacity by facilitating: the hiring of competent personnel, the engagement of a strategic marketing partner for the photographic operation; and a reduction of bureaucracy in running the outfit.  The FITC demonstration will still allow students to access the plant for training purposes, and the lessee to invest in the plant so that the operation becomes profitable. The proposed amalgamation of technical divisions and the shedding off of the FITC demonstration plant will reduce the organisation's employee complement by 36%. The reductions will mostly affect support staff while the number of technical positions will largely remain the same. The current and proposed organograms are presented as Appendices 1 and.
The proposed personnel reductions will reduce the current remuneration bill (including salaries and wages) by about 33%. However, the restructuring programme would cost the organisation a similar amount as indicated for the saving in retrenchment packages.
It was noted that the revenue base of the new Forestry Commission is quite limited. However, opportunities to strengthen the current revenue sources and to bring in additional ones were identified. They include: charging a levy to the forestry industry; establishing strategic business units within the authority; recovering costs from certain services rendered; tapping into financing windows of forestry related international conventions and agreements (eg, the Kyoto protocol) to which Zimbabwe is a signatory; offering a consultancy service; and leasing land to the Forestry Company of Zimbabwe. Such initiatives are expected to increase the organisation's own revenue receipts by about 60% within the two years. Although this figure is likely to increase as additional revenue sources come on stream in future, such incomes are unable to completely replace the need for government funding. It was pointed out that the foregoing reorganisation of the technical divisions coupled with increased own revenue inflows will considerably reduce the level of the government grant required by the organisation in future. Furthermore, a streamlined state forest authority will be able to competently translate and implement provisions of forestry related international conventions to which Zimbabwe is a signatory. However, in order to reap the full benefits of the new organisational structure and the broadened revenue base, there is need for an elaborate re-tooling exercise in the new Forestry Commission. To achieve this, the following initiatives are recommended:.
Undertaking a needs assessment and a resource requirements analysis in the areas of information technology, infrastructural development, capital requirements and capacity building in the key mandate areas. The consultancy established that the Forestry Commission is currently under capitalised and that most of its personnel will need some retraining in order to effectively fulfil the mandate of the organisation. Key areas include community participation, shared forest management and team building. 30.
Development of project proposals and the mobilisation of resources to undertake the following initiatives:  National Forest Programme development. This will help the new organisation develop a vision for the country's forestry sector and to articulate its role and that of other players through a consultative process.  Provision of incentives for sustainable forest management. This involves the development of resource and benefit sharing arrangements and the building of local level institutions.  Development of a shared vision within personnel of the new Forestry Commission. Institutional framework for wildlife.
The Department of National Parks and Wildlife Management (DNPWM) is the management and scientific authority for wildlife in the Parks and Wildlife Act. It manages wild fauna and flora within the wildlife estate which occupies some 13% of the country's land area. The DNPWM falls under the Ministry of Environment and Tourism. As a way of boosting the department's operational funds, government authorised it to retain the money it generates from various activities some two years ago. Such funds are normally sent to Treasury for nationwide allocation. Furthermore, plans are at an advanced stage to run the department as a Statutory Fund. Apart from enhancing the revenue base, such a move will enable the department to recruit and retain competent and qualified personnel. This is because as a semi-autonomous entity, the organisation will offer better conditions of service than those offered by purely government departments. Communities who include both the large scale commercial farmers running conservancies/game ranches and smallholder farmers involved in the Communal Area Management Programme for Indigenous Resources (CAMPFIRE) programme are key players in sustainable wildlife management in the country. The former have also been providing space for relocated animals such as the rhino from the Zambezi valley and offer the DNPWM opportunities to carry out research on their farms. A number of non governmental organisations (NGOs) also play central roles in wildlife management through their support to the CAMPFIRE programme. The foregoing stakeholder institutions involved in wildlife are linked through the services and facilities they offer. For example, the DNPWM sets out the overall policies and controls on wildlife utilisation; offers opportunities to other stakeholders for research within the protected areas; and negotiates on the international flora (e.g. Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species, CITES) for wildlife product markets Universities offer trained manpower to organisations involved in wildlife. For example, a two year MSc Programme run by the University of Zimbabwe in Tropical Resources and Ecology was specifically designed to train specialised initiatives within the CAMPFIRE programmes. Such linkages will help achieve greater synergy and efficiency within the wildlife sector in future. SUMMARY OF KEY FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS This chapter summarises options that can enhance the contribution of the forestry sector to sustainable development in Zimbabwe. This is achieved by addressing the internal and external pressures being brought to bear on the sector during the next twenty years. Depletion of indigenous forests About sixty percent of Zimbabwe is under various forest types while some heavily populated districts have less than 30% cover. It is estimated that some 0.6% of the country's indigenous forests are lost to agricultural expansion and other household uses such as energy supply, construction and food. In 31.
fact the current demand for commercial indigenous hardwoods cannot be met from the local resource alone. To address the problem of indigenous forest depletion the following recommendations are made:  Increasing the role and contribution of exotic plantations: Exotic plantations will increasingly become important ion future as timber processing companies thrive to complement the declining indigenous timber resource for their operations. However, since the area available for expanding large scale exotic timber production is limited, there is tremendous scope to engage communal and resettlement area farmers in exotic timber productions contract to large timber processing companies through outgrower schemes. This process has already started.  Recognising and supporting the increasing importance of trees outside forests: With the expansion of the agricultural frontier into traditional forest areas, trees outside forests are increasingly becoming important for the provision of timber and non-timber forest products and services at the local level. To address this problem, there is need to aggressively promote agroforestry and afforestation initiatives with emphasis on protected niches such as areas around the homestead, gardens and fields. The success of such moves will largely depend on adding value to non timber forest products and on improving their marketability in order to improve their competitive edge as a profitable land use system. It must, however, be noted that there is very limited data on the extent and state of these forests due to lack of information. Developing such a data base should be an important entry point.  Development of alternative energy sources: Sizable portions of indigenous forest areas are cut to meet household energy needs especially in the communal and resettlement areas. To reduce this over dependance on woodfuels there is need to intensify research into the development of alternative and appropriate technologies such as solar energy which has largely remained untapped. The communal land tenure system The communal land tenure system that operates in communal and resettlement areas is a disincentive to long term investment in natural resources such as forests largely due to lack of individual accountability on the resource. The situation has been exacerbated by the erosion of powers of the traditional leaders who used to oversee the observance of certain environmentally friendly resource management and utilisation regimes. As a way of addressing the communal land tenure problem, emphasis should be placed on building and capacitating local level institutions so that the community as a whole can take collective responsibility over the communally owned resources. In this regard, the concept of Resource User Groups will have to be strengthened and expanded. Once established, such groups are trained in leadership skills, by-law information and technical aspects of forestry. Such skills and instruments are then locally used to manage, protect and sustainably utilise the forest resource for the benefit of both the community and ecosystem. The concept of Resource User Groups is already being implemented in some districts. This is going a long way into strengthening the enforcement of existing legislation which has hitherto been rather weak. Reduced government support for sustainable forest management The economic reform programmes being implemented by government have led to a reduction in the financial and human resources being allocated to statutory agencies who regulate and advise on the management and utilisation of natural resources. Such a trend is likely to persist. To address this problem, the following recommendations are made:  The Forestry Commission, the state forest authority, should be restructured into a leaner and more efficient regulator and advisor in the forestry sector. This aspect is addressed later. 32.
Communities, especially those in the communal and resettlement areas should be given incentives for effective participation in the protection and management of forest resources. This can be achieved by promoting activities that increase rural incomes from forest resources. These include the establishment of pole treatment tanks, beekeeping, craft production and the processing and commercialisation of indigenous fruits. Communities can be enticed into these ventures by the provision of a low interest revolving fund which can be administered at the village or district levels. The revolving fund concept is already being developed as a substitute to the support fund that used to be given to communities in earlier reafforestation programmes. However, in order to legally operationalise this recommendation, there is need to revisit and amend the Communal Lands Forest Produce Act that restricts the exploitation of forest produce by communal and resettlement area inhabitants to "own use" and prohibits the sale or supply of any forest produce to any other person. The Resource User Group concept highlighted earlier can then be used as a vehicle to protect and sustainably utilise the resource. The private sector should be asked to fund specific aspects of plantation forestry development in which it derives a direct benefit. This has already started in research but needs strengthening. The Forestry Commission should forge strategic alliances with relevant government and non government organisations operating at various levels in order to minimise duplication and reduce costs. The forestry sector should develop a strategy for accessing financial resources from forestry related international conventions and agreements to which Zimbabwe is a signatory.
Shifting from the protectionist approach to gazetted forest area management Biodiversity conservation in the 800,000 ha of gazetted indigenous forest areas in the country is being threatened by neighbouring communal area inhabitants who illegally occupy or obtain timber and non timber forest products from them. To address this problem, plans are under way to replace the colonial protectionist approach to conserving these forests to one which considers communities living on the "forest edge" as partners in their conservation, management and utilisation. This is being pursued through the development of resource and benefit sharing models and a new policy that reflects this positive shift is being finalised. In addition to benefiting communities such a policy, once implemented, will reduce the cost of protecting and managing gazetted forest areas as such responsibilities will be eventually shared with the beneficiaries. Forest resource assessment and evaluation The forestry industry contributes 3% to the country's Gross Domestic Product. However, this does not include benefits derived by the nation and communities from various timber and non timber forest products and services that are not captured in the national accounts despite their increasing importance in rural welfare. This is exacerbated by the lack of comprehensive information on the indigenous forest resource base. For example, no information exists on timber volumes by species and age class. Furthermore, the forests are not classified by the dominant species. Such information is critical for the identification and subsequent economic evaluation of various timber and non timber products and services that flow from the forests. In view of the above, the following is recommended:  An evaluation of the biophysical status and economic value of forest resources. The latter helps to establish the true contribution of forests to the national economy and can be used to lobby for more public sector support into the sector in future. On the other hand, biophysical assessments can assist in establishing the relative contribution of the country's forests to carbon sequestration and to the ecosystem in general. 33.
Given the increasing importance of non timber forest products and services, there is need to raise their profile and improve their contribution to rural incomes through value addition and the commercialisation of the resultant products.
Expanding the formal timber market The local timber market for exotics is likely to remain depressed for the foreseeable future. Consequently, in order to improve viability in this sector there is need to place emphasis on value addition for the export market to generate the much needed foreign exchange. To achieve this there is need to invest in new product development and to upgrade the manufacturing and processing capacities of timber companies. The export market drive will also promote sustainable forest management by entrenching the certification process which has already been initiated in some indigenous forest areas and exotic plantation estates. Capacity enhancement in the forestry sector Given the increasing demands that will come to bear on the forestry sector during the next 20 years, there is need to enhance the resource base and product quality through appropriate research and human resource development initiatives as follows:  Given the long gestation period and large fixed costs associated with most tree related research initiatives, there is need to forge strategic alliances with other regional and international research institutions and networks. Furthermore, there is need to establish criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management at various operational levels as a basis for monitoring progress.  In the area of formal training, it is recognised that the country's forestry colleges cannot survive from the local market alone given the small related size of the country's forestry industry. To this end, there will be need to aggressively market these excellent training facilities throughout the Southern African Development Community (SADC) region. Getting an affiliate status with a renowned university can greatly improve the attractiveness of the training offered at these colleges regionally. Apart from the formal training offered by the colleges, there is need for capacity building, through in service training, in order to tackle the new challenges facing the forestry sector. These include the current thinking to consider communities as partners in forestry development (through the devolution of authority and management responsibilities) as opposed to the "command and control approach". Creation of an enabling institutional framework for forestry development The hiving off of trading activities from the regulatory and developmental functions of the state forest authority will enable the new Zimbabwe Forestry Commission to become only a referee and not a player in the forestry sector. Such a development, which is nearing completion, will help the Commission concentrate on vision setting and (through a National Forest Programme) the creation of a conducive environment for the forestry sector to thrive. Furthermore, a streamlined state forest authority with a broadened revenue base will be able to competently translate and implement provisions of forestry related international conventions to which Zimbabwe is a signatory. The leaner organisation will have to work very closely with local level institutions such as Resource User Groups (described earlier) and relevant government and non governmental organisations reduce transaction costs and duplication. With respect to wildlife, the imminent conversion of the Department of National Parks and Wildlife 34.
Management into a Statutory Fund will help to boost revenue receipts for wildlife conservation, management and sustainable use. In addition, it will help the department to recruit and retain experienced and qualified personnel. ---------------------------------.
