Gender Roles in Peanut Sector for Household Food Security.
Technical Consultation Report Editors: Dr. Revathi Balakrishnan Regional Rural Sociologist and Women in Development Officer FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific Dr. Penkwan Chombreeda Kasetsart University, Bangkok, Thailand Dr. Hathairat Rimkere Kasetsart University, Bangkok, Thailand.
Organized in Partnership with FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific Kesetsart Agricultural and Agro-Industrial Product Improvement Institute Kasetsart University Bangkok, Thailand and Peanut Collaborative Research Support Programme United States Agency for International Development University of Georgia, USA June 9 to 12, 1998 Kesetsart Agricultural and Agro-Industrial Product Improvement Institute Kasetsart University, Bangkok, Thailand.
The designations and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area, or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. The opinions expressed in this publication are those of the author alone and do not imply any opinion whatsoever on the part of FAO.
ISBN: 974-87222-9-5 All rights are reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying or otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner. Applications for such permission, with a statement of purpose and extent of the reproduction should be addressed to the Director, Information Division, Food and Agriculture Oganization of the United Nations, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 00100, Rome, Italy.
Editorial support: Dr. Revathi Balakrishnan Regional Rural Sociologist and Women in Development Officer FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific Dr. Penkwan Chombreeda Kasetsart University, Bangkok, Thailand Dr. Hathairat Rimkere Kasetsart University, Bangkok, Thailand.
For copies write to: Regional Rural Sociologist and Women in Development Officer FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific 39 Phra Atit Road Bangkok 10200, Thailand.
The report captures the outcome of the Technical Consultation on "Gender Roles in Peanut Sector for Household Food Security." This consultation was a collaborative effort of the Women in Development Programme of the Food and Agriculture Organization, Kasetsert University, Thailand and the USAID Peanut Collaborative Research Support Programme, USA (Peanut CRSP). We encourage such collaboration with research institutes and research networks to strengthen FAO's efforts in mainstreaming gender concerns in research and technology development. The role of women in cash crop in the Asia-Pacific region takes many forms and cuts across many crops. Their participation could vary from the extensive involvement of women in rice crop cultivation in South East Asia to intensive roles of women in plantation crops in South Asia. In many countries of the region, peanut is an important cash as well as food crop and is grown either in large acreage or in the homegardens. This crop has the unique character of being a cash crop with high market value, requiring intensive labour demand and at the same time it offers direct food value with minimum processing to enter the daily diet of the household. It also proves to be a product amenable for sale in small-scale food vending markets to generate cash income for women. Women's role in the peanut sector contributes to household food security and thus making the peanut sector a good entry point to assess the role of women in the cash crop sector. The document presents the summaries of the papers and a synthesis of the discussions on gender roles in production and consumption aspects in the peanut sector. It is envisaged that it would contribute to our continued exploration of gender dimension in various crops. I congratulate the Kasetsart University faculty and staff for organizing this meeting; particularly those associated with Kasetsart Agricultural and Agro-Industrial Product Improvement Institute. I also thank Peanut CRSP Management Entity in University of Georgia, for their support to this activity.
Prem Nath Assistant Director General and Regional Representative for Asia and the Pacific November 1999.
Acknowledgement.
The participants, organizers and sponsors express their profound thanks and appreciation to Kasetsart University and in particular to the Kasetsart Agricultural and Agro-Industrial Product Improvement Institute for the successful hosting of the Technical Consultation and for warm hospitality extended to them. The Technical Consultation also wishes to place on record its warm appreciation to Dr. Revathi Balakrishnan, Dr. Penkwan Chompreeda, Dr. Hathairat Rimkeeree, Dr. Patricia C. Jimenez, Dr. M.F.U. Mia, Mr. Chen Changbing, Dr. Shova Patrabansh and Ms. Sumalee Sunthornnarurangsee for chairing the sessions and to the secretariat which prepared the report in time for adoption. Thanks are also due to the resource persons. The Technical Consultation expresses its sincere appreciation to the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific and Peanut Collaborative Research Support Program-USAID for their support and assistance. We record our thanks to Mr. Jumpoth Ruayjaroensap, Manager Mae-Ruay Snack Food Factory Co. Ltd., for facilitating the technical study tour.
Hyperlinks to non-FAO Internet sites do not imply any official endorsement of or responsibility for the opinions, ideas, data or products presented at these locations, or guarantee the validity of the information provided. The sole purpose of links to non-FAO sites is to indicate further information available on related topics. This electronic document has been scanned using optical character recognition (OCR) software. FAO declines all responsibility for any discrepancies that may exist between the present document and its original printed version.
I. Introduction II. Conclusions and Recommendations III. Country Specific Recommendations IV. Country Reports: Summaries V. Organization of the meeting VI. Resource papers: Summaries Annexes Annex 1: List of Participants Annex 2: Programme.
Suggested Model for Linkages: A Suggested Model for Linkages: B.
Gender Roles in Peanut Sector In Selected Asian Countries.
Glossary of Acronyms FAO KAPI KU Peanut CRSP RAP USAID WID Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Kasetsart Agricultural and Agro-Industrial Product Improvement Institute Kasetsart University Peanut Collaborative Research Support Program Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific United States Agency for International Development Women in Development.
I. INTRODUCTION.
The Technical Consultation on "Gender Roles in Peanut Sector and Household Food Security" was held from June 9 to 12, 1998, at the Kasetsart Agricultural and Agro-industrial Product Improvement Institute, Kasetsart University, Bangkok. The consultation was supported by the Women in Development Programme of the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific (WID FAO RAP) and the USAID Peanut Collaborative Research Support Program (Peanut CRSP). The Kasetsart Agriculture and Agro-Industry Product Improvement Institute (KAPI) provided the leadership in organizing the Consultation and technical support. Hence, the Technical Consultation was an outcome of collaboration between three organizations that have a commitment to understand the gender roles in the peanut sector and to improve household food security by enhancing women's participation in production and consumption. Peanut crop has the unique characteristics of being both food crop and cash crop in small holder production systems. It is a also an important commercial crop, since peanut is the basic commodity for a wide range of commercial products such as oil, snack food and animal feed and other by products use in packing. Peanut is also a key ingredient in Asian culinary preparations. In this region, women play an important role in seed selection, cultural practices, in harvest and post harvest processing of the peanut crop. So, women share significant responsibility along side with men, in the peanut sector, which is important to ensure for foodsecurity in determining both access and availability of food at the household level. Given the wide range of use for peanut crop in food system and commercial enterprises, women's role in the crop is also important in the wider context of national food security. The Technical Consultation focus was to identify the gender differentiated responsibilities of women and men in the peanut sector from production to processing and marketing. From such a review examine the central role women play the peanut sector that have relevance for household food security. The countries represented in the Consultation were Bangladesh, Cambodia, China PR, India, Lao PDR, Nepal, The Philippines, Thailand and Viet Nam. The Experts at the Consultation represented diverse subject areas of expertise and institutional experiences.
II. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS.
2.1 Gender Roles in Peanut Sector and Household Food Security The technical papers and country papers presented in the consultation examined the aspects as relevant to: a) the importance of peanut crop in the household food security and b) gender roles in the peanut sector. From the view point of household food security, peanuts have a high protein content. Hence they can be an important item in the food chain to improve the nutritional status of children, women and the aged. In terms of access, peanuts are cheaper than animal product as a protein base. As a cash crop, peanuts provide opportunity to earn an income thus increasing the family's ability to purchase a better quality food resulting in improved nutrition. Since peanut production is labour intensive, it generated local labour demand and thus employment. These economic interactions generate income for the hired labor and thus in such agriculture labour households, the access to food could improve. From the cultivation perspective, the peanut crop as a nitrogen fixating crop improves the soil fertility and land of improved soil fertility can be put to use for cultivating other crops. A diversified cropping system adds to the income potential that could mean more food for the farm household. Peanuts are a good source of livelihood to augment family income with a potential to improve access to food. Additionally, peanuts are an acceptable nutritious food to maintain and improve the nutritional status of the family. Peanuts are a women's crop in a small farmer production system. In peanut production, women are involved at all stages of crop production, processing and food preparation. In the peanut production system, men do heavier jobs but claim fewer numbers of jobs. Women do the lighter jobs but serve in greater number of activities. Within peanut sector, in food preparation, at the industrial level, men hold the managerial jobs and women are the workers. At the household level, women do most of the work. Review of the documents and small group deliberations brought out a classification of activities for men and women in the peanut sector. Table 1 provides the information on the gender roles in peanut sector as analysed by the participants. The table indicates that men and women are equally involved in every aspect of production, though the frequency and levels of involvement varies by the task. At the production end both women and men's work in all aspects of production except those related to pest control through application of chemicals and maintaining machinery and equipment. But women play a key role in seed selection in peanut crop cultivation. Hence they have the primary responsibility for quality and quantity of crop produced. Women are more involved in hand shelling of peanuts but machine shelling is mostly male task domain. Women hare heavily involved in peanut processing phase. Women are more often responsible for selling peanut as snacks. In the consumption end, women have the primary responsibility for cooking and thus hold the key to the quality of the food consumed and the food security of the household members.
Gender Roles in Peanut Sector in Selected Asian Countries.
Segment Crop production Land Preparation Planting Seed Selection Fertilizer/manure application Weeding Mulching Irrigation Pest Control: Chemical Application Equipment Maintenance Harvesting Harvesting: Manual Harvesting: Mechanical Hauling the produce/Transportation Post Harvesting Separation Drying Grading/clearing/sorting Storage Shelling: Manual Shelling: Mechanical Processing : family operation Processing : Commercial By-product Utilization Marketing Selling by products: Family Selling by products: Commercial Selling : peanuts as food: Snacks as family enterprise/Vending Selling : commercial enterprise Household Production Fuel Collection Water Collection Cooking Tasks Women Men.
X X XX XX XX.
X X XX XX X X XX XX X X X X.
X X XX X X X.
XX X X X XX.
Note: X and XX show relative share of tasks involvement. X meaning less frequent involvement while XX more frequent involvement.
2.2 Current Understanding of Gender Concerns by Research and Extension Services.
The common research practice does not give any specific attention to gender issues. But in a case like dehulling, especially since females are involved, the simplification of the process through simple modifications may be suggested. In Thailand research linkages between Department of Agriculture Extension and Kesetsart University resulted in developing new Peanut Technologies. The technology is disseminated through Development of Agriculture Extension, to rural clientele. Among the clientele, 70% are women who implement the technology and the beneficiaries are 50% each of men and women. It should be noted that:.
Gender concerns are gaining importance nowadays. Larger number of women scientists, managers, researchers, extension agents are available these days. Extension services are now also reaching women. Control is still in the hands of men.
2.3 Methods to Develop Linkages between Researchers and Extensionists to Improve Women's Access to Peanut-sector Technology First and foremost extension agents should not make any sort of discrimination in transferring technology. However, as women are physically less strong, special attention should be given regarding transfer of appropriate technology to them. Second, the peanut sector technology should also be inclusive of by-product utilization. Third, it is important that policy makers should be educated and made aware about the production, utilization and nutrition value of peanuts. Fourth, awareness creation about the utilization of byproducts as an integrated approach in order to generate income may play an instrumental part to expand women's role in the peanut sector. Fifth, it is critical to identify the linkages among the various institutions and agencies involved in research, extension and agriculture production policies. 2.4 Proposed Models of Linkages to Enhance Support to Women in Peanut Sector The consultation proposed the following Models of Linkages among the actors involved in peanut sector development and promotion. Both the models place the women at the centre to support women's role in the peanut sector. Model A and B present somewhat similar linkages, while the first is process oriented and the second takes presents stakeholders' linkages. Additionally model A takes into consideration the segments in peanut sector to which women contribute.
Suggested Model for Linkages: A.
Suggested Model for Linkages: B.
The proposed models assume that women farmers will go to extension agents for better technology in the peanut sector. In order to assist women better, researchers will develop technologies and pass them to the extension personnel for dissemination at farmers' level. Further, policy makers will support both researchers and education for extension staff that may facilitate improved transfer of technologies. 2.5 Steps to Support Women's Role in Agriculture Including Peanut as a Cash Crop At the production level the following actions require attention to assist women as farmers:.
Provide more resources to women. The resources identified are credit, land, extension service, tool/equipment, knowledge/skills and access to market Support to improve women's participation in decision making Gender equality in the distribution of benefits Involve women in all stages of technology development and transfer Information dissemination should reach women Gender sensitization to those involved in research and extension through gender awareness sensitization programmes Technical and skills training for women Provision of adequate post harvest handling facilities Efficient marketing support mechanism that women could use Provision flexible credit/financing schemes.
At the consumption level, the following areas deserve attention to assist women as farmers and consumers:.
Information on nutrition value of peanut as food Methods to cook and process peanuts to preserve nutrition value Training for women in peanut processing Provision of resources for processing and finance for investment Follow-up activities in all areas of transfer of technology to women Promote peanut product, and assist to improve sale.
III. COUNTRY SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS.
The Consultation also identified country specific recommendations as relevant to gender roles in peanut sector for food security. This section presents these recommendations. 3.1 Bangladesh a. Develop gender-sensitive guidelines on better ways to address the technological needs and priorities of rural women on the role of local/indigenous knowledge systems in technology development and policy concerning the latter. b. Upgrade and broaden the information base on different aspects of women's role in agriculture. c. Undertake studies of female enrollment in agricultural education institutions in order to develop country strategies to increase female student enrollment and the number of female extension workers. d. Develop learning resource materials to train young rural women to improve peanut technology skills for technology transfer. e. Develop gender-sensitive training and educational materials for policy-makers and planners to improve household food and nutrition security among women-headed households. 3.2 Cambodia a. Recognition of importance of peanut as food and cash crop through agricultural and rural development policies to support production. b. Peanut cultivation should be included in the agenda of agricultural support services, with specific focus on institutions providing education, training and other services. c. Relevant government agencies must be geared toward an understanding of the role of peanut cultivation in food security. d. Research should be directed towards linking peanut cultivation needs to overall agricultural production. e. The socio-economic dynamics/gender roles in the peanut production system should be understood. f. An understanding of the role women play in peanut planting should be a precondition for the development of strategies intended to improve food security. g. Gender analysis should be part of policy formulation and programme planning in agricultural sector. Gender awareness and sensitization training should be made available to planners and policy makers. h. Gender sensitive-research findings should be incorporated into extension programmes to ensure that rural women's needs related to production are being addressed. i. Rural women's needs should be observed in decision-making on agricultural research including peanut enterprises. j. Collaboration between researchers, extensionist, and women's groups needs to be strengthened. k. It should be recognized that women managed production and controlled income from agricultural production including peanuts and its marketing which might have an impact on poverty reduction. l. Promotion of income opportunities for women that would lead to intensification of peanut cultivation and adoption of innovations such as improved stoves, that save both labour and natural resources.
m. It should be recognized that agro-processing and related micro-enterprises have an important role in increasing income from primary peanut activities. These activities, if organized as separate income-generation activities, rather than as an extension of homework, would enable women to pay full attention to technical requirements and to upgrading of their own skills. n. Efforts should be made to improve the process of listening and learning from female farmers and to facilitate the representation of women in agricultural policy making bodies. o. It is important to recognize that peanut cultivation is typically a family activity and thus it is necessary to learn about gender roles by region and in association with the activities of other family members. 3.3 China PR a. Provide women with enough input support such as finance and technology to help them develop family-based peanut production and processing. b. Organize and implement courses on peanut technology management and trade for women and at the same time provide assistance to solve problems faced in peanut production. c. Encourage women to set up peanut processing enterprises and strengthen their capabilities to become economically independent. 3.4 India a. Incorporate female farmers' perceptions into peanut technology development. b. Examine the workload associated with production practices. c. Develop policies to address issues on women's access to input and output markets in the peanut sector. d. Carry out need assessment of women in groundnut production by engaging women in on-farm research. e. Involve women and men in participatory breeding and varietal selection in the peanut sector. f. The following are suggested as potential areas of research where gender dimensions can be more specifically addressed: · In-situ conservation, seed networks, participatory seed collection and evaluation. · Labor-cost effective integrated pest and disease management practices/strategies. · Resource management practices - tillage, sowing operations, irrigation, soil nutrient management, weed management, and harvest and post-harvest processing. g. Strengthen user perspectives into adaptive research within the formal research sector and apply participatory techniques in adaptive research and technology transfer. h. Organize special field days for women farmers, providing them with a forum for feedback to researchers on women's needs, with access to specialized knowledge and information, not always available through male-oriented extension systems. i. In field research apply a balanced mix of gender-sensitive participatory methods, and other techniques of data collection. j. Beyond the specific research topic of gender analysis, continue to include women into consultative processes and information dissemination mechanisms.
k. Develop pragmatic approaches and realistic indicators and robust tools for monitoring the gender component of research programmes. 3.5 Lao PDR a. Target farm households for a main training program related to peanut sector, as a priority means for development of quality and productivity improvement in Lao PDR by the following measures: · collection, evaluation and dissemination of market information. · assistance in the planning and scheduling of production. · securing a market for producers. · advice on the best practical post-harvest practice. · coordination of inputs and credit delivery. · provision of transport, storage, and post-harvest facilities. b. As a follow-up to the gender research so far completed, initiate field programs for gender integration. 3.6 Nepal a. Women should be provided with additional productive assets and technical information along with assistance on improving quality and quantity of the product and access to research and appropriate technology. b. Provision of training, education and extension services to women entrepreneurs in various fields of intervention in order to enhance their production capacity and ensure product safety. c. Develop gender-sensitive training and educational materials to support improvement of household food and nutrition security. d. Develop self-sustainability and empowerment of women through income generating activities through the practice of equal rights in access to resources. e. Create awareness on the importance of the peanut crop for household food security and family nutrition. f. Encourage women's participation in decision-making processes in the adoption of peanut technology. g. Encourage utilization of peanut by-products as a resource for derivative products in an integrated way to generate income among women for female self-reliance. 3.7 Philippines a. Provide opportunities for training to improve women's technical capabilities for peanut cultivation and enterprise development. b. Integrate activities related to production, processing and consumption related to make peanut production profitable. c. Develop post-harvest technology and labor-saving equipment to lessen the burden of work on women peanut producers and processors. d. Link women peanut producers/processors with practicing scientists in institutions involved in research and development associated with agricultural science and technology to ensure that they will have direct access to research results. e. Women should have access to opportunities for capability building, training and participation in research.
Strengthen the entrepreneurial capacities of women through the provision of project development and management training. g. Improve support by ensuring equitable opportunity and access to credit (including the simplification of requirements). h. Farmers should use the government agencies' support services on production, processing and post-harvest handling of peanuts, investment counseling and market information and/or market matching. i. Farmers should receive information on policies, issues and developments in relation to the peanut industry. The information should be as relevant to legislation and executive orders passed to support, funding and other forms of assistance provided to production, cultivation, processing and marketing. j. Establish well-functioning cooperatives of women producers/processors of peanuts to overcome constraints stemming from marketing intermediaries. 3.8 Sri Lanka a. Conduct simple surveys to identify the respective roles of women and men in groundnut production (from seed selection to processing marketable value-added products) in randomly selected districts. b. Sensitize the relevant policy makers by using survey findings. Together with other agents develop a program to increase ground-nut production and introduce new groundnut products. c. Develop a follow-up mechanism at the initial stages of the program directed at policy makers. d. Study the groundnut market (market channels of collection and distribution and linkages, controls by various interests and the strengths and weaknesses of the marketing system). e. Observe the groundnut consumption patterns of a cross section of the society (e.g. income, ethnic groups, age). 3.9 Thailand Most rural women in peanut production do not know about advances in peanut technology, they commonly use only traditional practices. A programme should be developed to support rural women and to cover of them in areas of peanut production and processing such as by:.
training programmes. development of tools and equipment appropriate to women. support income-generating projects.
3.10 Viet Nam a. Transfer appropriate post-harvest technology, especially of peanut dryers to reduce mold and prevent generation of mycotoxin in general and aflatoxin in particular. This will help farmers to enhance product quality for domestic consumption and for export and reduce post-harvest losses. b. Introduce methods of using shellers to improve farmers' productivity. c. Encourage the consumption of peanuts in daily diet of the peanut farmers' families to improve their nutrition as a support to Vietnamese government's nutrition activity program 1996­2000.
3.11 Recommendations for Collaborating Organizations a. TCDC opportunities for research on gender roles in peanut sector should be identified. b. USAID Peanut CRSP-FAO RAP-KAPI-KU collaboration in this area should be strengthened. c. USAID CRSP should support additional activities in Asia with a focus on gender roles in the peanut sector both in research and technology transfer. d. Expand the CRSP network to include the participants of the consultation.
IV. COUNTRY REPORTS: SUMMARIES.
Participants presented a summary of each country statement. The presentations focussed on importance of peanut in household food security both as a food crop and as a crop with cash income potential. Furthermore these participants examined the respective roles of men and women in peanut production and processing in their countries and gender specific concerns to improve women's potential for income generation in the peanut sector. 4.1 Bangladesh Sustainable agriculture and effective rural development cannot be pursued without explicit recognition of the substantial contribution of rural women. Among oilcrops grown in Bangladesh peanuts rank third position both in area and production volume. Their potential is great as a cash crop contribute much to improve family income in rural areas. Women in Bangladesh can play a vital role in production, application of transferable technology, generating new technology and providing production inputs to increase the productivity of peanuts. In peanut production and processing, women share equal responsibilities with men in the case of marginal farmers, from land preparation to seed storage. Besides, at home scale women prepare many food items from peanuts for family needs and for sale for cash income. So women farmers can play a leading role in maintaining peanut production for food, fuel and health. Awareness of women's role in production, crop management, improvement and protection are vital issues for a developing country such as like Bangladesh. Women can participate more fully in decisionmaking rather than men alone when it comes to technology acceptance as well as in family guidance. Therefore, women should be trained well in technical, managerial and organizational aspects of improved peanut production and processing. 4.2 Cambodia The contribution of peanuts to the economy of Cambodia is very important. The GDP share of all crops including peanuts but apart from rice was 10% in 1990, 11.5% in 1992 and 10.1% in 1994. Peanut production is most directly contributing to household food security by providing direct access to food. A peanut crop can be harvested and prepared as food and fed to the family members, often on a daily basis. In the case of Cambodia, peanut production contributes to food security in two fundamental ways. First, through the provision of a greater diversity of food items those improve the quality and the nutrients available to farm families. Second, a large proportion of peanut producers sell surplus produce. Hence, peanut production is an important supplementary cash-generating activity for many poor households in Cambodia. Women play a very important role in peanut cultivation as they are the primary farmers due to loss of men in civil-war. Throughout the history of Cambodia, women always produced 60 ­ 80% of all food. Rural women in Cambodia still play a significant role in household food security, such as agricultural production, providing economic access to food for household and ensuring nutritional standards for household members. The participation of women in post-harvest phase such as preparing boiled, roasted, and fried peanut is also necessary. Women sell processed peanut products in local markets or near schools as a snack for children. Women have traditionally increased their income by selling the surplus generated by their work in the peanut cultivation. Men normally do not participate in peanut processing and marketing activities. 4.3 China PR.
In China, peanuts are one of the four traditional oil crops since from among a total of 31 provinces, 27 have land under peanut production. The importance of peanuts for household food security is shown by its role as a subsistence crop. More over due to the high quality, people's demand for peanut oil has risen year after year with increase of living levels among the people of China. At present, peanut oil accounts for about 40 percent of the total national consumption of edible vegetable oil consumption. In peanut production, women provide the main labor. After the adjustment of China's agricultural structure, many rural male laborers went to non-agricultural work. The number of women in crop farming, livestock management and horticulture is growing. They do irrigation, harvesting, drying, cleaning and sorting out damaged peanuts. On the other hand, men's role in peanut production is decreasing in recent years in China. Marketing is usually done by women, as they sell peanut in free markets after men transport peanuts there. In peanut processing, the men's role is relatively more important than that of women. Although many rural women work in township enterprises, engaged in peanut processing, they just do the simple work, and the managers are usually men. In family peanut processing, men are also the main labour force compared to women. Women help men only to produce peanut products. In peanut research, many achievements are attributed to men rather than women as due to historic reasons, Chinese women's overall educational level is low as compared to that of men, so their preparation for research are lower than those of men. But this situation has improved in recent years due to training courses held by the Chinese government for the purpose of improving the education level of women. From such courses, an average of courses about 3 million women have benefited every year. 4.4 Lao PDR The peanut crop is a complementary source of protein for rural people. At the same time it is contributing to the restoration of soil fertility by fixing nitrogen resulting in productivity gains. Lao women play an important role in peanut production as they work equally with men. Women contribute a major proportion of the labour force in peanut sector, accounting for 60 percent of all labour engaged. 4.5 Nepal Peanut falls in the category of oilseed crops as well as that of petty cash crops. The total area in groundnut cultivation covers 7,000 ha. Mostly grown in pocket plots, especially near rivers, and in sandy basins. In Nepal, both women and men are active in both cash and subsistence agriculture. However, women are responsible for much of producing food for the household and community consumption, which is important for food security. Yet, this workload is not counted in statistics. Women in Nepal play a major role in agriculture production by sowing, weeding, application of fertilizers and pesticides, harvesting, threshing, drying, sorting, grading and bagging of the products. In some parts of the country, women also take care of transportation and marketing of peanut to local market. In post harvest activities, the pulling of the plant from the soil is carried out by both men and women whereas processing such as separation of pods from plants, seed drying, sorting, dehulling, etc. are tasks mainly assigned to women. For marketing purposes, heavy jobs like roasting of whole peanut pods in traditional devices are carried out mostly by men.
Though peanuts have not been considered as an important crop for ensuring food security, they are often incorporated into the diet of children. Whole roasted pods are often eaten as a leisuretime snack. Besides being a source of oil products other uses are in the form of confectioneriesbiscuits, cakes, chocolate, ice cream, and sweets, peanut butter, chutney and as an ingredient for curries and other household preparations. 4.6 Philippines The peanut crop plays a significant role in achieving food security. In the Philippines, peanuts are used as an alternate crop wherein some quantity is sold to augment income and some is intended to home consumption. Peanuts provide nutrient for the body because of their high protein content as well as of fats and carbohydrates. Peanuts as a cash crop mean additional income for the farmer. Money earned from the crop is then used to purchase other food items and to finance other family needs. The role of men and women in the peanut sector indicates that men have a dominant role in land preparation, fertilization, and application of insecticide and pesticide. Men and women share work in the planting and harvesting. Women only do the task of weeding. In the postharvest phase, women and men are involved in drying and manual shelling. But handling and mechanical shelling are men's tasks. In peanut processing, small-scale processing is done by women for petty cash income. Largescale processing plants hire male production managers but most processing personnel are female. Men are mostly responsible for operation of heavy processing equipment while women undertake quality control and packaging. 4.7 Sri Lanka The subsistence food crop sector in Sri Lanka consists of paddy and other field crops such as pulses and horticultural crops. Seventy eight percent of the total population resides in rural areas and their livelihood depends directly on small-scale agriculture or indirectly on agriculturebased employment. A notable feature in agriculture-based production activities is the engagement of a comparatively high proportion of women workers. The data on household members in self-employment as unpaid workers supports this fact. In seasonal agriculture women represent 89.4 percent and men 41.6 percent; in other agriculture women make up for 68.5 percent and men for 26.3 percent and in non-agriculture, women represent 41.9 percent and men 20.9 percent. Unlike the plantation sector, labour enrollment figures are not available in the food crops. Women's engagement in agricultural production can be ascertained only by field enumeration. Data on the division of female and male labor in agriculture and fishing indicate that women are represented to the largest percentages in rubber and tea estates (67.8 percent), followed by paddy (17.1 percent) and other cultivation (10.1 percent). In Hambantota District family labor participation in peanut cultivation is relatively higher (76.75 percent) as compared to hired labor (31.57 percent). The peanut crop production is labour intensive and not highly mechanized. 4.8 Thailand Peanuts are leguminous crop, planted as a cash crop after harvesting other crops. The important peanut production areas are the North and the Northeast. Peanuts are important for local consumption. In Thailand people usually eat boiled and roasted peanut and other forms of.
snack food as sources of protein and energy. Women play an important role both in peanut production, sharing about 50% of production and working at 100% in preservation and processing for household use and selling to the market. Presently, the Department of Agricultural Extension in cooperation with Kasetsart University encourages a Farm Women Group in Udorn Thanee, to produce peanut products free from aflatoxin. The activity had been started in 1994 and now the group earns about 6,000 Baht @ $167) a year per family. An other impact of the project is that the members have learnt how to manage their resources. 4.9 Viet Nam In Viet Nam, the rate of women labour in agriculture is 78% in villages and communes. Women labour account for 54­60% of the total. Women take part in peanut cultivation from the stages of tillage onward to application of fertilizers and pesticide spraying, grading, storage, and selling. Women play an important role in agriculture in general and the peanut sector in particular. In Viet Nam peanut processing is divided into two levels namely household and industrial one. The household level processing mainly uses simple home-based extraction methods, utilizing basic traditional equipment, and free labour in family, especially women and children. At the industrial level Viet Nam operates several oil-processing factories. Presently, there are two foreign joint ventures. In these factories, men hold managerial jobs and women are workers. In rural areas, men do heavy jobs such as land preparation, construction of house, and managing. Peanuts are a food crop as well as an important source of oil with market potential. The peanut seed contains 22­26% protein and 45­50% oil. This is a food with high nutrition value for humans especially for those suffering from malnutrition in rural areas. Peanuts are cheaper than other crops. Besides, peanuts also help improve farm household income, since they contribute to increase in soil fertility.
V. ORGANIZATION OF THE MEETING.
5.1 Background The Technical Consultation on "Gender Roles in Peanut Sector for Household Food Security," was held at Bangkok from June 9 to 12, 1998. The hosting organizers were Thailand based institutions, namely Kasetsart Agricultural and Agro-industrial Product Improvement Institute, Kasetsart University, Bangkok. The sponsors were the FAO Women in Development Programme and United States Development Agency's Peanut Collaborative Research Support Programme. The Technical Consultation was an outcome of collaboration between three organizations that have a commitment to understand the gender roles in the peanut sector and to improve household food security by enhancing women's participation in production and consumption. 5.2 Objectives The primary purpose of the meeting was to examine the gender differentiated roles in the various aspects of Peanut sector, from production through marketing with associated impacts on household food security. Hence it was also important to review the consumption aspects of peanuts directly contributing to food security and through increase in cash income. The specific objectives were to: i. ii. iii. iv. assess the linkages among gender roles in peanut system and household security in selected countries within the sub-region, evaluate the peanut system with reference to access, stability, and accessibility to food with focus on women as producers and consumers, evaluate gender differentiated access to peanut sector on technology transfer and training, generate recommendations and support to strengthen regional network focusing on gender and peanut system to create link with the Peanut CRSP global network and FAO's sub-regional activities related to household food security.
Technical Consultation Participation and Field Visits.
Participants.
Presentations.
Discussions 5.3 Participation.
Field Visit.
The meeting was attended by 20 participants, including invited experts and resource persons (see the list of participants in Annex 1). The invited experts were representatives from Bangladesh, Cambodia, China PR, India, Lao PDR, Nepal, Philippines, Sri Lanka, Thailand and Viet Nam. Resource persons were invited from India. The Philippines and Thailand. Other participants were representatives from the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific in Bangkok, Faculty Members of the Department of Agro-Product Development, Kasetsart University, and interested observers from Kasetsart University and Department of Agriculture Extension (DOAE). The participants represented a wide range of academic expertise and diverse sector interests. The range of expertise included agricultural production, processing and consumption and sectoral interests were in research, extension and development. 5.4 Programme and Officers of the Meeting The programme was organized as plenary sessions and small group discussions. Presentations included both resource and country papers. A copy of the programme is included as Annex.
A field visit was organized to Mae-Ruay Snack Food Factory Co. Ltd. in Bangkok. The purpose was to view the production plant of a successful snack food commercial enterprise. The Session chairs were elected and reporters were assigned. The officers were: Dr. Patricia C. Jimenez, Philippines; Dr. M.F.U. Mia, Bangladesh; Mr. Chen Changbing, China PR; Ms. Shova Patrabansh, Nepal. The reporter was Ms. Sumalee Sunthornnarurangsee, Thailand. She was.
supported by Dr. Revathi Balakrishnan, FAO RAP, Bangkok, Dr. Penkwan Chompreeda, KU, Thailand and Dr. Hathairat Rimkeeree, KU. Thailand 5.3 Opening Session The opening session was held on June 9, 1998 and participants were welcomed by Dr. Hathairat Rimkeeree. Dr. Vichai Haruthaithanasan Director KAPI, presented a introductory report on the Technical Consultation. Dr. Soetatwo Hadiwigeno, Assistant Director General and Regional Representative of FAO, Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, opened the Technical Consultation and welcomed the participants on behalf of FAO/RAP. In his opening remarks he stressed the importance of women's role in the food sector and the extensive contribution women make to household food security. The women's role in the peanut sector is important, since peanut is both a cash crop and a basic home garden crop that directly enters the food system. He welcomed the institutional partnership forged in support to organize this Consultation and expressed hope for future similar institutional partnerships. Dr. Thira Sutabutra, President, KU also, welcomed the participants and stressed the importance of addressing intra-household and inter-sector gender concerns in the peanut sector. Dr. Revathi Balakrishnan, FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, presented an overview of the purpose of the Technical Consultation, particularly its relevance to FAO Plans of Actions for Women in Development and World Food Summit. Dr. Penkwan Chompreeda, Department of Agro-Product Development gave an overview on the Peanut CRSP and reviewed the KU collaborative activities with CRSP. She also read a message from Dr. Tim Williams, Associate Director, Peanut CRSP, based in the University of Georgia, USA. 5.4 Closing Session The closing session was held on June 12, 1998 in which Ms. Shova Patrabansh, Chairperson, presented a report. Dr. Suree Bhumibhamon Associate Director for Foreign Affair, on behalf of Kasetsart University closed the programme and thanked the participants. In his remarks he stressed the importance of women's role in food security. All closing remarks acknowledged an appreciation to FAO/RAP and USAID Peanut CRSP and KAPI for their support.
VI. RESOURCE PAPERS: SUMMARIES.
6.1 "Role of Men and Women in Peanut Production and Post-harvest Technology in Thailand" by Dr. Jungjun Duangpatra Kasertsart University, Thailand Thai Agronomist from KU, presented a resource paper on the "Role of Men and Women in Peanut Production and Post-harvest Technology in Thailand". Her presentation highlighted the importance of the peanut crop in small-farm production that depended on family labor. In Thailand, a distinct task specific role of men and women in local peanut production and postharvest management is not clearly evident. Such gender roles depend on the nature and practices of each farmer and the family status. The Thailand peanut sector, production is still very labour intensive, particularly mechanization is not widespread due to the small size of the farms. The Thai technology support to small farmers includes all aspects starting from advice on seed germination to post-harvest processing. Development of peanut production and post harvest technology is well established in Thailand. Both women and men have equal roles, involved in-farm level and socio-economic activities, especially those people who are targeted for a transfer of technology. Mechanisms of participation are more important than role of men and women. However, for household food security in the peanut sector, the women's role seems to be more important than that of men. 6.2 "Peanuts in Household Food Security and Extension Strategies to Enhance Women's Role in Peanut Sector" by Dr. Patricia C. Jimenez Farm Home Resources Management (FHRM) Section Agricultural Training Institute, Philippines The resource paper stated that the Philippines Department of Agriculture had identified peanuts as one of its priority crops. Stressing the importance of peanuts as food, she illustrated its nutritional value. The paper also highlighted the local beliefs and practices of using peanuts touching upon both positive and negative aspects. In the Philippines peanut are one of the important cash crops, both in vending and in local markets. Additionally, there were many nonfood industrial uses for peanut products and by-products. The income-generating opportunities arising from peanuts were many such as peanut butter making, roasted peanut and confectionery. The number of of males and females in the Philippine peanut product industries were almost equal. Peanuts are an important commercial crop for both the local and export markets. Interviews with women peanut producers in the central part of the Philippines revealed that they fully participated in all the production activities, such as in plowing, harrowing, planting, weeding, harvesting and post-harvest activities such as drying and storing. Women were also partners in non-chemical cultural practices of peanut production. They were very involved in peanut processing as an income-generating enterprise to augment family income. Some families do task-sharing in their peanut business, when father and son do the cooking while the mother and daughter do the peanut vending. The local government units and the Rural Improvement Clubs of the Philippines provide education on the nutritional importance of peanut in managing dietary deficiencies. There are also programs to include peanut products in children's feeding program. The extension needs of the women in the peanut sector were identified.
6.3 "Gender Differences in Groundnut Production Technology Evaluation and Choice: ICRISAT Experience and Relevance for Future Technology Development" by Dr. M.C.S. Bantilan Ms. Padmaja R. Kamtam Socio-economics and Policy Programme International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics Patancheru, India A resource paper prepared by Scientists from the International Crops Research Institute for Semi-Arid Tropics was presented by Dr. Padmaja R. Kamtam. The paper focussed was on "Gender Differences in Groundnut Production Technology Evaluation and Choice : ICRISAT Experience and its Relevance for Future Technology Development". The paper emphasized the Commitment of ICRISAT to equity in its pursuit of poverty alleviation and the importance of attention to the different ways men and women benefit from research. ICRISAT assumes that gender -role differentiation provides an important basis for targeting technologies that would improve food security and household welfare and hence concerns itself with the impact of change in agricultural technology on the welfare of women. Currently ICRISAT is evaluating gender differences in preferences for alternative variety traits, assessing the welfare impacts of groundnut technologies, and farm investment priorities. It is examining gender-related indicators for targeting nutrition interventions. The paper included short case studies and reviewed participatory approaches in gender analysis of groundnut production technology (GPT). The paper provided an overview of gender analysis and GPT study, which examined the role of women in groundnut production in semi-arid India. ICRISAT has also done pioneering work on assessing gender differences in groundnut technology evaluation. An important finding of this study is that gender-related differential effects stem from culturally defined labor specialization among men and women. In other words, traditional tasks especially those guided by the principal that "men do heavier jobs and women do lighter jobs", have varying consequences on decision-making power on labour allocation, household resource use and product utilization. New activity patterns suggest that technology intervention led to gender-specific tasks which are consistent with conventional division of labor. User perspectives of technology were closely related to the roles and responsibilities and power relationships between men and women. Women considered occupational hazards as well as workability options and not just the financial outcome as did the male farmers. The study suggested that gender specific perceptions will yield valuable information about the usefulness of a technology as well as the constraints that hinder adoption. Gender-differentiated impacts may be generated by desegregating overall gains among different members of households such as men and women and perhaps children. Important qualitative data add to the dimensions in which men and women assess benefits and how decision-making power is shared among household members. These are useful indicators of real gains enjoyed by different household members. Complementing gender-differentiated quantitative information with qualitative observations provide a holistic basis for capturing the effects of technology intervention in terms of balance of efficiency and equity consequences. Participatory research and gender analyses are crucial for ensuring that women's special needs are taken into account. 6.4 "Technology Transfer: Women Roles in Development of Peanut Processing, Consumption and Marketing in Thailand" by Dr. Vichai Harutahithansan KAPI, Kasetsart University, Thailand.
In two provinces of Thailand technology transfer of peanut processing, along with education on business and marketing, was affected to farm housewives in villages where they produced peanut as a cash crop. A first round of research was conducted in 1991/92 with farmers at Huay-Bong-Nua Village, Prao District, Chiang Mai Province, in the northern Thailand. A pilot group of seven housewives was trained in techniques of processing and quality control of peanut products with emphasis on processing oil-roasted and ground-roasted peanuts. Those two peanut products were planned to be marketed in downtown Chiang Mai and Prao District markets. Consumer acceptability of both products was high as their qualities were better than those of similar products in the markets. With this group of housewives, a follow-up was done in 1993/94 that revealed that this group had not continued to process peanut products. The reason for such lapse were that there was not enough raw peanuts for their use, due to very dry seasons during those years. A second round of research was conducted in 1995/96 with farmers in Nong-No Village, Kud-Jub District, Udorn Thanee Province, in north-eastern Thailand. A pilot group of 20 housewives was trained in the techniques of sand roasted whole pod, oil roasted and ground roasted peanut. The products were tested in the markets of downtown Udorn-Thanee and Bangkok. The results revealed that the housewives were well trained, understood the techniques of processing and quality control, and also learned how to sell their products in the markets and how to manage their work. The results also showed that improvement in the socio-economic status of the groups appeared promising, especially for families in Kud-Jub District. They earned more income from these activities, now a part of routine work of the group beside their main agricultural work. 6.5 "USAID Peanut Collaborative Research Support Programme and Linkages" by Dr. Penkwan Chompreeda, Kasertsat University, Thailand Dr. Tim William. Peanut CRSP, University of Georgia, USA The USAID Peanut CRSP was started in 1982. It is funded through Title XII - Famine Prevention and Freedom from Hunger and authorized under the International Development and Food Assistance Act of 1975. It is implemented by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) through to the University of Georgia. Additional U.S. University participants are Alabama A and M, Auburn, Connecticut, Florida, Purdue, North Carolina A and T, North Carolina State, Texas A and M, and Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State (Virginia Tech). Participating host country institutions represent Benin, Burkina Faso, Ghana, Mali, Niger and Senegal in West Africa; Malawi in South Africa; Philippines and Thailand in Southeast Asia; Bolivia and Peru in South America; Haiti and Jamaica in the Caribbean; and Bulgaria in Eastern Europe. Since the Peanut CRSP is funded through USAID, the primary goal is to improve the well-being of people in developing countries through:.
adequate quantities and qualities of food to become consistently available to the target population adequate access to food by the poor households (through self-production and/or purchasing power) improved agricultural practices that enhance conservation of natural resources.
Peanuts are particularly important to the realization of these goals because they are most valuable crop in many areas of the developing world. Peanuts provide a much needed source of purchasing power to small-scale farmers, many of whom are women. Peanuts are nutritious food and versatile in use and thus promotes health and family welfare and value-added.
industries in developing countries. As local markets exist for peanuts, they provide an essential opportunity for small-scale subsistence farmers to purchase inputs, such as fertilizers, needed to make farming sustainable. Peanuts are very important in a number of ways to food security at the household level. Firstly, the peanut is a high energy, high protein food that is highly effective in satisfying hunger, thus a little peanut goes a long way in feeding a family. Secondly, peanut is a crop that is easily processed and transformed into higher value products that are easily marketed. As such it provides women with a means of generating income to allow purchases of other foods, medicines and education for the family members. Thirdly, as a legume in the cropping system the peanut is one of the most effective of nitrogen fixers which allows it to sustain general cereal grain production at higher levels, directly and indirectly increasing household food security. High yields of cereals result in lower market prices and increases the availability of food per unit of income. The global program of the Peanut CRSP addresses the following five priority constraints in peanut sector: Aflatoxin Contamination: The Expected outcome is improved health, trade, and peanut value through decrease or elimination of aflatoxin contamination. This constraint is addressed through genetic prevention, pre-harvest management schemes, and detoxification of contaminated peanuts or products. Production Efficiency: The expected outcome is increased farm prosperity through improved production efficiency and sustainability. The approaches adopted are genetic improvement, better management practices, and model-guided management, research, and policy recommendations. Socioeconomic Forces: The expected outcome is rapid development through the adoption of technologies resulting from more sociologically appropriate research, policy interventions, and technology transfer. The approaches adopted are determination of gender and policy effects on the peanut system and of the impact of adopted technologies. Post harvest and Marketing Technologies: The expected outcome is improved health, increased prosperity, and trade through marketing, processing and consumption of peanuts as safer, more nutritious value-added products. The approaches adopted are better understanding of nutritional benefits of peanuts, expanded availability of peanut products matching local preferences, and increased income and employment from production of value-added products. Training, Information, and Programme Support: The expected outcome is the development and adoption of profitable technologies through increased training, technology diffusion and scientific exchange. The approaches adopted are consolidation and distribution of information, trained scientists, and development of collaborative linkages, and scientist exchange programs. Historically the Peanut CRSP has supported the development of activities that exploit these contributions of the crop to household food security, and a hope is that Peanut CRSP programme will be able to cooperate with Asian and global partners into the future in exploiting the knowledge that exists. The ongoing mission is to develop the peanut sector and transfer technologies as a way of helping improve the living standards of nations, communities, families and individuals. In addition to this activity in South East Asia there are other projects focused on women in development.
FAO RAP - USAID Peanut CRSP - KU Technical Consultation on "Gender Roles in Peanut Sector for Household Food Security" June 9­12, 1998, Bangkok, Thailand Dr. MD. Farid Uddin Mia Principal Scientific Officer, Oilseed Research Center Bangladesh Agricultural Research Institute (BARI) Joydebpur, Bangladesh FAX: 882 841678 TEL: 882 - 841678 Ms. Mahfuza Khatun Senior Instructor, Agricultural Training Institute Sher - e - Bangla Nagar, Dhaka, Bangladesh FAX: 882 9111502 Mr. Khann Samban Department of Agronomy, Ministry of Agriculture # 10 Monireth Street, Phnom Penth, Cambodia.. FAX: (855) 23 720704, (855) 23 214157 TEL: (855) 017 813619 Mr. Chann Sinath Department of Agronomy, Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fishery, P.O. Box : 958, Phnom Penh The Kingdom of Cambodia FAX: (855) 23 720704, (855) 23 214157 TEL: (855) 015 831467 Ms. Hu Yaguang Ministry of Agriculture No. 11, Nong Zhan Guan Nanli Beijing, China TEL & FAX: 8610-64-92815 Mr. Chen Changbing National Agro-Technical Extension and Service Center Ministry of Agriculture, P.R., China 11 Nongzhanguan Nanil Beijing, 100026, China FAX: 8610-65025146.
Tel: 8610-64194508 Mrs. Intranongsith Koumphone National of Agricultural Research Center Department of Agriculture and Extension, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, P.O. Box 811, Vientiane, Laos FAX: (856-21) 812090 TEL: (856-21) 812024 Mrs. Boulay Phongphichit National of Agricultural Research Center Department of Agriculture and Extension Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry P.O. Box 811, Vientiane, Laos. FAX: (856-21) 812090 TEL: (85621) 812024 Miss. Nguyen Thi Huong Tra Post Harvest Technology Institute Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development 4 - Ngo Quyen Street - Hanoi - Viet Nam FAX: 84-4-8258440 TEL 84-4-826-5679 Miss. Sumalee Soontornnarurangsi Department of Agricultural Extension 2143/1 Phaholyothin Rd. Chatuchak, Bangkok 10900, Thailand TEL: (662) 940 - 6096 Mrs. Sangwan Ratanatrakul Ms. Padmaja Kamtam Northeastern Regional Agricultural Extension Office Thapra, Khon Kaen 40000, Thailand ICRISAT, Patancheru PO 502324, Andhra Pradesh, India FAX: 91 40 241-239 Dr. Shova Patrabansh Centre for Energy and Environment Tripureswore, Kathmandu, Nepal FAX: 977-1-331964 TEL: 330348, 331303 Dr. Revathi Balakrishnan (FAO WID Officer) FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific Maliwan Mansion.
39 Phra Atit Road. Bangkok 10200, Thailand Tel: (662) 281 - 7844 Ext. 148 Fax: (662) 280 - 0445 Email: Revathi.Balakrishnan@fao.org Assoc. Prof. Vichai Haruthaithanasan (Director KAPI) Kasetsart Agricultural and Agro-Industrial Product Improvement Kasetsart University, Chatuchak, Bangkok 10900 Thailand Tel & Fax (662) 942-8662 Email: fagivch@nontri.ku.ac.th Assoc. Prof. Dr. Penkwan Department of Product Development Chompreeda Faculty of Agro-Industry, Kasetsart University (Peanut CRSP Chatuchak, Bangkok 10900, Thailand. Representative) Tel & Fax (662) 561-3456 Email: fagipke@nontri.ku.ac.th Assoc. Prof. Dr. JuangJun Department of Agronomy, Faculty of Agriculture Daungpattra Kasetsart University, Chatuchak, Bangkok 10900, Thailand. Tel & Fax (662) 942 - 8640 Ext. 132 Assoc. Prof. Sombat Khothaveewattana Department of Product Development Faculty of Agro-Industry, Kasetsart University Chatuchak, Bangkok 10900, Thailand Tel & Fax (662) 561-3456 Email : fagisbbk@nontri.ku.ac.th Dr. Hathairat Rimkeeree Department of Product Development Faculty of Agro-Industry, Kasetsart University Chatuchak, Bangkok 10900, Thailand Tel & Fax (662) 561-3456 Email: fagihru@nontri.ku.ac.th.
FAO RAP - USAID Peanut CRSP - KU Technical Consultation on "Gender Roles in Peanut Sector for Household Food Security" June 9­12, 1998 Bangkok, Thailand Tuesday, June 9, 1998 08.30 09.00 09.15 Registration Report: Director of KAPI Associate Professor. Vichai Haruthaithanasan Opening remarks: Assistant Director General Regional Representative FAO RAP: Mr. Soetatwo Hadiwigeno 09.30 09.40 Welcome address: President of Kasetsart University Professor Thira Sutabutra Technical Consultation objectives: FAO WID Programme Representative: Dr. Revathi Balakrishnan Peanut CRSP Representative: Assoc. Prof. Penkwan Chompreeda 10.00 10.30 Participants Self Introduction Break Session I Chair person: Dr. P. Jemenez 11.00 Resource Paper 1 "Roles of Men and Women in Peanut Production and Post-harvest Technology in Thailand" Associate Professor Jungjun Doungpatra 11.20 11.40 12.00 ­ 13.00 Country Background Paper : Bangladesh Dr. M.F.U. Mia / Mrs. Mahfuza Khatun Discussion Lunch Session II 13.00 Resource Paper 2 "Peanuts in Household Food Security and Extension Strategies to Enhance Women's Role in Peanut Sector" Dr. P. Jemenez 13.30 Country Background Paper: Cambodia.
Mr. Chann Sinath/ Mr. Khann Samban 13.50 Country Background Paper: China Mr. Chen Changbing / Ms. Hu Yaguang 14.20 14.40 Discussion Break Session III 15.00 Country Background Paper: Lao PDR Mrs. K. Intranongsith / B. Phongphichit 15.20 Country Background Paper: Nepal Dr. Shova Patrabansh Discussion/Synthesis Wednesday, June 10, 1998 Session IV Chair person: Dr. M.F.U. Mia 09.00 Resource Paper 3 "Gender Differences in Groundnut Production Technology Evaluation and Choice: ICRISAT Experience and Relevance for Future Technology Development" Dr. Padmaja Kamtan 09.30 Country Background Paper: Philippines Mrs. O. Del Rosario (Paper Received) 09.50 Country Background Paper: Sri Lanka Ms. R. Rupasingha Samuel (Paper Received) 10.10 10.30 Discussion Break Session V 11.00 Resource Paper 4 "Technology Transfer: Women roles in Development of Peanut Processing, Consumption and Marketing" Associate Professor Vichai Haruthaithanasan.
Country Background Paper: Thailand Ms. Sumalee Sunthornnarurangsee / Ms. Sungwal Ratunatakul Country Background Paper: Viet Nam Ms. Nguyen Thi Huong Tra Discussion Lunch Session VI.
Small Groups Session Break Small Groups Session (Continue) Presentation by Small Group Leaders.
Thursday, June 11, 1998 Session VII Chair person: Mr. Chen Changbing 09.00 10.00 10.30 10.50 11.30 ­ 12.30 12.30 ­ 17.00 Formulation of Recommendation Preparation of Report Break Preparation of Report (continue) Lunch Technical Tour-Peanut Industry.
Friday, June 12, 1998 Session VIII Chair person: Dr. Shova Patrabansh 09.00 10.00 10.20 11.30 12:00 Presentation of Report Break Adoption of Report Closing Session Lunch.
