The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. The word "countries" appearing in the text refers to countries, territories and areas without distinction. The designations "developed" and "developing" countries are intended for statistical convenience and do not necessarily express a judgement about the stage reached by a particular country or area in the development process. The opinions expressed in the articles by contributing authors are not necessarily those of FAO.
The EC-FAO Partnership Programme on Information and Analysis for Sustainable Forest Management: Linking National and International Efforts in South Asia and Southeast Asia is designed to enhance country capacities to collect and analyze relevant data, to disseminate up-todate information on forestry and to make this information more readily available for strategic decision-making. Thirteen countries in South and Southeast Asia (Bangladesh, Bhutan, Cambodia, India, Indonesia, Lao P.D.R., Malaysia, Nepal, Pakistan, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, Thailand and Viet Nam) participate in the Programme. Operating under the guidance of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission (APFC) Working Group on Statistics and Information, the initiative is implemented by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) in close partnership with experts from participating countries. It draws on experience gained from similar EC-FAO efforts in Africa, and the Caribbean and Latin America and is funded by the European Commission.
Cover design: Tan Lay Cheng.
For copies write to: Patrick B. Durst Senior Forestry Officer FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific 39 Phra Atit Road Bangkok 10200 Thailand Printed and published in Bangkok, Thailand.
© FAO 2003 ISBN 974-7946-34-3.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL DEVELOPMENT.
Information and Analysis for Sustainable Forest Management: Linking National and International Efforts in South and Southeast Asia.
EC-FAO PARTNERSHIP PROGRAMME (2000­2002) Tropical Forestry Budget Line B7-6201/1B/98/0531 PROJECT GCP/RAS/173/EC.
EVALUATION OF FOREST AND NATURAL RESOURCES DATA AND INFORMATION FLOW IN THE PHILIPPINES.
Nathaniel C. Bantayan1 and Richievel V. Arche2.
Project Leader and Associate Professor of Forest Management. Institute of Renewable Natural Resources, College of Forestry and Natural Resources, University of the Philippines Los Baños 2 Research Assistant, Environmental Remote Sensing and Geo-Information Laboratory, Institute of Renewable Natural Resources, College of Forestry and Natural Resources, University of the Philippines Los Baños.
Information and Analysis for Sustainable Forest Management: Linking National and International Efforts in South and Southeast Asia EC-FAO PARTNERSHIP PROGRAMME (2000­2002) Tropical Forestry Budget Line B7-6201/1B/98/0531 PROJECT GCP/RAS/173/EC.
Introduction There has always been a keen interest in policy formulation and how forest and natural resources policies respond to the needs of the sector in terms of assessment and monitoring. Since 1987, more than 70 policies (departmental administrative orders, memorandum circulars, special orders) have been issued in the forestry sector alone. This does not include national legislation relating to the Clean Air Act, Indigenous People's Rights Act, National Integrated Protected Areas Act, Mining Act and others. Legislation on sustainable forest management and a national land-use policy are under preparation. The Forestry Code of the Philippines (Presidential Decree 705) will be amended. The master plan for the Philippine environment and natural resources is being reviewed and some sections are being revised. A policy is only as good as the information on which it is based. Good policies are able to respond to the needs of the sector and are able to adjust accordingly. That is why the aggregation of data from the field offices to the policy-making office is so vital in the formulation of responsive policies. There must be a conscious, deliberate and institutionalized link between data collection, the generation of information and policy formulation. This study evaluated such a link including the flow of forest and natural resources data and information; the report is organized according to the objectives listed below. The subsequent sections contain a discussion of the objectives and the extent to which these were addressed within the constraints and limitations of the study. The primary objective of the study was to prescribe the most cost-efficient and cost-effective methodology for data transfer and information flow. The specific objectives were to: Assess the type, quality and amount of data and information being collected at the Community Environment and Natural Resource Office (CENRO) level of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR); Evaluate the efficiency and effectiveness of data transfer and information flow at environment and natural resources offices (ENROs) from the community ENROs to the provincial ENROs to the regional ENROs and ultimately to the DENR central office; Analyze the gaps in data transfer and information flow; Evaluate the data gathered in terms of attribute data and spatial information as an indication of GIS-readiness; Develop a strategy and methodologies for filling data gaps and for improving the flow of information; and Provide an indicative analysis on the quality of policy formulation as determined by the type, quality and amount of data and information. The study evaluated the data and information flow within the operational mechanism of the DENR. It has two major outputs: methodology for data transfer and information flow for forest and natural resources; and analysis of attribute data and spatial information as indicators of readiness for GIS implementation. Rationale The Government of the Philippines has formulated a comprehensive collection of policies on forestry, environment and natural resources. It is quick to respond to policy needs and as a result, policies embracing and addressing specific issues and problems are drafted. However, this swift response to needs is not necessarily translated into solutions at the ground level and there is a considerable number of overlapping policies. In addition, policies are not implemented based on the performance of the country's forest management sector as required. Over four centuries, the Philippine forestry situation has deteriorated to a situation where the country has become a net importer of timber. From an estimated 27.5 million ha of forest in 1575 (Revilla et al. 2000), the total forest cover (including plantations) has declined to about 6.5 million ha (FAO 2001). Per.
capita forest cover in the Philippines is estimated at 0.072 ha. This is 23 times lower than the average for the Asia-Pacific region (Revilla et al. 2000). The Philippine constitution mandates that forestlands and national parks, including their boundaries shall be marked clearly on the ground. Such forestlands (including national parks) shall be conserved and may not be increased nor diminished, except by law. On this basis, land classification at the national level divides the country into two categories: forestlands and alienable and disposable lands (A&D lands). The classification is based primarily on slope, which assumes that agricultural productivity diminishes in steeper areas. Here, agricultural productivity is defined in terms of the susceptibility of the land to erosion and soil degradation. Areas with slopes of 18 percent or more are not deemed suitable for long-term agricultural production and are classified as forestlands. Areas with slopes less than 18 percent are classified as A&D lands. Of the 30 million ha that comprise the total land area of the country, it is estimated that 53 percent (or 15.88 million ha) belongs to forestlands while the remainder are A&D lands. The irony is that while the policy on land classification has been in place for the past 80 years, the boundaries that separate the forestlands from the A&D lands are not marked on the ground. As a result, human intrusion has proliferated over the years to the extent that citizens have privatized areas that should remain as forestlands. Agriculture and livestock raising occur on certain parts of forestlands. All too often, these are critical watersheds ­ areas so degraded that forest renewal is a priority and must be the only activity. Only recently has the government undertaken a massive effort to delineate and demarcate the boundaries on the ground. According to the 2000 census, the estimated population was 76.5 million. About 26 percent is living in and dependent on the uplands for their livelihoods. Their contribution to forest degradation along with rampant illegal logging and ineffective forest renewal has contributed to the destruction of much of the country's forests. Primary or old growth forest is estimated at only 800 000 ha (see Table 1).
Breakdown of forest cover in the Philippines (after Revilla et al. 2000). Land cover in forestlands Dipterocarp forest (old growth) Dipterocarp forest (residual) Pine forest Submarginal forest Mossy forest Mangrove forest Brushlands Open/other uses TOTAL Area (million ha) 0.80 2.73 0.23 0.48 1.04 0.11 2.23 8.26 15.88.
Methodology Data flow diagram approach This study made use of the data flow diagram (DFD) approach following the three most important components of data and information management for the environment and natural resources (ENR) ­ processes, files and flow (see Figure 1). Processes show what systems do. Each process has one or more data inputs and produces one or more outputs. Each process has a unique name and number (Hawryszkiewycz 1994). On the other hand, a file is a repository and contains data that are retained in the system. It refers to a data store and each file contains important data that are transported accordingly between processes and external entities. "Flows" model the passage of data in the system between processes, between a data store and a process, from a source to a sink, or from a process to a sink.
Processes reside within the system boundaries. Those that are outside its boundaries, but are important to the functioning of the system, are called external entities. These are usually beyond the control of the system but are referred to as either sources or sinks. Sources are external entities that supply data to the system while sinks are those that use the data. Processes and files are visualized using a DFD. A DFD shows how data flow within a system. DFDs may be established at different levels of an organization; depending on the requirements of the task, more details can be added to the diagram. For example, a contextual DFD may appear as shown in Figure.
As mentioned earlier, DFDs may be drawn in more detail depending on the requirements of the analysis. Figure 2 shows that an Integrated Forest Management Agreement (IFMA) system may be sub-divided further into its component sub-systems. These components may refer to the following processes: species-site identification, ground validation, IFMA preparation and proposal, monitoring and evaluation. The input and output files are shown by the corresponding arrows which also indicate the flow of data.
Accomplishment_report LGU Application_ for_IFMA Site_description EIS Specific_ site Sub-site_ description Ground_ validation Validation_site_ descr iption IFM A proponent Feedba ck Appr oved I FM Draft_I FMA ECC.
endor sement.
Monitor ing_ and_ eva luation.
IFMA_ provision.
IFMA_ pr eparation _and_approval.
Figure.
Contextualized DFD for a DENR Forest Management System (after FMB 1998).
Pri vate technical orga nizations.
Request_for_ techni cal_ assist ance.
Grant/loa n/ donation.
Fina ncial establishments.
Request_ for_ financial_ assista nce.
Technical_ assistance.
DENR forest managem ent system.
LGU_la nduse_plans.
For estr y_policies.
Local government units.
Figure.
DFD for an IFMA system (after FMB 1998).
Primary data gathering through field visits A combination of primary and secondary data was used in the analysis. Primary data were gathered using an interview schedule that had the following components (see Appendix 1 ­ Survey Guide Questionnaire): duties and responsibilities within the organization vision/mission/objectives of the organization key result areas or priority areas of the office data collected and survey instruments used types of report that the central office requires including · originator of the report · when and where the reports are submitted · frequency of report preparation/submission · manner in which reports are submitted database maintenance problems encountered in terms of data and information management access of other agencies/offices/institutions to the data and information briefings/refresher and training courses conducted for the technical employees of the office Interviews were conducted with officials concerned at the different levels of the organization. Those interviewed at the study sites had a wide range of responsibilities and positions ­ especially the community, provincial and regional ENR officers; they included planning officers and staff from different units such as the timber management unit, the forest protection unit, the reforestation unit, community-based forest management (CBFM), and the protected areas and wildlife service (PAWS) unit. Planning officers at the different offices, including the central office, were also interviewed. A list of those interviewed and their assignments and positions is given in Appendix.
Primary data gathering via a workshop Initial results from field visits and interviews were analyzed at a three-day workshop attended by representatives from six regions and the central office (see Appendix 2). The number of workshop participants was restricted to maximize discussions and interaction. The participants represented various levels of the decision-making hierarchy ­ regional, provincial and community ENR officers, and planning officers, including the director of the Forest Management Bureau (FMB). The workshop was designed to elicit current practices in terms of data gathering and reporting procedures. The workshop was divided into three modules representing processes, files and flow. For each module, guiding questions were distributed and a plenary session was conducted for presentations. Some of the guiding issues or questions that were tackled during the workshop are listed below. Module 1: Processes This referred to the DENR policy and implementing rules and regulations on forest and natural resources. Guiding questions included: What are the responsibilities; accountabilities of each responsible office/unit? What, if any, are the conflicts in terms of responsibilities? Do assignments/reassignments of personnel occur? What is the reporting procedure? Is there an aggregation and disaggregation of data and information from the field offices to the higher levels of management and vice versa?.
Module 2: Files This referred to data and information being surveyed/collected/monitored. Some of the guiding questions included: What are the key result areas or priority activities in your area of jurisdiction? Is there a minimum dataset on ENR that must be generated? What is the format of the reports? Is there a central repository of files in the region, province or community ENR office? Other issues: survey instruments, maps, accuracy/precision standards, data maintenance. Module 3: Flow This referred to the direction of files along the processes concerned. Some guiding questions were: What are the lines of communication in terms of reporting? What is the reporting procedure? What is the frequency of reporting? What is the general route of reports? The DENR divides the country administratively into 16 regions consistent with the political subdivisions of the country. Each region is further sub-divided into districts, provinces, municipalities, barangays (villages) and sitios (hamlets). Two regions namely Cagayan Valley and Caraga were chosen as sample sites. The primary considerations in the choice of the study sites were relative abundance of forest cover, socio-economic setting and accessibility. The first study site is located in the northern part of the country while the second is in the south. Both sites are accessible by land and air. Table 2 shows the forest cover for all regions of the country based on estimates from SPOT imageries by the National Mapping and Resources Information Authority (NAMRIA). On a regional basis, Caraga Region ranks first in terms of forest cover followed by Cagayan Valley.
Comparative analysis of forest cover by region Region Caraga Cagayan Valley 1 CAR Southern Tagalog Southern Mindanao Eastern Visayas Northern Mindanao Central Mindanao W estern Mindanao 2 ARMM Central Luzon Bicol Region W estern Visayas Ilocos Region 3 NCR Central Visayas.
Land area (ha) 1 850 177 2 621 887 1 801 885 4 716 317 2 626 508 2 084 169 1 440 875 1 395 102 1 565 659 1 110 356 1 802 234 1 468 362 1 988 225 1 276 504 58 650 1 419 060.
Forest cover (ha) 936 152 1 036 437 607 286 1 304 469 703 515 519 554 335 752 307 983 289 532 210 680 291 626 106 164 144 232 68 804 2 101 34 467.
Forest cover (%) 50.60 39.53 33.70 27.66 26.79 24.93 23.30 22.08 18.49 18.97 16.18 7.23 7.25 5.39 3.58 2.43.
Cordillera Administrative Region Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao 3 National Capital Region.
The determination of candidate study sites (or data collection points) was also based on socioeconomic parameters such as household size and number, growth rate and population density (Table 3).
Total population, number of households, average household size, population growth rate and population density by region as of 1 May 2000.
Region/province NCR CAR Cagayan Valley Caraga Eastern Visayas Central Mindanao Western Mindanao Northern Mindanao ARMM Southern Tagalog Southern Mindanao Bicol Western Visayas Ilocos Central Visayas Central Luzon Filipinos in Philippine embassies Consulates and missions abroad.
Total Number of population1 households 9 932 560 1 365 220 2 813 159 2 095 367 3 610 355 2 598 210 3 091 208 2 747 585 2 412 159 11 793 655 5 189 335 4 674 855 6 208 733 4 200 478 5 701 064 8 030 945 2 851 2 132 989 263 816 554 004 393 362 715 025 501 915 595 728 542 075 393 269 2 410 972 1 066 199 891 541 1 211 647 831 549 1 129 317 1 632 047.
Average household siz e 4.62 5.15 5.07 5.32 5.04 5.16 5.18 5.06 6.13 4.88 4.86 5.24 5.12 5.05 5.03 4.91.
Annual growth rate 1990­1995 1995­2000 1990­2000 3.3 1.06 2.25 1.71 1.51 1.82 1.84 2.83 2.42 2.32 1.8 3.53 2.64 1.91 1.3 1.3 1.65 2.12 1.82 2.25 1.63 1.51 2.08 2.18 2.19 3.86 3.72 2.6 1.68 1.56 2.15 2.79 3.2 1.76 1.85 1.73 1.68 2.48 2.31 2.26 2.76 3.62 2.62 1.8 1.42 1.69 2.18 2.62.
Population densit y 15 617 95 105 111 173 179 193 196 211 251 263 265 307 327 381 441.
In 2000, the population of disputed areas was reported in the next higher geographic level. For example, the population of Barangay A claimed by both Municipality A and Municipality B will be reflected in the province. Source: National Statistics Office, Philippines (2000).
The study sites are found in the least dense regions of the country with populations exceeding 2.8 million and 2 million in Cagayan Valley and Caraga, respectively. The highest reported population is in Southern Tagalog and the lowest is in the Cordilleras. The average population growth rate from 1990 to 2000 has been steady at 1.73 percent for Caraga and 1.87 percent for Cagayan Valley. Southern Tagalog is the fastest growing region with an average growth rate of 3.62 percent for the same period. In terms of regional accounts, the combined agriculture, fishery and forestry sectors sustained growth of 3.7 percent in 2001 with the highest amounting to Php35.3 million in Southern Tagalog and the lowest in the Cordillera Administrative Region at Php3.5 million. Cagayan Valley and Caraga posted Php11.7 million and Php5.1 million, respectively. The figures for the study sites were slightly higher than the previous year (2000). The gross regional domestic product for 2001 was 2.7 percent and 1.5 percent for Cagayan Valley and Caraga, respectively. Interestingly, the highest was registered in Northern Mindanao at 5 percent while the lowest was posted in Western Mindanao at 0.6 percent. Forest cover was the primary consideration in choosing the study sites. The extent of forested area indicates activities related to forestry. Caraga and Cagayan Valley represent the last forest bastions in the Philippines including Southern Tagalog. More recently, these regions have been identified as biodiversity hotspots, both locally and internationally. They are considered vital corridors for biodiversity conservation. The study sites belong to the least densely populated regions of the country. With 26 percent of the population living in the uplands, social forestry in these regions fares better relative to other regions.
Results and discussion Each ENR office was studied in terms of activities on data gathering, organizing, input and maintenance. The type, quality and amount (including location and extent) of data collected were noted through interviews with personnel. Data transfer and information flow from the CENRO was evaluated as these are transmitted to the PENRO; from PENRO to the regional office; from the regional office to the central office and vice versa. Evaluating the type, quality and amount of data and information collected Files refer to data and information that are gathered and kept at the respective unit/office. Once these files are sent out in compliance with a directive or following a procedure, they become reports. In other words, reports are received and sent out and when they are archived they become files. The data and information collected at the CENRO level are shown in Table 4.
Data and information at the CENRO level Data and information Inventory of private tree plantations Survey of plantation status (including residual inventory) Private geodetic survey Forestland grazing lease agreement (FLGLA) data Price monitoring List of licensees/permittees List of reforestation projects List of people's organization/ cooperative partnerships Reports Report on issuances of forestry tenurial instruments (e.g. CBFM) Confiscation/disposition report Log production and disposition Lumber production/disposition Land report Reforestation report Forest production report Biodiversity monitoring system report ENR profile Sectoral monthly accomplishment report (quarterly, semi-annual, annual) Annual report.
Data collected by CENROs differ from those of PENROs, which collate the data gathered by the CENROs. Its main function is supervisory and it compiles the reports/data/information from the different CENROs under it. Local information is available only at the CENRO level. The central office outlines the programs and activities of the CENROs. For instance, if the CENRO plans to implement activities on maintenance (e.g. timber stand improvement) but the central office intends to carry out roadside planting, adjustments at the CENRO level need to be made specifically in relation to human resources and logistics. That is, CENROs have to adjust their budget because additional funds for roadside planting are not included in their annual budget. In the study, CENROs reported problems in data consolidation. Sometimes data are inadvertently excluded during consolidation. Maps are also used as references. They are drawn by hand and to date no training on computerized mapmaking (i.e. CAD or GIS) has been conducted. Private tree plantation owners and timber license agreement holders are required to submit operational, logging and development maps. Maps are reproduced by blue printing or by requesting hard copies from an independent or non-government office. PENROs and CENROs may request hard copies of maps from the regional office. Maps are also used as supporting documents for complaints on illegal activities to be filed in court. The types of data collected and stored at the PENRO are listed in Table 5.
Data and information at the PENRO level Data and information Data on land use (including maps) CBFM-ISF data Area coverage data, listings and maps on the various projects/activities/ programs Operational plans Progress maps Reports PENRO profile Consolidated monthly accomplishment report Statistical report (quarterly) Price monitoring reports (monthly) Confiscation and disposition report (monthly) Statistical profile, every year at the end of June.
For data maintenance, some DENR field offices reconstitute/reconstruct maps on tracing paper that bear the recording officer's signature. They also catalogue reports/records in filing cabinets and computers, if available. A list of data and information held at the Regional Environment and Natural Resources Office (RENRO) is provided in Table 6.
Data and information at the RENRO level Data and information Data and information on forest management activities such as location, source of lumber, volume, sales, lumber dealer, forest charges, area of operations, timber management plan, private tree plantation, minor forest products, special uses (e.g. salt works, bathing establishments, road right of way, grazing) Data and information on forest protection activities such as confiscated logs, fire, pests and diseases, cases filed in court, deployment of forest guards Data and information on CBFM such as CBFM areas, people's organizations, resource inventory W atershed management Land evaluation party Reports Quarterly/annual accomplishment reports Production reports for SIFMA/IFMA Monthly production and disposition report Annual concession report Monthly production and disposition report Site assessment report with maps for foreignassisted projects Forest protection report.
PENRO sectoral and annual reports W atershed profiles Survey reports Regular reports such as monthly accomplishments, quarterly, semi-annual, annual reports Statistical reports such as ENR statistical profile, quarterly/annual statistical profile and regional profile.
The DENR field offices prepare the following reports regularly: monthly accomplishments, quarterly, semi-annual, and annual reports (see Figure 3). These reports are prepared on the basis of the data and information that are gathered by the respective ENR offices be they community, provincial or regional. Report submission at the CENRO level occurs at the beginning of the month, the fifteenth of the month, quarterly and by semester. At the PENRO level, CENRO reports are reviewed and consolidated before they are submitted to the regional office on the twentieth of the month. At the end of each month, the regional office submits a consolidated report from all PENROs to the central office. Gaps in data transfer and information flow Reports are submitted via fax, courier, radio, telephone, and e-mail or by hand. Reports are kept in the record section, if there is one. In retrieving files, the record section officer is delegated as the property custodian, but as the need arises, other employees also help. Logbooks are kept for receiving and releasing communications and reports.
In the forestry sector, the community-based forest management information system (CBFMIS) and forest stock monitoring system (FSMS) are used, although the FSMS has not been implemented widely yet owing to a lack of computers. Even if a computer is available, some staff are not familiar with the use of CBFMIS and FSMS. CENROs hold refresher courses and briefings or training for their staff. Training is either hosted by the regional office, PENRO or CENRO. Staff are reoriented on their regular functions and updated on other aspects of their duties. Staff are also briefed on special projects. Through special orders, a forest ranger can be transferred as a log scaler. In such situations, the CENRO implements rescheduling and personnel adjustments to avoid total cessation of their regular functions. Field "truthing" and data discrepancy are also addressed. For example, the data of a particular area submitted to the regional office describe it as forestland but upon field validation the area is discovered to have been converted to a kaingin (slash-and-burn) area. The regional office conducts field validation, and if there are inconsistencies in the data, they return the information to the field office for revalidation. In general, however, there is no standard procedure for data collection, retrieval and overall management. A specific figure, for example on plantation status, may appear in several reports, which makes retrieval and updating a tedious process. Within the context of the existing reporting system, there appear to be no gaps because the reporting system is followed studiously. The problem, for instance, in generating a forecast based on what has been reported, may not lie in the contents of the report, but the data-generation instruments themselves. Attribute data and spatial information as an indication of GIS readiness In the Caraga Regional Office, a GIS database is available in ArcView® format (e.g. shapefiles of municipal roads; national roads; provincial roads; coastlines; rivers/creeks; regional boundaries; provincial boundaries; municipal boundaries; lakes; provinces of Caraga; Caraga Region). Unfortunately, there is no computer specialist for GIS databasing which makes the data vulnerable to corruption and loss. GIS data structures and analytical techniques are being incorporated gradually, however. Although some GIS encoding is pursued through georeferencing of important GPS points, its use is primarily for cartographic presentations. Despite its availability, GIS use lacks analytical form mainly for the following reasons: Lack of understanding on the basic concepts and principles of GIS; No training for personnel; The organization finds it prohibitive to establish a GIS system; Lack of institutional strengthening that integrates GIS within the DENR Usually, GIS processing is contracted out to GIS companies. Unfortunately, the GIS service provided is limited by the requirements imposed by the client organization ­ requirements that are essentially cartographic in nature. In addition, the reports submitted are in paper form and do not permit further analysis. Even if digital files are submitted, the maps are not in GIS format. Improving the flow of information Occasionally the regional office requests a report/data/information from the PENRO but the PENRO passes the retrieval of files to the CENRO, even when the PENRO has its own copy. This problem arises because of the lack of a standard data management system. A system has to be introduced that systematizes data and information collection, retrieval, updating and reporting. Even on a manual basis, if such a system is in place, files and reports can be accessed easily and data duplication and waste of time can be avoided. The importance of a computer-based system similar to CBFMIS or FSMS cannot be overemphasized. Such a system that imposes protocols for.
data and information handling will facilitate work for everyone. At the same time, the flow of information as outlined in Figure 3 can run smoothly.
CENRO Prepares reports and submits to PENRO @15th of the month, after the month, qrtrly or semester.
PENRO Reviews and consolidate s CENRO reports and submits to regional office @20th of the month.
Asst RED for Technical & Operations Reviews and consolidates PENRO reports for the RED;.
regional directors for MGB and EMB submits reports to their bureaus.
RED Transmits reports to concerned bureaus @ month's end.
BUREAUS and ATTACHED AGENCIES Consolidates regional reports and submits to PPSEAO 15 days later.
copy furnished.
(policy planning services & economic affairs office).
(project monitoring division).
Other Agencies.
Figure.
Forestry statistical reporting system (after Quintos 2002).
Quality of policy formulation The current practice for data and information handling makes it difficult to monitor the important activities of the ENR offices. The implementing rules and regulations (IRR) that are based on policies have to be improved, being cognizant of the local situation. Different CENROs have different problems and situations. There are policies applicable in one CENRO that are not applicable in other CENROs. CENROs should set their goals and targets based on their specific needs and circumstances. There are questions related to the transport of wood products from narra (Pterocarpus indicus Willd) produced by people's organizations across provincial borders. As a policy, however, logging of narra is strictly regulated. In effect, policies should be reflective of the true condition of the forest and socio-economic realities. Some policies should be reviewed and revised. Another.
example is the documentation on the cutting and transport of logs. There are cases where logs have been confiscated because the accompanying documents differ from those belonging to the inspection team. The most notable policies issued relate to: the statistical reporting system (SRS); the revised price monitoring system (RPMS); the physical performance monitoring system (also covers financial monitoring); and the land classification monitoring system (LCMS), which subsequently was transformed into the forestry statistics monitoring system (FSMS). In terms of forest cover assessment, the FSMS can be very useful. At the moment, however, there is no policy on national inventory although a proposal for one is underway. Assessment of forest cover can also be derived from ongoing and completed special projects, and reports of licensees, including CBFM project reports. Land cover statistics for the country used data from the Philippine-German national forestry inventory project in the 1980s. However, the projection formula has become invalid because logging of old growth forest stopped after 1992. Since 1998, NAMRIA and other stakeholders have tried to devise a new projection model. Care should be taken, however, when new projection models cite increasing forest cover. Such results should be backed up by data collected in the field. Unfortunately, without a national policy on environment and natural resources (ENR) inventory (at least on forest cover), estimates will not improve. A policy for generating baseline data is lacking and there is no single policy on ENR assessment. As a policy, all contractors should be required to submit maps in GIS format, preferably ArcView or ArcInfo® ­ the system that is widely available within the DENR. Conclusions This study has generated a number of important insights that probably explain the present status of forestry in the Philippines. The study results, however, contain gaps. Nevertheless, the first step towards sustainable management of forests, or any resource for that matter, starts with a confident appreciation of the resources at hand. It is clear that a reporting system is in place, which is followed carefully and implemented strictly. The subsequent issue is whether these reports can provide an indication of current resources, i.e. forest cover. Another issue is whether the DENR is organized and equipped to answer questions on current resources. Moreover, based on an appreciation of current resource plans for the future, is this capacity sufficient, especially in the light of global circumstances? Institutionally, there have always been efforts to generate data. In this context, it would be unwise to suggest that estimates of forest cover have been made randomly. Every office or agency implements some kind of data generation exercise according to its needs. However, the results are much duplication and redundancy of data. For instance, the major activities of the ENR offices with regard to forest management, forest protection, CBFM, watershed management, and land evaluation among others, have significant overlaps. Forest management encompasses forest protection although forest management is concentrated on production activities; CBFM areas occur within critical watersheds. Likewise, there are forest management issues with regard to CBFM areas. To address this problem, a system must be created that will efficiently and effectively gather, store, analyze and display data. Recommendations This study proposes three major activities to address the problem of interactively linking data generation with policy formulation. These include a policy analysis and review; establishment of a database following a standard protocol for data; and GIS databasing and training. In the first instance, the DENR managers are not new to these recommendations. As the workshop revealed, to a certain degree, the data that are required to generate a more or less acceptable.
overview of the state of forestry in the country, even on a yearly basis, are available although not readily. In other words, some of these data pass through the system of reporting in one way or another. It is simply a matter of defining such standards clearly to allow users to access these data and use them for their purposes. The baseline data must be available in a generic form that will allow various needs to be met. Conduct a policy study on encroachments of the forest estate Responsive management must be based on realistic and empirical foundations. This implies welldefined protocols for data generation at the field level. Parameters for data collection should be present and standard formats for collection and encoding should guide field personnel. Raw data consequently undergo deliberate transformation according to the requirements at the next higher level of management and use. This aggregation transforms the data from mere alphanumerical characters and digital numbers to a form that will be useful for decision-making. Efforts are underway, within the DENR, to review policies and relevant administrative orders and decrees. A priority is to demarcate forest boundaries. Current practices show that the boundaries, as provided by law through the 18 percent slope prescription, have been violated grossly and forests have been encroached. There is a need for a careful analysis of illegal land-use change. Establish a computer database The provision of timely, accurate, accessible and relevant data and information facilitates the decision-making process. Thus, a framework for management including a user-friendly implementation procedure through a database system is essential. The DENR and its attached agencies manage an extensive collection of spatial and statistical data. The FMB, for instance, supports a GIS-based database of CBFM areas. The database may be guided by four major components, i.e. physical resources and infrastructure, biological, social and economic components. Their characteristics at the lower and more detailed levels should be encoded following a logical recording structure. Thus, specifications and coding structures will be based on these four major components. Protocols for data formatting, encoding, elements and fields including processing, analysis and output should be enumerated. One approach is to generate a forest and natural resource database following generally acceptable boundaries. There are two ways to accomplish this: (i) via geographic coordinates by establishing, for instance, kilometer grids (Revilla et al. 2000). Such grids should support the Philippine Reference System of 1992 (PRS92) and support the densification efforts of NAMRIA. Each square kilometer grid should contain relevant information following the components mentioned above; (ii) the dataset may be generated following another generally acceptable boundary, which refers to the lowest administrative government unit ­ the barangay. There are practical implementation issues that support this approach. For one, each barangay is mandated by law to prepare a land-use plan. All of the necessary information can be generated and accessed through this activity. Another practical advantage is jurisdiction. Each CENRO is composed of one or more municipalities, and each municipality is composed of barangays. Close coordination between the local government units and the DENR with regard to the generation of this dataset in support of the development of the database should be pursued. Implement a GRID-based GIS system A program for forest and natural resource assessment must be based on sustainable development principles and embrace the watershed approach. Under these circumstances, a GIS-based sustainable resource assessment can proceed. The DENR, in principle, already embraces the concept of the GRID-based system when it implemented such a project in 1999. The time has come for its full implementation complemented by GIS for feature and attribute data handling. It divides the entire country into 100-ha "grid cells" using permanent/fixed grid lines such as PRS92.
(Revilla 2000). Such a system fully describes land and water areas of any given geographic territory in terms of physical, social, biological, economic and environmental characteristics. The implementation should focus on the three phases in GIS implementation: encoding; processing and analysis; and display and output. Certainly, data quality and accuracy are just two of the more important requirements for a meaningful assessment. All types of assessment and modelling are futile if they are not based on accurate and timely data. Phase I ­ GIS encoding GIS encoding involves gathering and compilation of all relevant data and converting these into GIS format. In other words, a digital database should be established along with scanning and digitizing of maps. GIS encoding involves geo-referencing (locating features within a model of the surface of the earth) geo-coding (assigning a geographic reference to non-geographic data), and the creation of topology (the branch of mathematics that defines the relationships between features) that will systematically associate the features with their corresponding attributes. Phase II ­ GIS processing and analysis Once relevant thematic data and information are available in GIS format, the system can be used to generate answers to spatial questions. These questions can range from presence or absence of features within a geographic boundary or proximity to points of interest or even, and more importantly, estimates of susceptibility to degradation/hazards including a preview of mitigating measures based on modelled scenarios. Certainly, the issue of updating is straightforward given the nature of the data, which is digital. A system must be put in place that will support data entry, processing, analysis and output. Phase III ­ GIS display and output This phase includes presentations to policy-makers and other interest groups. As far as possible, different public groups must have access to Phase III to generate the necessary response to and debate of the results. For the successful construction of a sustainable resource assessment, monitoring and evaluation system, the development of a spatial decision support system is required. Conceptually, this is embraced by the DENR. However, the practical applications are still fragmented and isolated. The Decision Support System Office within the DENR can facilitate the unification of these datasets into one synergistic system that provides the necessary services and benefits to users. To implement a truly sustainable resource assessment, monitoring and evaluation system, the DENR must make the necessary adjustments to allow for an efficient aggregation and disaggregation of data and information across all levels. As mentioned earlier, a GRID-based system should be generated for each CENRO and tagged and classified accordingly. Thus, the jurisdiction and "management influence" for a specific CENRO will be clearly listed and reported. Whereas in the past, CENRO officers changed guard occasionally without a clear set of accomplishments, through this system, a CENRO with say, 100 grid cells should be able to report its accomplishments statistically and more importantly in a spatial-explicit fashion through maps.
References Bantayan, N.C. 2001 Community-based GIS. Professorial chair lecture delivered on 21 June, 2001. Los Baños. University of the Philippines Los Baños. Bantayan, N.C. 2002. Using remote sensing and GIS in assessing the impact of landuse change on the biodiversity of Mt. Makiling, Philippines. In Forest cover assessment in Asia. Proceedings of the international workshop on Asian Forest Cover Assessment and Conservation Issues, 12-14 February 2002. Dehradun, India. Indian Institute of Remote Sensing. pp. 311-317. FMB. 1998. Development plan for the Forestry Statistics Information System. Proposal submitted by the Forest management bureau of the DENR to the International Tropical Timber Organization. Quezon City. Department of Environment and Natural Resources. Hawryszkiewycz, I. T. 1994. Introduction to systems analysis and design. 3rd edition. New York. Prentice Hall. National Statistics Office. 2000. www.nso.gov.ph Quintos, Mayumi Ma. 2002. Process, files and flow of forestry reports. Presented to the workshop on Evaluation of Forest and Natural Resources Data and Information Flow in the Philippines held at Holiday Inn Resort, Clark Field, Philippines,7-9 March 2002. Revilla, J.A.V., Javier, E.Q., Vergara, N.T. & Gendrano, O.A. 2000. Quo vadis, Philippine forestry: toward environmental disaster or on to sustainability (Forestry 2050). Unpublished report. Revilla, J.A.V. 2000. Final Report on the DENR-funded project: Comprehensive database system for sustainable development planning, field operations and monitoring. Quezon City. Department of Environment and Natural Resources. Sprague, Jr, R.H. & Watson, H.J. (Eds). 1989. Decision support systems ­ putting theory into practice. 2nd edition. New York. Prentice Hall.
Annex 1 Evaluation of forest and natural resources data and information flow in the Philippines Survey guide questionnaire [this questionnaire is completed through a guided interview].
4. Name : Office : Position : What are your duties and responsibilities in the organization? [attach a copy of duties and responsibilities, if available].
As you understand it, what is the mandate of the office? Vision? Mission? Objectives?.
7. What are the key result areas/priority areas of the office? What are the data on forest and natural resources that the office collects?.
What survey instruments are being used to collect such data? Who collects the data? After data gathering, where does the data go? Do the recipients refer to the data from time to time? Are there data and information gathered in the field that the recipients consider to be unnecessary/insignificant? If so, what are these data?.
What are the types of report that the department requires from the office?.
What are the reports that the office prepares? Who makes the report?.
When and where are the reports submitted? Does the office submit the reports on time? If not, why? How does the office communicate with other offices? How are recommendations addressed?.
Has a system of communications been adapted? · If so, what are the advantages and disadvantages of the system?.
10. With regard to forest and natural resources, is there a database that the office maintains?.
What are the problems encountered in terms of data and information management? How are these problems managed? In terms of data and information management, what activities are conducted by the office?.
How can other agencies/offices, institutions have access to the data and information?.
11. Are any briefings/refresher courses/training events conducted for the technical employees of the office? 12. Are the current policies that the Central Office implements reflective of the true sentiments of the people or the state of the forest?.
Does the office strictly implement/follow all policies of the department?.
13. Please furnish suggestions to improve the current situation in data and information flow in the department.
List of interviewees and workshop participants 2a. List of interviewees.
Name Rochel P. Yabo Suzette M. Duya Maritess M. Ocampo Edwin Raymundo Maria B. Miranda Julieta R. Huyo Alfonso P. Calimag, Jr. Wagayway Agatep Mildred Baricua Josie Singson Ralph Pablo Nicasio Pascua Rouel Villanueva Tela B. Lamsen Wilma Mercado Alexander Querido Aida D. Bruzon Pedro P. Cacho, Jr. Antonio Picardal Marvin Lucero Leonora Suazo Rosalie L. Uriarte Gil Calangian Maritess Cajutoc Ma. Victoria B. Corvera Ceriaca B. Abarico Lilian S. Lirogao Pedro A. Casinsinao Leovino M. Constantino Alain P. Cabanilla Angel Africa, Jr. Region Region 2 Region 2 Region 2 Region 2 Region 2 Region 2 Region 2 Region 2 Region 2 Region 2 Region 2 Region 2 Region 2 Region 2 Region 2 Region 2 Caraga Caraga Caraga Caraga Caraga Caraga Caraga Caraga Caraga Caraga Caraga Caraga Caraga Caraga Caraga Position Forest Ranger Planning Management Division Staff Chief, Planning Officer Computer Programmer Administrative Officer Records Officer PENRO, Cagayan Planning Officer; Forester II Engineer I Operator in charge CENRO PENRO CBFM Coordinator Planning Officer; Chief Planning Officer Planning Officer; Chief Chief Chief, Forester III CBFMO Forester I Administrative Officer Tree Marker CBFMO Planning Officer Planning Officer; Forester I Records Officer Planning Officer Administrative Officer Forester III Forest Ranger Forester III Office Planning Management Division, Regional Office Planning Management Division, Regional Office Planning Management Division, Regional Office Planning Management Division, Regional Office Administrative Support Section Records Section PENRO Cagayan Valley PENRO Cagayan Valley Lands Management Section, PENRO Cagayan Valley CBFM Unit, PENRO Cagayan Valley CENRO Peñablanca PENRO Quirino CBFM Unit PAWS Unit, CENRO Aglipay CENRO Nagtipunan CBFM Unit, CENRO Nagtipunan Timber Management Unit, CENRO Bislig Forest Protection Unit, CENRO Bislig CBFM Unit, CENRO Bislig Reforestation Unit, CENRO Bislig CENRO Bislig CENRO Bislig CBFM Unit, CENRO Lianga CENRO Lianga CBFM Unit, CENRO Cantilan CENRO Cantilan PENRO Surigao del Sur PENRO Surigao del Sur PENRO Surigao del Sur Forest Management Section, PENRO Surigao del Sur CENRO Tandag.
CBFM CBFMO CENRO PAWS PENRO.
Community Based Forest Management Community Based Forest Management Officer Community Environment and Natural Resources Office/Officer Protected Area and Wildlife Sector Provincial Environment and Natural Resources Office/Officer.
2b. List of workshop participants.
Name Romeo T. Acosta Joey E. Austria Mayumi Maria Quintos Dolores Catindig Genesis Francisco Rita Flordeliz Alfredo S. Pascual Lucena Mercado Teresita Rivera Wagayway Q. Agatep Ralph Pablo Manolito Dela Cruz Jose Cabrera Vilma Garcia Jesse Vego Sergio C. Aresta Adelfo Luengas, Jr. Percival Bertuso Leonardo M. Aya-ay Region Region 4 Region 4 Region 4 Region 4 Region 4 Region 4 Region 2 Region 2 Region 2 Region 2 Region 2 Region 2 Region 2 Region 3 Region 6 Caraga Caraga Caraga Caraga Position Director CDO V Chief, Forest Economics Division Chief, Forest Statistics Section Senior Forest Management Specialist Project Development Officer III Regional Executive Director Senior Science Research Specialist Forester I Forester II/Planning Officer CENRO OIC, CENRO OIC, CENRO Planning Officer Chief, Forest Management Specialist Assistant Regional Executive Director for TS EMS II/Acting Forester III Forester II Forester II Office Forest Management Bureau Forest Management Bureau Forest Economics Division, FMB Forest Economics Division, FMB Forest Economics Division, FMB Planning Services, Central Office Regional Office Regional Office Regional Office PENRO Cagayan Valley CENRO Peñablanca CENRO Diffun CENRO Nagtipunan Regional Office FRDD, Regional Office Regional Office PENRO Surigao del Sur CENRO Cantilan CENRO Tandag.
Legend: CDO CENRO EMS FMB FRDD PENRO.
Cagayan de Oro Community Environment and Natural Resources Office/Officer Environmental Management Systems Forest Management Bureau Forest Resources Development Division Provincial Environment and Natural Resources Office/Officer.
