IDAF/WP/42 January 1992.
REPORT ON THE REGIONAL SEMINAR ON ARTISANAL FISHERMEN'S MIGRATIONS IN WEST AFRICA.
prepared by M. Chimère DIAW & Jan M. HAAKONSEN.
Programme de Développement Integré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest - DIPA Programme for Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries in West Africa - IDAF.
With financial assistance from Denmark and in collaboration with the Republic of Benin, the Fisheries Department of FAO is implementing in West Africa a programme of small scale fisheries development, commonly called the IDAF Project. This programme is based upon an integrated approach involving production, processing and marketing of fish, and related activities, it also involves an active participation of the target fishing communities. This report is a working paper and the conclusions and recommendations are those appropriate at the time of preparation. The working papers have not necessarily been cleared for publication by the government(s) concerned nor by FAO. They may be modified in the light of future knowledge gained at subsequent stages of the Project and issued later in other series. The designations employed and the presentation of material do not imply the expression of any opinion on the part of FAO or a financing agency concerning the legal status of any country or territory, city or area, or concerning the determination of its frontiers or boundaries. IDAF Project FAO Boîte Postale 1369 Cotonou, Benin Telex : Fax : 5291 FOODAGRI (229) 313649 Tel. : (229) 33.09.25 (229) 33.06.24.
Mr. Diaw, normally based at CRODT (Dakar), is currently on study-leave at the Université Laval in Québec. He was hired as a consultant by FAO to help organize the migration seminar. Mr. Haakonsen is an independent fisheries development consultant based in Norway who from 1986 to 1991 was part of IDAF's staff in Cotonou.
Page 1 1 2 2 3 3 3 4 8 10 12 18 19 25 28.
REGIONAL SEMINAR ON ARTISANAL FISHERMEN'S MIGRATIONS IN WEST AFRICA.
Cotonou - 3rd to 5th December 1991 Report A regional seminar on artisanal fishermen's migrations in West Africa (from Mauritania to the Congo) took place in Cotonou from the 3rd to the 5th of December 1991, in Cotonou, on the initiative of the FAO/IDAF.
OBJECTIVES.
This seminar brought together fisheries officials from ten countries in the region and was organized as a follow-up to the Round Table of experts held in Kokrobite from the 6th to the 9th of November 1990. Its main objectives were :.
to convey the considerable amount of information brought to light at the Kokrobite meeting to fishery officials in the region.
to gather information as to national policies and official points of view concerning fisheries migrations in the region.
to encourage an exchange of opinions on these different questions and to formulate recommendations to serve as reference in the setting-up of national and regional policies on the specific theme of artisanal fisheries migrations.
PARTICIPATION.
Of the 14 countries invited 4 (Togo, Sierra Leone, Gabon, Guinea) were unable to attend the seminar for diverse reasons. The absence of Togo (like that of Liberia which could not even be invited) is explained by the exceptional political context prevailing at present in this country. Sierra Leone, Guinea and Gabon were unable to attend because of reasons pertaining to the invitation itself or for logistic problems. Considering the importance of migration in these countries, particular care will be given to inform them of the results (see appendix 1 for the list of participants).
2 It is also regrettable that the ECOWAS, with whom informal contact had been made as of last July, did not reply to the invitation and other official correspondence sent about it. The seminar did, however, benefit by the participation of Mrs. King, FAO consultant on mission for this organization. The seminar organizers expressed the hope that this participation would facilitate future involvement of this regional organization in the follow-up of the seminar's recommendations.
THE MEETING.
The seminar followed the established programme, with participants showing great engagement. It was chaired by Mr. George Everett, FIP/FAO, following an introductory note delivered by Mr. Mensah, Benin's Director of Fisheries (see appendix 2).
3.1.Review and discussion of the situation in the countries represented.
A review of the artisanal fishery context and the situation of migrant fishermen in the different countries represented was undertaken through a summary of the document "Migrant fishermen in West Africa : Problems and Prospects" (to appear in the IDAF Working Papers series). This full document had been handed out upon the arrival of participants. The country summaries were presented in English and French, respectively, by Jan M. Haakonsen and Chimère M. Diaw. They were followed by amendments and discussions in which special attention was given to the comments of the representative of the country concerned. Several participants had prepared written exposes to this effect. The discussions mostly concerned the statistics for the fishery sector (FAO, 1986) which the participants requested to be brought up to date using more recent data obtainable in the different countries. The presentation of the migratory patterns, their impact and future prospects for the migrant fishermen in each of the countries considered, also stimulated lively discussion which brought to light the concerns of fishery administrators as well as national policies on the topic. On the whole, a distinct willingness to work towards greater integration of migrant communities in the economic and social life of the host countries was expressed, as well as a desire to obtain more active collaboration between immigrant and emigrant countries (coastal and continental) in the management of this particular phenomenon. In the discussions it was also reminded that other aspects of the problem should not be neglected ; in particular, the question of internal migrations, continental migrations and that of auxiliary workers to the fishery sector (such as women) or other sectors connected with fisheries.
3 The revised version of the document "Problems and prospects" will take into account a significant part of the complementary information gathered during these discussions.
3.2 Presentation of the results of the questionnaire sent to fisheries departments in the region.
This questionnaire had been distributed to the 14 countries long before the seminar was to take place. It covered certain legislative or regulatory aspects concerning artisanal fishery and migrant fishermen. It also included a section dealing with the way in which the responsible services perceive the conditions and contributions of migrant fishermen to the economy of their respective countries. 13 countries replied and the results, as presented in the course of the seminar, are included in appendix 3.
3.3 Aspects of ECOWAS policies relevant to artisanal fisheries.
In the absence of an official representative from the ECOWAS, Mrs. Hannah King made a concise summary of the regional organization's engagement in the subject, especially on food security. It was emphasized that, although the ECOWAS has not really looked into the matter of fishermen's migrations, the connection between these and food security objectives are sufficiently evident to justify increased interest. In the general recommendations made during a reunion of regional fishery experts in Dakar in 1985, the ECOWAS also emphasized the importance of scientific research and the necessity to coordinate scientific studies on a regional level so as to facilitate the establishment and utilization of the data bases, as well as the carryingout of different quantitative measures, of validation or follow-up of research.
Group work.
Three working groups were assembled as a result of the general discussions in order to formulate recommendations on the subject. Their first task was to look into a fictitious case (appendix 4) in which different problems and different levels of comprehension concerning them were presented. The purpose of this simulation was to encourage active collaboration within the groups, through problems to which everybody would be neutral. Although conceived so as to avoid any resemblance with real situations in the region, the simulation nonetheless handled plausible problems, for which all participants actively took part in trying to find a solution. Following the three cases studied during this exercise, the participants elaborated a certain number of recommendations which they were able to use later on when considering the real situation in the region.
4 This simulation work was thus followed by a second meeting of working groups to discuss the problems in the region and elaborate the recommendations of the seminar. This work, the results of which are presented below, was also carried out in excellent spirit. All the working group meetings were followed by discussions in full session.
RECOMMENDATIONS.
As a result of the seminar held from the 3rd to the 5th of December 1991 in Cotonou, on the theme of artisanal fishermen's migration, the participants recommend : I. Information and follow-up of the question.
Wide diffusion of the information and recommendations resulting from the seminar in Cotonou and that of Kokrobite (6th - 9th November 1990) to : · · the Governments of the countries in the region, with copies to the Ministries supervising fisheries, Fishery Departments and marine research institutes. Regional and Sub-regional Organizations : o ECOWAS ; UDEAC ; CEAO. o Ministerial Conference on Fisheries Cooperation Between States Bordering the Atlantic Ocean (from Morocco to Angola). o Sub-regional Fisheries Commission (Mauritania, Cap-Verde, Senegal, The Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Guinea). o Regional Fisheries Committee of the Gulf of Guinea - COREP (Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Sao-Tomé and Principe, Gabon, Zaïre). o Lake Chad Basin Commission - CBLT (Cameroon, Niger, Nigeria, Chad). o CECAF.
5 · Continental and International Organizations o OAU ; ADB ; o FAO ; ILO ; World Bank. It is also recommended :.
That the question of migrant fishermen be followed closely by all the organizations and institutions concerned and that active research be carried out so as to define the means of management more adapted to the diverse situations found in the region.
To set up means to follow the movements of people and property associated with artisanal fisheries in those countries where such means are non-existent and to periodically evaluate the socio-economic importance of such movements.
To facilitate, in accordance with those measures that can be taken on a regional level, the comparability of information relating to these movements as well as the exchange of information between national institutions.
To encourage collaboration between fisheries administrations, representatives of the fishing communities and consular representatives of the countries concerned, so as to improve the monitoring of fishermen's migrations. II. REGIONAL AND SUB-REGIONAL COORDINATION AND COOPERATION Recognizing that artisanal fishermen's migrations are but a reflection of the characteristics of the fishery sector as well as the great interdependency of the different fisheries and their economies in the region, the seminar recommends :.
To work towards the harmonizing of legislation and regulations through mutual consultations between the different countries in the region or a given sub-region.
To encourage and coordinate national and regional research efforts on fisheries management and migrations and to stimulate cooperation between research institutes and national fishery departments in the region.
To encourage the signing of bilateral and/or multilateral agreements facilitating the movements of artisanal fishermen as well as the interregional flow brought about as a result, especially in regards to commerce and food supply.
To work together and in close collaboration with the ECOWAS, UDEAC, the Ministerial Conference and all other competent institutions, towards the gradual establishment of a regional framework responsible for the management of artisanal fishermen's migrations and other associated migrations. 10. To bear in mind the isolation of certain communities, as well as the problems of convertibility of different currencies. III. NATIONAL MANAGEMENT OF FISHERIES Recognizing the positive impact of migrant fishermen on national fisheries economies, especially with respect to the production and supply of animal protein, the creation of employment and technological progress, but also recognizing the occasional occurrence of friction and even conflicts caused mainly by misunderstandings or management problems in the sector, the participants recommend : 11. To make migrant fishermen aware, in their country of origin as well as in the host country, of the laws, regulations and agreements applicable to artisanal fisheries and fishermen's migrations in the countries or zones of destination, and to ensure that existing national arrangements be applied. 12. To protect migrant fishermen, a particularly vulnerable category of people, against administrative misuse of authority, and to this end carry out active policies aimed at sensitizing relevant national services. 13. To advise host country governments to help facilitate the reception and sojourn procedures concerning migrant fishermen and allow them access to the same subsidiary services as the local population. 14. To take into account migrations auxiliary to fishing in the above-mentioned measures as well as in the management of fisheries in general. 15. To prioritize the prevention of conflicts and to try to solve them at a local level, with the help of local administrations.
7 16. To encourage integration of the economic activities of the migrants and local populations within the fishing sector (crew formation, transfer of techniques), within artisanal processing as well as the commercialization of marine products. Within this context and bearing in mind the vital and dynamic role played by women in West African fisheries, it is particularly recommended, when relevant : 17. To encourage cooperation between the migrant and local women in the processing and commercialization of the fish rather than exclude one or the other of these two categories. The seminar finally recommends : 18. That host countries allow migrant fishermen to carry out their customs and traditions, within the limits of the laws in force in these countries. 19. To acknowledge the positive role of traditional and community institutions set up by the migrant fishermen, or local communities, and therefore to try to include them into fisheries management, inter-communal relations and solution of conflicts. 20. To work towards creating relationships of confidence between the administrators and fishermen, including migrant fishermen, by making the administrations more accessible to the fishermen. 21. To encourage the diffusion of existing information on artisanal fisheries and the role of migrant fishermen, for the purpose of improved fisheries management and educating communities and administrative agents.
8 Appendix 1.
SEMINAIRE SUR LA MIGRATION DES PECHEURS ARTISANAUX SEMINAR ON ARTISANAL FISHERMEN'S MIGRATIONS.
Cotonou, 3 - 5 December 1991 ========================== Participants Mr. Sidi Ould BRAHIM Mr. Tahirou BODIAN Direction des Pêches Artisanales Ministère des Pêches Nouakchott, MAURITANIA Direction de l'Océanographie et des Pêches Maritimes, Ministère de l'Equipement des Transports et de la Mer Dakar, SENEGAL Department of Fisheries Banjul, GAMBIA Projet Pêche Artisanale Tombali Ministerio das Pescas Bissau, GUINEA-BISSAU Direction de l'Aquaculture et des Pêches, Ministère de l'Agriculture et des Ressources Animales Abidjan, COTE D'IVOIRE Fisheries Research and Utilization Branch, Department of Fisheries Tema, GHANA Direction des Pêches Ministère du Développement Rural Cotonou, BENIN Département de la Coopération Internationale, Ministère des Affaires Etrangères et de la Coopération Cotonou, BENIN Federal Department of Fisheries Benin City, Bendel State, NIGERIA.
Mr. Alhaji JALLOW Mr. Marcos DA SILVA Mr. Mamadou DOUMBIA.
Mr. Kwame KORANTENG Mr. Bonaventure HOUNDEKON Mr. Lassissi AKAMBI Mr. Abdul Rahim IDRIZ Mr. Samuel AMEHOU.
Mr. E.G. SAGAY.
9 Mr Bakouyi Joseph AFIAN Service des Pêches Artisanales Ministère de l'Elevage, des Pêches et de l'Industrie Animale Yaoundé, CAMEROON Direction de la Pêche Maritime Ministère de l'Economie Forestière, de la Pêche et de l'Environnement Brazzaville, CONGO FIP, FAO HQ, Rome, ITALY Programme DIPA/IDAF Project FAO Cotonou, BENIN Expert-Conseil FAO/ECOWAS Expert-Conseil FAO/FAO Consultant Expert-Conseil FAO/FAO Consultant.
Mr. Appolinaire NGOUEMBE.
Mr. George EVERETT Mme Eva CALLERHOLM-CASSEL Mme Hannah KING Mr. Mariteuw Chimère DIAW Mr. Jan M. HAAKONSEN.
10 Appendix 2.
OPENING SPEECH.
delivered by Mr. Gilbert Mensah Director of Fisheries, Benin LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, DEAR GUESTS: We are particularly honoured to host this first seminar for West African fisheries officials on the important question of migrant fisherman. This meeting is also important in that it constitutes a precise - and certainly precious - attempt to transmit a certain number of research findings to those who are responsible for the application of development policies in the area. This meeting has therefore the intent of providing a valuable setting for exchange and synergy based on the acknow-ledged fact that our fisheries are interdependent, not only on an environmental and biological level, but also from the point of view of social and economic exchanges. LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, The round table of experts on West African fisheries migrations which took place in Kokrobite (Ghana) a year ago, has considerably increased our knowledge of these kinds of movements, though there still remain a certain number of points requiring closer examination. One could perhaps start by intimating that the secret behind the vitality of African canoe fisheries may well lie in its flexibility and continuance as well as in the historical role played by migrations, which go back to the 5th century at least, in their evolution and consolidation. Even today, on the strength of this formidable heritage, West African marine fishermen daily brave the sea, fate and frontiers. As we will most certainly see in the course of this seminar, the studies presently available on fishermen's migrations cover a significant number of themes, in particular their extent in both quantitative and qualitative terms, their range, patterns, impact and variations ; both on national, sub-regional and regional levels. The participants at the Kokrobite meeting came to the conclusion that the migrant fishermen have, on the whole, a mainly positive impact on the evolution of the fisheries.
11 They tend to create new possibilities of employment and income both in the host countries and in their countries of origin, and are active agents in the diffusion of technology and new fishing methods. In certain cases, their presence can serve as a pretext for friction or conflicts. However, it should no doubt be possible to minimize these conflicts, by identifying the true causes and by establishing appropriate rules and measures to deal with it. That is why the Round Table in Kokrobite judged it absolutely necessary to seriously inform the governments of the region on the importance of fishermen's migrations. Such information is essential to increase our ability to manage national fisheries. LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, The objective of this seminar that I have the honour to inaugurate today, is thus linked to a desire to improve the position of fishery administrators and decision-makers faced with the question of fisheries migrations in West Africa. In spite of the availability of the interesting scientific reports and documents published on the subject, it would seem that direct dialogue between national fisheries officers is an irreplaceable element in the setting-up of liable standards of management. That is the actual purpose of our presence here today and the main aim of this seminar. The second aim of this meeting is to obtain the points of view of the governments and acquire better understanding of the considerations behind them. Closely connected to this is the third aim of the seminar which is to identify the governmental policies applied to migrant fishermen and artisanal fishermen in general, and evaluate the context of their application. The underlying goal of the seminar as a whole is, of course, to be able to formulate suggestions and conclusions as expressed by official government representatives. Combined with the information presented at Kokrobite, these could then serve as a basis for IDAF and FAO to formulate a common reference framework for governmental policies in the region. Wishing you all a fruitful session, I reiterate my welcome and hope you will have a pleasant stay in Benin.
12 Appendix 3.
SYNTHETIC TABLE OF OFFICIAL POLICIES PERTAINING TO ARTISANAL FISHERIES AND MIGRANT FISHERMEN.
(based on the replies given by 13 countries to a questionnaire distributed to fishery departments in the West African region) I. FISHING ZONES RESERVED FOR ARTISANAL FISHERY (map N° 1) All the countries in the region (apart from Liberia for which the information was not available) have established a fishing zone reserved for artisanal fishery. However, considerable variations may be observed in the different countries ; the Côte d'Ivoire has the most narrow limit (1 nautical mile although an extension to 2 miles is probable) and Guinea-Bissau the widest (12 nautical miles). In between these extremes, one may distinguish two groups: a group with a relatively narrow reserved zone ranging from 2 (Cameroon and Nigeria) and 3 n. miles (Mauritania, Benin and Gabon) to 4 n. miles (Togo). a second group with relatively wide reserved zones ranging from 5 (Sierra Leone) and 6 n. miles (Senegal, Guinea) to 8 n. miles (Congo). In the case of Ghana, this distance from the coast could not be measured as the artisanal fishing zone is determined according to bathometric depth (30 meters). In addition, some countries tolerate the used of the reserved zone by certain types of vessels. This is the case in Senegal where sardine-boats are allowed to fish within 3 miles of the coast and in Ghana, where the limitation is not applied to pelagic vessels. In addition, Guinea reserves the zone between 6 and 15 nautical miles for "advanced" artisanal fisheries. Other countries, on the other hand, have restrictions to certain types of artisanal fishing, some of which are totally prohibited. This is the case of beach seines in The Gambia and drift nets in Benin.
13 All the countries impose sanctions on industrial vessels (and semi-industrial ones in some cases) that violate the reserved zones. These sanctions take the same form everywhere, that is to say fines (the amount of which varies according to the country), coupled with confiscation of the catch and/or temporary seizure of the vessel. There are only two countries (Senegal and Mauritania) where these measures are theoretically coupled with prison sentences, while Benin and Gabon give the offender the choice between prison and payment of the fine. II. TAXES, RIGHTS AND FEES.
Fees and fishing rights The first significant fact is that no country admits to any official distinction between national fishermen and foreigners. When categorial distinctions appear, notably in the payment of fees or fishing rights, these are made according to technological differences so as to the type of fishery (Guinea-Bissau excepted). This is the case in the Congo where the big motorized canoes (of the Popoh type) pay 25.000 F CFA, double the annual fee paid by the smaller motorized boats (Vili type). The same differentiation is to be found in the Cameroon, where there are 4 categories of fishing licence. The large artisanal boats are classed as category A ; that is "semi-industrial fishing" and pay an annual fee of 50.000 F CFA compared to "sport fishing" (25.000 F CFA), shrimping (5.000 F CFA) and "lucrative artisanal fishery" (3.000 F CFA). Guinea-Bissau, along with Togo, seems to be the only country making a real distinction between national and foreign fishermen in the payment of fishing licences. In the former, the scale is from 1 to 10 in disfavours of the foreign fishing units : 25.000 Guinean pesos (5 US $) compared to 250.000 PG (50 US $) for non-motorized canoes ; 100.000 PG (20 US $) to 1.045.000 PG (209 US $) for motorized canoes. In Togo, however, the scale is of 1 to 2, whereas the amount of the fees is minimal anyway (1.000 F CFA for nationals and 2.000 F CFA for foreigners). Generally though, disregarding the case in Togo, and The Gambia where fishermen are shortly to be exempted from the payment of fishing licences, one may observe the existence of two types of policies, greatly contrasted, with regards to rights and licences or taxation of artisanal fishery products. On the one hand, a group made up of Mauritania, Senegal, Ghana, Benin, and Nigeria, where artisanal fishery units are exempted from all taxes and fees. On the other, a group made up of Guinea-Bissau, Côte d'Ivoire, Cameroon, Gabon, Congo and Guinea, where the taxes and fees to be paid are considerable. We have already looked at GuineaBissau, Cameroon and Congo. As for the last 2 countries, one must also add a production tax of 2 F CFA/kilo (Cameroon) as well as 25 F CFA/kilo on tuna landed in the Congo. However, it is not clear whether this last tax concerns artisanal fisheries (small tuna).
14 In Côte d'Ivoire, fishing rights are collected in two ways ; the licence itself (15,000 F CFA/year) and a boat tax (36.000 F CFA) for a total of 51.000 F CFA per annum. In Gabon, the fishing rights are even higher, being 25.000 F CFA a quarter, or a total of 100.000 F CFA per annum. Lastly, Guinea (Conakry) applies a particularly heavy system of taxation whereby the merchant navy collects five different taxes : inspection for putting into service, exceptional technical inspection, navigation licence, driving licence and professional card (for a total of FG 37.000) and the fishery department two other fees - fishing licence and professional card, the latter at FG 500 per horse power of the engine. The total amount paid in taxes is therefore FG 49.500 to FG 57.000 or more, depending on the power and number of engines, FG 500 worth about 1 US $. (According to another source - see IDAF/WP/36, p.110 - both the merchant navy and the fisheries department in Guinea apply two additional fees each bringing the total taxes to somewhere between FG 118.000 and FG 159.000).
Customs duty exemptions on equipment and fuel Customs duties complete the picture of taxation policies as applied to artisanal fishery in the region. None of the countries make any distinction between national and foreign fishermen at this level. One does observe however, with slight variations, the same tendencies already apparent in the area of fishing rights. In fact, Mauritania, Senegal, the Gambia, Togo and Ghana all apply a policy of exemption to artisanal fishermen for all duty due on equipment and fuel (only partial exemption for fuel in Ghana) whereas the Congo, Gabon, Guinea and Guinea-Bissau do not practice any kind of exoneration whatsoever. Between the two tendencies, we may situate Cameroon where only the equipment in exempted from duty ; Côte d'Ivoire and Benin (partially) where only the fuel is exempt. Lastly, in Nigeria, the equipment is taxed, but the locally produced fuel is the cheapest in the region (0,60 Naira per litre, about 0.06 US $ or less than 20 F CFA).
Import and export taxes Senegal, probably taking advantage of its limited imports of fishery products, is the only country, together with Guinea, that does not collect import or export taxes. Côte d'Ivoire recently abolished VAT on exported products and even established a bonus on exports. Mauritania, the Gambia, Guinea-Bissau and Congo thus remain the only countries still taxing exports of fishery products. However, for reasons perhaps similar to Senegal, Mauritania does not collect customs duties on imports. All the other countries, except for Guinea, collect import tax on different categories of products at a rate of 5 to 30 - 35 % of their value.
15 III. CONDITIONS AND CONTRIBUTIONS OF MIGRANTS IN TERMS OF HOST COUNTRIES AND COUNTRIES OF ORIGIN The second part of the questionnaire inquired about the migrants' situation but also on the way they are perceived by official services. It was presented with two types of questions; those directed at countries receiving large immigrant communities and those directed at countries "exporting" migrant fishermen. Benin and Nigeria are the only countries concerned by both aspects in a significant way. The present summary is based on the assumption that the replies given are a general reflection of the true situation.
Countries of immigration : Mauritania, The Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Côte d'Ivoire, Togo, Benin, Nigeria, Cameroon, Gabon and Congo Certain facts appear to apply massively to all these countries with respect to the access migrants have to motors, equipment and credit. This access is considered by those answering the questionnaire to be the same for all, regardless of origin. Only Togo and Gabon admit to differentiate on the subject of credit, and Mauritania did not reply to this question. However, the latter is the only country where it is not considered that the migrants posses better equipment than nationals. As for transfer of technology from migrants to nationals, only Cameroon and Gabon consider that this does not occur, while Mauritania was unable to answer. Lastly, conflicts are considered as rare except in Côte d'Ivoire and Gabon where they are said to occur frequently.
Countries of emigration : Senegal, Ghana, Benin and Nigeria No distinct pattern appears except for those questions concerning consular registration (only Senegal affirms that it actually takes place) and the signing of bilateral agreements. The situation of Senegal and its neighbours (Guinea-Bissau, the Gambia and Mauritania) differs greatly from the pattern of migrations in the Gulf of Guinea as a whole, where no bilateral agreements have been singed between countries of immigration and emigration. As for the other subjects raised (importance of income repatriated to the country of origin, importance of migrants contribution to the host country, flight of subsidized equipment and qualified labour force), the situation is appraised differently depending on the countries and even constitutes in some cases (on the subject of subsidized equipment for example) problems of interpretation. On the whole however, it would appear that Ghana is the country where the impact of emigration is least felt (in terms of income as well as drain) in contrast to Benin and to a lesser degree, Senegal, followed by Nigeria.
MAP No. 1 FISHING ZONES RESERVED FOR ARTISANAL FISHERIES ANALYSIS OF QUESTIONNAIRE DISTRIBUTED TO FISHERIES DEPARTMENTS IN WEST AFRICA.
PRESENTATION OF GROUP WORK.
Welcome to Equatoria ! You are members of a team of fisheries officials from the inter-regional Association of Coastal African States (ACAS) and have been sent by the organization to advise the government of Equatoria on how to resolve problems arising from the presence of substantial numbers of artisanal fishermen from Tropica in the country. Attached you will find some basic data on Equatoria, particularly those concerning the fisheries sector the last 30 years, including statistics on catches, number of canoes, etc. You will be travelling to Equatoria several times, each time to deal with a specific question or set of questions, so do not try to solve all of Equatoria's fisheries problems at one time. Please bear in mind that this exercise is a simulation. Equatoria is a fictitious country which is not modeled on any specific West African nation, though some of Equatoria's problems may be encountered here and there in real countries. Any possible similarities between Equatoria and actual African nations are however unintended and purely coincidental. Good luck with your assignment !.
19 Appendix 4.1.
BACKGROUND NOTES ON EQUATORIA.
General The Republic of Equatoria is a West Africa country which gained independence in 1960. At the time, it has the most part in the rich agricultural areas of the Central Province. It's coastal belt has traditionally been sparsely populated. The sandy plains of Western Province, the mangrove swamps of Delta Province and the steep mountains of Eastern Province are for the most part unsuitable for cultivation. Equatoria's rich mineral deposits, particularly copper and bauxite, have long been the backbone of the country's economy. A railway linking the mining areas in Northern Province and the main port in the south, was completed in the 1950's and Portville has since grown to become the largest town in the country. The first 15 years of its existence, remained very much a closed country to the outside world except for certain European nations who purchased much of the country's mining products. After the death of the country's first president in 1975, a more liberal regime took over. Equatoria opened up more, and many young workers from neighbouring countries started to drift in, particularly to Portville. The elections of 1987, however, brought a new government to power, and one of its first actions was to expel all foreigners without legal immigration papers from its territory. By 1990, Equatoria's population had increased to about 10.5 million.
Fisheries Inland fisheries, including estuary fisheries in the delta of the Equatoria river, was traditionally more important than marine fisheries. Before the founding of Portville, the coast of Western Province was virtually uninhabited, and the strong surf discouraged activities at sea. The principal ethnic group of Delta province, the Tiki, have always been known as skilled fishermen but seldom venture outside their brackish water environment, and then only to operate small beach seines.
20 The only marine fishermen of Equatoria have traditionally been the Toko of Eastern Province where small bays offer some natural protection against the dreaded surf. For most Toko, however, fishing has been a part-time activity and concentrated on simple line-fishing or used gill nets set in shallow water. Some have also specialized in catching lobster on the rocky bottoms offshore of Eastern Province. Even today, most Toko canoes are small, un-motorized dugouts carrying three men at the most. A problem for Eastern Province fishermen has always been poor road communication with the rest of the country, a journey to Portville taking up to two full days. This has been a problem for marketing the fish, and it is only the highly valued lobster that attracts a few fish traders from Portville to make the long journey east to buy marine products. Despite its 450 km coastline, Equatoria is not particularly rich in fish resources, due mainly to a narrow continental shelf covering but 11,000 sq km (see table I for the estimated MSY for its principal species). However, the presence of a small local upwelling area off the Western Province and which was first discovered by the Fisheries Research Centre (FRC) in Portville in the 1960's, boosts the resources of small pelagic species like sardinella and anchovy. The upwelling has been known to fail to appear about once in every decade. During the first 15 years of independence, artisanal fisheries were given no priority at all in official development policies. Instead, a substantial industrial fleet was built up with base in Portville which in fact was mostly owned and run by European countries who paid only nominal fees to operate in Equatorian waters. Shrimp and tuna catches were exported, while most of the other fish was sold to the government of Equatoria in exchange for a substantial part of its mineral production. After 1975, when the new government insisted to pay for the fish caught by the industrial fleet in local currency, most foreign controlled fishing vessels left the country. Those remaining were all owned by the National Fish Company which ran into increasing difficulties in maintaining its vessels in operating condition and to make a profit. Only the export-oriented tuna and shrimp operations remained largely unaffected. At the same time, fishermen from the nearby nation of Tropica started to establish themselves in Portville and the coastal villages of Eastern Province. Tropican fishermen are well known for their fishing skills and operate from large motorized dugout canoes carrying between 10 and 20 men. Their main target has usually been small pelagics caught traditionally with large drift and encircling nets and later also with purse seines. Most of their catches are smoked except for anchovies which are mostly sun-dried. In Portville, this processing work is done by local women who at the same time act as the fishermen's "agents", providing them lodging, food, supplies and if needed also credit. In the villages in Eastern Province, it has been more common for Tropican fishermen to bring their own wives to do the smoking and drying.
21 As a consequence of the problems in the industrial fleet and the arrival of the Tropicans, artisanal fisheries has become as productive as the industrial sector in 1980 and continued to grow steadily until 1986. In 1983, many Tropicans started to employ fine-meshed purse seines in order to catch the seasonal anchovy, provoking outcries from local Toko fishermen who claimed they were also catching juveniles of demersal species which are the main target of these fishermen. Some Toko also claimed the mobile gear of Tropican fishermen destroyed the fixed lobster nets of the Toko. Tropican fishermen, however, have always maintained it would be destructive for them to operate encircling gill nets and purse seines on the rocky grounds favoured by the Toko, and if they lost their lobster nets, this was more due to poor marking of their location for fear that somebody come and steel their lobster catches. In 1985, following a gift of 800 outboard engines from Nippo, the government made a major effort to encourage Equatorian fishermen to engaged more actively in marine fisheries by selling the engines on credit at highly subsidized prices to Tiki and Toko fishermen. However, the attempt did not succeed : Tiki recipients used the engines almost exclusively to engage in transport of people and goods in the delta area, while many Toko sold the engines on, with a profit margin, to Tropican fishermen. Those local fishermen who kept the engines for fishing operations, found running costs to be too high to be able to repay their credit to the government. In 1986, sardinella and anchovy catches showed a drastic decline, fuelling the fire for those who claimed the Tropican purse seines led to overfishing. Researchers at the CFR, however, published a study which showed that for the first time in 13 years, there was no occurrence of an upwelling in Equatoria, concluding that this was the main reason for the decline in pelagic catches. In 1987, the strong measures taken by the new government also affected Tropican fishermen who were given 72 hours to leave the country. Most were forced to leave many of their belongings behind or see them confiscated by overzealous police and customs official. The following year, artisanal fish production in Equatoria fell to its lowest levels since the midseventies and the government could only partly replace the shortfall of fish through increased imports. The government elected in 1987 was short-lived and was replaced in 1989 by a new one which opened up for foreign artisanal fishermen again, under certain conditions. With the 1987 events fresh in mind, many Tropicans were however reluctant to come back, but not all. In 1990, artisanal fish production had again increased, but not up to the levels of the record year of 1984. The same year, the Minister of Fisheries could formally open 5 community fisheries centre built with UN assistance in Eastern Province, two of them with their own ice.
22 plants. With the new highway due to be completed in 1992, fresh fish on ice could then potentially be transported from Eastern Province to Portville, a journey that will take about 8 hours. Table I : Estimated Maximum Sustainable Yields in Equatoria Small pelagics Large pelagics (i.e. tuna) Demersal species Crustaceans tonnes 40,000 8,000 20,000 2,500.
23 TABLE.
EQUATORIA FISHERIES STATISTICS (IN TONS).
24 TABLE.
MARINE ARTISANAL FISHING FLEET IN EQUATORIA.
CANOES Local Number % motorized Foreign Number % motorized FISHERMEN Local Full time Part time Foreign Full time Part time 120 0 130 0 3,000 0 5,000 0 8,500 0 6,500 0 0 0 3,500 0 350 1,200 300 1,250 360 1,150 380 1,190 390 1,220 550 970 420 1,120 430 1,210 15 0 17 50 296 84 442 94 602 96 453 97 0 253 98 1,420 0 1,460 0 1,390 1 1,420 1 1,520 2 1,550 32 1,560 12 1590 8 1960 1975 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990.
26 Appendix 4.2.
ASSIGNMENT I.
Ever since fishermen from Tropica started to come in some numbers, there have been occasional friction between them and the local Toko, but not too much as they have been targeting different resources. With the introduction of the fine-meshed purse seine, however, there have been some incidents involving violence between Toko and Tropican fishermen. The former say the purse seine destroys their gear and catches juveniles of demersal species, while the Tropicans say that without the purse seine they cannot catch the anchovy which is one of the most appreciated foods in Equatoria. The anchovy usually appears for two or three months between August and November. The year is 1983. As the ACAS fisheries team, you are called into Equatoria to try to settle the differences between the two groups of fishermen in collaboration with the Equatoria Dept. of Fisheries.
ASSIGNMENT II.
The year is 1986. The Government of Equatoria has been distributing the 800 40 hp outboard engines to local fishermen through and ad hoc credit scheme in an effort to "modernize" the Tiki and Toko fisheries, but without much success. Both groups continue to fish as they are used to, i.e. the Toko in the estuaries and the Tiki in shallow-waters of the sea. Obviously, the introduction of large outboard engines is not enough to encourage local fishermen to change their traditional ways. At the same time, Tropica fishermen are being blamed for overfishing, causing some ill-feelings against them, although the report from CFR seems to suggest that there are natural causes to the decline in catches. CRF has also made some cost and earning calculations on the operations of both Toko and Tropican canoes, below are the average costs and incomes for each fishing operation ; including depreciation costs : Cost per average fishing operation Toko un-motorized canoe Toko motorized canoe Tropican motorized canoe Income per average fishing operation Toko un-motorized canoe Toko motorized canoe Tropican motorized canoe 200 Eq 400 Eq 7,000 Eq 100 Eq 500 Eq 5,000 Eq.
The government of Equatoria has already indicated that it may purchase more outboard engines to distribute to local fishermen and also that Tropican fishermen may be asked to leave in the near future. What would you advise.
ASSIGNMENT III.
Politics is changing quickly in Equatoria. The foreign fishermen have been expelled only a few months after you last were on assignment. Now, in 1991, the new government considers letting Tropican fishermen into the country, but in a more controlled form. They would also like Tropicans to play an active part in training local Tiki and Toko fishermen. Make suggestions as to how this can be done and outline directives for the future of Equatorian artisanal fisheries.
29 Appendix 4.3.
Results of the Group Work.
Situation I : 1983 1st action Inform and sensitize the fishermen as to the difference between the two types of fishing carried out by the Tokos and Tropicans (lobster and small pelagics). 2nd action Suggest to the Toko that they mark the position of their lobster-pots placed on rocky sea-bed so as to prevent them being unintentionally destroyed by the Tropicans. 3rd action Check with the Equatoria fisheries department whether information is available on the different fishing zones, seasons and period of the year each type of gear is used. If this information is non-existent, it would be useful to establish a system whereby it could be collected. This information would allow the drawing-up of a fishing calendar for the Tokos and the Tropicans. 4th action Suggest to the Tropicans that they plan their migration to Equatoria in periods not coinciding with the use of Toko gear.
Situation II : 1986.
The FRC study reveals that the fall in production observed is caused by a natural phenomenon absence of upwelling) ; it must thus be explained to the Tokos that the Tropicans are also victims of this phenomenon's bad effect.
The profitability study reveals that the Tokos working the estuaries have only a limited fishing area and the net income of their motorized canoes is in fact negative, (-100 Eq) compared to the Tropicans' (+ 2,000 Eq). Therefore, it would seem sensible to suspend the sale of outboard motors on credit to Toko fishermen, as it appears that they are not prepared for motorization as yet.
The Toko fishermen should be trained to use engines, with help from the Tropicans. Afterwards, sales of engines on credit could be started again. Situation III : 1991.
Consult the Tiki and Toko communities and explain the contribution made by the Tropicans to fish supply in Equatoria and the problems with fish imports since the Tropicans were expelled.
Look into the conditions in which the Tokos would accept working with the Tropicans (i.e. have part of the processing and commercialization carried out by Toko women) and aim towards harmonious cohabitation.
Have the studies mentioned above carried out, that is in regard to the fishing zones, fishing seasons and periods of use of each type of gear.
In addition to the five community fishery centres, the Equatorian government should file a request to the United Nations for assistance in training national fishermen. A fishery technician could outline the content of the training programme (training young Equatorian fishermen in fishing techniques, motor maintenance, management, etc...).
Train Toko fishermen's wives in processing techniques and connected activities.
Create easier access to credit for equipment and supplies for the groups of young Equatorian fishermen thus trained.
Reorganize the transportation and commercialization circuits.
31 GROUP II Situation I Group II considered that the best possible way to approach such a question as to start with an impartial familiarization mission to gather and record information, after having consulted existent references available on Equatoria.
Study and research mission A. In the field The different aspects of the real causes of the problem must be studied in the field consulting both the groups of fishermen and the Fisheries Department, and also request support from FRC. Criteria of research : mapping the different fishing zones in Equatoria. There are three scenarios possible here :.
The Toko fishermen are in the right ; their nets have been destroyed, in particular those gill nets set away from the rocky sea-bed.
The Tropican fishermen are in the right ; the nets were not "destroyed", it's merely a question of markers.
The two communities are partially right. The nets in question have been destroyed by the elements outside the two communities, (e.g. trawlers). B. Urgent measures Discussions with both communities, explaining the study to be undertaken, require systematic marking of the set nets and demand that the users of purse seines respect the right of first occupancy. C. Implementation of the study and analysis of results The aim of the study is to identify which of the 3 scenarios should be retained. It will be short-term, (one to six months) in collaboration with the FRC and the Fisheries Department. The terms of reference are as follows : Define the different fishing zones (for anchovy, lobster, demersal species), determine the fishing seasons and the schedules of going to sea and landing for the different kinds of fish; see whether there is spatial compatibility or incompatibility (seasonal or temporal) with regards to these different practices.
32 D. Recommendations These are according to the imagined scenarios. Scenario 1 (the purse seines destroy the gill nets).
use of visible markers.
application of strict regulations to protect the gill nets.
choice of the most appropriate rule to govern the use of purse seines so as to preserve their contribution to the community as well as to protect the gill nets. Choice between : · · · defining separate fishing areas defining distinct fishing seasons establishing different departure and landing times.
Scenario 2 (has no relation to the gill nets) This scenario brings to light a deeper reason for discord than that apparent in the conflict itself. It necessitates two different types of measures be taken : Immediate measures : explanation of the study's results, being particularly insistent with regards to the Tokos. · · request the Tokos to place more noticeable markers on the gill nets request communal supervision of the fishing sites, possibly with the help of the Tropicans, as a gesture of goodwill.
Medium-term measures (1 to 3 years) : launch an in-depth sociological and economic study with the aim of understanding the workings of each community and identify the causes of frustration, resentment or conflict other than those directly connected with maritime fisheries.
33 Scenario 3 (both communities are partly right) The immediate measures are the same as in scenario.
A medium-term study should be carried out as the fact that the Tropicans were accused of a crime they did not commit suggests a climate of distrust that could be prejudicial in the future. Situations II & III Situation 2 served as a basis for recommendations of a general nature for the future of Equatorial fisheries. We can note several troubling factors in this particular situation: · · · 40 HP power engines for fishing shallow waters are excessive absence of consultations with the technical and research services absence of socio-economic studies.
Recommendations.
carry out all the technical studies necessary to define the real needs of these fisheries before accepting such donations in the future. Specify the particular needs to the donor ;.
include the migrant fishermen in the distribution of motor ;.
measures should be taken by the Government to promote integration of the local and foreign communities, taking into consideration the impact of the latter on the environment and host communities ;.
initiate intensive research so as to understand the fishing system as a whole and identify the different aspects of the problem and establish a realistic management and development programme.
34 GROUP III Situation I (Fishing conflict opposing use of fixed gear by local fishermen and mobile ones by the foreign fishermen) Recommendations.
Policies · · · development of, and rendering accessible, the landing sites by the government in order to increase the quality and value of the catches of local fishermen ; check whether any regulations are in force pertaining to mesh-size ; fixed nets to be adequately marked.
Techniques · consult the research centre about the matter before taking any restrictive measures against the use of purse seines.
Situation II · · · the modernization of fishing units must be in accordance with the fishermen's requirements, something which does not appear to be the case here ; the Government should identify the fishermen's real needs in advance ; modernization through acquisition of 40 HP outboard engines is not justified in this case considering the type of fishing undertaken by locals, namely set nets in near-shore waters and the utilization of small canoes not suitable for 40 HP engines ; the claim that the fall in production is caused by the foreign fishermen is not justifiable, which is also refuted by the results of research undertaken ; as to the decision taken at a later date by the Government to deport the foreigners, the following should be remarked : o The local fishermen are unable to take over the whole artisanal fisheries sector ; o In 1986, foreign fish production accounted for 85 % of the artisanal fisheries production ;.
35 o The Government's decision to deport the foreigners will have a negative impact on the total amount captured ; o The Government should concentrate on regularizing the position of the fishermen instead. Situation III · · · · · · · · · · To conduct a census of all fishermen (local and foreign) as well as their fishing units ; Create structures allowing better control of the fishing effort ; Make landing sites accessible by the construction of roads ; Introduce fisheries legislation covering : access to the fisheries fishing zones types of gear used size. Setting-up of a structure of fisheries surveillance ; Creation of an artisanal fishery development project with the aim of : a) training fishermen o to use the echo-sounders, compass and ice boxes for canoes using lines o to use of different types of fishing gear o about saving schemes o in the management of fishing units b) improving fishing and processing techniques c) facilitating access to credit for fishermen. The project will also be directed at migrant fishermen.
