Forest-based Poverty Reduction: A Brief Review of Facts, Figures, Challenges and Possible Ways Forward.1 Olivier Dubois, Forestry Policy and Institutions Branch, FAO.
Agreeing on the concept of poverty and forestry in the context of the forestrypoverty nexus, and how to address it.
There is nowadays a broad consensus about the multi-dimensional and dynamic character of poverty. Growth is therefore not the only route to poverty reduction, and aspects related to distribution of assets (e.g. land), vulnerability and human development are proving equally important. This is reflected in the generally-accepted definition of poverty given by the World Bank (2001a), i.e. "Poverty is a pronounced deprivation of well-being related to lack of material income or consumption, low levels of education and health, vulnerability and exposure to risk, and voicelessness and powerlessness". Forests being one amongst several possible sources of livelihood means for the poor, there is a need to envisage a broad definition of forestry in the context of its linkages with poverty, i.e. one that encompasses sources of forest products outside as well as inside forests. In doing so, the term 'forests' should be interpreted as referring to all forms of tree cover which poor people draw upon for forest outputs (Arnold, 2001). Therefore in this paper the terms `forests' and `forest resources' include trees outside forests, and in particular those included in agroforestry systems. The definition of poverty given above underlines the fact that poverty is not only income and/or food based. This `welfare' aspect of poverty has to be complemented by `asset' poverty; which emphasises the importance of access to assets. Following this line of thinking, a current approach that attempts to go beyond income and food and to include multidimensional characteristics and causes is that of sustainable livelihoods (SL). 2 A livelihood comprises the capabilities, assets and activities required for a means of living. A livelihood is sustainable when it can cope with and recover from stresses and shocks, and maintain or enhance its capabilities and assets both now and in the future, while not undermining the natural resource base (Carney, 1998). See Box 1.
Box 1: Sustainability Sustainability is important if progress in poverty reduction is to be lasting not fleeting. Sustainability of livelihoods rests on several dimensions, including environmental, economic, social and institutional. Livelihoods are sustainable when they: ! are resilient in the face of external shocks and stresses; ! are not dependent upon external support (or if they are, this support should itself be economically and institutionally sustainable) ! maintain the long term productivity of natural resources; ! do not undermine the livelihoods of, or compromise the livelihood options open to others. Source: Ashby and Carney, 1999.
Paper prepared for the International Workshop on "Forests in poverty reduction strategies: Capturing he potential., 01-02 October, 2002, Tuusula, Finland. 2 While the DFID definition is being used in this paper, it should be noted that similar approaches are being used by a number of agencies including CARE, UNDP, Oxfam and FAO.
But what are the assets that are the building blocks of livelihoods? The assets that are analysed are not only natural, physical and financial capital, but also social (kinship and networks) and what is termed human (nutritional levels and health) ­ See Box 2.
Box 2: The five forms of capital required for sustainable livelihoods Natural capital: natural resources such as land, forests, water, wildlife and pastures. Physical capital: (a) privately-owned assets that can be used to increase labour and land productivity such as farm animals, tools, machinery; (b) the publicly-owned economic infrastructure (e.g. roads, electricity supply) and social infrastructure (e.g. schools, hospitals). Financial capital: cash (income and savings) and readily convertible liquid capital. Human capital: health, nutritional levels, educational standards and skills. Social capital: the set of social relationships upon which people can draw to expand livelihood options. These include kinship, friendship, patron-client relations, reciprocal arrangements, membership of formal groups, and membership of organisations which provide loans, grants and other forms of insurance. Source: Carney, 1998.
Sustainable livelihood approaches (SLAs) like the one presented above reflect the three currently accepted dimensions of poverty, i.e. subsistence needs (food, shelter, etc), income and vulnerability/powelessness. The latter dimension of poverty is strongly linked to the limited access of the poor to one or a combination of the livelihood capital assets defined in Box.
This, in turn relates heavily on disparity in bargaining power amongst local stakeholders, with the poor often at a loss in that respect. Therefore, we tend to agree with Baumann (2001) that it would be useful to add a sixth capital asset to those mentioned in Box 2, i.e. political capital, in order to capture the key role played by power aspects in enhancing or reducing opportunities to improving security in relation to subsistence needs, increase income and lessen vulnerability. This in turn points to the importance of governance in addressing poverty issues, a subject that is discussed further in this paper (See Section 3). The need to account for power differences and the political character of land and natural resource management explains the growing consensus amongst environment and development practitioners that one needs to move from participatory to negotiations approaches (Dubois and Lowore, 2000; Leeuwis, 2000, Edmunds and Wollenberg, 2001 and 2002, FAO 2002). However, the implications of such negotiation processes on disadvantaged groups are seldom critically examined, and several practitioners thus also suggest a strategic approach to negotiation, with an emphasis on power brokering, joint social learning and empowerment of weaker parties (Castellanet, 1999; Dubois and Lowore, 2000; Wollenberg et al, 2001; Jiggins and Röling, 2002; Edmunds and Wollenberg, 2002). In their present use, SLAs approach also often fail to take into consideration the importance of informal processes and structures. Yet, these are known to be crucial in the coping strategies of the poor (Silverman, 2000; New Scientist, 2002). One example of this relates to employment; with the proportion of informal to formal jobs in the wood industry sector being estimated to be at least 5-10:13 (ILO, 2002). As regards forest-based poverty reduction, it is important to make a distinction between the `subsistence' informal sector and the large scale ­ often corporate informal sector, as the former is usually a key component of coping livelihood strategies of forest-dependent rural poor; while the latter has often overlooked and sometimes hampered them.
Equivalent to 30-50 million jobs (ILO, 2002).
What do we know about the contribution of forest resources to livelihoods and poverty reduction? Some facts and figures.
The types of livelihoods inputs from forestry.
Forests are important natural capital. Past development efforts have primarily focused on building natural capital, however. Equal attention has not been paid to how such as forests are used in combination with other natural assets and other livelihood assets to sustain livelihoods. This has resulted in gaps in our understanding of the contribution of forest products to sustainable livelihoods and thus poverty reduction (DFID, 1999). The three dimensions of poverty mentioned in section 1 and captured in the sustainable livelihood approach provide a useful way to assess the role of forestry in poverty alleviation, to which we now turn.
Securing subsistence needs.
Forest and tree stocks provide a reserve upon which people can fall back for subsistence and income, especially in times of crop failure, unemployment and other kinds of hardship, or to meet exceptional needs. Forest and tree foods are most extensively used to help meet dietary shortfalls during particular seasons in the year. Energy-rich tree foods such as roots, tubers, leaves, rhizomes and nuts are especially important during emergency periods such as floods, famines, droughts and wars. In addition to food, forests and trees outside forests play often a significant role in meeting the needs of the rural poor, including those related to shelter (building material) and health (medicinal plants).
Increased income.
Although income criteria of poverty when used alone may be criticised, it is recognised that people seek to increase the amount of money coming into the household. Increased income also relates to the idea of economic sustainability of the household. Forest role in increasing income opportunities can come in different guises (Warner, 2000): # Through employment in formal forest industries, and more importantly, in small informal forest-related businesses 4; # As a complement to other sources of income (mainly farm income) 5, and for several forest products, often o a part-time basis and along seasonal patterns. ); # Indirectly, as a source of inputs for non-forest income-generating products (e.g. source of fertility for agricultural products or fodder for livestock). Flexibility of income from forest/tree products is a positive feature for the rural poor. Income generation can be either "lumpy" (e.g. through sales of mature trees planted at the period),.
For instance, the estimate from a national small enterprise survey of 237 000 persons employed in small woodworking, carving, wood fuel, and cane and grass product enterprises in Zimbabwe in 1991 compares with a reported 16 000 employed in forestry and forest industries in the country in that year (Arnold et al., 1994). 5 This can sometimes form a significant part of farmers' income, especially for poorer households (e.g. sale of eucalyptus make some 50% of small farmers' income in Karnataka).
as an opportunity for investment in building up assets); or staggered (e.g. fruit trees) which helps in making ends meet and/or fulfilling social obligations.
Better access to capital assets / more bargaining power.
Although crucial to meeting subsistence needs and increasing income, the political dimension of poverty reduction has only recently been tentatively addressed in the livelihoods approach. Its importance for the poor can be illustrated by the fact that in many instances, rural people place more importance in controlling access to what they see as the forest resources key to their livelihoods than to trade this for more income from these resources, e.g. in Tanzania (Wily, 2000) or India (Sahrin, 2001). Denying access to natural capital alone can significantly deteriorate the status of those who are already worse off and therefore rely more heavily on forest resources, as illustrated from an example in Thailand see Box 3.
Box 3: Impact of Forest Closure on the Poor In Thailand the government tried to conserve a forest by `closing it off' in 1990. This caused major changes in the access to food for the villagers as they used the forest both directly for foods and indirectly as a source of income. The most vulnerable group to increased food insecurity due to the forest closing were the extremely poor households whose rice production was insufficient for up to 10-12 months per year. These households were landless, lacked animals, and were reliant on work as day labourers. Income generation projects focused on animals and so the food insecure households were not able to benefit. Kunarattanapruk, Chokkianapitak, and Saowakontha 1995.
Different patterns of the people/forest relationship.
Tens of millions of people depend on forests, and the contribution of forest resources to their livelihoods can come in different guises, summarised in Box 4.
Box 4: What do poor people get from trees and forests? · Subsistence goods such as fuelwood, medicines, wood for building, rope, bush meat, fodder, mushrooms, honey, edible leaves, roots, fruits · Goods for sale all of the above goods, arts and crafts, timber and other wood products · Income from employment, both in the formal and the informal sectors · Indirect benefits such as land for other uses, social and spiritual sites, environmental services, including watershed protection and biodiversity conservation Source: FAO/DFID, 2001.
However, it is difficult to be very precise about the proportion of poor depending on forest resources because "dependence" can vary according to circumstances and how livelihood patterns evolve over time. Qualitatively speaking however, there is a general agreement about the categories of forest dependence proposed by Byron and Arnold (1999) and Sunderlin et al (2002), i.e. # Forest dwellers, including hunter-gatherers and swidden cultivators; # Farmers living next to forests, who use forests as a complement to livelihood diversification (includes the landless); # Commercial users, including small producers, traders and employees; # Consumers of forest products among the urban poor. The following comments can be made on these categories: # They have been well developed and rationalised for forests, but if the intention is to include those who rely on trees as a whole, then these categories are too forest specific.
The 1.2 billion people mentioned in the World Bank statistics (see Table 1 further) would not fit into any of these categories. Many of those practising agroforestry, or in extensive parkland systems have often little or no interaction with forests. In fact intensification of agroforestry systems in some areas is a direct result of lack of access (e.g. change in legislation, distance) to forests. # These categories are not mutually exclusive. However, it is often convenient to use to make the distinction between two broad categories of "poor", i.e. the `very poor', who use forest resources mainly as a safety net and the `less poor' who have the opportunity to use forest and tree resources beyond meeting their subsistence needs, i.e. as sources of income. It is important to note that these two categories of poor often compete for the local forest resources, e.g. the wealthier may wish to convert forest used as source of food and medicine by the poorest of the poor into agricultural plots. On the other hand, though the wealthier in a community, with more resources to devote to forest product gathering and production, are often the heaviest users, the poor usually derive a greater share of their overall needs from forest products and activities. Therefore, any significant reduction in the local forest and tree capital affects primarily the poorest section of the population (DFID et al, 2002). # Although the distinction between different categories of poor and their relationships to forests is useful it sometimes leads to an exclusive focus on these categories when it comes to tackling poverty through forestry. In doing so, it overlooks key players in the way forestry contributes or not to poverty reduction, such as forestry staff and middlemen. These stakeholders often put pressure on and/or provide valuable services to both categories of poor defined above to satisfy their own needs. Thus, ways and means to address these must be sought when working on forest-based poverty reduction (FBPR). More broadly, this is just one illustration that FBFR will only work if the livelihoods and concerns of the `non-poor' forest stakeholders, and their formal and informal interactions with the poor are also taken into consideration.
Some figures.
Despite the difficulties in characterising "dependence" mentioned in the previous section, an array of figures has been recently produced, aiming at illustrating the magnitude of the linkages between the poor and forestry, and especially the amount of poor dependent on forest resources for their livelihoods. Table 1 summarises some of the more prominent information in that respect. Table 1: Some figures illustrating people and poor's dependency on forests and trees.
Figures (i) People's dependency on forests and trees #.
billion people in the world rely heavily on forest resources for their livelihoods, of which: ! 60 million indigenous people living in the rainforests of Latin America, Southeast Asia and West Africa depend heavily on forests. ! 350 million people living in, or next to, dense forests rely on them for subsistence or income. ! 1.2 billion people in developing countries use trees on farms to generate food and cash. More than 2 billion people rely on biomass fuels (mainly fuelwood) for cooking and heating Forestry provides more than 10 million real jobs in developing countries; to which one should add between 30 and 50 million informal jobs in the Sources World Bank, 2001b.
UNDP, UNDESA and World Energy Council, 2000 Poschen, 2002; ILO, 2002.
wood industry # Natural products (many from forests) are the only source of medicine for 75-90% of people in developing countries FAO, 1996.
(ii) Poor's dependency on forests and trees # One out of four of the world's poor depend directly or indirectly on forests for their livelihood World Bank, 2000.
These figures call for some comments: # Those related to dependence on trees are much larger than those related to forest resources alone. This is just another indication of one point that this paper tries to make clear, i.e. the importance of "getting out of the forest box" and having a landscape perspective on forests when it comes to their linkages with poverty reduction; # Most figures concern the relationship between forests and (usually rural) people, not that between forests and `the poor'. Thus, they include the less poor rural people who also use forest resources. This reflects a general trend in the documentation available on the subject. # The above it reflects the complexity of the forestry-poverty problematic, not least the difficulty to grapple with the key aspect of informal processes and structures in a systematic fashion, and the figures on employment are but one illustration of how important informal processes are in the livelihoods of the poor.
Moving beyond facts and figures and making more sense of the forestrypoverty nexus ­ Some major challenges ahead.
The facts and figures presented in Section 2 show that there is a relationship between forestry and poverty, and they provide some indications on the magnitude and nature of the dependency of the poor on forest. However, they are desperately inadequate when it comes to making sense of the quality of this relationship, how it evolves over time and how it relates to non-forest livelihood strategies. Indeed, despite ample evidence of the crucial role forest resources often play as safety nets and sources of income for the rural poor, the relationship between forest resources and poverty alleviation is far from straightforward. Promoting this link is challenging because of the very nature of some forest products and services, and the fact that these links often hinge on relationships between the poor and other actors in he forestry sector. This is a complex matter, i.e. Some cons: # The long rotation of forest trees entails low short-term profitability of sustainable forest management (SFM) and tree-planting, compared to goods that produce faster returns, typically agricultural products (including horticultural goods)6; # Timber production attracts powerful "outside" interests, and therefore requires sufficient bargaining power; which the poor often lack; # Forests may provide more environmental services than agricultural land, but, to date, mechanisms to make these services competitive with other land uses for the poor are still lacking; # The poor have often little comparative advantage when it comes to making sufficient income out of forest resources. While there are less and less doubts about the value of indigenous knowledge as regards the "tending" of natural resource, this knowledge seldom concerns the commercialisation of forest goods, and in particular timber. Moreover, the poorest of the poor are sometimes at a disadvantage due to a shortage of manpower to harvest forest products in such households compared to wealthier ones. Some pros: # Forest often provides a safety net to the poor because the harvesting or hunting of its products does not require strong rights to the land, as opposed to agriculture. The poorer households with sufficient manpower often sell forest products to wealthier families, e.g. in some villages of Mali (Kerkhof, 2000); # Utilisation of some forest products (e.g. non-wood forest products) do not necessarily require heavy investments; # Where sufficiently strong, traditional rules sometime contain poverty adjustments. For instance in the Alamodiou traditional ruling system that covers fifty villages in the.
This is particularly the case where the forest asset itself has little monetary value, as in Sahel. For instance, Kerkhof (2000) reports cases in the Kelka and Bankass forests of Mali, where revenues from fuelwood sales account for at least 4 times less income than those from the trade of agricultural products. Market-oriented agriculture (including livestock) provides more income even in the case of the relatively successful Energie II/Rural Fuelwood Market World Bank Project in Niger (Kerkhof, 2000).
Bankass district of Mali, villages known to be poor pay less taxes and fees in relation to access forest resources (Kerkhof, 2000); # The relationships between people and forests often expand beyond commercial exploitation in that forest has often a strong cultural value to forest dwellers. However, the extent to which these values provide enough incentives for conservation and/or sound use depends on several factors, including the strength of traditional leadership and the pressure on the forest itself. Furthermore, where lacking or lost, it is often a daunting task for change agents to create/recreate such spiritual incentives. In such cases, such incentives do not constitute a useful entry point for bringing about change; # Forest and trees can often be combined with other resources in ways that achieve multiple uses for the poor with satisfactory production-environment trade-offs, e.g. the case agroforests in Indonesia (Foresta and Michon, 1990). The above shows that there are no simple causal links between forest management and poverty. The four types of associations described by Mayers (1997) and presented in Figure 1 further illustrate this. Figure 1: Four possible associations between poverty and forests.
`Poverty increase' `Forest Reduction' A Poor do not benefit from unsustainable use of forest resources (e.g. some high impact logging in Central Africa) C Poor are affected by reduced access to land and forests (e.g. through protected forests) `Poverty Reduction B Poverty is reduced by forest conversion to e.g. extensive farming D Less pressure on forest due to e.g. agriculture intensification or employment opportunities in environmentally-friendly enterprises, or outside forests.
`Forest increase'.
Adapted from Mayers (1997).
This Figure shows in particular that: # Only the environment-friendly enterprises can implement forest management likely to reduce poverty (i.e. situation D). The other situations are likely to actually enhance a separation between forests and people; # However, context is all-important, and shifts between the situations described above can occur over time. For instance, a logging company might have different influences on poverty and forests according to its logging practices or employment policies (e.g. % of local versus outside workers); influence of agriculture as a source of income will affect the links differently depending on local farming practices, etc. Linking active participation to poverty reduction might prove quite challenging when it comes to collaborative forest management (CFM). Not only are the poor often those finding most difficult to "self-mobilise", but once self empowered through CFM, they might find it more rewarding to engage in non-forest activities. CFM actions aimed at bringing or keeping forest dwellers close to the forest might actually end up reducing the relationship. But is it such a bad thing, if one sees this dynamic from a livelihood perspective? Is the objective of CFM to maintain the forest, or to raise people livelihoods? Surely it is a success if through collaborative forest.
management, other options open up and people are released from their dependency on their forest. Likewise it is positive since the type of livelihood chosen by newly empowered people is their prerogative. In short, depending on the type of new livelihood chosen by these newly.
empowered rural people, pressure on the forest might be reduced (e.g. if they engage in offfarm work) or increased (e.g. if they increase their farming areas). To complicate matters further, forestry is often in competition with other livelihood options when it comes to achieving better livelihoods for the poor. A particular point in case relates to the mutual interactions between agriculture, forestry and poverty. Some recent work by CIFOR (Angelsen and Kaimowitz, 2001) has significantly helped us understanding some important dimensions in the agricultural technology change-deforestation link. But not much comprehensive work has been carried out regarding how these interactions in turn influence poverty beyond anecdotal examples. This is illustrated in Figure 2, and shows one example of the scope of our knowledge gap regarding these matters. Figure 2: Important dimensions in the agricultural technology changesdeforestation links and deforestation.
Dimensions of the agricultural technology-deforestation link Reduced Intensive (high) Constrained Local Yield-increasing Local, segmented Intensive (lowland) Global Short term Impacts on deforestation Labour & capital intensity Framer characteristics Output market Technology Labour market Sectors experiencing technological change Scale of adoption Time horizon of analysis Increased Saving (low) Well-off Global Cost-saving Mobile labour (migration) Frontier areas (uplands) Local Long term How do these different dimensions and their impact on agriculture and forests influence poverty? Impact on poverty.
Adapted from Angelsen and Kaimowitz (2001).
In short, while there certainly are important links between many rural poor and forest resources, the potential of forest-based poverty reduction should not be exaggerated. Some would argue that it is actually rather limited (Wunder, 2001; Poschen, 2002). Most potential seems to lie in the safety net function of forest resources in times of hardship for the poor. On the other hand, the advantages of forestry are likely to be much less obvious when it comes to income generation, especially in comparison to other livelihood options. In this case it is often at best a complement to other income-generating activities. However, one should not underestimate the indirect importance of forest resources, i.e. as a means to access and/or secure other capital assets that directly affect the poor, such as water supply and quality, soil fertility, and bargaining power.
Linking Livelihood Approaches, Sustainable Forest Management/NFPs and Poverty Reduction /PRSPs.
According to the Forest principles developed at the UNCTAD Conference in 1992, Sustainable Forest Management (SFM) is "the management of forest resources and forest lands in a way which ensures that the goods and services derived from the forest meet the social, economic, ecological, cultural and spiritual needs of present and future generations". National forest programmes are recognised through the IPF/IFF proposals for action as important means for addressing forest sector issues in a holistic, comprehensive and multisectoral manner, and thus promote SFM. In this context, national forest programmes (NFPs) are seen as the ongoing forest policy dialogue occurring in various forms in most countries. On the other hand, in recent years, Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPS) have increasingly become the national frameworks for tackling poverty at national level, and also the basis for country assistance programmes by many cooperation agencies. Finally, despite their weaknesses, livelihood approaches seem to provide a good starting point to assess and appraise situations where pro-FBPR interventions are envisaged. Based on the above, the greatest need for capturing the potential of FBPR strategies may be for: # A policy and legal framework that legitimises access to capital assets and increases bargaining power of the poor in that respect; # National strategies and action plans that clearly and adequately link NFPs to PRSPs; # Much more work on the interface between SFM and SLAs, and in particular on the operationalisation of inter-sectoral and multi-disciplinary approaches; # One first step in that direction is to recognise the diverse nature of rural livelihoods. In particular, this would require forestry to be considered in a land use perspective ­ dynamic over time - with sustainable forest management (SFM) as one amongst several sustainable livelihoods options for the poor. One key consequence of this would be that forest changes such as deforestation should not necessarily be seen as negative per se. The right question in this case would be: who wins and who looses from deforestation, with a particular emphasis on the poor; # Finally, development of local governance7 mechanisms (both formal and informal); which ensure use of this bargaining power by the poor, and the necessary capacities to sustain these Given the importance of informality in the livelihood strategies of the poor, both formal and informal governance should be considered. Figure 3 attempts to illustrate the above points, and notably the fact that, without good governance capacities and enabling policies, bringing together the requirements of SFM and those of sustainable livelihoods as a key condition for forest-based poverty reduction, is likely to live short of expectations.
Governance can be defined as the structures and processes that determine the way policies are formulated and implemented and the power relationships between the stakeholders involved in these processes and structures.
Linking Sustainable Forest Management, Sustainable Livelihood Approaches and Forest-Based Poverty Reduction.
Good Governance & Enabling Policies.
To operationalise the SFM/SLA interface S.
To achieve Forest-based Poverty Reduction SLAs.
Doing something about forest-based poverty reduction: FAO's recent contribution.
FAO's mandate has always been very close to that of poverty reduction since it concerns a key dimension of it, i.e. food security. As far as FAO's Forestry Department is concerned, work on poverty has recently received some extra boosting in different guises, i.e. A recent workshop on "The Role of Forestry in Poverty Alleviation" A Poverty Strategy; The creation of new programme entities relevant to poverty Information-communication on FBPR Strengthened support to national forest programmes in the form of the National Forest Programme Facility (NFPF); # A proposal for a partnership programme on "forestry for sustainable livelihoods" # # # # # These different elements are briefly presented hereafter.
The outputs of the Tuscany Forum and other recent work.
In September 2001 the Forestry Department of FAO held a Forum on "The role of Forestry in Poverty Alleviation", with DFID support. The discussions held during this Forum resulted in a Policy Brief (http://www.fao.org/forestry/fon/fonp/cfu/brochure/brochure.stm) containing an "Agenda for Action" which highlights 4 points of action for international agencies to take into account in terms of increasing forestry contribution to poverty alleviation. These points are presented in Table.
They have been recently reiterated and complemented by those proposed in a recent document on poverty-environment linkages jointly produced by DFID, EC, UNDP and the World Bank (DFID et al, 2002); and the later are thus also presented in Table 2.
Two examples of recent proposals of agendas for action to improve poverty-environment/forestry outcomes.
Agenda for Action proposed in the joint DFID/EC/UNDP/WB document on poverty-environment linkages A. Improve Governance ! Integrate poverty-environment issues into national development frameworks ! Strengthen decentralization for environmental management ! Empower civil society, in particular poor and marginalized groups ! Address gender dimensions of poverty-environment issues ! Strengthen anti-corruption efforts to protect the environment and the poor ! Reduce environment-related conflict ! Improve poverty-environment monitoring and assessment. B. Enhance the assets of the poor ! Strengthen resource rights of the poor ! Enhance capacity of the poor to manage the environment ! Expand access to environmentally-sound and locally appropriate technology ! Reduce the environmental vulnerability of the poor. C. Improve the quality of growth ! Integrate poverty-environment issues into economic policy reforms ! Increase the use of environmental valuation ! Encourage appropriate private sector involvement in pro-poor environmental management ! Implement pro-poor environmental fiscal reform. D. Reform International and industrial country policies ! Reform international and industrial country trade policies ! Make foreign direct investment more pro-poor and proenvironment ! Enhance the contribution of multilateral environmental agreements to poverty reduction ! Encourage sustainable consumption and production ! Enhance the effectiveness of development cooperation and debt relief. Source: DFID,EC,UNDP ad WB, 2002.
Agenda for Action from the FAO/DFID Tuscany Forum A. Strengthening Rights, Capabilities and Governance ! Support the poor's own decision-making power ! Strengthen forest rights of the poor and the means to claim them ! Recognize links between forestry and local governance.
B. Reducing Vulnerability ! Make safety nets not poverty traps ! Support tree planting outside forests ! Cut the regulatory burden on the poor and make regulation affordable C. Capturing Emerging Opportunities ! Remove the barriers to market entry ! Base land use decisions on true value of forests ! Ensure that markets for environmental services benefit the poor ! Support associations and financing for local forest businesses D. Working in Partnership ! Simplify policies and support participatory processes ! Promote multisectoral learning and action ! Enhance interagency collaboration ! Make NGOs and the private sector partners in poverty reduction.
Source: FAO/DFID 2001.
These points for action cut across all the facets of the forest sector and similarly across the FAO Forestry Department. They highlight issues that require interdisciplinary planning and action, and functional partnerships amongst those providing support. A proposal in that sense is discussed in Section 5.2.
Recent progress at FAO to carry forward the FBPR agenda for action.
Since September 2001, FAO has made some tangible progress in its thrust to contributing to the implementation of the agenda for action that resulted from the Tuscany Forum. This has occurred in different ways, including strategic, institutional, information-communication and programmatic aspects. These are summarised in Table 3.
Major FAO actions to implement the forestry-poverty agenda for action since the Tuscany Forum (September 2001).
Specific Actions A Strategy for developing a poverty focus in the work of the Forestry Department developed and being implemented Inter-Divisional Task Force on Poverty set up in March 2002 Institutional Several new programme entities (PEs) relevant to poverty to be created in the context of FAO's Medium-Term 2004-2009: Policy Brief translated in 5 languages and widely disseminated (about 4,000 copies so far) Presentation and distribution of the Policy Brief at FAO Conference (November 2001) and the World Food Summit + 5 (June 2002).
Aspects of FAO's progress Strategic.
Information-Communication Forest, poverty alleviation and food security a main theme for State of Forests (SOFO ) and Committee on Forests (COFO) 2003 Participation to the International Workshop on "Forestry and Poverty Reduction ­ How can development, research and training agencies help?", Edinburgh, June 2002 Strengthening of FAO's support to national forest programmes through the national forest programme Facility Programmatic More emphasis on negotiation and partnership approaches ! Forest extension through muti-stakeholder partnerships ! A proposal for a post-2002 partnership programme on livelihoodoriented forestry.
Some of the actions mentioned in Table 3 are briefly presented below. (i) New programme entities relevant to poverty FAO's medium term plan for the period 2004-2009 envisages several two new programme entities relevant to poverty within the Forestry Department, i.e. on "Forest Policies and Governance", "Forests, Poverty Alleviation and Food Security", "Forests and Water" and "Planted forest and Trees outside Forests". In addition the current entity on Forest Participation" will become "Forest Participation and Sustainable Livelihoods". These changes are important from an institutionalisation point of view. Indeed, the existence of programme entities implies a commitment by FAO to allocate funds from Member States contribution to FAO's Regular Programme as well as other resources to the activities included in these entities. (ii) The Poverty Strategy of the Forestry Department An Inter-Divisional Taskforce on Poverty (ITP) is operational within the Forestry Department since March 2002. Following the wide dissemination of the Policy Brief, it is envisaged that FAO member states will increasingly be looking for assistance from the Forestry Department in the development of forestry programmes with a poverty focus. In order to meet the expectations of member states and donor partners, it has become clear a stronger focus on poverty is needed in the Forestry Department. A strategy to that end has been drawn and is being implemented. There are four steps to be implemented between September 2002 and March 2003:.
Internal stock-taking exercise.
Plan overall framework for FO work in support of poverty alleviation.
Identify activities for a programme entity on Forests, Poverty Alleviation and Food Security.
Draft project concept notes for possible extra-budgetary funding. (iii) The National Forest Programme Facility (NFPF) The need to maintain a broad base of support across civil society is fundamental to the success of national forest programmes, and flexibility is required for these programmes to encompass and address new issues and opportunities. In order to facilitate broad involvement by civil society and in order to bring the latest forest information to bear on the forest policy dialogue, the National Forest Programme Facility (in short the "Facility") was created by a group of concerned countries alongside of FAO. The Facility focuses especially on knowledge sharing and capacity building in the forestry sector and assists to upgrade the role of information and knowledge to ensure the informed participation of a broad range of stakeholders in the national forestry debate. The Facility also seeks to effectively link forest policy and planning with the broader national objectives, strategies and programmes particularly to those related to poverty alleviation. The Facility concentrates on improving enabling conditions towards sustainable forest management through capacity building and knowledge sharing rather than through project funding. Critical to the success of the programme will be the development of partnerships among governments with civil society, institutions, private sectors, forest dependent people, and donors and NGOs. The Facility operates with a two-pronged strategy: Direct country-level support to assist countries in building up the capacity of governmental and civil society actors involved in an NFP process in order to enable them to successfully manage and develop such processes. The expected key outputs of the direct country-level support are improvements in: # capacity of the national actors to manage the NFP process in a participatory manner; # coherence and synergies between the NFP process and broader policy and planning processes; # civil society participation in the NFP process, especially regarding the capacity of the forest-dependent people and other marginalised groups (such as the rural poor) to make themselves heard in the process; # availability of information and knowledge relevant to the NFP; # capacity for policy analysis, negotiation and formulation; # systematic use of local knowledge, experiences and capabilities in the above processes; # access to internationally available information and knowledge; # sharing of knowledge between institutions and actors both nationally and internationally. Information services: The Facility will develop and maintain a forest information platform to facilitate the exchange of information and knowledge relevant to NFP processes. These services are provided by the Facility to strengthen the overall momentum for effective implementation of NFPs by sharing experiences and knowledge world-wide. The platform will rely on knowledge networks and communities of practice to link and provide access to experiences in other countries and to the global body of forest related knowledge. (iv) Forest extension though equitable partnerships and markets The theme of FAO's work in forest extension is to promote problem solving, participatory and multi-stakeholder approaches to enhance the contribution of trees and forests to sustainable land use, and food security (FAO, 2002). It uses approaches that tackle issues of social justice, using principles of dialogue, mutual respect and learning among stakeholders, balanced with parameters of ecological sustainability.
The extension programme is elaborating and implementing five main partnership models based on principles of social, economic equity (FAO, 2002): # links between farm foresters and the private sector; # farmers associations in small-scale agroforestry and non-industrial private forestry, facilitating understanding of the structure and dynamics of the product marketing chain, negotiation among market actors, organisational learning and group promotion; # participatory joint action learning among stakeholders in plantation forestry, including communities, farm foresters, he private sector, non-governmental organisations and government; # clearinghouses for technical and marketing information related to tree and forest products; # benefit-sharing mechanisms. The activities described above are developed in the context of and in close collaboration with national forest programmes (v) A proposal for a post-2002 Partnership Programme on "forestry for sustainable livelihoods" (FSL) The basic concept of this partnership programme proposal is that enabling policies and equitable governance are important to operationalise the interface between SFM and sustainable livelihood approaches; this itself being a crucial factor to enhance the contribution of forestry to poverty reduction. In this proposal, multi-stakeholder, adaptive policy processes and supportive institutional capacities ­ based on negotiated roles - are deemed two key factors to achieve this. The Forestry for Livelihoods (FSL) programme would address this challenge through a learning process that would involve FAO and partners in four key areas: # # # # Development of locally-designed and operational good-governance mechanisms; Development of approaches for adaptive multi stakeholder policy making processes; Enhancement of knowledge generation and sharing related to livelihood-oriented forestry; Development of equitable, transparent and cost-effective communication mechanisms.
The emphasis on learning is based on lessons from past experience regarding national forest processes, i.e. that implementation involves processes of continuous improvement for understanding and coping with change. FSL would act in synergy with the ongoing support to national forest programmes, including the National Forest Programme Facility (NFPF). Figure 4 attempts to illustrate how these different components of the FSL programme relate to each other, and Annex 1 presents its goal, purposes, outputs and preliminary ideas on sets of activities to be included in the programme.
Linking SFM/NFPs and SLAs/FBPR through the FSL Partnership Programme.
National Forest Programme Facility.
Knowledge Sharing.
Adaptive and Multistakeholder Policy Processes.
Capacity Building, based on negotiated roles and needs.
Knowledge Generation on topics relevant to LivelihoodOriented Forestry.
Good Governance.
Better interface between SLAs and SFM.
Forest-based poverty reduction.
The nfp Learning Cycle.
The Knowledge Sharing Box and the black arrows compose the communication aspects of the good governance learning cycle.
The FSL partnership Programme is likely to make a difference for different reasons, i.e. # It combines work on policy approaches and on local level governance mechanisms, thus linking macro and micro level processes. This combination is likely to reduce the barriers for scaling up participatory forestry initiatives and strengthen efforts to achieve SFM; # The Programme will therefore increase and sustain the involvement of small-scale forest users in decisions pertaining to forestry matters; # This work on policy and local level processes will build on FAO and other partners' recognised experience on participatory approaches and community forestry, and these are crucial to scale up SFM and the contribution of forestry to sustainable livelihoods; # It will benefit FAO's comparative advantages, including: $ Its UN status makes it a neutral forum for debates and exchange of experience, and this is essential in this type of Programme; $ The UN status also allows for world-wide influence of given the existence of formal mechanisms to support the 180 or so Member States that compose FAO's governing body; $ The wealth of multidisciplinary experience that can be tapped within FAO $ FAO is the Chair of the Collaborative Partnership on Forest (CPF), an international partnership which represents the willingness and commitment of its member organisations to support the work of UNFF and to enhance co-operation and collaboration amongst partners; $ FAO's widely acknowledged key role in and significant capacity for supporting national forestry processes and community/participatory forestry as crucial means to achieve SFM and sustainable livelihoods; $ Its considerable experience in gathering, digesting, producing and disseminating information and knowledge in a user-friendly and objective way. For these reasons, it is proposed that FAO coordinates the programme; # This will be a Programme "without walls", which emphasizes networking, capacity building, and strong partnerships. # Its flexible modalities will further increase impact, by tailoring action to circumstances and partners and seeking strategic alliances. Examples of this flexibility include: The modular character of the programme, i.e. different partners will be able to lead on different parts of the programme. For instance, thought its poverty strategy, the Forestry Department of FAO has already started working on the poverty module of the FSL programme (i.e. activities.
in Annex 1) and on ways to adapt management plans to livelihood-oriented forestry (see activity.
in Annex 1); $ One consequence of the above is that neither FAO nor any other partner will be in charge of the funds needed to implement the programme.
Acknowledgements.
The author would like to acknowledge the useful contribution from colleagues of the Forestry Department of FAO, and more particularly those of Christine Holding Anyonge, Dominique Reeb, Syaka Sadio, Froylan Castaneda and François Wencélius.
The content of this paper expresses the authors' views and does not necessarily reflect FAO's position.
Angelsen, A. and Kaimowitz, D. 2001. Agricultural technology and forests: A recapitulation. Oxon, UK, CABI Publishing in Agricultural technologies and tropical deforestation, pp 383-402. Arnold. J.E.M. 2001. Role of Forestry in Poverty Alleviation. Introductory Note to the FAO/DFID International Forum on "The role of Forestry in Poverty Alleviation", September 2001, Cortevecchia, Italy. Arnold, J.E.M.; Liedholm, C. Mead, D.; and Townson, I.M. 1994. Structure and growth of small enterprises using forest products in southern and eastern Africa. OFI Occasional Paper No 47, Oxford, UK. Alden Wily, L. 2000. Community involvement in the management of forests in Eastern and Southern Africa at the beginning of the 21st century. Ashby, C. and Carney, D. 1999. Sustainable livelihoods: lessons from early experience. DFID, London, UK. Baumann, P. and Sinha, S. 2001. Linking Development with Democratic Processes in India: Political Capital and Sustainable Livelihoods Analysis. ODI Natural Resource Perspectives, Number 68, June 2001. Byron, R.N. and Arnold, J.E.M. 1999. What futures for the people of the tropical forests? World Development 27(5), pp. 789-805. Carney, D. 1998. Implementing the sustainable livelihood approach. In D. Carney (ed.). Sustainable rural livelihoods: what contribution can we make? DFID, London, UK Carter, J. 1999. Recent experience in collaborative forest management approaches: A review of key issues. The World Bank, Washington. Catellanet, C. 1999. Les "plate-formes de négociation »entre usagers des ressources naturelles : Expérimentation avec des municipalités du front pionnier amazonien. GRET, janvier 1999. DFID, EC, UNDP and World Bank 2002. Linking Poverty Reduction and Environmental Management­ Policy Challenges and Opportunities. July 2002.
DFID 1999. Sustainable livelihoods guidance sheets: framework. London, UK. Dubois, O and Lowore, J. 2000. The `journey towards' collaborative forest management in Africa: Lessons learned and some `navigational aids' ­ An overview. IIED Forestry and Land Use Programme Series No15, July 2000. Edmunds, D. and Wollenberg, E. 2002. Disadvantaged groups in multistakeholder negotiations. CIFOR Programme Report, June 2002, CIFOR, Bogor, Indonesia Edmunds, D. and Wollenberg, E. 2001. A Strategic Approach to Multistakeholder Negotiations. Development and Change, Vol. 32 (2001), pp 231-253. FAO 2002. Equitable partnerships, markets and forest extension. Forestry Information NotesUpdated August 2002. FAO/DFID 2001. How Forests Can Reduce Poverty. Policy Brief, November 2001. FAO 1996. Forestry and Food Security. Brochure prepared for the World Food Summit, 1996. Foresta, H.,de and Michon, G. 1990. Complex agroforestry systems and conservation of biological diversity. In: Harmony with Nature ­ International Conference on the Conservation of Biodiversity, Kuala Lumpur, pp488-500. ILO 2002. http://www.ilo.org/public/public/english/dialogue/sector/sectors/forest/emp.htm. Jiggins, J. and Röling, N. 2002. Adaptive Management: Potential and Limitations for Ecological Governance of Forests in a Context of Normative Pluriformity. IUCN SUI Tech. Series, Vol.
Kerkhof, P. 2000. Local forest management in the Sahel: Towards a new social contract. Version 4, 15/02/2000 of a SOS-Sahel Report edited by Gerald Foley (forthcoming), 53 p. Kunarattanapruk, K.; Chokkianapitak, J. and Saowakontha, S. 1995. Thailand dependency on forests tree products for food security. In Bogle, H.C. Chu and N.T. Yen (eds.). Dependency on forests and tree for food security. Proceedings of an International seminar, Hanoi, Vietnam, 5-8 December 5-8 December 1994, Forest Research Centre, Ministry of Forestry, Vietnam. Leeuwis, C 2000. Reconceptualizing participation for sustainable rural development: Towards a negotiation approach, Development and change Vol.31, pp. 931-959, Institute of Social Studies, Blackwell Publishers, Oxford, UK Mayers, J. 1997. Poverty and forests: A preliminary review of the issues, and how they can be tackled. Unpublished, IIED, London. New Scientist. 2002. How the other half live. Interview of Theodor Sarin, Issue of 3rd of August, 2002, pp44-47. Poschen, P. 2002. The Forests, The Poor and The Foresters. Presentation for the International Workshop on "Forestry and Poverty Reduction ­ How can development, research and training agencies help", Edinburgh, 13th of June, 2002.
Sahrin, M. 2001. From right holders to `beneficiaries'? Community forest management, van panchayats and village forest joint management in Uttarakhand. Paper for CIFOR (forthcoming) Silverman, J.M. 2000. Governance and Poverty ­ An Alternative Paradigm. A paper prepared for presentation at a Seminar at the Universidad Catolica Boliviana (La Paz), December 01, 2000. Sunderlin, W.D.; Angelsen, A. and Wunder, S. 2002. Forests and Poverty Alleviation. Draft Paper for SOFO 2003 (forthcoming.) UNDP, UNDESA (United Nations Department for Economic and Social Affairs), and World Energy Council. 2000. World Energy Assessment, UNDP, New York. Warner, K. 2000. Forestry and sustainable livelihoods: What part can forests and forestry play in reducing poverty? Unasylva, 202, Vol. 51, 2000, pp. 3-12.
Wollenberg, E.; Anderson, J. and Edmunds, D. 2001.Pluralism and the less powerful: Accommodating multiple interests in local forest management. International Journal of Agricultural Resources, Governance and Ecology Volume 1 Nos ¾ 2001 World Bank, 2001b. A Revised Forrest Strategy for the World bank Group. Draft 30 July 2001, WB, Washington, DC. World Bank. 2001a. World Development Report 2000/2001: Attacking Poverty. Oxford: Oxford University Press. World Bank. 2000. World Bank reviews global forest strategy. News Release No. 2000/193/S. http://wbln0018.worldbank.org/news/pressrelease.nsf. Wunder, S. 2001. Poverty alleviation and tropical forests-what scope for synergies? World Development 29 (11), November 2001.
Overall goal: Contribution of forestry to sustainable livelihoods and poverty alleviation is enhanced Immediate Objective/Purpose: To develop enabling conditions for the formulation and implementation of livelihood-oriented forest policies Output 1: Generation of strategic Output 2: Support the Output 3: Support the strengthening Output 4: Support access to & Output 5: Enhancement of information & knowledge relevant to development of multiof institutional capacities to dissemination of information ownership by users and livelihood-oriented forestry stakeholder approaches to the formulate and implement adaptive and knowledge related to coordination between partners in formulation of adaptive policies livelihood-oriented forest policies at livelihood-oriented forestry at order to maximise impact of the and regulations towards local and national levels local, national and international other outputs livelihood-oriented forestry levels.
Review current needs,.
Establishment of strategic.
Contribute to the development.
Selection of 'focal' countries and.
Establishment of a programme partnerships outside and within 'focal' of approaches regarding adaptive in-country partners. means, best practices and steering committee at international countries and multi-stakeholder policy approaches in terms of level composed of representatives of.
Awareness raising on the processes, including: communication networking and main partners and 'focal' countries.
Contribute to the development of advantages of livelihood-oriented information flows at local, national · Participatory learning approaches/ methods regarding : forestry for forests, policy makers and and international levels, with a.
Development of a comprehensive regarding the contribution of people. focus on the topics of outputs 1,2 M&E system, concerning both · Valuation of forest services and the forestry to sustainable and.
operational and substantive aspects of custodian role of small-scale forest livelihoods and poverty.
Needs assessment/constraints the Programme users in that respect; alleviation; analysis in terms of technical and.
Develop an overall, · Financing mechanisms for · Linked to the above, locally governance/institutional capacities to integrated communication plan in.
Development of review livelihood-oriented forestry; designed good governance achieve livelihood-oriented forestry, support of the FSL Programme. procedures, at both country and mechanisms; · Marketing strategies for small-scale including those mentioned under international levels (e.g. review · Approaches aimed at linking forest producers, and how to link outputs 1 and.
4.3. Develop approaches towards committees of approaches and/or the micro and macro these to the financing of livelihoodcost-effective informationguidelines) decision-making levels oriented forestry.
Training of trainers as regards communications means to regarding forestry matters. · Inclusion of forest & tree tenure approaches and concepts related to achieve livelihood-oriented.
Tailoring of programme work to status in national forest inventories livelihood-oriented forestry, including forestry. local circumstances through the.
Testing of the above and surveys; those mentioned under outputs 1 and inclusion of inception phases at the · Adaptation of management plans to approaches in 'focal' countries.
4.4. Support the development beginning of the Programme and at the the requirements of livelihoodand strengthening of information launching stage of work in 'focal'.
Development of oriented forestry.
Support the integration of networks and other mechanisms countries recommendations and/or approaches and concepts related to at local, national and international approaches regarding the.
Development of Principles, Criteria livelihood-oriented forestry in levels, as part of a learning.
Involvement of partners in the inclusion of strategic information & Indicators for assessing the role of curriculum material and programmes. process on livelihood-oriented selection of the Programme Coand knowledge in policy forestry in poverty alleviation. forestry. ordinating Team. processes.
Support the development of.
Testing of approaches/methods on capacities for the development of cost4.5. Develop the role of FAO's.
Review of the work of the Forestry.
Production of generic and the above topics in 'focal' countries. Forestry Department as an Department of FAO and other specific analysis, guidelines and/or effective and equitable information & communication means at local, national international centre for executing agencies as regards approaches on the above, as.
Production of generic and specific and international levels. information exchange in support forestry-poverty links, in order to deemed necessary. analysis, guidelines, approaches on the of the Programme. improve the support of FAO's Forestry above topics, as deemed necessary. Department in that respect.
