RAP Publication 2004/07.
Report of the.
FAO-ASEAN STRATEGIC PLANNING WORKSHOP ON HARMONIZATION OF STANDARDS FOR SHRIMP EXPORT-IMPORT.
Bangkok, 4 to 6 November 2003.
Report of the FAO-ASEAN STRATEGIC PLANNING WORKSHOP ON HARMONIZATION OF STANDARDS FOR SHRIMP EXPORT-IMPORT Bangkok, 4 to 6 November 2003.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS.
Bangkok, 2004.
DISCLAIMER The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this document do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the United Nations or the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO) or of the Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia-Pacific (NACA) concerning the legal or constitutional status of any country, territory or sea area, or concerning the delimitation of frontiers or boundaries.
NOTICE OF COPYRIGHT All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holder. Application for such permission should be addressed to the Aquaculture Officer, FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, Maliwan Mansion, Phra Athit Road, Bangkok 10200, Thailand.
PREPARATION OF THIS DOCUMENT Due to the increasing concerns regarding disparities in quality control and inspections standards among ASEAN countries and the ability to export seafood commodities (especially shrimp) to other regions, the ASEAN Sectoral Working Group on Fisheries (ASWGFi) meeting in Lao PDR in May 2003 formed an ASEAN Sectoral Task Force to harmonize quality and inspection standards for shrimp export and imports in the region. As the lead country nominated by the ASWGFi for this issue, Thailand, through the Department of Fisheries, has requested FAO for technical and financial assistance in organizing the first strategic planning workshop of the Task Force. In response to this request, the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, in collaboration with FAO Fisheries Department, ASEAN Secretariat and the Thai Department of Fisheries organized the "FAO-ASEAN Strategic Planning Workshop on Harmonization of Standards for Shrimp Export-Import" held at the ChaoPhya Park Hotel, Bangkok, Thailand, 4 to 6 November, 2003. This document contains the report of the workshop as well as selected parts of the presentations made at this workshop. The contents of the report were compiled and edited by Simon FungeSmith (FAO Regional Office Asia and the Pacific),.
ACCSQ ASEAN ASWGFi AVA BFAR BMP CCP CoC CODEX CoP DGCF DOF ELISA EU FAO FDA FVA GAP GC GHP GMP HACCP HPLC IAFI LC-MS-MS MRA MRL NACA NAFIQAVED NFSA NFSNC NSA RA SEAFDEC SPS SSOP TBT TSV US FDA VPHL WHO WSSV WTO YHV ASEAN Consultative Committee on Standard and Quality Association of South East Asian Nations ASEAN Sectoral Working Group on Fisheries Agri-Food and Veterinary Authority (Singapore) Bureau of Fisheries and Aquaculture Resources (Philippines) Best Management Practice Critical Control Point Code of Conduct FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission Code of Practice Directorate General of Capture Fisheries (Indonesia) Department of Fisheries Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay European Union Food and Agriculture Organization Food and Drug Administration Food and Veterinary Administration Department (Singapore) Good Aquaculture Practice Gas Chromatography Good Health Practice Good Manufacturing Practice Hazard and Critical Control Point High Pressure Liquid Chromatography Integrated Quality Management Program Liquid Chromatography - Mass Spectrometry Mutual Recognition Agreement Minimum Residue Level Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia-Pacific National Fisheries Quality Assurance and Veterinary Directorate (Viet Nam) National Food Safety Committee National Food Safety and Nutrition Council (chaired by the Ministry of Health, Malaysia) National Standardization Agency Risk Analysis South East Asian Fisheries Development Center Sanitary and Phytosanitary Agreement Sanitation Standard Operating Procedures Technical Barriers to Trade Agreement Taura Syndrome Virus United States Food and Drug Administration Veterinary Public Health Laboratory (Singapore) World Health Organization White Spot Syndrome Virus World Trade Organization Yellow-head Virus.
Introduction and background.
In the year 2000, global aquaculture production exceeded 35 million metric tonnes with a value of over 52 thousand million US dollars. Although crustaceans represented only 4.8 percent of total production by weight, they comprised almost 21 percent of the value of global aquaculture in 2000. The giant tiger prawn is ranked first by value at over four thousand million US dollars and more recent estimates indicate that white shrimp produced in Asia are making an increasing contribution to the overall production of Asian farmed shrimp. The USA has been the major market for farmed shrimp over the past few years and the market condition in the USA is now the predominant factor affecting international market prices. Shrimp is the number one seafood consumed in the USA and imports have reached 430 000 tonnes per year, worth 3.4 thousand million US dollars and are still increasing The Japanese market is also important with 80 percent of its imports in 2002 coming from Asian countries (particularly Indonesia, Viet Nam and India), compared to just 20 percent from Latin America. The European market is more difficult to penetrate than the United States or Japanese markets due to pressure from consumers as well as increasingly stringent European Union regulations about a range of issues that include sustainability criteria, traceability, contaminants and residues. The issues concerning antibiotics that have led to recent bans on importation and blacklisting of farmed shrimp from many Asian countries has caused considerable economic losses in many Asian countries. Part of the problem is due to the disparities in quality control and inspection standards among ASEAN countries. If it were possible to harmonize these, it would result in substantial savings while contributing to the stimulation of intra regional trade. Common standards could also enhance the reputation of the region as an exporter of safe products of consistent quality and composition. These considerations have been acknowledged by ASEAN in incorporating a move towards harmonization and equivalence in the ASEAN Strategic Plan 1999-2004. As the world moves towards a system of food regulation based on an assessment of risk, there will be a need to evaluate existing standards and regulations on a country by country basis. In the year 2000, FAO, in collaboration with the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme, considered that it would be timely to examine opportunities for action on a region-wide scale. A consultation was convened1 in Manila, Philippines on 23 to 24 November 2000, immediately following the 7th ASEAN Food Conference and was attended by 23 representatives from the 10 ASEAN countries. This consultation recognized that differing priority levels within the ASEAN countries makes regional negotiations and consensus difficult especially when linked to the differing value and rate of growth of the fisheries sector. With respect to export products, the ASEAN states are frequently in a competitive position with one another, both for foreign and intra-ASEAN markets, further constraining cooperation and coordination. The conclusion of the Manila `Workshop on Harmonization of Regulations and Standards for Fishery Products in the ASEAN Region' identified the need for: 1.
open and transparent discussions to promote confidence building between the various inspection systems; the development of food control capacity through training and exchange of information;.
Workshop on Harmonization of Regulations and Standards for Fishery Products in the ASEAN region, 23-24 November 2000, Manila, Philippines.
working towards equivalence between the different control systems with the goal of concluding mutual recognition agreements between all ASEAN members; the preparation of a hazards and control guide specific for ASEAN products coupled with encouragement of increased CODEX participation; and the formulation of regional risk assessments for products of particular importance to the region.
Since this consultation, there has been increasing awareness of the World Trade Organization (WTO) and its implications for regional and global trade. There is recognition of the need for concerted action and a concerted voice in decision making on issues related to quality and safety standards and this has been most recently highlighted by the focus on antibiotic residues in farmed shrimp. To address these critical emerging issues and in recognition of the need to raise the profile of these issues at a policy level, the ASEAN Sectoral Working Group on Fisheries meeting in Lao PDR in May 2003 established an ASEAN Task Force to work towards recognition of regulatory inspection and control system of antibiotic residues in cultured shrimps. Thailand was assigned as the lead country. As the lead country, Thailand, through the Department of Fisheries, requested FAO for technical and financial assistance in organizing the first strategic planning workshop of the Task Force which was held at the ChaoPhya Park Hotel, Bangkok, Thailand, from 4 to 6 November 2003.
Purpose and objectives.
The participants at the workshop included national counterparts from the ASEAN countries comprising: - focal points for the ASEAN Sectoral Working Group on Fisheries and - a representative from the national agencies in the ASEAN countries with competence for coordination on the issues of harmonization and equivalence of standards for shrimp products FAO provided resource persons with competence in health and safety in seafood products, and also aquaculture production and management. The ASEAN Secretariat provided a resource person with competence in fisheries issues and the ASEAN processes that concerned regional harmonization and equivalence and trade with other regions. As lead country for the task force, the Department of Fisheries Thailand provided several additional resource persons competent in seafood safety and quality, the shrimp farms' code of conduct certification programme, as well as aquatic animal health. A list of participants is given in Appendix.
The workshop was opened with statements from the Thai Department of Fisheries, the ASEAN Secretariat and the regional office of the Food and Agriculture Organization. These statements can be found in Appendix.
The strategic planning workshop process included presentations by country representatives which outlined the current status of their national mechanisms for safety and quality of exported shrimp. The presentations also included references to the various national initiatives that had been undertaken to improve the quality of the shrimp produced at farm level. A synthesis of the country papers is presented in Section.
Resource persons at the workshop made presentations covering the following subject areas: a description of the steps required and issues which need to be covered in the development of regionally harmonized standards and quality management systems (Presented paper);.
presentations on global harmonization and equivalence2 efforts (FAO HQ); and strategic approaches in the region for addressing the problem of shrimp product quality at the farm level (with emphasis on cluster approach and certification systems).
The workshop process included three working group sessions which were dedicated to the task of identifying issues and solutions to the following three key areas of harmonization and equivalence: how to initiate a process to conclude Mutual Recognition Agreements (MRA); how the concept of an acceptable level of risk to the domestic and export food chains could be applied as a tool for encouraging equivalence and how to establish Risk Analysis as a basis for strengthening the negotiating position of producers; identification of the existing and potential mechanisms for achieving harmonization and equivalence.
The report of the workshop is a synthesis of the outputs of the working groups discussions and indicates areas for action and possible mechanisms by which this may be achieved. The schedule of the workshop can be found in Appendix 3.
`Equivalence' is the term used by Codex Alimentarius. `Harmonization' is a more restrictive term meaning "equal regulation"; whereas "equivalence" means "equal effect". In addition `harmonization', in principle, does not require risk assessment (e.g. see EU current food regulations).
Regional synthesis on issues relating to the import and export of cultured seafood products and harmonization and equivalence.
3.1 Introduction.
The top five largest producers of cultured shrimp are Asian countries i.e. China, India, Indonesia, Thailand and Viet Nam,. It is estimated that around 1.0-1.5 million tonnes per year of shrimp are traded internationally. Major importing countries are the USA, the European Union (EU) and Japan. ASEAN countries such as Malaysia and Myanmar are also developing shrimp farming with the goal of generating foreign income. There are potential areas for shrimp farming in these two countries, however, development of the sector requires both culture techniques and investment. The Philippines export of cultured shrimp has declined over recent years compared to other ASEAN countries (excluding Singapore where shrimp is imported and re-exported). Cambodia, Brunei and Lao PDR are not key players in the area of shrimp production and export, although there are shrimp farms in Cambodia and Brunei. Table 1 presents the updates of export of fresh and frozen shrimp from ASEAN countries based on the country papers presented at the FAO-ASEAN Strategic Planning Workshop on Harmonization of Standards for Shrimp Export-Import. According to the available data, Thailand and Indonesia were surpassed as the largest shrimp producers and exporters of the region by Viet Nam in 2002. Cultured shrimp, especially, Black Tiger shrimp (Penaeus monodon), has always been the most important cultured shrimp species for ASEAN countries. More recently, there has been the introduction of White shrimp (Penaeus vannamei) into the region and this is now making up a significant part of the region's production. Whilst there is strong interest in the culture of white shrimp, it has been subject to bans on importation for culture in some ASEAN countries over concerns of its possible impact on indigenous shrimp species and the potential transmission of viral disease. Despite these bans, these shrimp are now forming an increasing percentage of the cultured shrimp in several ASEAN countries. Table.
Export of fresh and frozen shrimp from selected ASEAN countries Country Indonesia Malaysia Myanmar Philippines Singapore Thailand Viet Nam 2001 Volume (Tonnes) 124 064 NA 21 454 12 061 8 069 144 606 87 151 Value (US$ 1,000) 924 667 NA 251 000 144 651 92 090 1 303 524 777 820 2002 Volume (Tonnes) 121 526 NA 22 868 23 621 6 570 102 753 114 580 Value (US$ 1,000) 831 965 NA 317 000 50 648 61 285 819 619 949 418.
Note: NA = Not available.
Shrimp farming and processing in ASEAN is targeted at the export market which means that the quality and standards of shrimp products depends largely on the requirement of importing countries. Consumers worldwide are increasingly demanding safe and high quality seafood. Issues of contaminations with pathogenic bacteria such as Salmonella, Vibrio cholerae, V. parahaemolyticus etc. and drug residues such as chloramphenicol and nitrofurans, have triggered importing countries to.
tighten their import requirements and regulations. This now requires ASEAN countries to produce and export shrimp that meet these standards of these importing countries. Thailand, which is both an exporter and an importer of cultured shrimp from other ASEAN countries (for re-processing and re-export), has responded to this concern by imposing import regulations. As of July 25, 2003, imported cultured shrimp must be accompanied by health certificate and animal health certificate assuring that the shrimp is free from chloramphenicol, nitrofuran as well as TSV (Taura Syndrome Virus), WSSV (White Spot Syndrome Virus) and YHV (Yellow-head Virus). Consignments without the certificates can still enter the country, but will be subject to sampling and analysis by Department of Fisheries (DOF) laboratories. The shrimp will be held at the importing company's cold storage until the analytical results reveal that there is no violation to DOF's regulations. There is growing concern among ASEAN countries that existing systems for inspection and testing are not adequate to respond to the new requirements of importing countries (both within the region in internationally). There are acknowledged discrepancies in the inspection and analytical capacities of the ASEAN countries and well as concern regarding differences between the exporting and importing country. There is a need for improvement and upgrading of inspection systems and analytical capacity of the competent authorities within the region. The aim of this would be the harmonization and equivalence of the inspection and control systems, which would facilitate intra regional trade as well as guarantee safe and high quality seafood for local consumption and for export outside the region to the global market. Cooperation among ASEAN countries would also enable a stronger negotiating position with major importing countries, especially in situations where standards are developed or imposed that do not reflect actual risk or internationally accepted levels. This section discusses the existing controls in place for safety and quality of cultured shrimp in the ASEAN region. The problems encountered by the member countries and ways to harmonize their standards are also addressed.
Existence of inspection authorities.
This section on the existing inspection bodies and control systems will focus only on 7 countries, i.e. Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam, since they are the regional key players for shrimp culture and export. To date, Brunei, Cambodia and Lao PDR have not yet had developed control systems for the import and export of fish and fishery products. These six ASEAN countries listed above, except for Myanmar, are recognized by the EU as third countries entitled to export fish and fishery products into the community. However, Myanmar is able to export to the EU on interim status, pending a visit of EU official inspectors to assess its inspection and control system if in compliance with the EU Directive 91/493. Table 2 shows the import and export control authorities of the seven countries. Controls for both import and export of fish and fishery products lie under fishery agencies in most countries. For Singapore, import and export of food and agriculture products are the responsibility of Agri-Food and Veterinary Authority of Singapore (AVA). Malaysia and Thailand have similar structures where fishery imports are covered by the Ministry of Health, while the export is controlled by Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Agriculture. This is an example of where different government agencies have jurisdiction over different parts of the inspection and control system. An example of the potential problem is the case of Thailand, where there has been import of shrimp and tuna to the country for further processing and re-export. The imported raw material must meet the country's standard (and is controlled by one department), and when processed and re-exported must meet the standard and requirements of the importing country (and is under the jurisdiction of another department). The government of Thailand foreseeing the 5.
potential disruption to trade, authorized DOF by Cabinet Decision on March 4, 2003, to control imports of shrimp and tuna under the authority of Food Act (1979). The Act is actually enforced by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of the Ministry of Health. Modern inspection systems emphasize the risk analysis approach and verification measures cover both plant inspection and analysis of finished products. Increasingly, certification is seen as a means to reassure consumers and is becoming part of a farm-to-table approach. It should be noted however, that `certification' is not recognized under the food safety regulations for either the EU or USA. It is important that the agency authorized to deal with health and safety of products should have overall control, capacity and expertise in the area to ensure health and safety throughout the production chain. Often, this responsibility is shared between more than one government department. Revision or promulgation of new laws to give this authority might not be practical in some countries or could take considerable time. Interim measures would be more effective cooperation between Ministries to strengthen control systems. An example of this is Indonesia, which established a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Agriculture to jointly set-up a compulsory Fish Inspection and Quality Control Regulation in 1975. this was based on the Health and Hygiene Acts of 1960 and 1962 and in the MOU, the Directorate General of Capture Fisheries (DGCF) took over responsibility for inspection and quality control of fish and fishery products.
List of ASEAN export and import control authorities.
Country Indonesia Malaysia Myanmar Philippines Export Control Directorate General of Capture Fisheries (DGCF), Department of Marine Affairs and Fisheries Department of Fisheries (DOF), Ministry of Agriculture Department of Fisheries (DOF) Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (BFAR) Food and Veterinary Administration Department (FVA), Agri-Food and Veterinary Authority (AVA) Import Control Department of Marine Affairs and Fisheries Food and Drug Administration (FDA), Ministry of Health NA Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (BFAR) Food and Veterinary Administration Department (FVA), Agri-Food and Veterinary Authority (AVA) Department of Fisheries (DOF), Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives and National Fisheries Quality Assurance and Veterinary Directorate (NAFIQAVED) DOF have control of imports of shrimp and tuna only. Other products are still under jurisdiction of Food and Drug Administration (FDA), Ministry of Health No reference regarding import authority in the country paper Remarks.
Thailand Viet Nam.
Department of Fisheries (DOF), Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives National Fisheries Quality Veterinary Directorate (NAFIQAVED) Assurance.
Controls in place from farm-to-table.
Control at production level In 2002, the EU imposed a 100 percent scheme of all shrimp imported from Indonesia, Myanmar and Viet Nam, after shipments were found to contain Chloramphenicol residues. Later Thailand was put on the same probation when metabolites of another type of antibiotic, Nitrofuran, were detected in Thai shrimp shipments. Although monitoring programs on drug residues had been initiated previously in these ASEAN countries, the differing detection methods and sensitivities of the equipment used between the exporting and importing country resulted in considerable disagreement over the existence of the residues and the levels they were present at. Oxytetracycline and Oxolinic acid are permitted to use in shrimp farming in some countries, where withdrawal periods and maximum residues are controlled by regulations. Chloramphenicol and Nitrofurans are prohibited in most ASEAN countries for use in feeds for animal for human consumption. However, the illegal addition of the drugs in aquatic animal feeds, vitamins or biological products is still widely conducted without the authorities' knowledge. Since intensive farming is promoted to obtain higher yield in limited farming areas, the use of drugs and chemicals is considered essential by some farmers, to sustain production by preventing or curing aquatic diseases. In addition, farmers may be misled by sales representatives and encouraged to use prohibited drugs and chemicals. The solutions to this issue is not only improved production practice, but also more effective control over access to and the marketing of veterinary drugs. With the ban or 100 percent inspection imposed by the EU is a strong incentive for ASEAN countries to strengthen their own controls over the import and distribution of prohibited drugs An approach to prevent farmers using prohibited or restricted drugs and chemicals in the first place would be the introduction of some form of code of conduct for shrimp farming in the region. There are several different terms for this and these are known variously as a `Code of Conduct (CoC)', Code of Practice (CoP)', `Good Aquaculture Practice (GAP)', `Best Management Practice (BMP)'. The use of a Hazard and Critical Control Point (HACCP) system for aquaculture is also considered as a mechanism to ensure safe and good quality raw material and has been already implemented in aquaculture production in a number of countries for a number of species. These includes salmon (e.g. Norway and Canada), seabream and seabass (a number of Mediterranean countries); trout (a number of European countries) and catfish (USA). Unfortunately for the ASEAN context, HACCP is very difficult to implement at the farm level where the unit of operation is very small (this is the typical form of aquaculture producer in Asia). The use of HACCP at the farm level makes it particularly easy to identify the use of veterinary drugs (either approved or not approved) and in the case of approved drugs the management of the course of treatment and withdrawal time to assure an accepted Minimum Residue Level (MRL) HACCP is already in place in many processing plants, where CCP (Critical Control Points) can be more effectively controlled to assure product safety. The challenge is to seek ways to introduce some regionally acceptable form of HACCP to the production level3. Indonesia has responded to the global trend for a Farm-to-Table approach by establishing a program to monitor the use of antibiotics (especially Chloramphenicol) in shrimp farming and during processing. Awareness among farmers on proper use of therapeutic agents is created through dissemination. Each lot of finished product is examined for the residue prior to export. Malaysia has established Code of Practice for fish and shrimp farming. A `Malaysian Aquaculture Farm Certification Scheme' is being launched to certify farms for GAP, on a voluntary basis.
CODEX code of practice and guidelines are currently proposing the use in HACCP for fish production. It is also expected that future EU regulations will include HACCP in production and in feed production. US regulations cannot currently enforce HACCP in production.
Shrimp farms are to be registered with the Department of Fisheries of Myanmar and although GAP is not practiced in the country yet, since currently there are only semi-intensive culture systems in Myanmar. It is planned to be implemented in the future. CoC and GAP concepts are acknowledged and practiced in the Philippines, however, there is no information as to the extent BFAR is involved in promoting the operation and what percentage of farms are currently certified. One activity which should be recognized as a good initiative for the Philippines is the certification of private hatcheries and accreditation of private shrimp laboratories. Since shrimp is the major export fishery commodity for Thailand, it has a national initiative to promoting the Farm-to-Table approach through a voluntary Code of Conduct for responsible shrimp farming, first introduced in 1998. In addition there is a second initiative for small farms known as `Good Aquaculture Practice', which targets the practices of smaller farmers and is less comprehensive. While the CoC deals with both environmental management and controlling of product safety (and is more easily implemented in larger farms), GAP narrows the scope by focusing only on safety of the products. Currently there are approximately 5 000 shrimp farms certified for CoC and GAP by DOF in Thailand. The country is targeting the remaining 25 000 farms (which are mostly small scale with areas less than 1-2 ha), to be certified by the end of 2004. CoC and GAP are in the initiation stage or undergoing pilot implementation in some provinces of Viet Nam. In order to promote regional cooperation, Thailand is working with Viet Nam to achieve its goal in implementing CoC and GAP countrywide. Whilst the ASEAN region is becoming proactive in developing systems for the production of safe and high quality shrimp to supply the world market, there are considerable discrepancies in capacity and legislative authorities in the member countries. To ensure that production of shrimp is free from prohibited drugs, controls must be in place that covers the import of the chemicals, distribution channels and the production of aquatic animal feeds. In many countries, such as Myanmar and Thailand the import of drugs is controlled by Ministry of Health, however, the registration of feed mills and feed formulations are mostly under jurisdiction of Fishery Agencies such as Thai DOF and NAFIQAVED of Viet Nam. More effective monitoring of the production and distribution of animal feeds and chemical sales outlets are needed for an effective traceability system. Traceability, as a means to ensure product safety, is an emerging mechanism that has been introduced by major importing countries such as USA and the EU. Traceability (whereby individual batches of shrimp could be traced back to the pond they were produced in) is not well developed in the ASEAN countries. Establishment of such a system is hampered by small farm size, the large numbers of farms, lack of effective farm registration systems, monitoring capacity (and the costs involved) as well as the diversified nature of farm harvesting collection and transport to the processors. In order to effectively introduce a traceability system requires comprehensive documentation throughout the whole production chain from hatcheries, to farms, through to processing and the export of the finished product. The ASEAN countries should seriously consider how to establish such systems that would enable the tracing back from finished product to origin of the raw materials used. Thailand has enforced the use of a `Movement Document' which should accompany the harvested shrimp from the farm via the broker or shrimp collector, through to processing plant. Processing plants are required to implement a coding system for product recall purposes, which can be linked to the movement document. If finished products are found to contain prohibited drugs by an importing country, this system can assist Thai DOF to trace back to the farm of origin as well as link to feed or chemical suppliers. This system is not fool proof, since shrimp are still marketed in central markets and supplied by a large group of shrimp collectors, which compromises a system based on individual documents for each batch of shrimp. In this situation shrimp from many farms are often mixed to supply specific sizes as required by the buyers; compromising the ability to track individual harvests. Contract farming or buying directly from reliable farms is a mechanism that enables far better control batches and thereby traceability of products. Contract farming requires the agreement of harvest prices as well as compliance with codes of practice. There are examples in the region where this has been attempted, although there are a range of problems that limit its attractiveness to farmers. International.
price fluctuations are a major reason for farmers leaving such systems as fixed prices may not reflect buoyant price at the time of sale and farmers felt that they have lost opportunity. A crucial aspect of limiting the illegal use of drugs in production is a more effective control over the distribution and sale of such drugs, which are typically readily available and often do not require veterinary certificates or documentation for their purchase. As mentioned above, there is often more than one government authority responsible for the control of such drugs and chemicals and effective coordination between these departments will be necessary if controls are to be effective. Control at Processing Level Control at processing level in most of the seven ASEAN countries has been improving continuously. In early 1990s, as HACCP was just becoming recognized internationally, the concept was poorly understood in the region. During this period, technical assistance and expertise were extended to ASEAN fish-processing countries by international organizations such as FAO, DANIDA, SEAFDEC, ASEAN-CANADA etc. These ASEAN countries benefited from intensive training courses, workshops, seminars and further developed their own HACCP schemes with their private sector (principally seafood processors). The mandatory requirement for `HACCP' or `Self-Check Systems' processors that wished to sell to USA and the EU was the strong driving force for this upgrading of capacity in the ASEAN region. For export to the EU, recognized government agencies (the "competent authority") were given the responsibility for validation, monitoring and audit of the implementation of the HACCP system giving greater national responsibility for the control of product quality. Before HACCP can be developed and implemented, a processing plant needs to have achieved a number of so-called "Pre-requisites". These pre-requisites are essentially all the construction and equipment related requirements that enable the carrying out of a hygienic operation. From an operational point of view, HACCP plans should be complemented with GMP (Good Manufacturing Practice) and sanitary and hygiene plans, sometimes called also SSOP (Sanitation Standard Operating Procedures). Table 3 describes the status of the ASEAN countries are in terms of the implementation of quality control system in the export fish industry.
Country Indonesia GMP & SSOP Mandatory Mandatory for medium scale factories Mandatory Mandatory Mandatory Mandatory Mandatory HACCP Mandatory since 1999 Voluntary Mandatory for USA and the EU markets Mandatory Mandatory for export plants Mandatory since 1996 Mandatory since 1998 Remarks Has HACCP-based IQMP (Integrated Quality Management Program) Programs are administered by Ministry of Health.
Myanmar Philippines Singapore Thailand Viet Nam.
From Table 3, it can be seen that all ASEAN countries recognize HACCP as a tool to produce safe quality seafood. The responsible agency of each country plays an important role in assisting the 10.
industry to implement HACCP. The government agencies verify or audit the system for approval for export. HACCP principles became mandatory in most of these countries during the late 90s, which coincided with the US FDA's (US Food and Drug Administration) deadline for HACCP implementation (December 1997) for both domestic and overseas processing plants which supplied seafood products to the US market. Though the seafood industry in Malaysia developed before that of Myanmar, HACCP in Malaysia is still conducted on a voluntary basis. In Myanmar, the system is compulsory for Grade A and B plants for export to USA and the EU markets. In Malaysia the responsible agency for the control of fish processing for both domestic and export is the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), Ministry of Health. The Department of Fisheries, however, is authorized to control farming practice, grant import and export permits and issue health certificates for export. The splitting of responsibilities between two departments in the various parts of the production and import-export process may cause confusion and inconvenience to processors and exporters. In general, it is desirable to give jurisdiction to a single agency that has the greatest competency to control the whole system. This streamlines monitoring and control as well as the related certification and can greatly facilitate and promote international trade. Singapore has limited land area available for agriculture and 90 percent of food consumed in the country is imported. Food safety is a priority concern and Singapore has a stringent and comprehensive food control programme in place, to ensure safety of food. HACCP is mandatory for food processing plants, which export to other countries. For some commodities, such as meat and poultry, overseas farms and food processing plants are subjected to inspection and accreditation by AVA. To ensure safety and wholesomeness, imported foods are inspected and sampled for laboratory analysis at the port of entry. The monitoring of plant performance through inspection is a common practice among ASEAN seafood producing countries. Processing plants must be registered with the fishery authorities before they can be approved for export. Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Thailand and Viet Nam, all have surveillance or monitoring programmes that reflect the nature of their production and available capacity. Fish processing plants are inspected or audited on GMP, SSOP and HACCP on a regular basis, by trained inspectors or auditors of the fishery authorities. The exception to this is Malaysia, where plant inspections and audits are conducted by the FDA of the Ministry of Health. Some countries, such as Myanmar and Thailand, categorize fish processing plants in up to 4 levels, and inspection frequency depends upon the plant level. The rated level of a plant is based upon the plant performance and structure. For example, Thai DOF schedules an inspection/audit frequency for an approved plant with an average of 2-4 times per year depending on the level. Plants are visited monthly in Viet Nam (by NAFIQAVED), since there are fewer plants approved for export and more inspection personnel compared with Thailand. Laboratory capacity and control of finished product quality Most of the seven ASEAN countries are equipped with sophisticated analytical laboratory equipment such as HPLC, GC, LC-MS-MS. These laboratories are located in both central and regional areas to provide services on chemical, microbiological and physical analyses. For example nationally, Indonesia has 38 laboratories, Thailand has 4 laboratories and Viet Nam has 6 laboratories. The Veterinary Public Health Laboratory (VPHL) of Singapore is the national food control laboratory, performing a wide range of food safety tests for food products both imported as well as for locally food processed. In the Philippines, BFAR have its own food analytical laboratories, but these facilities may not be proportionate to the amount of exported shipments. The Philippines has focussed more on the establishment and operation of fish health diagnostic laboratories, where 25 sites are located nationwide. For the analysis of fishery products, BFAR collaborates with other government agencies and recognized private laboratories and accepts their test results for monitoring and certification purposes. This is a similar system to Malaysia, where DOF accepts test results from other government.
or approved private laboratories, for issuance of health certification under DOF's authority. Laboratory capacity in Myanmar is less developed than in the rest of ASEAN shrimp exporting countries. The current facilities can accommodate only a limited number of samples for the monthly monitoring program. Therefore this system relies on own check system by the processors. As a control system, physical checks at processing plants prior to sealing of shrimp containers are undertaken by DOF inspectors to prevent economic fraud. Most ASEAN countries have a monitoring program to determine quality and safety of finished products in terms of chemical, microbiological and physical quality. Indonesia and Thailand conduct antibiotic analysis on each lot of cultured shrimp products prior to export (especially to the EU). Indonesia emphasizes chloramphenicol, while Thailand determines for residues of chloramphenicol and nitrofuran. Viet Nam performs laboratory analyses on each lot before shipment. Due to the rapidly increasing amount of exports, NAFIQAVED accepts analytical results from other government and private laboratories for monitoring and certification purposes. From the information above, laboratory capacities in these ASEAN countries are more or less adequate to monitor and guarantee the quality and safety of fishery products using the analytical methods for which they are equipped. It is increasingly apparent that constraints are being faced throughout the region with the increasing stringency of import control programs that are being introduced by importing countries. The effect of this is that there is a continuous trend to increase the sensitivity of analytical methods in importing countries. This gives ever-increasing detection sensitivity to veterinary drug residues or their metabolites at part-per-billion (ppb) or even fractions of ppb level. Since the drug residues that are tested for are covered under `zero-tolerance' by CODEX, any detectable amount can result in the detention and rejection of a batch. The effect of this continual move to greater sensitivity is that ASEAN countries must increase investment to acquire the knowledge of techniques and replace or upgrade equipment to keep up with this advancing technology of the importing countries. There is an inevitable time delay in ASEAN countries' ability to upgrade equipment, adjust to the new analytical techniques and standards, has already resulted in trade disruptions and disagreements over rejections and detentions. Adequate adjustment time is required to achieve the new standards and this is an essential consideration that should be made by importing countries prior to imposition of new standards. It is important that there is adequate and timely access to information regarding analytical methods and transparency in the conduct of research and risk analysis on health hazards of drug residues and their metabolites. If the precautionary principle is to be utilized as the basis of consumer protection, scientific justification based on risk assessment should be conducted within reasonable timeframes and the results of this communicated in an expeditious manner. This approach is essential to ensure that the continuing trend of increasing sensitivity and stringency of standards, does not in effect become a non-tariff barrier to trade.
Import control.
Intra regional trade of shrimp has become significant in ASEAN. Singapore is a well recognized net importer of food including live, fresh and frozen shrimp from other ASEAN countries (particularly Malaysia, Myanmar, Thailand and Viet Nam). These imports are not only for local consumption, but also for re-export. Malaysia also imports shrimp from Indonesia, Myanmar and Thailand. Thailand has increased its import of both captured and cultured shrimp for further processing and re-export but has increased its controls over quality of imported product. ASEAN countries affected by Thailand's newly imposed import restriction are Malaysia, Myanmar and Viet Nam. Thai importers are required to withhold their imported consignment if it is not accompanied by proper health certificate and animal health certificate, until the test results by DOF laboratories become available. Such import.
control is considered necessary to ensure health and safety of local consumers as well as meeting the requirements of other importing countries if the product is for re-export. The legal jurisdiction for import of fish and fishery products into most ASEAN countries is given to the competent fishery authority. High-risk seafood imported into Singapore must be accompanied by health certificate to ensure that the shipment conforms to the country's standards for product safety. Random monitoring and sampling is conducted for microbiological and chemical tests including antibiotic residues. ASEAN countries typically have different safety standards for products that are destined for local consumption versus those targeting export. The major importing countries such as USA, the EU, Japan, Australia typically impose higher standards than ASEAN to protect their consumer health and safety. In order to supply these markets, the ASEAN as exporting countries need to develop and upgrade their production to keep up with this global trend of health concern. Two important questions arise concerning the detection of non-compliance in products prior to export: If further processing cannot rectify the problem (i.e. the product still cannot comply), where will the sub-standard products be disposed? Is it possible that these products will be subject to destruction, where considerable business costs are at stake? Typically the result is that products that cannot meet export quality requirements are directed to other markets that have lower import requirements or are sold on the domestic market. The resolution of this issue requires attention by the competent authorities of all ASEAN countries, since it has health-risk implications for domestic consumers or those in countries that have less stringent import controls.
Legislative framework.
The agency in charge of fish inspection and quality control systems should have the authority to control all stages of the production chain. To ensure food safety and prevent the placement of unsafe food on the domestic market or export, legislation must cover:     control of fish production, harvesting, handling, transportation processing, packaging, distribution, import and export.
Since the detection of drug residues and metabolites, as well contamination by pathogenic bacteria in seafood products, are major reasons for product rejections, the responsible agency should have the legal authority to prevent the import/export and placing on the market of such products. The competent agency should also be empowered to impose measures and penalties on the parties involved. The competent agency should also be to order a product lot to be re-processed, re-exported or destroyed. All of the ASEAN shrimp exporting countries possess the authority for fish inspection and quality control. However, these authorities must act within existing legal frameworks such as a Fisheries Act and/or Food Act. Indonesia and Thailand possess similar legal structure where different Acts are enforced to control fishery production, import and export. Fish inspection and quality control activities are covered under the Fisheries Act, whilst Food Standard Setting and Control of Food Additives are promulgated under the authority of National Standardization Agency and Food and Drug Control Body respectively.
Myanmar, the Philippines and Viet Nam fully manage fish production, fish health, processing, hygiene, safety, import and export, under the authority of the national Fisheries Laws. In Singapore, the Agri-Food and Veterinary Authority, being the National Food Safety Authority (NFSA), has jurisdiction over domestic, import and export of all food products including seafood. The fish industry in Malaysia is operated under a unique system where import and export permits for live fish and fishery products are to be issued by DOF. Nevertheless, food inspection and control, including seafood, is under supervision of the Food and Drug Agency. The country has established a National Food Safety and Nutrition Council, chaired by the Ministry of Health, in an attempt to integrate the roles of these various agencies in order to ensure food safety. The competent legal authorities must be clearly identified to avoid delays in resolving any violation of food safety law. In Thailand, production of food products is under the authority of Food Act which is administered by FDA. For instance, when prohibited drug residue or its metabolites are found in a shrimp consignment, the shipment, by law, needs to be destroyed. DOF, though authorized to control the production, import and export of fish and fishery products, has to notify FDA of the violation. FDA will then bring the matter into the National Food Safety Committee to decide on issuing legal action against the parties involved. This process may take a long time and the costs to the private sector party concerned can be extremely high. One way that may make this system more responsive is to vest overall legal authority with the competent agency responsible for fish inspection and safety and quality control.
Harmonization and equivalence of the product standards and inspection and certification systems.
From the country reports of the seven ASEAN shrimp exporting countries, it is unanimously agreed that harmonization and equivalence of the product standards and inspection and certification systems should be established. The main objective would be to promote international and intra regional trade, avoid duplication of import-export inspection and certification, assist the member countries in capacity building and create an ASEAN voice in dispute settlement with common importing parties or in international forum. Harmonization and equivalence of standards for shrimp and shrimp products should be based on available recommendations and guidelines proposed by Codex Alimentarius Commission (CODEX). In situations where CODEX does not provide the requisite guidance on specific aspects of food safety, collaborative studies among ASEAN countries based on risk analysis should be undertaken. Coherent ASEAN standards should be established based on sound scientific justification. This will give ASEAN countries a stronger create voice when it comes to negotiations regarding the imposition of standards and requirements that are not clearly based on sound risk assessments. The concept of risk analysis is not currently well understood within many ASEAN fishery authorities and there is a clear need for capacity building in this area. Since there is major capacity building requirement in this area, research studies in support of risk assessment should involve academic institutions as well as health agencies, since these institutions possess greater expertise and are typically better equipped. The seven ASEAN countries have all expressed their interest in improving laboratory capacity and the expertise of technical personnel. Inter-laboratory calibration and/or proficiency testing should be performed among member countries to ensure appropriate quality management systems within testing laboratories. Countries that have greater capacity in terms of laboratory analytical techniques (especially the determination of antibiotic residues) should extend technical assistance to the less developed members. This would be an effective mechanism to initiate the process of regional harmonization and equivalence.
The ultimate goal for the ASEAN countries is to upgrade their national capacities to an extent that Equivalence Agreements or Mutual Recognition Agreements (MRA) can be made with importing countries. These bilateral agreements are made between individual exporting and importing countries, whereby the exporting country is recognized as competent to monitor and control health and safety to a standard acceptable to the importing country. Under such agreements, shrimp and shrimp products produced and exported by a country to another are typically exempt from duplication in inspection and minimum inspection at the port of entry ensures fast market access. The negotiation process for such agreements is lengthy and if the agreement were to be on a regional basis (i.e. ASEAN) becomes extremely complex due to the number of parties involved. This situation is made almost impossible if there are major discrepancies between individual countries inspection and control capacities. This emphasizes the need for a greater degree of harmonization and cooperation in place within ASEAN before such regionally based negotiations might be considered. Equivalence of national control systems should be initiated covering farm production through to finished product. Cooperation in developing this is an area that would benefit strongly from greater ASEAN cooperation. Equivalence Agreements or MRA may be established among countries that are ready and equipped with systematic control first, and later expanded to include the rest of the region. Countries such as Indonesia and Thailand already have experience in the negotiation and conclusion of MRAs on fish inspection and control systems with Canada. Sharing information on this process and their respective experiences would be of assistance to other ASEAN members and would be a first step towards regional equivalence. The CODEX Guidelines for the Development of Equivalence of Agreements regarding Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification Systems (CAC/GL 34-1997) should be adhered to for transparency.
Conclusion and recommendations.
The above review shows that most ASEAN countries have developed some degree of fish inspection and control systems to some extent. This is particularly so for export targeted products. Monitoring programs from Farm-to-Table are in place in most of the countries, though these systems still have weaknesses. In particular, traceability is still a grey area, but it is expected that this will be strengthened in the major shrimp exporting countries, to ensure product tracing from finished products to the origin. ASEAN countries are determined to remain competitive in the global fish market by continuously improving their capacity to meet consumer demands of safety assurance and high quality seafood. Thailand is not the largest shrimp exporter in ASEAN being surpassed by Viet Nam and with Indonesia Malaysia and Myanmar quickly catching up. Despite the fact that the ASEAN countries are in strong competition with each other for markets, rigorous competition among themselves, through the ASEAN cooperation mechanism, they are still able and willing to assist each other in many regional activities such as: exchange of experts, transfer of technology, provision of scholarships for training or degrees in academic institutes, organization of study tours of CoC/GAP farms and processing plants. A consolidated regional effort to upgrade regional capacity in health and safety of cultured shrimp is seen as the key helping the region maintain its leading status as the major shrimp supplier of the world. The following recommendations are provided as opportunities for ASEAN members to strengthen their control systems and further achieve harmonization and equivalence within the region.
Harmonization and Equivalence should be established among ASEAN to facilitate intra regional trade and create a strong ASEAN voice in international fora that relate to Sanitary and Phytosanitary Agreement (SPS) and Technical Barriers to Trade Agreement (TBT).
Member countries should adopt Codex standards for harmonization and equivalence as a first priority. When Codex is not available to provide the required guidelines or standards, collaborative studies based on Risk Analysis on common interest should be performed to establish regional standards. Participation of academic institutes, government agencies and private sector concerned should be encouraged since their expertise and experiences are necessary for the collaborative studies.
Laws and regulations regarding control of fish production, import and export should be reviewed and revised to become more consistent with the requirements of modern inspection systems, as well as the newly imposed regulations and requirements of trading partners. Effective legislation is required for the control of distribution and use of prohibited drugs in farming.
Cooperation among government agencies concerned should be promoted to effectively control the import, distribution and use of prohibited drugs in farming. The competent authority should be empowered to issue necessary measures on non-compliance products, in order to prevent such products from entering domestic market or being diverted to other countries.
A rapid alert system among ASEAN should be initiated. Information on rejected consignments of imported fish and fishery products as well as the widespread of aquatic diseases should be shared for precaution and prevention of regional damages.
Traceability system should be established in each country and effectively implemented. The US, which is one of the major shrimp importing countries, has included this issue into its Bioterrorism Act (The law has been effective since December 12, 2003). The competent agency in each country should have the necessary legal authority to enforce the use of traceability system by all stakeholders in the fish production chain.
Reference laboratories within ASEAN should be established. A country with particular technical capacity should be the lead in the area of expertise. The reference laboratory will serve as a technical hub for a specialized field, such as antibiotics, pathogenic bacteria or biotoxin determination. The laboratory could also provide analytical services for test confirmation, conduct inter-laboratory calibration and proficiency testing programs as well as offer technical assistance and training for the member countries. The structure and management of the EU reference laboratories which are located in various EU countries could be studied as a potential model.
ASEAN should seriously promote the implementation of CoC/GAP for responsible and sustainable shrimp farming and ensuring safe products4. If possible, such programs should be made mandatory and typically should be linked to a system of farm registration or licensing.
Contract farming should be encouraged between farmers and shrimp processors to minimize or eliminate processing and placing on the market of shrimp containing drug residues. Countries that are more developed in this area should extend technical assistance to the others in order to upgrade and highlight ASEAN image as the best supplier of shrimp to the global market.
It should be noted that CoC/ GAP alone are insufficient as tools to solve the existing problems (e.g. unregulated utilization of even unknown antibiotics). It also seems likely that there will be an increasing requirement for HACCP at production level (especially with respect to EU markets) and this should be planned for.
Priority areas covered by the workshop.
4.1 Initiate a process to conclude Mutual Recognition Agreements (MRA).
The workshop pointed out that the need for MRAs between countries in the region was probably not as significant as the need to conclude such agreements with importing countries/blocs in other regions. The workshop identified some key activities which could enable countries to initiate the process of concluding MRAs. Lack of experience in developing MRAs was highlighted by the workshop, although it was noted that ASEAN countries had developed MRAs for products in other sectors (non-food).
Using risk analysis as a tool.
"Risk analysis  is the business of the management of risk - which also incorporates risk assessment, risk communication and risk management". Increasingly, risk analysis is now being used as a tool for managing health and safety of food products. The analysis of risk by a country or group of countries is a tool by which standards can be established or negotiated and can strengthen producers and exporters ability to access markets or to challenge excessively stringent or unreasonable requirements of importing countries. Such assessments can be applied as part of the supply chain or can be more comprehensive covering the production process as well as the post-harvest chain. The absence of risk assessment for a specific commodity or evidence regarding levels of risk may provide opportunities for importers or buyers to impose their own standards and requirements upon producers and exporters. In this situation, there is no guarantee that the standards imposed will reflect the actual risk and may draw from inappropriate situations or examples. It is, therefore, important that information for risk analysis is available to enable a country or producer to challenge inappropriate standards. The workshop considered the application of the concept of an acceptable level of risk to the domestic and export food chains and provided some recommendations as to how to establish Risk Analysis as a basis for strengthening producers' and exporters' negotiating position. The workshop noted that despite the increasing acceptance of risk analysis as a means to establish fair standards, many countries continued to use their own standards which were not based on appropriate information or risk criteria. It was acknowledged that there is a critical gap in the ASEAN region in developing risk assessments for internationally traded seafood commodities such as shrimp.
Action points identified by the workshop.
The workshop identified the following action points that could be addressed at regional national and local level.
Review existing MRA's within ASEAN and in other regions.
Review examples of MRAs already finalized within ASEAN as possible models for adaptation (e.g. on cosmetic, electrical appliances) by the ASEAN Consultative Committee on Standard and Quality (ACCSQ). Review the regional and international frameworks such as that of Codex Alimentarius, among European Union, between Australia and New Zealand, etc. for establishing an MRA. Evaluate the adaptability of those existing MRAs and their frameworks to the proposed ASEAN MRA.
Identify and describe the competent agencies within the region.
At national level, it is important to establish an inventory of competent agencies that have jurisdiction for health and food safety inspection. For example, clarification of the agencies responsible for control programs and their authority and scope of jurisdiction should be identified. Within this, elaboration of the following should be addressed: laws and regulations; inspection programs and procedures  elements of food control system; existing facilities/infrastructure; organizational structures; types of services provided; and competency/capacity of personnel. Apart from the national agencies, it is also important to identify the other national key players who have stake in the health and safety inspection, but which may not actually have specific authority. These stakeholders will include both private and public sectors: private sector groups (farm producers, seed and feed producers, processor, distributors, exporters); national fishery related agency; other national agricultural related agency (i.e. Veterinary); national health related agency; national commercial and trade related agency; and research institutions.
Creation of awareness regarding MRAs and risk analysis.
The workshop identified that it was important to have private sector buy-in to the process and that to ensure their involvement, it was necessary to create awareness of the opportunities and mechanism that exist for improving product safety and quality. The workshop emphasized the need to improve awareness and access to information related to health and safety requirements (e.g. certification systems, accreditation, etc.). The responsibility for this was delegated to the national institutions. 18.
The workshop highlighted the importance of demonstrating the application of risk analysis to the private sector and this was most likely to be achieved through undertaking a practical/model example with collaboration between the government and private sector. At the higher level, the workshop also emphasized the need for policy level support to the process. The active awareness and involvement of government and the coordination of related agencies was highlighted as important in ensuring that resources and commitment were available for the harmonization and equivalence process.
Capacity building at national and regional level.
Developing competence and equivalence promote required capacity building exercises to ensure equivalent level of competence among national competent agencies in countries in the region; develop national criteria including regulations for MRAs on health and food safety inspection with realistic goals; identify required studies or research on health and safety inspection throughout the whole supply chain to support the formulation of the MRAs; identify supporting activities to materialize the agreed national MRAs in the whole supply chain; and formalize the national MRAs through the relevant national mechanism. Capacity in risk analysis The workshop concluded that in those countries where Risk Analysis is not generally practiced at the national level, there is a need to create awareness on the importance of RA and promote the use of the RA concept as a guiding principle to develop quality and safety standards for the whole food supply chain. In countries where Risk Analysis is already in use (possibly in other sectors) the following actions are suggested: establish a National Committee/Task Force on Risk Analysis (with particular emphasis on risk assessment aspect) composed of representatives from various stakeholders' groups, to develop and promote the framework of risk analysis; identify research institutions in the region capable of performing risk analysis for possible networking and unified approach; identify and categorise aquatic products or commodities on the basis of risks on trade In order to identify the gaps and develop the required information for risk analysis, identify the research capacity/capability needs for antibiotic residue testing and the analysis of bacteria and heavy metals (with reference to culture d shrimp in particular); it is important that ASEAN countries should be involved in, or be aware of, research on harmful effects of chemicals on human health and incorporate such knowledge in the production and supply chain to build up confidence of consumers; and review legal and institutional framework, and where appropriate, make necessary adjustment to support the promotion of the use of Risk Analysis.
Undertake case studies/examples/models.
The workshop mentioned several times the value of undertaking a model MRA and/or risk analysis as a means to learn the process. In most of the countries, the lack of practical experience means that the.
national mechanisms and the steps that need to be taken have not yet been identified and often cannot be identified until the process is initiated. Model MRAs for a specific commodity establish the minimum criteria required to ensure regional MRAs; promote sample models for implementation; identify missing areas and fill the gap of each country's MRAs to ensure regional MRAs; use Codex documents to provide guidance on equivalence agreements; and undertake studies of shrimps/prawns regulations in the ASEAN countries that could help in facilitating the consensus on MRAs. Example risk analysis for a specific commodity In order to promote capacity building for stakeholders in understanding and using Risk Analysis, models could be developed for a commodity such as shrimp. the risk analysis should include hazard identification, risk management and risk communication; develop common risk profile for the relevant hazard/ product pairs; the acceptable levels of risk for domestic and export food chains should be the same, however, their monitoring and control mechanism may be different; and the data/information needs for some parts of the risk assessment process can only come from industry (e.g. temperature/exposure assessments). However, the industry is often cautious about this due to confidentiality and therefore it is critical that they are involved in this process from the start.
Ensure collaboration with the private sector.
Lack of accurate information available for the private sector (including both farmers and processors) was identified as a limiting factor, which affects the awareness and perception of risk in the farm level. This strongly affects farmers attitudes to the use of chemicals and antibiotics. The production sector was also considered to be generally slow or unwilling to comply with government measures because of lack of awareness of the reasons for the measures or perception that they were not really important. The workshop emphasized the need for involvement of private organization in both risk management activities and the development of whole risk analysis exercises and MRA. Some mechanisms for achieving this were identified: improve communications/consultation between government authorities and private sector; inform the private sector of the advantages and benefits of collaboration in the areas of risk assessment and MRA; promote safe image of seafood produced in ASEAN (through various fora, trade missions, etc.); encourage industry to share its information/data (such as temperature data in storage, spoilage times, microbiological test results etc.) so that research institutions can develop risk analyses; involve the private sector in the risk assessment process and reassure them that this is intended to facilitate trade, not prevent it; encourage collaboration in the private sector to establish an ASEAN aquaculture industry association; and collaborative on-farm research on alternatives to chemical use in farm management would be a parallel requirement and assist in raising awareness at the farm level.
Draw together national models to establish regional standards.
In order to develop regional approaches and achieve regional harmonization and equivalence, the various national examples would have to be drawn together, comparing similarities and identifying common ground for consensus. ASEAN Sectoral Working Group on Fisheries can take the lead in identifying regional training needs. There is a need to organize regional workshops and practical training for ASEAN member countries e.g.: - production of safe fish products from aquaculture (HACCP, CoC, GHP and GMP in aquaculture production); - introduction to risk analysis with particular reference to fish aquaculture; - development of equivalence on fish and fish products in Codex Alimentarius terms; - organization of reference labs for fish and fish products; and - introduction to hazard identification and risks to consumers from veterinary drugs utilized in fish aquaculture. Establish a regional information and knowledge network on risk analysis. The existing APEC/NACA/FAO manual/activities in risk analysis of transboundary movement of aquatic animals are complementary and coordination between this and ASWGFi is encouraged.
Address the specific issues of residues and reliable management practice at the farm level.
The workshop was informed of the important difference between the issues of residues of antibiotics that are prohibited for veterinary use and those for which no such prohibition exists (but for some of which residue limits are specified). It was emphasized that in cases where an antibiotic was prohibited, the best policy was to ensure that farmers (use most appropriate, but not both) complied with the ruling and did not use the chemical or drug in the production system. Avoidance of use of antibiotics not allowed for veterinary use Since it is increasingly difficult to challenge import regulation standards once they have been established, a more constructive route for addressing the issue of problems with residues of banned chemicals or drugs is to avoid their use. The appearance of residues in a crop can come from deliberate or inadvertent application: farmers apply the drug because they believe the drug will improve their production or prevent disease  possibly because they have received misleading information from colleagues or sales representatives; the farmer has a production problem and will try anything to save the crop; the farmer is applying an approved treatment to the pond which is mislabelled or is contaminated; the feed or supplemental feed is contaminated (deliberately or inadvertently); and there is contamination of the water supply.
The control of deliberate addition of any substance and its final residue in fish is one or more critical control point (CCP) in a HACCP plan for aquaculture fish production. Examples of substances to be controlled are: veterinary drugs commercial feeds commercial feed supplements, top-coatings, vitamin mixes, `growth enhancers' other `additives/treatments' such as colour enhancers, etc. The lack of coordination between control agencies concerned with chemical trade, supply, distribution and usage is most evident in the lack of involvement of prescribing authorities in aquaculture production. Whilst there is a high degree of capacity in the area of production amongst professionals in the aquaculture sector, they may not have as much experience in public health aspects related to fish as food. The availability and accessibility to drugs in the market is a problem, especially for the drugs that are not allowed for veterinary use (e.g. Nitrofurans and Chloramphenicol) that very often can be purchased "over the counter". The workshop recommended that: it was important to enforce stricter controls over chemical and drugs not authorized for veterinary use; develop a process for making the activities of the aquaculture service providers (feed, seed, drugs) more responsible by bringing them under a system of code of practice or selfregulation; improve or strengthen existing law enforcement and monitoring systems for sale, distribution and use of such drugs and chemicals; and training of all professionals and technicians working on aquaculture production should be enhanced and updated in regards of safety of fish as food products. There is an urgent need to bridge this gap. Labelling and certification The workshop was informed that there are now some indications that consumers are no longer using only the price of the product in their purchasing choice. It is also apparent that food safety is becoming a principal factor affecting consumers' choice for some products and that consumers are prepared to pay more for food safety. It was stressed however that the guarantee (or credibility) aspect is crucial, since certification is not particularly trusted. This is because product packaging now has a wide range of certificates and labels and the addition of a further label may not necessarily have any additional impact on a consumer. It was also mentioned that there is a critical impact if a certification/labelling scheme fails to deliver what it claims and that consumer confidence will collapse completely in such circumstances. There is a question as to whether the additional price that a consumer will pay for improved safety products will actually be passed on to the producer. This is partly due to so called `market imperfections' and the length of the market chain. Most CoC/BMP schemes target a product that is safe to eat and certify it as such. However the workshop questioned whether such schemes could also guarantee whether a product was free of disease from a quarantine perspective. This concern was raised because some importing countries require that the imported product should also be certified free of specific diseases that are unrelated to human health.
The solution in this case is to undertake a risk assessment of the product in relation to the risk of transmission of a disease. An example of this is the export of shrimp to Australia which is concerned over the transmission of viral disease such as WSSV. Shrimp imported to Australia must be head off and frozen, and not the product of an emergency harvest. Following a risk analysis, it was concluded that this form of product is presented the lowest risk of transmission of WSSV. The workshop was informed that in the future it can be expected that importing countries will increasingly require this certification related to animal health as well as ensuring the product is safe from the human health perspective. It is therefore timely that ASEAN countries should start to cooperate in dealing with this issue. In Thailand, one feature of the CoC is to encourage good environmental management and this tends to reduce incidence of animal disease (but this does not necessarily mean that it is safe with respect to human health). Actually, in testing product as disease free is problematic because the sensitivity of testing methods inevitably means that disease can be detected  it is therefore more productive to engage is a process of risk assessment in order to determine what can be accepted and what must be controlled. The workshop concluded that: there is an opportunity for labelling schemes  with strong ownership from the private sector that would assist in the promotion of reputation of ASEAN products; there should be collaboration along the market chain to provide incentives to farmers to produce quality products (farmers-processors/traders-consumers); facilitate import and export procedures for traders that supply quality products (provide an incentive to traders through reduced transaction costs); use market-based incentives as far as possible and caution should be exercised in using government subsidies when considering incentives (This is due to trade (WTO) implications); and encourage local farmer organizations to take responsibility for quality production and selfregulation. Codes of Conduct, Best Management Practice The workshop was informed of several schemes that were aimed at improving farmers' practices. Different approaches were used but all were based around the concept of farmers being encouraged to adopt some standardized practices or protocols5. An example of producers in India using a BMP/GAP approach through cluster management (see section below), were able to achieve better production results and reduced risks. Monitoring of the adoption of BMP has shown several positive results  the reduction in antibiotic usage as well as increased crop duration, better yield and increased survival. An additional benefit to this was that processors are becoming interested in purchasing from producers within the scheme because they do not use antibiotics. In another example from Thailand, producers who were certified under a Code of Conduct scheme were able to obtain a higher price for their product because the producers did not use restricted or banned chemicals. Additional benefits were reduced problems with between farm pollution and reduced environmental impact. The ability to sell products preferentially to producers, enter into forward contracts or obtain higher than market prices for products are strong incentives for farmers. Higher prices may be due to a better market value at the consumer end or may be due to the reduction in testing costs being passed onto the.
It should be noted here that whilst CoC or BMP may be able to ensure that a product is not contaminated or contain certain residues, it still does not ensure that the product is safe with respect to human health. It is in this area that HACCP is seen as the effective means to control quality and safety of the product.
farmers. Increasingly it may become the case that farmers cannot actually sell their product unless they are part of such schemes due to the unwillingness of processors to risk purchasing products that contain residues. At the global level there are a number of schemes for codes of conduct and best management, ASEAN countries engagement in the development of standards for best management is important. This is because many of the `best management principles' may vary according to size and type of the farm and scale of production including factors such as: zoning (buffer zones between farms or shoreline); requirements for effluent treatment (percentage of farm area for settlement, treatment); maximum stocking densities, feeding rates, growout duration; and monitoring and inspection protocols. All of these factors vary considerably between different shrimp producing regions. The workshop concluded that: it is important to encourage and provide incentives to farmer to enter schemes for improving management practices (priority in giving loans, certification process, higher product price, preferential purchasing) to those who meet the requirements and abide by good practices; identify set of ASEAN-wide operating principles as the basis for national aquaculture product certification (encourage linkages to the Consortium programme FAO/NACA/WB); and communication with farmers is important in order to raise awareness of the potential benefit and that farmer to farmer communication is an important feature of this. Cluster management Cluster management is a self-regulation mechanism for the implementation of standards at farm and processing level. Typically, state agencies do not have the capacity to regulate the numerous small farms that often exist in an aquaculture producing area. This inevitably means that monitoring and control of practice are effectively outside of the government's capacity to control. This means that the avoidance of use of banned or controlled chemicals and the production of healthy and safe aquaculture products relies heavily on the behaviour of farmers and their willingness to modify their practices. CoC and BMP exist in various countries and for various aquaculture systems, but their introduction to such a large and dispersed sector faces the same constraints as monitoring and control as noted above. Taking two examples (i.e. the shrimp farming area of ~70,000 ha in Andhra Pradesh, India and the ~24,000 shrimp farms in Thailand) it is clear that some form of grouping of farms or farmers is required in order to deliver services, transfer information and ensure a degree of self or mutual monitoring for responsible practice. Cluster management seeks to achieve this by encouraging farmers to adhere to codes of practice or best management practices as a group and to monitor each others activities to ensure that the group complies with the principles of the particular scheme. Typically farmers are unwilling to do this initially, but experiences have shown that the benefits are soon realized by the group and this encourages others to join (these benefits include: priority market access, ability to join certifications schemes, improved reliability of production, reduced risks) The workshop recommended to: encourage application of the cluster management concept in aquaculture, to reduce the risks of production and trade through internal mechanism or systems.
Enhance the impact of ASEAN countries in the CODEX process.
The workshop noticed that agreed Codex Alimentarius Commission standards have not been incorporated in actual regulations of many countries and that these standards do not necessarily cover all the situations found in current fish production and trade practices. The prioritization of areas that are covered by the CODEX Committee depends upon the participation of the member countries. The important role of risk analysis in elaborating CODEX standards was also emphasized. It was recognized by the workshop that the impact of the ASEAN countries on the CODEX process is still limited and that it is important that this is strengthened to ensure that the relevance of CODEX to ASEAN issues is improved. The importance of Trade Associations in the CODEX process was also mentioned. Such associations can participate in CODEX discussions as observers, however they have no voting rights in this capacity. Trade and producers' associations can be more effectively involved in Codex Alimentarius activities if they participate as members of their own country delegation. Recommendations for action by the workshop included: arranging consultation/dialogue with trading partners collectively on seafood safety issues as an ASEAN voice; continuing linkage with international agencies like FAO and other relevant organizations for assistance and support; and challenging standards that are unfair (using science based evidence and arguments e.g. risk analysis and results of research.
5.10 Action for promoting the reputation of ASEAN seafood products.
The workshop deliberated on what local, national and regional mechanisms could be used (both public and private sector) for collaboration in food safety issues. In particular, how to enhance the reputation of the ASEAN region as a supplier of safe products to export markets. The workshop identified the need for attention to be directed towards the promotion of the image of ASEAN seafood products (especially shrimp) as being safe and healthy. This requires the reassurance of importers and consumers regarding methods of production and the meeting of product standards. build an ASEAN Shrimp Website under ASEAN Food Safety Network; participate in existing seafood trade shows as ASEAN cooperation/booth i.e. under ASEANJapan center mechanism; promote confidence in the country products among ASEAN members and importing nations outside ASEAN through : Transparency  in procedures, rules and regulations, certification systems, government and private sector food safety procedures Encouraging responsible practice among public and private sector Consumer awareness - promoting food safety as part of country reputation etc.
5.11 Communication.
Many of the workshop recommendations had a strong feature that required improved communication between the various actors and there were a number of areas where action was needed. The importance of promoting awareness building on quality and safety of fish and fishery products in the whole supply chain (seed and feed, chemical, farm, processing, export) as well as with `consumers', featured in several of the working group's conclusions encourage producers' groups/associations; encourage better links between ASEAN Fisheries Federation and other producer associations; strengthen the linkages of national fisheries federation and ASEAN Fisheries Federation and national ASEAN FWG focal points; promote clear and strong consensus between government and private sector in promoting quality and safety issues; establish dialogue between national fishery related agencies and other national trade and tourism related agencies to have a clear position on the promotion of quality and safety issues of fish and fishery products at regional/international level; and incorporate mass media as a means to promote reputation.
Potential ASEAN mechanisms.
Existing ASEAN mechanisms The following groups are coordinated through the respective Chairpersons (of Working Groups) or the appointed lead countries (of projects/ initiatives), with assistance and service provided by the ASEAN Secretariat. Individual ASEAN Member Countries have assigned their focal points for the groups, which meet normally at least once a year. ASEAN Expert Group on Food Safety (AEGFS) This is a subsidiary body under the ASEAN Senior Officials on Health Development (SOMHD) which is responsible for formulating ASEAN Food Safety Policy and ASEAN Food Safety Improvement Plan (AFSIP); ASEAN Task Force on Codex (ATFC) This Task Force reports to the SOM-AMAF for coordinating ASEAN's position on matters pertaining to the agenda to be discussed at Codex Committees and Codex Alimentarius Commission meetings; Product Working Group on Prepared Foodstuff It is a working group under the ASEAN Consultative Committee on Standards and Quality (ACCSQ) in addressing the elimination of technical barriers to trade for prepared food stuffs ASEAN Sub-Committee on Food Science and Technology (SCFST) A sub-committee under the ASEAN Committee on Science and Technology (COST) responsible for promoting intra-ASEAN cooperation and collaboration, establishing databases for exchange of information, and increasing capabilities and improving infrastructure; ASEAN Food Safety Network A recently ASEAN established network to provide cohesive approach for the relevant sectoral ASEAN bodies in addressing the issues of non-tariff barriers related to food safety, that are facing the region's agricultural and fisheries trade. Thailand is the lead country for this network.
ASEAN Network on Cultured Shrimp Inspection Authority A newly established task force to work together towards mutual recognition of regulatory inspection and control system of antibiotic residues in cultured shrimp products in ASEAN. Thailand has been appointed as the lead country. ASEAN Network of Fisheries Post Harvest Technology (FPHT) Centre Under the coordination of Singapore, as the lead country, the Network has been working in close collaboration with the Marine Fisheries Research Department (MFRD) of SEAFDEC focusing on research and training in aspects of seafood safety and quality and HACCP. ASEAN Fishery Federation (AFF) ASEAN Fisheries Federation (AFF) is an association of private sector of fisheries industry affiliated to ASEAN with its main objective to promote and coordinate all activities relating to fisheries and fisheries-based products. The Constitution of the ASEAN Fisheries Federation forms the basic framework for administration and operation. The AFF is currently involving a number of fishery issues, particularly in relation to trade and export of fish and fishery products including the chloramphenicol ban. Recommendations for the workshop that related to the strengthening of ASEAN countries and ASEAN- type mechanisms included the following: establish an ASEAN veterinary drug surveillance and control initiative (to enhance monitoring and control over the use of drugs, both veterinary and non-veterinary); encourage the establishment of an ASEAN Sea Food safety Information network; develop ASEAN Sea Food safety standards; establish or enhance ASEAN Sea Food Safety Reference Laboratory(ies); promote and support ASEAN Sea Food Trade Risk Assessment; and Identify the key elements of an ASEAN food safety system. (Once this is established, then there is a possibility to determine the training, information and networking needs. This group could cover areas of regional interest such as HACCP, CoC or GAP and training). ASEAN fisheries food safety group Establish an `ASEAN fisheries food safety network/group' (possibly as under the ASWGFi) responsible for looking at each country's system and how effectively does it address the issues relating to safety of fisheries products. National committees would be formed and members drawn from the competent national agencies. The focal point would represent the country at the ASEAN committee. Initially, this group would meet with the purpose of starting dialogue on standardization of control measures and sharing/comparison of approaches. Improve ASEAN access to information required for risk analysis Collate research and coordinate with institutions (and especially importing countries) that are involved in studying: the harmful effects of antibiotics and residues on human health and international agreement/standardization of detection methods for these antibiotics (e.g. sensitivity, cross calibration/comparison of ELISA methods, elaborating issues relating to false positives and false negatives in testing methods).
Opportunities for FAO support.
The issue of improving culture practices, harmonization and equivalence of standards improving food safety and quality are all part of FAO's programme of work. These areas have also been repeatedly highlighted in the Committee on Fisheries Sub-committee on Trade and Sub-committee on Aquaculture. Many of the issues relating to responsible aquaculture practice are also enshrined with the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries (CCRF). Regionally relevant activities by FAO that are already planned include: the development of technical guidelines for the improvement of hygiene and safety at the farm level. This will also include two training workshops on same subject (to be held in Asia in collaboration with INFOFISH); an international expert consultation is planned for late 2004 (possibly in Asia) which will cover advance on fish safety (including traceability, risk analysis in fish and fish products and this will also include aquaculture); regional training course (in Asia) in the application of risk analysis in the seafood (this could also include cases relevant to aquaculture/mariculture); the publication of the nominally titled "Fish safety aspects of antibiotic use in aquaculture". This will cover aspects of antibiotic hazard control in aquaculture and will shortly (mid 2004); development of a register of experts in human health and antibiotic/veterinary drugs utilization in research/universities; and FAO has the potential to sponsor participants from Asia to attend IAFI. There are also follow-up opportunities to explore the possibility for a regional Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP) project to support harmonization and equivalence within ASEAN in aquaculture products.
List of Codex Alimentarius guidelines/standards relevant to the workshop on harmonization of standards for shrimp exportimport.
Guidelines for Generic Official Certificate Formats and the Production and Issuance of Certificates (CAC/GL 38-2001).
Guidelines for the Development of Equivalence Agreements Regarding Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification Systems (CAC/GL 34 - 1999).
Guidelines for the Design, Operation, Assessment and Accreditation of Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification Systems (CAC/GL 26-1997).
Principles for Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification (CAC/GL 20-1995).
Guidelines on the Judgement of Equivalence of Sanitary Measures Associated with Food Inspection and Certification Systems (adopted by Codex Commission; refer Report ALINORM 03/41).
Codex Standard for Quick Frozen Shrimps or Prawns (Codex Stan 092-1981, Rev. 1-1995).
Codex Standard for Canned Shrimps or Prawns (Codex Stan 37 - 1991, Rev. 1-1995).
Codex Standard for Crackers from Marine and Freshwater Fish, Crustacean and Molluscan Shellfish (Codex Stan 222-2001).
Codex Alimentarius Recommended International Code of Practice for Shrimps or Prawns (CAC/RCP 17-1978) 28.
Brunei SABRI HAJI MOHD. TAHA Head, Post harvest Development and Quality Assurance Division Department of Fisheries Ministry of Industry and Primary Resources Jalan Menteri Besar, Bandar Seri Begawan Brunei Darussalam, BB3910 Tel. 673-2-770234;2383067 Fax. 673-2-770235 E-mail: sabri_taha@fisheries.gov.bn Indonesia SIMSON MASENGI Head, Standardization Section Directorate General of Capture Fisheries JI. Harsono, Rm 3, Ragunan Jakarta, Indonesia Tel. 62-21-7826104 Fax. 62-21-7826194 E-mail: simsonmasengi@hotmail.com MURTININGSIH Fish Inspector National Center for Fish Inspection and Quality Control (NCQC) Jalan Muara Baru Ujung, Penjaringan, Jakarta Utara, Jakarta 14440, Indonesia Tel.: +62-21-6695586 Fax.: +62-21-6695593 E-mail: niningfish@hotmail.com Cambodia CHIN DA Deputy Chief Aquaculture Bureau Department of Fisheries 186 Norodom Boulevard Phnom Penh Tel. No.: +855-23 210565 Fax. No.: + 855-23 210565 E-mail: smallfish@online.com.kh.
Lao PDR CHINTANA CHANTHAVISOUK Deputy Chief Animal Health Center Department of Livestock and Fisheries Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry P.O. Box 811, Vientiane, Lao PDR Tel./Fax: +856-21 415674, 416932 E-mail: eulaodlf@laotel.com Malaysia BADARIAH bte MOHD. ALI Head of the Fish Quality Control Department of Fisheries 8th Floor, Wisma Tani Jalan Sultan Salahuddin 50628, Kuala Lumpur Malaysia Tel. : +60-3-26175623 Fax. : +60-3-26980227 E-mail: badariah01@hotmail.com BELAYONG AK NYUAK Fisheries Officer (Aquaculture) Sarawak Marine Fisheries Department 15th Floor Bangunan Sultan Iskandar Jalan Simpang Tiga P.O. Box 1375 93728 Kuching, Sarawak, Malaysia Tel.: +082-252743 Fax.: +082-415499 E-mail: yongbel@hotmail.com.
Myanmar U TINT WAI Chief, Export Quality Control Laboratory Department of Fisheries Sin Min Road, Ahlone T/S Yangon, Myanmar Tel. : +95-1-211382, 222139 Fax. : +95-1-228258 E-mail: DOF@mptmail.net.mm Philippines MELCHOR TAYAMEN, JR. Chief, National Freshwater Fisheries Training Center CLSU, Munoz, Nueva Ecija Philippines Tel. No.: +63-44 4560670 to 71 E-mail: nfftrc@mozcom.com CONSUELO C. BALTAZAR Chief, Fish Inspection & Quality Control Section Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources 860 Arcadia Bldg., Quezon Ave., Quezon City, Philippines Tel. : +63-2-3725059, 3725045 Fax. : +63-2-3725045 E-mail: cbaltazar@bfar.da.gov.ph DAW HLA HLA KYU Chief Inspector Physical Assessment Department of Fisheries Sin Min Road, Ahlone T/S Yangon, Myanmar Tel. : +95-1-211382, 222139 Fax. : +95-1-228258 E-mail: DOF@mptmail.net.mm.
Singapore LIM POH CHOO Senior Scientist Food & Veterinary Administration Veterinary Public Health Laboratory Agri-Food and Veterinary Authority of Singapore 5 Maxwell Road #04-00 Tower Block MNO Complex Tel.: +65-67952831 Fax.: +65-68619491 E-mail: Lim_Poh_Choo@ava.gov.sg Thailand JARANTHADA KARNASUTA Deputy Director General Department of Fisheries Paholyothin Road, Kaset-klang Chatuchak, Bangkok 10900 Thailand Tel.: +66-2 5620600-15 Fax.: +66-2 5620493 JIRAWAN YAMPRAYOON Director, Fish Inspection and Quality Control Division Department of Fisheries Tel.: +66-2 5580133 Fax.: +66-2 2842062 E-mail: jirawany@fisheries.go.th SUPRANEE CHINABUT Senior Expert in Fish Disease Department of Fisheries Paholyothin Road, Kaset-klang Chatuchak, Bangkok 10900 Thailand Tel.: +66-2 5796803 Fax.: +66-2 5613993 E-mail: supranee@fisheries.go.th SUWIMON KEERATIVIRIYAPORN Director, Fish Inspection Samutsakorn P.O. Box 39, Amphur Muang Samutsakorn 74000.
KRISSANA SUKHUMPARNICH Senior Food Technologist Fish Inspection and Quality Control Division Department of Fisheries Tel.: +66-2 5580150-5 Fax.: +66-2 5580136 E-mail: krissana_s@yahoo.com SIRI TOOKWINAS Senior Expert on Marine Shrimp Culture Department of Fisheries Paholyothin Road, Kaset-klang Chatuchak, Bangkok 10900 Thailand Tel.: +66-2 5798500 Fax.: +66-2-5620971 E-mail: sirit@fisheries.go.th USA BAMRUNGBHUET National Bureau of Agricultural Commodity and Food Standards Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives Rajadamnern Nok Avenue Bangkok 10200 Tel.: 662 2803883 E-mail: usa@acfs.go.th Viet Nam TRAN BICH NGA (MS.) National Fisheries Quality Assurance and Veterinary Directorate (NAFIQAVED), Branch 1 Ministry of Fisheries 39A Le Lai Street, Ngo Quyen District Haiphong City Tel. : + 84-31-837508/837124 Fax. : +84-31-837507 E-mail: naf1@hn.vnn.vn.
WARAPORN PROMPOJ Chief, International Cooperation Group Department of Fisheries Tel.: +66-2 5620529-30 Fax.: +66-2 5620529-30 E-mail: prompoj@inet.co.th CHUL SINCHAIPANICH Fishery Biologist Department of Fisheries Paholyothin Road, Kaset-klang Chatuchak, Bangkok 10900 Thailand Tel.: +66-2 5620500 ext 3223 E-mail: chul@fisheries.go.th.
TRAN THI DZUNG Senior Fish Processing Technologist and Quality Manager Department of Science & Technology Ministry of Fisheries 10-12 Nguyen Cong Hoan Street Ba Dinh District, Hanoi, Viet Nam Tel. : +84-4 8354517 Fax. : +84-4-7716702 E-mail: trandung@mofi.gov.vn INFOFISH S. SUBASINGHE Director, INFOFISH P.O. Box 10899 50350 Kuala Lumpur Malaysia Tel. : +603 2914614; 2914794 Fax : +603 2916804 E-mail: infish@tm.net.my.
ASEAN SOMSAK PIPOPPINYO Assistant Director Function Cooperation Bureau ASEAN Secretariat 70 A, Jl. Sisingamangaraja Jakarta 12110, Indonesia Tel. : + 62-21 7243372, 726 2991 ext 396 Fax : +62-21 7398234; 7243504 E-mail: somsak@asean.or.id.
NACA M. PHILLIPS Environment Specialist NACA Kasetsart University Campus Bangkok 10903 ,Thailand Tel. : +662 5611728 Fax. : +662 5611730 E-mail: Michael.Phillips@enaca.org SEAFDEC SURIYAN VICHITLEKARN Policy and Program Coordinator SEAFDEC Secretariat P.O. Box 1046, Kasetsart Post Office Bangkok 10903, Thailand Tel. : +662 940-6326 Fax. : +662 9406336 E-mail: suriyan@seafdec.org Private Sector WACHARAWAN CHOMDONG Assistant Manager Thai Frozen Foods Association 9216, 6th Floor, Sathorn Thani Bldg. Silom, Bangkok Tel.: 662 2355622 Fax : 662 2355625 E-mail: wacharawan@thai-frozen.or.th YENCHIT BENJA-ARPORN Quality Assurance Manager The Union Frozen Products Co. Ltd. 1259 Wichianchodok Road Amphur Muang Samutsakorn, Thailand Tel.: 66-34 411081 Fax : 66-34 422775 E-mail: yen@ufp.co.th FAO Fisheries Department Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy, Fax.: (39) 0657053020 LAHSEN ABABOUCH Chief Fish Utilization and Marketing Service (FIIU) E-mail: Lahsen.Ababouch@fao.org FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific 39 Phra Athit Road, Bangkok 10200, Thailand, Fax.: +662 6974 445 DEREK STAPLES Senior Fisheries Officer E-mail: Derek.Staples@fao.org YANINEE SONGYOKA Head, Technical Section Thai Food Processors' Association 170/21-22, 9th Floor, Ocean Tower 1 New Ratchapisek Road Klong Toey, Bangkok Tel.: 662 2612684-6 Fax : 662 2612996-7 E-mail: thaifood@thaifood.org CELIA R. Lavilla -PITOGO Scientist, Fish Health Section SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department Tigbauan, Iloilo 5021 Philippines Tel.: +063-33 3351009 Fax: +063-33 5119070 E-mail: celiap@aqd.seafdec.org.ph C.V. MOHAN Aquatic Animal Health Specialist NACA Kasetsart University Campus Bangkok 10903 ,Thailand Tel. : +662 5611728 Fax. : +662 5611730 E-mail: mohan@enaca.org.
HECTOR LUPIN Senior Fishery Officer Fish Utilization and Marketing Service (FIIU) E-mail: Hector.Lupin@fao.org ROHANA SUBASINGHE Senior Fishery Resources Officer (Aquaculture) Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service (FIRI) Email: Rohana.Subasinghe@fao.org MEETING SECRETARIAT FAO Simon Funge-Smith Pornsuda David Kesara Aotarayakul.
SIMON FUNGE-SMITH Aquaculture Officer E-mail: Simon.FungeSmith@fao.org SHUNJI SUGIYAMA Fishery Statistician (APO) E-mail: Shunji.Sugiyama@fao.org.
Department of Fisheries Thailand Waraporn Prompoj Saowalak Winyoonuntakul Sirichat Penpibulratana.
Welcome Address by Dr. Sitdhi Boonyaratpalin Director General, Department of Fisheries, Government of Thailand Mr. He Changchui, Assistant Director-General and Regional Representative FAO/RAP, Distinguished Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen. It is my great pleasure to welcome you all to the FAO-ASEAN Strategic Planning Workshop on Harmonization of Standards for Shrimp Export-Import to be held in Bangkok today. As the host country, first of all I wish to express my sincere thank to the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific in Bangkok for their technical and financial support for this workshop. The occurrence of this workshop has been stemming from the result of the Eleventh Meeting of ASEAN Sectoral Working Group on Fisheries by the end of May 2003 in Lao PDR. In that meeting, one of the important initiatives that Thailand proposed was the recent critical issue on antibiotic residues and the regulation and control system of those residues for cultured shrimp products among ASEAN countries. Although 75percent of the world shrimp trade has been exported from the Asian countries and mainly from ASEAN, there is still the issue from importing countries on the requirement for inspection and control system to assure the quality and safety standard for cultured shrimp products. And while exporting countries in ASEAN has tried to comply with those regulations, cooperation among ASEAN countries in this matter is still minimal. Each country has developed their own regulatory and inspection system which bring the success to the certain level. Moreover, the higher levels of food safety standard has continuously and increasingly been imposed to producing countries like ASEAN. Therefore to sustain an inter-regional trade with major importing countries, cooperation among ASEAN countries in recognition of regulatory and inspection system is indispensable. In doing so, it will enable member countries to strengthen shrimp inspection and control system for international recognition. At the same time, member countries could resolve food safety and quality problems arise in intra regional trade more efficiently. Moreover, to unify as a group of ASEAN, Thailand does believe that the cooperation in inspection will strengthen the negotiation with importing countries. The recognition or harmonization of regulatory and control system will ultimately lead to the establishment of equivalence that will benefit mutually for both exporting and importing countries as well as protecting the health of consumers locally and regionally. It will finally serve to facilitate intra regional trade and minimizes the costs of regulations, inspection and transaction costs to the governments, industries, producers, and consumers by allowing the exporting countries to employ the most convenient means in its circumstances to achieve the level of protection desires by importing countries. It also helps to avoid unnecessary duplication in inspection of cultured shrimp products by both parties. Thailand by the Department of Fisheries, appointed by ASEAN as a lead country of this initiative, has made effort to explore for appropriate institution to assist us on this issue. And during the past few months FAO/RAPA has accepted our request which kindly agreed to support technically and financially on this program starting with this strategic planning workshop on harmonization of standards for shrimp import-export. I, therefore, again wish to thank both FAO/RAPA and FAO Head Office in Rome for their support of the specialists to this workshop. I hope that this meeting will be a first and good step in bringing us a strategy or framework for the harmonization of standards for shrimp import and export for ASEAN. The implementation would be a major challenging step ahead that is hoped to lead us to reach an ultimate outcome of having reputation of "ASEAN Cultured Shrimp Products" as healthy, safety food for the world consumption.
Last but not least, I wish to welcome you all particularly our ASEAN colleagues and the specialists to this meeting. I hope you have a fruitful meeting and enjoy your stay in Bangkok. Thank you.
Supporting Statement by Dr. Somsak Pippopinyo, Assistant Director, ASEAN Secretariat Honorable Dr. He Changchui, Assistant Director-General and FAO Regional Representative for Asia and the Pacific; Dr. Sitdhi Boonyaratpalin, Director-General, Department of Fisheries of Thailand; Distinguished Guests and Delegates from ASEAN Member Countries; Ladies and Gentlemen. It is indeed my great privilege to be invited to deliver the Opening Remarks at this auspicious occasion of the Opening Ceremony of this FAO-ASEAN Strategic Planning Workshop on Harmonization of Standards for Shrimp Export-Import. Please allow me, on behalf the Secretary General of ASEAN to thank FAO for the generous support and invitation extended to all ASEAN Member Countries, and to Thailand for hosting this workshop. I would like also to express our sincere appreciation to the international experts and resource persons who are here to share with us their knowledge and experiences in our efforts to harmonizing food safety and quality standards in fisheries products. ASEAN Member Countries have since long given strong attention to those issues related to food safety. The increasing awareness and desire to improve food safety and agricultural trade as well as to enhance ASEAN competitiveness in food, agriculture and fisheries products have prompted Member Countries to work together in undertaking a number of cooperative programmes and activities on food safety. ASEAN bodies that, in one way or another, involve in food safety issues include: (i) (ii) ASEAN Expert Group on Food Safety (AEGFS) under The ASEAN Senior Officials on Health Development (SOMHD) which is responsible for formulating ASEAN Food Safety Policy and ASEAN Food Safety Improvement Plan (AFSIP); The ASEAN Task Force on Codex (ATFC) under SOM-AMAF which coordinates ASEAN' s position on matters pertaining to the agenda items to be discussed at Codex Committees and Codex Alimentarius Commission meetings; Product Working Group on Prepared Foodstuff under ASEAN Consultative Committee on Standards and Quality (ACCSQ) which assists ACCSQ in addressing the elimination of technical barriers to trade for prepared food stuffs; and ASEAN Sub-Committee on Food Science and Technology (SCFST) under the ASEAN Committee on Science and Technology (COST) responsible for promoting intra-ASEAN cooperation and collaboration, establishing databases for exchange of information, and increasing capabilities and improving infrastructure.
In addition, the ASEAN Ministers on Agriculture and Forestry (AMAF) have recently endorsed the establishment of an ASEAN Food Safety Network with the view to provide cohesive approach for the relevant sectoral ASEAN bodies in addressing the issues of non-tariff barriers related to food safety, that are facing the region's agricultural and fisheries trade. To ensure appropriate coordination among the various existing ASEAN bodies, which have been handling the respective matters relating to food safety, the ASEAN Secretariat has been tasked to work closely with all ASEAN bodies to ensure effective and efficient coordination among us.
To me, it is no doubt that globalization and trade liberalization have contributed to the growing levels of international trade in agricultural and fisheries products. However, in liberalizing agricultural trade, the countries' commitments to reduce tariffs and subsidy policies, may have reinforced tendencies to use "technical standards" to protect domestic products. For the past years, developing countries, including ASEAN, have witnessed alarming signals of those Non Tariff Barriers (NTB), in spite of the establishment of WTO in 1994 as well as the adoption of the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS Agreement), which suppose to prevent the WTO Members from arbitrarily and irrationally adopting any SPS measures. The proliferation of the numerous ASEAN bodies involved in food safety issues, as mentioned earlier, is a clear indication of the growing magnitude and complexities of the problems. ASEAN Member Countries have become increasingly subject to the stringent and more requirements of several "technical standards", such as labelling, hygiene, drug residues and toxin. These will definitely have certain impacts on ASEAN trade. The recent EU application on zero tolerance of chloramphenicol as well as the newly developed analytical technique for detection of drug residue, for example, have proved to have profound effect, to a large extend, on shrimp exports from our region. Like many other NTBs, regardless of the soundness or unsoundness of the measures, which are still subject to further debate, these will clearly affect costs and therefore competitiveness of ASEAN shrimp products. As you may be aware, the particular issues on zero tolerance and regulatory inspection and control system of antibiotic residues in shrimp products as well as their implications on trade have been discussed in several ASEAN bodies including SOM-AMAF, ASEAN Sectoral Working Group on Fisheries (ASWGFi) and Senior Economic Officials Meeting (SEOM). To address the problems, ASEAN Member Countries agreed to strengthen the following efforts: (i) (ii) (iii) Promote the implementation of Good Aquaculture Practices; Closely regulate and monitor the usage of antibiotics in the aquaculture practices; and Develop national capacity including analytical capacity on lower detection limits, traceability and certification from relevant authority.
The ASWGFi has also recently agreed to establish an ASEAN network of cultured shrimp inspection authority to work together in addressing the issues of drug residues in shrimp products. The network is expected to provide scientifically and systematically appropriate inputs for timely decision of the ASWGFi as well as other parties concerned. As an initial step, this FAO-ASEAN Strategic Planning Workshop on Harmonization of Standards for Shrimp Export-Import is being conducted to discuss the strategies and work plan of the establishing network/task force. Given expanding global economy and international trade of agricultural and food products as well as the increasing complexities of non-tariff barrier issues, it is difficult, if not at all impossible, for a country or any agencies within the ASEAN umbrella to single-handedly face the challenges alone. Effective collaborations and linkages among ASEAN countries to develop and implement mutual strategies are therefore necessary. The conduct of this workshop is therefore very timely. I sincerely hope this workshop will give us the answers and help us address some of the technical difficulties we are currently faced at this stage of our fisheries development. I look forward to a fruitful discussion, over the next three days, with outcomes and recommendations that will further enrich our work both at national and regional levels. To conclude the remarks, the ASEAN Secretariat would like to take this opportunity to congratulate Thailand, the appointed regional coordinator and the host country of this workshop, who has successfully adhered to its commitment to lead other ASEAN Member Countries in this initiative, and also to express our appreciation to other ASEAN Member Countries for their cooperation. We, at the ASEAN Secretariat, stand ready to assist in what ever way we can and to join hands with the Member.
Countries to meet the challenges that lie ahead of us in this important journey. With the traditional spirit of ASEAN cooperation and solidarity, we are confident that this initiative will ultimately achieve its objective. We also hope that the international organizations, including FAO, too can continue to extend to us the necessary and required assistance to help us better meet the challenges of the harmonization exercise and the process we have started. With that note, I wish all delegates a fruitful Meeting, and hope that your stay in Bangkok, my home town, will be a productive and an enjoyable one. Thank you.
Opening statement by Dr. He Changchui FAO Assistant Director-General and Regional Representative for Asia and the Pacific Distinguished Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen, On behalf of the Director-General of FAO, I wish to welcome you all to the FAO-ASEAN Strategic Planning Workshop on Harmonization of Standards for Shrimp Import-Export. This workshop is a collaborative effort by FAO and ASEAN to address the critical issue of harmonization regarding quality and inspection standards in the ASEAN member nations for exported shrimp, as the lack of a strategic and cohesive approach in addressing the issue has already resulted in considerable lost opportunities for many Asian countries. The ASEAN region represents some of the largest shrimp exporting nations in the world and its contribution to both the food security and the economies of these developing countries is considerable. In the year 2000, global aquaculture production exceeded 35 million metric tonnes with a value of over 52 thousand million US dollars. Although crustaceans represented only 4.8 percent of total production by weight, they comprised almost 21 percent of the value of global aquaculture. The tiger prawn is ranked first by value at over four thousand million US dollars and one recent estimate indicates that white shrimp produced in Asia are making an increasing contribution to the overall production of Asian farmed shrimp. Developed countries have been the major markets for farmed shrimp over the last few years, and the market conditions in the USA are now the predominant factor affecting international market prices. Shrimp is the number one seafood consumed in the USA and imports have now reached 430 000 tonnes per year, worth 3.4 thousand million US dollars, and are still increasing. The Japanese market is also important, with 80 percent of its imports coming from Asian countries (particularly Indonesia, Viet Nam and India) in 2002, compared to just 20 percent from Latin America. Recently there have been a series of events that have impacted the ability of ASEAN and other Asian countries to export shrimp, especially to the European Union. The European market has been more difficult to penetrate due to consumer pressures regarding a range of issues that include sustainability criteria, traceability, contaminants and residues. Issues concerning antibiotics has lead to recent bans on importation and blacklisting of farmed shrimp from many Asian countries. While it is true that agriculture subsidies and trade tariffs are the major issues in trade liberalization today, it is crucial that we address the technical issues, such as the harmonization of disparities in quality control and inspection standards if the obstacles to import bans by the developed nations are to be lifted. The harmonization of standards will not only result in substantial savings, but also contribute to environment, human health and sustainable agriculture; common standards could also enhance the reputation of the region as an exporter of safe products of consistent quality and composition, facilitating the access to international markets. FAO recognizes the urgent need to address issues such as these, as demonstrated by its involvement in the SPS agreements which have played an important role in harmonizing sectoral international instruments on food safety within the framework of the FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission. The importance of this area has also been acknowledged by ASEAN in incorporating a move towards harmonization in the ASEAN Strategic Plan, 1999-2004. As the world moves towards a system of food regulation based on food safety assessment, there will be an increasing need to evaluate existing, and/or establish new standards and regulations on a country by country basis. In the year 2000, FAO, in collaboration with the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme, considered that it would be timely to examine opportunities for action on a region-wide scale. A.
consultation was convened in Manila on 23-24 November 2000, immediately following the 7th ASEAN Food Conference and attended by 23 representatives from ten ASEAN countries. The consultation recognized that differing priorities within the ASEAN countries makes regional negotiations and consensus difficult, especially when linked to the differing value and rate of growth of the fisheries sector. With respect to export products, the ASEAN countries frequently compete with one another, both for foreign and intra-ASEAN markets, further constraining cooperation and coordination. Since the consultation, there has been increasing awareness of the WTO and its implications for regional and global trade. Opening of markets and fair and equitable trade are important concepts, but all too often circumvented by technical barriers to trade and lack of agreement on criteria or standards between importing and exporting countries. This highlights the necessity and importance of having a concerted voice in global decision making mechanisms, such as WTO and the Codex Alimentarius Commission, since quality and safety standards are fundamental to the criteria for market access. Within the fisheries sector, this has been most recently highlighted by the focus on antibiotic residues and restrictions on imports of farmed shrimp by some countries. To address these critical emerging issues and in recognition of the need to raise the profile of these issues at a policy level, the ASEAN Sectoral Working Group on Fisheries meeting in Lao PDR in May 2003 developed an ASEAN Sectoral Task Force to harmonize quality and inspection standards for shrimp export and import in the region, nominating Thailand to act as the lead country. As the lead country, Thailand, through the Department of Fisheries, requested FAO's assistance to organize this strategic planning workshop. FAO, in response to this important initiative of ASEAN members, is pleased to be able to provide both technical and financial support to this activity, particularly since it also involves collaboration with the ASEAN Secretariat and the ASEAN Sectoral Working Group on fisheries. I hope that this `regional ownership' would be an important factor for informing policy makers from the ASEAN member states and for developing concerted actions to jointly address specific regional issues. As you are aware that the aim of this strategic workshop is to develop a strategy that will assist in: promoting confidence building between the various inspection systems through open and transparent discussions; development of guidelines for food control capacity through training and exchange of information; working towards equivalence between the different control systems with the goal of concluding mutual recognition agreements between all ASEAN members; preparation of hazards and control guides specific for ASEAN products, coupled with encouragement of increased CODEX participation; and formulate regional risk assessments for products of particular importance to the region. We hope that by Thursday you will be able to recommend what needs to be done to move forward on these important matters. It is my sincere hope that this workshop will provide the initial stimulus to facilitate the ASEAN member countries to undertake concrete follow-up actions on the issues of harmonization of standards for exported shrimp, as well as on the broader issues relating to the harmonization of safety and quality standards in seafood products. In closing, I wish to thank the Department of Fisheries of the Government of Thailand for its generous assistance in the organization of this meeting. May I wish you fruitful deliberations and an enjoyable stay in Bangkok. Thank you.
Day 1 - Tuesday 4th November.
08.30 - 09.00 09.00 - 09.30 Opening ceremony Registration Introduction speakers the Dr. Simon Funge-Smith, Aquaculture officer, FAO RAP Dr. Sitdhi Boonyratpalin Welcome address Director-General, Thai Department of Fisheries Mr. Somsak Pipoppinyo Supporting statement Assistant Director, ASEAN Secretariat Dr. He Changchui Opening Address Assistant Director-General FAO RAP Group photo Introduction Simon Funge-Smith Country report Country report Country report Country report Presentation of the workshop goals, items to be covered and expected outputs Philippines Malaysia Viet Nam Singapore to.
BREAK Session 1.
LUNCH Country report Country report Country report BREAK Session 2 Overview presentation 1 Lahsen Ababouch (FAO FIIU) Overview presentation 2 Hector Lupin (FAO FIIU) Overview presentation 3 S.Subasinghe, (INFOFISH) Plenary discussion Welcome Cocktail reception "Requirements and status of regional and global harmonization and equivalence in fish safety and quality" "Risk, Risk Assessment and Regulations (Standards)" " Marketing of aquaculture products and harmonization of product standards  role of INFOFISH" Discussion Hosted by Mr. He Changchui, ADG/RR, FAO/RAP In the Ratchada 2 Room Thailand Myanmar Indonesia.
Day 2 - Wednesday 5th November.
08.30  08.55 08.55  09.20 09.20  09.45 09.45  10.15 10.15  10.45 10.45  11.00 BREAK Session 4 Function of the working Explanation of how the working groups groups will operate the schedule and the expected Simon Funge-Smith outputs of each group. (FAORAP) "Identify the principle steps required to conclude mutual recognition agreements Working group 1 between the region's agencies having Working group 2 jurisdiction for health and safety Working group 3 inspection" Session 3 Overview presentation 4 Mike Phillips (NACA) Overview presentation 5 Waraporn Prompoj (DOF Thailand) Overview presentation 6 Rohana Subasinghe (FAO FIRI) Plenary discussion "Quality from the bottom up?. Practical experiences with small holder shrimp farmer groups in Viet Nam and India" COC and GAP for shrimp farms in Thailand "Opportunities for harmonization and equivalence among ASEAN".
LUNCH Short presentations of Short 5 minute presentation by each working group outputs working group on their conclusions Discussion "The application of the concept of an acceptable level of risk to the domestic Working group 1 and export food chains and how to Working group 2 establish "Risk Assessment" as a viable Working group 3 basis for development".
BREAK Short presentation of working group outputs Discussion Workshop dinner Hosted by Thai Department of Fisheries.
Day 3 - Thursday 6th November.
"What national & regional mechanisms can be used (both public and private sector) for collaboration in food safety and in enhancing the reputation of the ASEAN region as a supplier of safe products to export markets".
Working group 1 Working group 2 Working group 3.
10.00  10.30 10.30- 11.00 BREAK.
Short presentation of working group outputs What have the three working groups concluded that is common to all? Which conclusions should be included in the strategy What action steps should be taken by the countries represented? What kind of support will this require? Strategy for ASEAN to address harmonization and equivalence needs.
Plenary discussions.
Conclusion & closing LUNCH.
