RAP publication 2004/14.
The Report of the.
REGIONAL HIGH-LEVEL ROUNDTABLE.
23-24 February 2004 Bangkok, Thailand.
SUBREGIONAL COOPERATION FOR ERADICATION OF POVERTY AND FOOD INSECURITY IN ASIA AND THE PACIFIC.
The Report of the REGIONAL HIGH-LEVEL ROUNDTABLE.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS REGIONAL OFFICE FOR ASIA AND THE PACIFIC Bangkok, 2004 i.
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory or any area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors alone and do not imply any opinion whatsoever on the part of FAO.
NOTICE OF COPYRIGHT The copyright in this publication is vested in the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. This publication may not be reproduced, in whole or in part, by any method or process, without written permission from the copyright holder. Applications for such permission with a statement of the purpose and the extent of reproduction desired should be made through and addressed to the Chief, Policy Assistance Branch, FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, Maliwan Mansion, Phra Athit Road, Bangkok 10200, Thailand.  FAO 2004.
Asia and the Pacific region is characterized by high economic growth, increasing per capita income, and high agricultural production and productivity. Notwithstanding the success many countries in Asia and the Pacific have achieved in reducing poverty and improving food security and the overall welfare of the people, the region remains home to the majority of the world's poor and hungry. Out of approximately 1.2 billion people in the world who are estimated to be living under a dollar a day consumption level, roughly two-thirds of them live in Asia and the Pacific, particularly in South Asia. To address poverty and food insecurity, Asia-Pacific countries have been implementing several national initiatives with their own resources as well as in collaboration with the United Nations System, including the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP) and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the Asian Development Bank (ADB), international financing institutions (IFIs) and multi- and bilateral donors. The region still faces several challenges and constraints to sustainable agricultural development. These are mainly related to sustainable management of natural resources, the spreading of plant pests and a n i m a l diseases, consumer concerns about food safety and inadequate food marketing systems. Furthermore, globalization and the international and regional trade and economic environments impose additional challenges, which call for collaboration at regional and subregional levels to attain sustainable poverty reduction and food security. With a view to addressing these issues, the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, UNESCAP and ADB jointly organized a Regional High-level Roundtable Meeting to discuss how Asia and the Pacific can meet the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and World Food Summit Declaration through opportunities offered by subregional and regional collaboration, derive lessons learned and formulate a future course of action. The discussions and the deliberations in the Roundtable rightly concluded that for certain aspects of food security, poverty eradication and the promotion of agricultural and rural development, regional collaboration can provide a critical and indispensable contribution and that Regional Economic Organizations (REOs) have a significant role to play in this regard. Such a development is helped by strong political commitment to policy harmonization among the REO's, which is critical to fostering economic growth, employment and the income earning capacities of the poor and thereby increasing their access to food. Continued reduction of trade barriers to intraregional trade, the establishment of common phytosanitary regulations and common standards, the harmonization of tariff nomenclature, customs valuations and customs procedures and so forth are still necessary if we are to achieve the MDGs. The Roundtable provided a high-level forum to discuss the political commitment and building of fruitful partnerships within and amongst the subregional bodies in Asia and the Pacific and co-ordination of their respective initiatives and programmes related to agriculture and rural development with a focus on eradication of poverty and food insecurity. It urged leaders and decision-makers of countries in the Asia-Pacific region to put the fight against hunger and poverty at the forefront of national priorities and to urgently strengthen their political commitment towards this objective. This Report is thus useful and timely, as there is a need to design a separate package of policy targets, strategies and programmes that are directly designed to address poverty issues and problems for specific poverty groups in the various subsectors of the economy. This Report is based on the cooperative work done by the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, UNESCAP and ADB. The contributions of UNESCAP and ADB are greatly acknowledged and appreciated. HE CHANGCHUI Assistant Director-General and FAO Regional Representative for Asia and the Pacific iii.
Page Foreword ............................................................................................................................................. I. II. III. IV. INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................... INAUGURAL SESSION ......................................................................................................... EXCHANGE OF GENERAL VIEWS .................................................................................. TECHNICAL DISCUSSIONS ............................................................................................... iii 1 3 4 7 7 7 7 8 9 9 9 9 10 12 13 13 16 18.
Overview on the incidence, nature and causes of poverty and food insecurity in the region, with analysis of progress in achieving the MDGs ...................................................................................... UNESCAP Paper: The incidence of poverty and food insecurity and the progress in achieving the Millennium Development Goals in the region .................................................. ADB Paper: Rural development policies in Asia and the Pacific: Lessons learned and future course of action ............................................................................................................... FAO Paper: Opportunities and scope for subregional and regional collaboration to address poverty, food security and sustainable agriculture and rural development .............. Current and/or planned initiatives and programmes of the SREOs .................................................. Current and/or planned activities of ASEAN ........................................................................... Current and/or planned activities of SAARC ........................................................................... Current and/or planned activities of PIF ................................................................................. V. VI. DECLARATION ...................................................................................................................... CLOSING REMARKS ...........................................................................................................
Contents (continued).
Page Statement by Honourable Prakash Chandra Lohani, Minister for Agriculture and Cooperatives, Nepal .................................................................................................................................................... Statement by Honourable Tuisugaletaua Sofara Aveau, Minister for Agriculture, Forests, Fisheries and Meteology of Samoa ..................................................................................................................... Statement by H.E. Mr Zhang Baowen, Vice Minister of Agriculture of the People's Republic of China .................................................................................................................................................... Statement by Mr R.C.A. Jain, Secretary, Agriculture, Government of India ................................... Statement by Mr Rahul Raturi, Sector Manager, the World Bank .................................................... Statement by Mr Keng Yong Ong, Secretary General of ASEAN .................................................... Statement by Mr Q.A.M.A. Rahim, Secretary-General of SAARC .................................................. Statement by Mr Aleki F. Sisifa, Representative of PIF .................................................................... Annex II List of Participants ...........................................................................................................
Heads of country delegations at the Regional High-level Roundtable on Spearheading Subregional Programmes and Cooperation for Eradication of Poverty and Food Insecurity in Asia and the Pacific.
Top row, left to right: Mr Ramesh Chandra A. Jain, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, India; Mr Mohammed Umar, Director, Institute for Research, Extension and Training in Agriculture, University of the South Pacific; H.E. Hima Takelesi, High Commissioner of Niue to New Zealand; Dr Virachai Virameteekul, Vice Minister, Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives, Thailand; Mr Keng Yong Ong, Secretary General, ASEAN Secretariat; Middle row, left to right: Dr Hari Krishna Upadhyaya, Member (Agriculture) of the National Planning Commission, Nepal; Mr Q.A.M.A. Rahim, Secretary-General, SAARC; The Honourable Tuisugaletaua Sofara Aveau, Minister for Agriculture, Forestry, Fisheries and Meteorology, Samoa; H.E. Major General Nyunt Tin, Minister for Agriculture and Irrigation of Myanmar; The Honourable M.K. Anwar, Minister for Agriculture of Bangladesh; H.E. Y.B. Tan Sri Dato Haji Muhyiddin bin Haji Mohd Yassin, MinisterforAgriculture of Malaysia; H.E. Mr Zhang Baowen,Vice Minister of Agriculture, China, Bottom row, left to right: Mr He Changchui, Assistant Director-General and Regional Representative for Asia and the Pacific, FAO; Mr Jacques Diouf, Director-General, FAO; H.E. Mr Somsak Thepsutin, Minister of Agriculture and Cooperatives of Thailand; Mr Kim Hak-Su, Executive Secretary UNESCAP; Mr G.H.P.B. van der Linden, Vice-President, ADB; Honourable Young M. Vivian, MP, Premier of Niue.
INTRODUCTION.
Asia and the Pacific region is characterized by high economic growth, increasing per capita income, and high agricultural production and productivity. Notwithstanding the success many countries in Asia and the Pacific have achieved in reducing poverty, improving food security and the overall welfare of the people, the region remains home to the majority of the world's poor and hungry. Out of approximately 1.2 billion people in the world who are estimated to be living under a dollar a day consumption level, roughly two-thirds of them live in Asia and the Pacific, particularly in South Asia. At the international level, the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the World Food Summit Plan of Action adopted at the World Food Summit (WFS) of 1996 and the World Food Summit: five years later (WFS: fyl) in June 2002 brought to fore the global commitment to eliminate hunger and malnutrition, and to achieve sustainable food security for all people. This global commitment was further reaffirmed in the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) following the Millennium Summit in 2000. MDGs are now widely accepted as the framework for development action and for measuring development progress. Within these, MDG-1, calling for eradication of extreme poverty and hunger, is on the top of the development agenda. To address poverty, food insecurity and sustainable economic growth and rural development, Asia-Pacific countries have been implementing several national initiatives with their own resources, as well as in collaboration with the UN System, including ESCAP and FAO, the Asian Development Bank, international financing institutions (IFIs) and the multi- and bilateral donors. However, it is emerging that due to increasing reliance on regional and international trade, investment and technology transfer for economic growth, national economies of most countries have become interdependent. In the context of the current global trading system, including World Trade Organization (WTO) agreements and the continued negotiations for trade facilitation (i.e. Doha, Cancun), generation of collective bargaining power with countries of common interest vis-à-vis other dominant trading partners have become critically important for sustaining agricultural and overall economic growth. Poverty, food security and development issues are increasingly becoming part of trade negotiations. Also, though poverty, hunger and food security are essentially issues of national concern, for many countries in the region production, trade and distribution of food and agricultural commodities, as well as opportunities for alternative livelihoods, transcends national boundaries. The implications of interdependence and the linkages of trade with development issues and concerns are amply recognized in Asia and the Pacific as indicated by the existence and activities of several Subregional Economic Organizations/Communities (SREOs/SRECs), trading blocks, growth triangles and subregional initiatives for economic integration. Some SREOs/SRECs, with the support of their member governments, are engaging themselves in efforts to eradicate poverty, hunger and food insecurity through achievement of overall sustainable socio-economic development, including agricultural and rural development. SAARC had decided to establish Regional Food Security and Seed Security Reserves and mandated the preparation of a Regional Poverty Profile. Above all, the 2nd Meeting of SAARC Ministers of Agriculture, held in Kathmandu, Nepal in May 2002, adopted a resolution on eradicating hunger and poverty. At its Ministerial meeting in Islamabad, SAARC adopted a Plan of Action to abate the menace of poverty. ASEAN strives to provide adequate levels of food supply and food accessibility to its members and, at the same time, enhance the competitiveness of its food sector. It is also engaged in implementing the Strategic Plan of Action on ASEAN Cooperation in Food, Agriculture and Forestry (1999-2004) and the Hanoi Plan of Action (1999-2004) and is discussing preparation of a Subregional Programme for Food Security (SRPFS) in collaboration with FAO. PIF-FIC has prepared a SRPFS, presented and discussed during the side events of the World Food Summit: five years later held at FAO, Rome, Italy in June 2002. The Italian Government has approved funding for some components of this SRPFS. The executive heads of the subregional economic organizations have been meeting on the sidelines of the UN General Assembly and other venues to discuss areas of mutual cooperation. One such meeting was the Consultative Meeting between the Executive Heads of SAARC, ASEAN, Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), Pacific Forum Secretariat (PFS), and United Nations Economic and Social 1.
Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP). The Meeting in Bali, Indonesia in September 2002 agreed to consider ways and means of mobilizing resources for cooperation between the Subregional Organizations and identified the Asian Development Bank (ADB) as one of the possible donors for funding collaborative activities between these organizations. These developments provide an excellent base to launch innovative joint programmes to complement national actions to achieve MDG-1. Such programmes can focus on poverty reduction and food security by addressing problems of a transboundary nature affecting sustainable agriculture and rural development. This requires understanding and analysis of the opportunities and scope for regional cooperation to address poverty, food security, agriculture and rural development. In this context, the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific (FAO-RAP), the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia the Pacific (UNESCAP) and the Asian Development Bank (ADB) jointly organized a Regional High-Level Roundtable on 23-24 February 2004 in the United Nations Conference Center (UNCC), Bangkok, Thailand to discuss how Asia and the Pacific can meet the MDG Goals and WFS Declaration through opportunities offered by subregional and regional collaboration, derive lessons learned and formulate a future course of action. Objectives The Roundtable provided a high-level forum to discuss political commitment and building of fruitful partnerships within and amongst the subregional bodies in Asia and the Pacific, and coordination of their respective initiatives and programmes related to agriculture and rural development with a focus on eradication of poverty and food insecurity. It facilitated achievement of a common understanding and modalities for addressing the regional challenges by fostering discussion of the linkages between action by the SREOs, ADB, the UN-system, including ESCAP and FAO, and civil society organizations. The meeting offered a chance to build on the SREOs mandate for subregional economic integration to explore how they can promote the convergence of national interests around selected priority agricultural and rural development initiatives so that Asia and the Pacific can meet the MDG objectives. In particular the meeting:.
spearheaded the process of identifying the priority subregional issues and concerns affecting poverty, food security, agriculture and rural development and formulating and implementing regional programmes to address these issues and concerns and reinforce national initiatives; strengthened the dialogue among the Subregional Economic Organizations (SREOs) and between the SREOs and interested international and regional technical and donor agencies on MDG; and derived views, lessons learned and perspectives towards realigning regional rural and agricultural development policies towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
In addition to the above specific objectives, the meeting laid down a framework to continue the process of realising the MDGs and WFS Declaration and broadening the process of forging partnerships amongst the stakeholders. Participants In attendance during the Roundtable were one prime minister, six ministers, two vice ministers, three secretaries/director-generals and other high-level government officials of the agriculture/food, rural development and planning ministries from ten Asian and Pacific Island countries; heads of subregional economic organizations such as ASEAN and SAARC and high-level representatives of PIF-FIC; representatives of international development agencies, multi- and bilateral donors, selected regional civil society organizations and other relevant institutions. It also involved participation of the Director-General of FAO, Executive Secretary of UNESCAP, Vice President of ADB and Senior Vice President of IFAD. The list of participants is appended to this report as Annex II.
INAUGURAL SESSION.
Opening statements Mr Jacques Diouf, Director-General of FAO, pointed out in his opening statement that the Asia and Pacific region has accomplished much in the fight against poverty and food insecurity, but there is still significant work to be done. These positive results have been achieved because countries of the region have increased productivity per unit of land through expansion of irrigation and have taken advantage of improved technologies and inputs. Mr Diouf indicated that sustained and equitable growth of rural areas depends on multiple components including an improved economic environment, human resource development, participation of the private sector and civil society organizations, good governance, and judicious use of public resources in the provision of key public goods. The region still faces challenges such as sustainable management of natural resources and those caused by globalization. The avian flu outbreak demonstrates the necessity "for improved regional collaboration and communication" in order to address emerging shared policy issues. The existence and continuing work of ASEAN, SAARC and PIF show the region has the capacity to face the emerging challenges. S o m e regional collaboration on food security and poverty eradication already exists under the South-South Cooperation Programme of the FAO Special Programme for Food Security. This kind of collaboration should continue and expand. Additionally, countries of the Asia and Pacific region should cooperate on issues including the prevention of animal disease outbreaks, complementary agriculture systems, and economic integration. This meeting provides an opportunity to discuss how regional cooperation can aid in the fight against poverty and hunger. During this meeting, particular attention should be paid to two issues. First, it is necessary to identify "activities that would help achieve the immense potentials for fair trade expansion unleashed by the Uruguay Round Agreements and the establishment of the WTO." Second, special attention should be given to "the decline in commitment of national, as well as international, resources to agriculture and rural development." FAO is committed to supporting regional efforts to end hunger and poverty. Mr G.H.P.B. van der Linden, Vice President of ADB, stressed that one of the challenges is the MDG of halving extreme poverty by 2015. The Asia and Pacific region has made some progress in meeting this goal. But much remains to be done. The Asian experience suggests that success in the fight against poverty requires policies that simultaneously strengthen three key areas of development. These three pillars for poverty reduction are economic growth, social development and good governance. Economic growth is the most important factor. The growth must be strong, sustained, and focused on improving the lives of the poor. One prerequisite for economic growth is adequate an infrastructure, which is not currently receiving enough investment. The second pillar ­ social development ­ is necessary to ensure that economic development is equitable, that all people in society benefit. Good governance will provide the backbone to the other two pillars by ensuring that the public good is provided for in every way. It is mainly up to individual countries to strengthen the three pillars and to carry out poverty reduction strategies and programmes. But cooperation between developing and developed countries must also occur if the first MDG is to be reached. One means of cooperation would be "the establishment of an open and nondiscriminatory trading system that would bring massive befits to developing economies and accelerate their progress in reducing poverty." Also, developing countries have realized that regional cooperation can prove useful in addressing many issues. This cooperation needs to continue and be used to deal with the problems of poverty and hunger. All actors must work even more closely if we are to reach our goals.
Mr Kim Hak-Su, Executive Secretary of UNESCAP, stated that while significant progress has been made towards eradicating poverty and food insecurity in the region, there is still a need for much more work. UNESCAP has recently undergone a reform in order to better focus on issues in the region. He pointed out that UNESCAP now focuses its efforts on three areas: reducing poverty, managing globalization and addressing emerging social issues. This meeting deals with all three areas. UNESCAP uses many programmes and strategies to eradicate poverty. They include examining the economic and social trends in the region, recognizing specific successful programmes dealing with poverty, and checking the progress made by countries in the region towards reaching the MDGs. Additionally, UNESCAP hopes to work with other agencies to promote good policies that have been adopted throughout the region. Finally, UNESCAP will work to further promote regional cooperation in order to eradicate poverty and food insecurity. H.E. Mr Somsak Thepsutin, Minister of Agriculture and Cooperatives of Thailand (Representative of the Prime Minister of Thailand), stated that the Asia and Pacific region is still home to the majority of the world's poor. Because this is the case, even though the region has experienced major economic growth, there may be something wrong with the development models being employed. Human resource development is one area that needs particular attentions. This meeting can serve as a forum for sharing successful and unsuccessful development strategies. While the countries of the region are different, some programmes and policies may be applicable to different situations. Thailand has found that the main problems of poverty are the lack of land for cultivation, indebtedness, and the lack of stable occupation and has set up programmes to deal with these issues. Additionally, the Government of Thailand recognizes that there are issues which must be dealt with multilaterally because they know no geopolitical boundaries.
EXCHANGE OF GENERAL VIEWS.
Mr Cyril Enweze, Senior Vice President, IFAD, indicated that while the Asia and Pacific region has experienced significant economic growth in resent decades, there still exist major problems of food insecurity and extreme poverty. More must be done, especially in the rural regions, if MDG-1 is to be accomplished. IFAD focuses its development strategy on less favoured areas, like remote mountains, and less favoured groups, like women and indigenous peoples. While there are difficulties in addressing poverty and food insecurity at the regional level, this meeting provides a chance to discuss ways to cooperate more efficiently regionally. While IFAD and many other groups have been making efforts at the regional level, much more must be done. A six-point agenda will provide ideas on how this can be accomplished. First, it is necessary to recognize and spread successful strategies and practices used to combat poverty and food insecurity. IFAD can help with this process. Second, regional mechanisms could be useful in facilitating upscaling and replication. Third, countries should collaborate regionally to address the issue of sustainable natural resource management. Fourth, while largely a national and local issue, there is scope for regional initiatives to promote equity and access to productive assets. Additionally, globalization and its effects on markets should be discussed at a regional level. Fifth, discussion of government policy should be carried out at the regional level. Sixth, regional cooperation can help promote peace and stability, which is a necessary condition for development. The Honourable Young M. Vivian, MP, Premier of Niue, stated that one of the major characteristics of the South Pacific region is its physical environmental diversity. Also, resources are unequally distributed among the countries of the region. Because of this, agencies have been established to deal with the resulting "socio-economic disparity". These agencies, including the Forum Fisheries Agency, use a collective approach. The region is using the same collective approach to eliminate food insecurity and poverty through FAO programmes. Globalization poses a special challenge for the small island nations of the region. It is especially important for the region's countries to act collectively in dealing with this challenge. The region also faces the special problem of losing its means of sustainability because of natural disasters. This makes it even more difficult for the South Pacific countries to move forward. International and regional cooperation are necessary for overcoming the challenges that face the region. 4.
The Honourable M.K. Anwar, Minister for Agriculture, Bangladesh, stated that the agriculture sector of Bangladesh has achieved much in the recent past. These accomplishments are due to the combination of international and domestic efforts of "effective public policy interventions in a market driven agriculture sector" and helpful public investment. Two major achievements are the following. First, production of foodgrains has increased per capita availability of food. Second, there has been a notable decline in poverty since independence. But poverty and food security remain major problems for the region and for Bangladesh. This is largely due to "our deficiency in political will to act together and our failure to mount a purposeful, coherent and time-bound regional and subregional effort to end food insecurity and poverty from this region." While leaders have committed to solving these problems, not enough progress has been made. Regional cooperation is crucial for overcoming these problems. Additionally, the cooperation of stakeholders and donors is necessary. A national emphasis on pro-poor economic growth will also help the situation. Moreover, regional cooperation is needed to effectively use the region's water resources and take advantage of the opportunities of biotechnology. Adversities can be translated into opportunities through regional cooperation. H.E. Mr Y.B. Tan Sri Muhyiddin Yassin, Minister for Agriculture, Malaysia, pointed out that for Malaysia the issue of food security consists of two parts: "the first is the right to access to food while the second is to be self-sufficient in food production." Malaysian agricultural policy is focused on making the agriculture sector "modern, dynamic and competitive." The agriculture sector is crucially important and Malaysia sees its greatest challenge as the lessening of dependence on both agriculture and food imports. In addressing this issue, Malaysia's national policy and the involvement of the private sector are important. The elimination of poverty must be done through rural development. Malaysia has concentrated its governmental efforts in these areas and has made significant progress owing to continuous budgetary support and political will. While Malaysia has accomplished much, it must now look towards regional cooperation as a way of dealing with globalization and increasing it's accomplishments in the areas of food security and poverty alleviation. Malaysia is currently working well with ASEAN but sees that progress could be made through cooperation in the areas of research and economic development. While regional cooperation is necessary and beneficial, it requires that all involved parties are committed to the cooperation. Overall, the primary responsibility of overcoming the problems of food insecurity and poverty lies with the individual countries, but regional cooperation can and should be utilized as well. H.E. Maj. Gen. Nyunt Tin, Minister for Agriculture and Irrigation, Myanmar, underlined that while global commitments have been made to fight against poverty and food insecurity, these issues are still major problems for the Asia and Pacific region. More efforts must be made at the regional level if the fight is to be successful. Myanmar has actively supported the development of agriculture and irrigation through its programmes and resources. Rice needs to be at the center of development plans for the region. The accomplishments of the agriculture sector in Myanmar are due to national, international and private actions. In particular, the government of Myanmar focused on improving infrastructure and supporting rural areas. Additionally, Myanmar is currently cooperating regionally through ASEAN, particularly in the area of poverty reduction and food security. Fair trading practices are crucial for increasing income which will in turn increase food security. Regional cooperation can be especially productive in establishing "a level playing field in international trading practices." The Honourable Tuisugaletaua Sofara Aveau, Minister for Agriculture, Forest, Fisheries and Meteology, Samoa, stated that agriculture is of vital importance to Samoa and the country is committed to achieving the MDGs. There appears to be an absence of hunger in Samoa, but anecdotal evidence suggests the presence of relative poverty and food insecurity. A more complete and accurate study is necessary to completely understand the situation. It is known that nutrition deficiencies are leading to health problems.
The Government of Samoa is committed to strengthening institutions and developing policies that will increase production of the agriculture sector. In order to eradicate poverty, food insecurity and the inequalities in income distribution, people must have economic opportunities. The creation of these opportunities is at the core of Samoa's development policies. The fight against poverty and food insecurity is being fought in cooperation with regional and international groups. "The sustainable management of natural resources and finding solutions to environmental concerns" are major focuses of established regional groups and will help to end poverty and food insecurity. Better trade practices are also on the agenda of the Pacific Forum Secretariat. The reduction of market barriers is of critical importance to countries of the region. The ability of regional and international organizations to help in the fight is constrained by their own limited resources. H.E. Zhang Baowen, Vice Minister of Agriculture, China, pointed out that China has made great progress in food security and poverty alleviation but still "faces severe challenges in agricultural development." The SARS outbreak caused a severe decrease in food production. The Government has adopted policies such as direct subsidies to grain producers and decreasing taxes on agriculture in order to combat this problem. China has been and remains committed to regional and international cooperation in the agriculture sector. China is going to establish a China-ASEAN Free Trade Zone by 2010 when 6 000 products will enjoy zero tariffs. Additionally, China works with FAO to eradicate food insecurity and poverty. In the future, developing countries should keep their agriculture sectors as priorities and donors and the international community at large should continue to support these efforts. H.E. Ramesh Chandra A. Jain, Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, Ministry of Agriculture, India, pointed out that "geography clearly dictates a subregional approach in catering to the problems" of poverty and food insecurity, among others. Despite the progress that India and the region as a whole have made in the battle against poverty and food insecurity, a more strengthened and concerted effort is needed. Agriculture remains the key to sustainable development in India. When discussing the agriculture sector in India it is important to keep in mind the small average landholding size. The Government's achievements on the supply side combined with the expansion of the public food distribution system to more villages helped make food more secure. Additionally, it must be noted that India dealt well with its recent drought experiences. The improvement and growth of the agriculture sector is necessary to eradicate poverty. With so much work to be done to end poverty and food insecurity, it is crucial that political will and resources are mobilized. Additionally, fair trade policies are necessary to ensure the farmers' well-being. While there is much promise for the benefits that regional cooperation can bring, the inherent difficulties that come with collaboration must be recognized. The key to successful "cooperation is information and experience sharing in the policy and programme domains." More work needs to be done by FAO, other UN agencies, and international financial institutions to make these information networks more effective. The Honourable Dr Prakash Chandra Lohani, Minister for Agriculture and Cooperatives, Nepal, underlined that while the world is more prosperous today than it was a decade ago, this is an aggregate picture and masks the faces of more than 800 million people who do not have adequate access to food. This is a problem for all countries of the world whether they are developed or developing, but progress has been slow. Significant increases in food production are necessary and can only happen through another major technological breakthrough. But increased food production by itself is not the answer. Poverty must be reduced as well. This can be done by diversifying the agriculture sector through increasing access to markets. This is where regional cooperation can be extremely helpful. Improvements in the development process need to occur at all levels (i.e. local, national, regional and international). Agriculture is very important to Nepal, but agricultural productivity is low and approximately half of its districts are classified as food deficient. The Government is working hard to alleviate poverty by promoting economic growth, infrastructure, specific programmes and good governance. Finally, it needs to be acknowledged that the eradication of poverty and food insecurity is a highly politicized process. 6.
Mr Rahul Raturi, Sector Manager, Rural Development and Natural Resources, East Asia Region, World Bank, pointed out that while the growth of the agricultural sector is necessary for poverty reduction, accomplishing agricultural growth is becoming more difficult because the world is running out of farmable land and not much more land can feasibly be irrigated. Thus, productivity from the use of land, labour, water and capital assets must be increased. Governments must re-examine their rural development strategies with a new focus on issues like Integrated Pest Management (IPM) and water degradation for achieving sustainable agriculture. Finally the international community as a whole must address some challenges. It needs to increase the importance of rural development in national policy, increase investment for rural development, have donors work together and "create a rural alliance of interested donors, NGOs and the private sector, to help coordinate international efforts.".
TECHNICAL DISCUSSIONS.
Overview on the incidence, nature and causes of poverty and food insecurity in the region, with analysis of progress in achieving the MDGs UNESCAP Paper: The incidence of poverty and food insecurity and the progress in achieving the Millennium Development Goals in the region (Presented by Mr Raj Kumar, Chief, Poverty and Development Division, UNESCAP) According to the UNESCAP-UNDP report, the Asia and Pacific region will probably achieve the target of halving by the year 2015 the incidence of extreme poverty measured by the international standard of US$1 per day. The aggregate figures, however, mask the significant differences among countries. The reduction in poverty took place mainly in China and South East Asia. Progress towards halving the number of people who suffer from hunger was more modest during the last decade. The proportion of underweight children under five fell from 35 to 32 percent and the level of undernourishment across the population fell from 20 to 16 percent. Again, the progress was mainly achieved in China. Conclusion: Considerable progress has been achieved in the Asia Pacific region towards the goal of reducing extreme poverty and hunger. There is ample evidence of the significance of economic growth for poverty reduction. It is, however, important that economic growth is sustained and is not accompanied by increases in income inequality. ADB Paper: Rural development policies in Asia and the Pacific: Lessons learned and future course of action (Presented by Dr John Y.L.Yee, Principal Senior Economist, ADB) Trends in rural development approaches have changed a lot since the 1950s to the present. The emphasis on agricultural development supported by community development in the 1950s shifted to small farm growth in the 1960s, then to integrated rural development for small farm growth in the 1970s and later to state-led rural development and market liberalization in the 1980s and to participatory processes and approaches in the 1990s. Today the prevailing framework of rural development encourages sustainable livelihoods and mainstreaming rural development in poverty reduction strategies and programmes. The lessons learned, however, of what worked well in the Asia and Pacific region in the past can still be built on to guide future rural development initiatives. Creating policy regimes conducive to market oriented development, steady investments in rural infrastructure to link people to markets, providing quality social services to foster human resource development, building social overhead capital in irrigation and water resources management to increase cropping intensities and reduce climatic risk, and developing rural financial services to mobilize savings and finance private initiatives worked well in the past and will work well in the future with the appropriate modifications. The new challenges arising from globalization, demographic changes, environmental stress, scientific advances, gender discrimination, governance weaknesses and the changing face of rural poverty make it.
essential for governments and their donors to rethink the future course of action regarding the policies and strategies to foster rural development. The strategies for fostering rural development include: a) Developing strategic approaches to fostering rural development.
Rural development strategies should be built around a set of prioritized and affordable reforms i.e. policy, regulatory, institutional and fiscal initiatives. The private sector should be a full partner in developing strategies. Attention should be paid to the needs of the poor.
b) Building on supply side interventions which worked well in the past, e.g. competitive rural markets, roads, irrigation, extension approaches with diversity of providers, human resource development. c) Scaling-up new demand side approaches that deliver results including decentralization, participation and devolution.
d) Multiplying the benefits of rural development through regional initiatives, e.g. the Brunei DarussalamIndonesia-Malaysia-Philippine East Asian growth area. Conclusion: No single strategy or policy blueprint can possibly fit Asia and the Pacific's diverse circumstances. There may be many ways for rural communities to escape from poverty and these escape routes merit public support. An appreciation and respect for location differences that builds on local initiative and uses development assistance support to accelerate the transfer of good practice knowledge, applications, techniques and technology from one setting to another is needed to foster rural development. FAO Paper: Opportunities and scope for subregional and regional collaboration to address poverty, food security and sustainable agriculture and rural development (Presented by Dr Saifullah Syed, Chief, Policy Assistance Branch, FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific) Food security and the fight against hunger are primarily issues of national concern. However, for certain aspects of food security, poverty eradication and promotion of agricultural and rural development, regional collaboration can provide a critical and indispensable contribution. For this reason regional organizations in Asia and the Pacific have integrated the fight against hunger and food security into their objectives and programmes of action. Some examples of these initiatives are the SAARC Plan of Action on Poverty Alleviation, the ASEAN Plan of Action on Rural Development and Poverty Eradication and the PIF Regional Approach to Food Security. Other areas where regional organizations in Asia and the Pacific can play a key role in the fight against hunger and malnutrition include: policy harmonization that can promote trade, such as continued reduction of trade barriers to intraregional trade, the establishment of common phytosanitary regulations and common standards, the harmonization of tariff nomenclature, customs valuations and customs procedures and so forth. Functional cooperation which is designed to take advantage of economies of scale in managing common resources and in operating institutions at a regional level is likewise auspiciously promoted in regional organizations. Examples of such cooperation are technical cooperation at the regional level of common water resources, regional networks of universities and schools of agriculture, subregional research organizations, etc. FAO is committed to providing support for regional cooperation for the eradication of poverty and food insecurity in the following concrete ways: A) Regional Programme for Food Security (RPFS). FAO has been supporting 12 regional organizations around the world in: i) trade facilitation ii) harmonization of national agricultural policies and iii) support to national Special Porgrammes for Food Security. B) Regional Initiatives around thematic issues. FAO is assisting regional organizations in the development of RPFS in implementing several regional projects in specific technical areas like capacity building and.
regional initiatives like Emergency Prevention System (EMPRES) for Transboundary Animal and Plant Pests and Diseases, and Global Framework for the Progressive Control of Foot-and-Mouth Disease and Other Transboundary Diseases (GF-TADs). Conclusion: It is hoped that this paper has contributed in clarifying further the significant roles that regional organizations can play in addressing the problems of food insecurity and poverty by promoting agricultural competitiveness and trade, functional cooperation, policy harmonization, networking and benchmarking by including support to the vulnerable in regional integration schemes through the twin track approach. Successful formulation and implementation of regional programmes and projects will ultimately depend on political will and mobilization of resources Current and/or planned initiatives and programmes of the SREOs Mr Keng Yong Ong, Secretary General, ASEAN: ASEAN deals with poverty by first encouraging economic growth and then promoting rural development. ASEAN attempts to advance economic and social progress simultaneously. ASEAN sets goals and plans strategy for poverty alleviation and food security in the Framework Action Plans. A new edition, for 2004-2010, has just been prepared. ASEAN cannot look to the European Union or other regional groups for a blueprint for development action. Its situation is unique. The concept of national food security varies among countries, ranging from absolute self-sufficiency to a more flexible vision of self-reliance. ASEAN has had a difficult experience recently when attempting to improve food security. There are five key values in tackling issues of poverty and development. They are shared responsibility, shared prosperity, shared identity, a habit of consultation, and a forward orientation. One shared agricultural trade policy would not be appropriate for ASEAN member countries. Instead the organization wants harmonization of rules and nomenclature and removal of trade barriers. A more supranational arrangement would also be inappropriate. ASEAN prefers to utilize ministerial committees and annual meetings. ASEAN is currently working with FAO on a RPFS. There is a need to improve human resources. The upcoming Vientiane Action Plan will specify new plans to address food insecurity and poverty. Enhancing participation in existing regional organizations is preferable to establishing new institutions. The ASEAN Secretariat facilitates cooperation between member states, but must also facilitate cooperation between other Secretariats in the region. Mr Q.A.M.A. Rahim, Secretary-General, SAARC: Hunger threatens the stability of the international community. The challenge of food insecurity must be met by an increase in food production that can be accomplished through an "improvement of soil fertility, and arresting and reversing of agricultural land degradation and water loss." Increased investment, quality of human resources, and technology are needed to meet these goals. Poverty alleviation was declared to be the overarching goal of all SAARC activities at the Twelfth SAARC Summit in Islamabad. There are four major regional initiatives in the area of poverty alleviation. The first is the Report of the ISACPA that sets goals and strategies for accelerated poverty reduction. The second is the Plan of Action on Poverty Alleviation. Third is the Regional Poverty Profile. The fourth initiative is identifying appropriate projects for SAARC to supplement the work of the member states. Member states are considering a proposal for collaborative work with FAO on regional food security programmes. Additionally, SAARC is attempting to make its "existing Food Security Reserve more effective." In order "to create an enabling environment supportive of the national poverty eradication and food security programmes", SAARC calls for cooperation from developed countries such as funding and technology transfer. To relieve poverty and food insecurity, countries need to create jobs to generate income, stabilize food prices, and be prepared for emergency situations that may be caused by natural disasters. Mr Aleki F. Sisifa, Representative of SPC (PIF): WFS declarations and MDGs are being supported at the national level throughout the region. The Pacific area has many subregional economic organizations (SREOs), many of which are devoted to eradicating poverty and food insecurity. There are attempts to 9.
coordinate the programmes and actions of the various SREOs. Development of Sustainable Agriculture in the Pacific takes a participatory process approach and is designed to increase the sustainable production of farm families. The RPFS for the region has two goals: enhancing food security and production and strengthening agricultural trade and policy. Agricultural development programmes deal with plant protection, crop improvement, and animal healthcare and production. Policy assistance is provided by FAO. There are also programmes in place to improve health and nutrition, and the forestry and fisheries sectors. Pacific subregional priorities include looking at both similarities and differences among member states. Gap areas include policy assistance, information dissemination, agricultural statistics, agricultural marketing, and agricultural diversification.
DECLARATION.
The Roundtable adopted the following declaration: We, the participants of the Regional High-Level Roundtable gathered here in Bangkok on 23 to 24 February 2004 for the purpose of spearheading regional cooperation on agricultural and rural development for poverty alleviation and food security in Asia and the Pacific; Recalling the global commitment embodied in the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) to eradicate extreme poverty and hunger; Recalling further the global commitment manifested by the Rome declaration on World Food Security and the World Food Summit Plan of Action (WFS/PoA) at the World Food Summit in 1996 and the World Food Summit: five years later (WFS: fyl) in 2002 to eliminate hunger and malnutrition and to achieve sustainable food security for all people; Recalling that the majority of the poor live in rural areas; Noting that Asia-Pacific countries have been implementing national initiatives with their own resources as well as in collaboration with the UN-System, including FAO and UNESCAP, the Asian Development Bank, IFAD, the World Bank and other international financing institutions (IFIs) and multi- and bilateral donors to address poverty and food insecurity and to promote economic growth and sustainable agricultural and rural development; Recognizing that the national economies of most countries have become more interdependent due to increasing reliance on regional and international trade, investment and transfer of technology for economic growth; Noting that Regional Economic Organizations (REOs) with the support of their governments are engaging in efforts to eradicate poverty, hunger and food insecurity through promotion of overall socio-economic development and agricultural and rural development, like.
the SAARC Regional Food Security Reserve; the Twelfth SAARC Summit Declaration (4-6 January 2004, Islamabad) recognizing poverty alleviation as the greatest challenge facing the peoples of South Asia and declaring poverty alleviation as the overarching goal of all SAARC activities; the SAARC Proposal to establish a Regional Food Bank; the SAARC Adoption of the Plan of Action on Poverty Alleviation; the Report of the reconstituted Independent South Asian Commission on Poverty Alleviation to abate the menace of poverty; the ASEAN Strategic Plan of Action on ASEAN Cooperation in Food, Agriculture and Forestry (1999-2004); the ASEAN Food Security Reserve Agreement; the ASEAN Plan of Action on Rural Development and Poverty Eradication (2004-2010); 10.
the ASEAN Hanoi Plan of Action (1999-2004); and the PIF-FIC Subregional Programme for Food Security (SRPFS).
Concerned that, notwithstanding the high economic growth, increasing per capita income and agricultural productivity that have characterized the Asia-Pacific Region as well as the success of many countries in reducing poverty and improving food security and overall welfare of the people, the region remains home to the majority of the world's poor, landless and hungry; Reaffirm global commitments made at the various fora such as the World Food Summit in 1996, World Food Summit: five years later (WFS: fyl) in 2002 and the UN Millennium Summit in 2000; Call on all stakeholders, including bilateral donors, international organizations and civil society to join hands and coordinate their efforts to overcome the problem of hunger and rural poverty; Urge leaders and decision-makers of countries in the Asia-Pacific region to put the fight against hunger and poverty at the forefront of national priorities and to urgently strengthen political commitment. Towards this end, there is a need to design a separate package of policy targets, strategies and programmes that are directly designed to address poverty issues and problems for specific poverty groups in the various subsectors of the economy. There is also a need to incorporate them in the national planning document; Encourage regional economic organizations and other institutions involved in economic integration, with the participation of CSOs and social movements, to spearhead the process of identifying the priority regional and subregional issues related to poverty, food security, agriculture and rural development and of formulating and implementing programmes to address these issues and concerns including: i) ii) iii) iv) v) vi) cooperation and collective action in international trade for securing better market access and better returns on produce, prioritizing small and marginal farmers; promotion of joint human resource development and R&D for food security and poverty alleviation; exchange of experience and expertise among countries in tackling poverty and food security issues; knowledge exchange to foster sustainable livelihoods and deliver rural services including utilization of local knowledge and innovation of farmers; research into and implementation of genuine agrarian reform and access to productive resources; participation of women and farmers as well as social movements in processes to design, decide and implement food and agricultural policies including poverty and hunger eradication policies and programmes; the special challenges facing small island countries; and strengthening the mechanisms for the prevention and resolution of conflicts.
Encourage dialogue and information exchange, as well as greater cooperation and partnerships among REOs and between them and international and regional technical bodies interested in WFS Plan of Action and MDG, with a view to lending unstinting support and moving towards: i) ii) consensus on priority areas of collaboration for the purpose of overcoming hunger and poverty; and the formulation and implementation of comprehensive regional programmes for food security with special attention to increasing agricultural production.
Recommend that The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) continue to collaborate with and assist the REOs and the member nations of FAO in specific technical areas to address, among others:.
trade facilitation, including capacity building in SPS and trade negotiations; harmonization of national agricultural policies; support to national special programmes for food security; regional cooperation on early warning and response systems to natural disasters and emergencies; capacity building and emergency prevention systems (EMPRES) for plant and animal pests and diseases; and progressive control of FMD and other transboundary animal diseases.
Recommend further that FAO, in collaboration with UNESCAP, ADB, IFAD, the World Bank and CSOs, monitor on a regular basis the progress on the implementation of the recommendations in this declaration, and as set out in the Annex and report at the FAO Regional Conference.
CLOSING REMARKS.
Mr He Changchui, Assistant Director-General, FAO Regional Office, Mr Kim Hak-Su, Executive Secretary, UNESCAP, and Mr John Y.L. Yee, Principal Sector Economist, ADB, made closing remarks. They pointed out that the discussions and the deliberations in this Roundtable rightly concluded that for certain aspects of food security, poverty eradication and the promotion of agricultural and rural development, regional collaboration can provide a critical and indispensable contribution and that the Regional Economic Organizations (REOs) have a significant role to play in this regard. Such a development is helped by strong political commitment to policy harmonization among the REO's, which is critical to fostering economic growth, employment and the income earning capacities of the poor and thereby increasing their access to food. Continued reduction of trade barriers to intraregional trade, the establishment of common phytosanitary regulations and common standards, the harmonization of tariff nomenclature, customs valuations and customs procedures and so forth are still necessary if we are to achieve the MDGs. They expressed the strong belief that this Regional High-level Roundtable on Spearheading Subregional Programmes for Eradication of Poverty and Food Security in Asia and the Pacific has helped in clarifying the roles of regional and subregional collaboration in addressing poverty and food insecurity and in promoting sustainable agricultural and rural development. In particular, the important declaration adopted provides clear guidelines and strong encouragement to regional organizations to continue and further intensify their efforts in the fight against poverty and food insecurity to attain the WFS and Millennium Development Goals, to which we all subscribe.
Your Excellency Mr Somsak Thepsutin, Minister of Agriculture and Cooperatives of Thailand (Representative of the Prime Minister of Thailand), Your Excellency Mr Young M. Vivian, Prime Minister of Niue, Your Excellencies Honourable Ministers, Distinguished Heads of Delegations, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, On behalf of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), I would like to express my profound gratitude to the Government and to the people of the Kingdom of Thailand for the warm welcome extended to all participants of this meeting. I would like to express my gratitude also to the Honourable Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra, and the Ministers and Vice-minister present here, for kindly accepting our invitation to share their perspectives, wisdom and guidance on the themes of this meeting. I wish to welcome Mr Yong, Secretary-General of the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Mr Rahim, Secretary-General of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC), and all the other professional and civil society organizations that are represented here today. Their role is crucial to ensuring success in our efforts to develop agriculture and to combat hunger. I would like to express my sincere thanks to the Asian Development Bank and the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP), for jointly convening with FAO this important meeting. The joint convening of this meeting reflects the excellent collaboration between these two institutions and FAO and bears testimony to the firm commitment of all of us to support the subregional organizations ­ ASEAN, SAARC and PIF ­ to enhance food security, alleviate poverty and promote rural development. Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, At the World Food Summit of 1996, Governments agreed to eliminate hunger from the world and set an objective of halving, by 2015, the number of the undernourished. The Millennium Summit held in September 2000 also reaffirmed the World Food Summit target. Nonetheless, as we all are aware, progress towards the WFS goal is very slow and we still have a long way to go. The world has some 842 million people suffering from hunger, of which 798 million, or almost 95 percent, live in the developing world. Approximately 503 million, accounting for 63 percent of the undernourished people in the developing countries of the world, live in this region. The Asia and Pacific region is also home to about two-thirds of the world's poor, subsisting on income below the poverty line of $1 a day. Hunger, or lack of access to adequate food, is one of the most painful aspects of poverty. Fighting hunger should thus form a fundamental part of any strategy to eradicate poverty. The causes of poverty and chronic hunger are well known and documented, as are the solutions. The Asia and the Pacific region, while still harbouring the highest number of the poor and hungry, is also the leading example in the world to demonstrate that the war against hunger and poverty can be won. This is a continent which is feeding 57 percent of the world's population with only 37 percent of the world's arable land. Per capita agricultural land availability in Asia and the Pacific (0.16 ha) is lower than in the rest of the world (0.37 ha). Despite a low and decreasing per capita supply of (use of) agricultural land, per capita daily calorie intake increased from 2 553 in 1989-1991 to 2 706 in 1999-2001. This resulted in a 57 percent increase in the food production index during the period which witnessed an agricultural GDP growth of more than 3 percent annually. In terms of progress in reducing hunger, the proportion of undernourished in the total population declined from 20 percent in 1990-1992 to 16 percent in 1999-2001. 13.
These positive results are anchored on gains in productivity per unit of land achieved through expansion of irrigation and greater user of improved technologies and inputs. For example, in the 1990s the irrigated area in the region expanded by nearly 18 percent, from 147 million hectares in 1991 to 173 million hectares in 2001. Fertiliser use per hectare of land in Asia and the Pacific is 130 kg against the average of 67 kg in rest of the world. The key lesson learned from the development experience in the region is that the strategy for achieving sustained and equitable growth of the rural areas, home to majority of the poor, hinges on a drive for an improved economic environment, human resource development, participation of the private sector, civil society organizations, good governance, and judicious use of public resources in the provision of key public goods. The region has also demonstrated that, although economic growth is necessary for poverty reduction, it is not sufficient. Poverty reduction requires its own inclusive and broad-based pattern, particularly broad-based agricultural growth, so that the poor can benefit from the growth process by enhancing their access to markets and improving their ownership of productive assets. In agriculture, the best opportunities for growth lie in increasing productivity and cropping intensity with the adoption of improved irrigation, watershed management, technology and farming practices. For the majority of the rural poor, the expansion and improvement of livestock, fisheries, forestry management and agro-forestry are also important. These experiences are succinctly internalized in the FAO Special Programme for Food Security (SPFS), which is currently operational in 21 countries of the region. In support of the SPFS, FAO has mobilized US$56.6 million, of which US$9.2 million from FAO's own resources and US$13.3 million from the countries themselves. The donor community has contributed US$34 million through FAO. Furthermore, the SPFS has promoted the use of technical expertise available in the developing countries of the region for the benefit of other developing countries within the region. Under its South-South Cooperation Programme, a total 393 experts from six Asian countries are currently providing technical support to 21 other countries of the region in achieving food security and sustainable agricultural development. The region still faces several challenges and constraints to sustainable agricultural development; these include, among others, problems related to sustainable management of natural resources, the spreading of plant pests and animal diseases, consumer concerns about food safety and inadequate food marketing systems. Furthermore, globalization and the international and regional trade and economic environments impose additional challenges, which call for collaboration at regional and subregional levels to attain sustainable poverty reduction and food security, as trade and distribution of food and agricultural commodities, as well as opportunities for alternative livelihoods, transcends national boundaries. Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, The spread of the highly pathogenic avian influenza in several areas in Asia is a disaster for livestock production and a threat to human health. Although it has not happened yet, the so-called "bird-flu" presents a risk of evolving into a dangerous human pathogen, and a serious hazard to food security and food safety. FAO is encouraged by the initiatives and timely responses of the Asian countries and their development partners in containing the spread of the disease and ­ eventually ­ eliminating the immediate emergency situation. However, the extent of the current outbreaks of avian flu clearly demonstrates the need for improved regional collaboration and communication. Countries and regional and international organizations have to collaborate in the prevention and mitigation of such disastrous disease outbreaks in the future, and enhanced mechanisms have to be developed and established which comprise surveillance, early-warning, and early response for both animal and plant pests and diseases as foreseen in EMPRES (Emergency Prevention System for Transboundary Animal and Plant Pests and Diseases) launched by FAO in 1994. In addition, the avian influenza crisis is an opportunity to address emerging policy dimensions such as the need for sustainable agricultural practices (from the farm to the table), building up healthy farming systems, and introducing further improvements to food safety and biosecurity issues. The needed structural changes should be guided by overriding concerns for pro-poor livestock development, friendly to the environment and granting due respect to both producers and consumers of livestock products. 14.
Of course, the Asia and the Pacific region has the capacity to face these emerging challenges as it has faced other challenges in the past. Recognising the implications of interdependence and the linkages of trade with development issues has resulted in the establishment of several regional, subregional, as well as international alliances/groupings, such as ASEAN, APEC (Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation), SAARC, and PIF. Some of these, with the support of their member governments, are engaged in efforts to eradicate poverty, hunger and food insecurity, through regional/subregional approaches. The 12th SAARC Summit held in Pakistan last month, recognised, very appropriately poverty alleviation , as the greatest challenge of South Asia and declared poverty alleviation as the overarching goal of all SAARC activities. Among other initiatives, it approved a Plan of Action on Poverty Alleviation and signed the Framework Agreement on South Asian Free Trade Area (SAFTA). These reflect real commitment and political will ­ a critical need ­ for inter-country collaboration for economic development, eradication of poverty and food insecurity. ASEAN strives to provide adequate levels of food supply and food accessibility within its member countries and, at the same time, enhance the competitiveness of its food sector. It is also engaged in implementing the Strategic Plan of Action on ASEAN Cooperation in Food, Agriculture and Forestry (1999-2004), the ASEAN Plan of Action on Rural Development and Poverty Eradication and the ASEAN Action Plan on Social Safety Nets. ASEAN countries have also acceded to the Agreement on the ASEAN Food Security Reserve. The PIF members, recognising the importance of a regional perspective and particular problems faced by small island economies, have also adopted a regional approach to food security. The FAO Trust Fund for Food Safety and Food Security is funding two important components of the Regional Programme for Food Security (RPFS), and acts as a catalyst for mobilising further financing and donor support for a wider programme. These components are: Enhancing Food Production and Security, and Strengthening Agricultural Trade and Policy. The first one focuses on investments on specific production activities while the second emphasizes activities on trade facilitation and food safety norms and standards. These developments are very encouraging and provide an excellent base to launch innovative joint programmes to complement national actions to achieve World Food Summit and Millennium Development Goals. Such programmes can focus on addressing problems of a transboundary nature affecting sustainable agriculture and rural development by promoting the evolution of complementary agricultural production patterns based on comparative advantages and the adoption of mutually beneficial common agricultural policies. They can also promote inter-regional infrastructure development; the fostering of trade harmonization and liberalization policies; economic integration; improvement of food quality and safety standards; export diversification; and integrated early warning systems for the region. In this context, I would like to emphasize two points for consideration by the distinguished participants of this meeting. First, the regional/subregional cooperation efforts should pay particular attention to activities that would help achieve the immense potentials for fair trade expansion unleashed by the Uruguay Round Agreements and the establishment of the WTO. While the agenda of greater trade liberalization and market access for developing countries' exports should be pursued vigorously, countries in the region must work together to develop and harmonize the sanitary and phytosanitary standards and rules which presently constrain agricultural trade among countries within the region and with others outside the region. The second issue that should be tackled urgently is the decline in the commitment of national, as well as international, resources to agriculture and rural development. Poverty is basically a rural phenomenon in Asia and the Pacific, with 76 percent of the rural population in the region classified as poor, with the highest concentration amongst agricultural households. Thus achieving the Millennium Development Goals with respect to the eradication of extreme poverty and hunger critically depends on the allocation of adequate resources for these sectors. Supporting and promoting investment in agriculture and rural development at national and international levels should, therefore, be at the top of the agenda of regional cooperation.
FAO remains ready and committed to support such regional efforts and programmes. The role of active and progressive regional financing institutions like the Asian Development Bank in supporting regional and national efforts to fight hunger and achieve sustainable food security and rural development is increasingly recognized and appreciated. Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, I am sure that this meeting will permit further exchange of ideas and views among the Regional Economic Organizations attending, and between them and development partners, and will arrive at a consensus on priority areas of collaboration and commit itself, through a joint declaration, to pursue those priorities. I thank you for your kind attention, and wish you successful deliberations.
OPENING STATEMENT BY MR G.H.P.B. VAN DER LINDEN VICE PRESIDENT, ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK.
Mr Prime Minister, Excellencies, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, First, let me join Mr Diouf in welcoming you to this important conference. The high level of representation today underlines the importance of the issues we have gathered to discuss. WHAT IS THE CHALLENGE? The challenge is to "Halve extreme poverty and hunger by the year 2015." This is the first and most important of the Millennium Development Goals agreed by the international community. In recent decades the Asia and Pacific region has made remarkable progress in eliminating poverty. Strong economic growth has raised per capita incomes higher in most countries in the region. As a result, while in 1990, about 32 percent of the people in the region were living on less than $1 a day, this proportion had fallen to 22 percent by 2000. The absolute number of poor also fell from 900 million in 1990 to 720 million by the end of the decade. This is truly an impressive achievement and one that translates into more education, better health, longer lives and greater opportunities for tens of millions of Asians. But it is important to note that the region's performance was driven largely by the progress in India and the People's Republic of China. Excluding these countries, the number of poor in the region remained at about 170 million. It is also worth noting that while rural poverty declined from 39 to 28 percent, urban poverty fell at a much more modest pace, from 24 percent in 1990 to 20 percent in 2000. In 2000, some 720 million people in Asia and the Pacific continued to survive on less than $1 a day. Another 1.2 billion people had barely more than that, making ends meet with less than $2 a day. Indeed, despite its success, Asia remains home to 60 percent of the world's poor. This is unacceptable. Hunger is one of poverty's most obvious manifestations. This region is also home to just under two-thirds of the developing world's undernourished. In 19910, 20 percent of the people in Asia and the Pacific were hungry. By 1995, that proportion had fallen to 16 percent, and that is where it remained in 2000. That means one in six people in the region do not have enough to eat. More than 500 million people ­ eight times the population of Thailand ­ still do not get enough food to meet basic nutritional requirements and to allow them to fulfil their economic potential. If we are to achieve our goal of reducing by half the number of people suffering from poverty and hunger we need to do more.
MEETING THE CHALLENGE What can be done? The Asian experience suggests that success in the fight against pover1y requires policies that simultaneously strengthen three key areas of development. These three pillars for poverty reduction are economic growth, social development and good governance. Empirical evidence across countries demonstrates that robust and sustained pro-poor economic growth is the single most important factor in attaining rapid poverty reduction. India, China, Thailand and Viet Nam are among the countries where rapid growth has resulted in a significant drop in poverty in the last decade. The success of East and Southeast Asian economies also underlines the importance of dynamic public policy and an active role of the state in providing the conditions for rapid growth. One such condition is the availability of adequate infrastructure, in both urban and rural areas. Asia is currently under-investing in infrastructure. Even before the Asian financial crisis, only about 4 percent of GDP was allocated for infrastructure against a requirement of 6-7 percent. Following the crisis, the investment levels have dropped. This needs urgent attention if growth is to be sustained and poverty and hunger reduced. Secondly, social development policies that promote greater participation by the poor in economic and social activities are needed to make sure that the benefits of economic development are shared by all. Asia's experience, including that of Thailand, highlights the crucial role played by investments in basic services such as the delivery of health, education, and water. The third pillar is good governance ­ the ability of a country to formulate and implement sound policies, and to ensure accountability in fiscal administration and efficiency in the delivery of public services. This is crucial to achieving inclusive growth. Without sound policies and strong institutions, the challenges of poverty and food insecurity cannot be met. Of course, the primary responsibility for poverty reduction lies with countries themselves. Success in meeting each of the MDGs will largely depend on the commitment and capacity of individual countries to promote their own poverty reduction strategies and to strengthen the three pillars I have just discussed. Preparation of a clear national strategy to reduce poverty is a complex and time-consuming process. But it is essential. It requires good analytical work to identify the root causes of poverty and the constraints to poverty reduction. Based on this knowledge, key targets for poverty reduction and strategic priorities to achieve them need to be identified and agreed among key stakeholders, and sufficient financial resources mobilized. While each country must lead its own poverty reduction efforts, without strong collaboration between developing and developed countries, achievement of the first MDG, and, in fact, all MDGs, becomes unlikely. This reality led to the international community's commitment to set an eighth goal, which requires a collaborative effort between developed and developing countries to deal with pressing global economic and trade issues. It is estimated that subsidies to the agriculture sector in developed countries amount to about $300 billion annually. This is approximately six times global annual flows of official development assistance. The establishment of an open and non-discriminatory trading system would bring massive benefits to developing economies, and accelerate their progress in reducing poverty. It is urgent that global trade talks resume soon and are concluded successfully. Finally, developing nations recognize that regional cooperation can play a critical role in promoting economic growth, providing regional public goods, and addressing security and other concerns, all of which contribute to poverty reduction. In recent years, the region's economies have become increasingly integrated. We must work together to sustain this positive trend. This meeting presents a great opportunity 17.
to deepen regional cooperation aimed at reducing poverty and food insecurity. Support of regional cooperation has been a high priority of ADB. CONCLUSION Ladies and Gentlemen, The Asian Development Bank is committed to play its part in meeting the Millennium Development Goals and to helping build a better future for the hundreds of millions of Asians who remain poor and hungry. This region has made real progress in the past 13 years. But if we are to achieve these goals developing countries, developed countries and the international community must all work more effectively, more efficiently and more closely over the remaining 12 years. This conference brings together the technical experts and the decision-makers who can ensure that happens in Asia and the Pacific. ADB is eager to work more closely with you. We must start now. Thank you.
O P E N I N G STATEMENT BY MR KIM HAK-SU, EXECUTIVE SECRETARY, UNITED NATIONS ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COMMISSION FOR ASIA AND THE PACIFIC.
Excellency Mr Somsak Thepsutin, Minister of Agriculture and Cooperatives of Thailand; Mr Jacques Diouf, Director General of FAO, Mr Van der Linden, Vice-President of ADB, Mr Keng Yong Ong, Secretary General of ASEAN, Mr Rahim, Secretary General of SAARC, Excellencies, Distinguished Representatives, Ladies and Gentlemen, I am delighted to welcome you to this regional high-level meeting on subregional cooperation for the eradication of poverty and food insecurity in Asia and the Pacific. Poverty reduction is now the overarching goal of UNESCAP. Two-thirds of all the poor in the world live in Asia and the Pacific. Despite notable economic growth and some success in reducing income poverty during the last decades, still approximately 800 million people in this region live on less than a dollar a day. Poverty has many sides and manifestations, but the most extreme of them is not having enough food to eat. In order to make our work more focused on the most pressing issues in the region, I initiated a reform process in UNESCAP. UNESCAP now concentrates its efforts on three areas: reducing poverty, managing globalization and addressing emerging social issues. The focus of this conference relates not only to poverty reduction. It also deals with some of the most relevant social problems in the region, such as the marginalization of women, which affects their access to food. And it is about the process and the consequences of regional economic integration, of which the subregional organizations are important actors. There are different ways in which UNESCAP works towards the reduction of poverty. Because economic growth is a fundamental requirement for reducing poverty, we monitor and analyze the macroeconomic and social trends in the region. The Economic and Social Survey, published every year by UNESCAP, is the best example of this work. Equally important, we identify and document specific and targeted interventions to alleviate poverty that are successful and innovative. Through pilot projects, these practices are replicated under different circumstances across the region. Not only do these pilot projects improve the living conditions of the people involved, the projects determine the conditions and support required to replicate and up-scale these practices. 18.
Another of UNESCAP's responsibilities is monitoring the progress of countries in the region towards achieving the targets stated in the Millennium Declaration. For this, we have joined our efforts with UNDP in a project that supports the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals in Asia and the Pacific. A report on the progress that individual countries have made towards these goals has been produced last year and has been distributed to you among the documentation for this meeting. You will also have the opportunity to view a film on the MDGs in the Asian and Pacific context. There is a second phase of this project that will extend the collaboration to other agencies in order to create new synergies in this field. The objective is to promote policies that support the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and to facilitate the understanding of key strategies and options. A depository of regional experiences and lessons that may be adopted by other countries will be provided to assist in this objective. In the Millennium Declaration, the countries resolved to create strong international partnerships for economic and social development. "Responsibility for managing worldwide economic and social development [...] must be shared among the nations of the world and should be exercised multilaterally. As the most universal and most representative organization in the world, the United Nations must play the central role". UNESCAP, as the regional commission of the United Nations Secretariat, is uniquely placed to promote regional and subregional partnerships in Asia and the Pacific in support of poverty reduction and food security. Indeed, we frequently hold consultations with subregional organizations on issues of economic and social development in this region, and we hope to continue this in the future. This meeting is a good opportunity to build partnerships for eradicating extreme poverty and hunger. During these two days, different international organizations, subregional economic organizations, representatives from governments and civil society will work together to strengthen the cooperation in the area of poverty and food security. Each institution should bring to this meeting its strengths and skills and complement them with those of the other partners. It is also one of the roles of UNESCAP to stimulate policy dialogues on important issues for the region. At this regional high-level roundtable meeting, the problems of poverty and food security should be discussed from the perspective of the subregional organizations and by doing so, new elements will be added to the debate and new partnerships and ideas for action will emerge. Most of the hungry people in the world live in our region. One of the main conclusions of our Report on the Millennium Development Goals is that, for most countries, the progress achieved in the past decade is not enough to reach the targets. It is our hope that your deliberations will bring new ideas and commitments from all the partners involved and that the subsequent efforts will be strengthened in the years to come.
INAUGURAL STATEMENT BY H.E. MR SOMSAK THEPSUTIN, MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE AND COOPERATIVES OF THAILAND.
Your Excellency Prime Minister of Niue, Honourable Ministers, Mr Director-General of FAO, Mr Executive Secretary of UNESCAP, Mr Vice President of Asian Development Bank, Distinguished Heads of Delegations Ladies and Gentlemen, As His Excellency Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra is unable to make it to this important meeting, I, as the Minister of Agriculture and Cooperatives, was assigned to deliver this inaugural statement. On behalf of the Prime Minister and of the Thai people, I extend a very warm welcome to each one of you. We are very delighted to have the honour to host this regional high-level roundtable meeting.
This meeting is intended to seek cooperation in eradicating poverty and food insecurity, especially in the Asia and the Pacific region. In spite of rapid and continuous economic growth, the largest number of the poor and hungry is still in this region. Human resource development to which we have always professed our highest priority still cannot meet its targeted objective as poverty and food insecurity still exist. This may be because there is something wrong in our development models. Therefore, we are here to discuss and exchange our experiences in order to collectively derive the practical solution to poverty elimination. As a developing nation, Thailand has its own experience with eradication of poverty and hunger, which may be different from those of other countries. However, this difference is a lesson that we can amply learn from one another. The present government continues to accord high priority to the Millennium Development Goals. The Prime Minister has declared his noble determination, as Thailand's commitment to the international community, to absolutely eradicate poverty within six years. The main problems of poverty, which the government has learned from the registration of the poor, are: the lack of land for cultivation, indebtedness and the lack of stable occupation. To provide the opportunities to the disadvantaged, the government has set measures such as the decentralization of administration to the local level, the allocation of land for agricultural use, the One Village One Product Project, the Asset Capitalization Project, and the People's Bank Project. Besides, in the present day world, which is also called by many as the global village, there is growing interdependence among countries through movement of people, knowledge, goods and services, and financial resources. And there are issues transcending political boundaries that must be addressed in a multi-country framework, as the recent experience with bird flu has amply shown. Thailand is therefore actively pursuing many bilateral, subregional, and regional cooperative activities under the framework of ASEAN, Greater Mekong Subregional Programme, BIMSTEC and several other arrangements that enable us to address common problems collectively. Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, I am confident that this meeting will facilitate further deliberations towards identification of the priority areas of cooperation and the modalities that will strengthen existing cooperation to address the current and emerging issues. I wish you all every success in meeting your objectives and sincerely hope that the results will make the intended contribution towards alleviating poverty and enhancing food security of our less fortunate citizens. Please rest assured of Thailand's full support and participation in regional initiatives to meet the objectives set in the World Food Summit of 1996. I wish you a pleasant stay in Thailand. Thank you for your kind attention.
STATEMENT BY MR CYRIL ENWEZE, VICE PRESIDENT OF IFAD.
As we all know, Asia and the Pacific region has seen enormous economic growth in the past three decades. And, yet, poverty remains a massive problem. It is widely known that two-thirds of all the world's poor and the highest absolute number of poor people live in Asia and the Pacific. And, as pointed out in a number of the papers prepared for this meeting, 70 percent of Asia's poor live in the rural areas. This means that rural development and poverty alleviation will be crucial in achieving MDG-l in the Asia and Pacific region. Consequently, IFAD has focused the bulk of its efforts in the region at the national and, indeed, at the grassroots level. Our regional strategy (IFAD Strategy for Rural Poverty Reduction in Asia and the Pacific, March 2002) posits that IFAD can playa catalytic role by focusing on the less favoured areas remote uplands and mountains, marginal costal areas and rainfed areas and the less favoured groups within these areas. Fundamental to our strategy are emphases on changing unequal gender relations, enhancing productivity of staple foods in less favoured areas, reforming property and tenurial rights of 20.
marginalized minorities and especially indigenous peoples, and empowering and expanding the capabilities of the poor and vulnerable through self-help, local accumulation and new skills and technologies. IFAD has put special emphasis on two key groups: women and indigenous peoples (IPs). Why? Because IPs are a major subgroup of rural poor and 70 percent of the world's indigenous peoples live in Asia. And the severity of poverty is always higher for women; they face greater hardship in lifting themselves and their children out of poverty. We believe that the gender dimension is key to poverty alleviation. As pointed out in the papers prepared by FAO and ADB for this meeting (FAO: Regional Organizations in Asia and the Pacific, page 11; ADB: Rural Development Policies in Asia and the Pacific: Lessons Learned and Future Course of Action, paragraph 61), because of the inherent difficulties in addressing agriculture and rural development at the regional level, there is a tendency to focus efforts at the national level. So, the difficult but interesting challenge we are all facing is how our respective efforts at the local and national levels can be enhanced through regional programmes and cooperation. This is the subject of our meeting today and tomorrow, and we are fortunate, in this regard, to have the benefit of some excellent analytic papers by UNESCAP, ADB, FAO and others to structure our discussions. They have done a superlative job in identifying the need for concerted action in this area, at the regional level. Despite our focus to date on the local and national, IFAD has been making efforts at the regional level. For example, we are a major supporter of CGIAR research centres in the region, with links to the NARS. Many IFAD grant-funded projects have been regional ones in pro-poor agricultural research, training, policy analysis and implementation support. One major emphasis has been on finding sustainable agricultural technologies for less favoured areas. Our support of ICRISAT (International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics) led to the development of the world's first hybrid pigeon pea to be bred successfully under resource-poor conditions. We also support sustainable and regenerative technologies, which have special significance for indigenous peoples. But more can and must be done including, particularly, through existing regional and subregional organizations in this region. Drawing from IFAD's Regional Strategy for Asia and the Pacific, as well as some of the excellent papers prepared by ADB, FAO and UNESCAP, we table for your consideration a six-point agenda: First, as noted by UNESCAP in its technical paper (The Incidence of Poverty and Food Security and the Progress in Achieving the Millennium Development Goals in the Asia-Pacific Region), we agree that one important component of regional support to complement poverty reduction efforts at local and national levels would be the identification and dissemination of "good practices". We believe that IFAD can make a contribution by tapping into our comparative advantage based on our 25+ years of experience as the only international financial institution that has focused exclusively on the reduction rural poverty. Second, and related to this first point, IFAD aims to playa catalytic role in its areas of strength as an innovator, sharing its successes for up scaling and replication. We have already had some experience in this area with ADB, among others; we need to build on this experience, capturing lessons learned. Regional mechanisms could be useful to facilitate upscaling and replication. Here, we were struck by the ideas in the UNESCAP paper, among other things on building the capacity of replicators (page 15) at the regional level. Third, the issue of sustainable natural resource management, as highlighted in the FAO paper (page 16) and the ADB paper (paragraph 63), can and should be the subject of cross-border collaboration. For example, diseases, air, seas, river basins and fisheries do not recognize national boundaries. IFAD, as noted above, has already done some important work in sustainable pro-poor agricultural technologies that could be shared and upscaled at the regional level beyond current levels.
Fourth, we agree with FAO's assessment that, while largely a national and local issue, there is scope for regional initiatives to promote equity and access to productive assets, especially support for vulnerable groups to take advantages of the opportunities presented by trade integration. As noted, this is already at the heart of IFAD's regional strategy at the grassroots level; the challenge will be to find ways and means to address the issue more globally and regionally. Globalization and markets, and its impact on less favoured areas and groups, is already one of IFAD's prime areas of concern in the region. Indeed, our 2004 Governing Council, which took place only last week, had trade and rural development as one of its major themes. An interactive panel discussion on this topic centered around a background paper prepared by IFAD entitled "Trade and Rural Development: Opportunities and Challenges for the Rural Poor". Issues included: how to reduce small farmers' dependence on traditional exports to developed countries, how to diversify into higher-value products, how to enter into the value-added chain, how to address tariff escalation issues, and how much to focus on developed country markets as opposed to regional, national and local markets in and among developing countries. The paper points out that real barriers to internal agricultural trade in many developing countries are often as high as barriers to entry into developed country markets. Moreover, agricultural trade among developing countries is subject to significant tariff and non-tariff barriers. These are complex issues and can only be properly addressed not only at the global but also at the regional levels. In this connection, Asian SREOs will have a role to play. We think that this document is relevant to the deliberations of this roundtable, so we have submitted it to the Secretariat to make available to those of you who may be interested; your feedback to us in IFAD would be most welcome. Fifth, policy dialogue is another area where a regional approach could be useful in creating an enabling environment for rural development and poverty alleviation. (See ADB paper, paragraph 18). IFAD has been active in promoting policy dialogue through support of pro-poor advocacy groups at the local level; this can and should be brought to a higher level. As mentioned, IFAD views gender as a key issue; given the subregional disparities in this area, gender may be a fit area for subregional approaches. Other policies that may be approached ­ or at least shared ­ at the regional level include macro-credit and rural enterprises. In all of these areas, collaboration among governments in the region, international agencies, as well as NGOs, should be promoted. Food security is, of course, a key issue. We would agree with FAG (page 4) that at the household level, for those groups that IFAD is most concerned with, lack of access to food is basically an outcome of poverty, and our focus should therefore be on poverty alleviation. Sixth, in the area of governance, we would point out the primary importance of peace and stability for development. We salute the fact that ASEAN has played a key role in preventing conflict among member states in the region. But we are also concerned that conflict within countries, which threaten development efforts, can be found in a number of countries in the region. IFAD's Regional Strategy (page II) points out that rising inequality and persistent poverty, together with forms of exploitation and social injustice, will sooner or later lead to conflict and insurgency. But peace is more than just the absence of conflict; to be positive, peacemaking must eliminate the structures that support unequal fulfilment within or between countries and address the wrongs done to those who suffer from unequal power relations, including gender relations. Here, again, regional cooperation can help; the challenge will be to identify and define the opportunities and modalities. IFAD looks forward to a fruitful discussion at this meeting. Finally, many thanks again to FAO, ADB and UNESCAP for a superlative job in preparing and organizing this meeting.
STATEMENT BY THE HONOURABLE YOUNG M. VIVIAN, MP, PREMIER OF NIUE.
The South Pacific region is characterized by amongst other things the diversity of its physical environment. We have the high islands as can be found in Samoa, Fiji, French Polynesia and others where soils are extremely fertile. Then we have the low laying atolls of Tuvalu, Niue, Kiribati and others where soils are thin and easily exhausted. In some instances this imbalance is re-dressed by the presence of a rich marine resource. 22.
In a number of our small island countries the resources are such that it can sustain only the existing population and, unless another kind of resource that is marketable outside the country is found, there can be little economic growth. We have a number of agencies in the region whose existence ­ in part ­ is to address the socio-economic disparity among our countries. We have found that in certain things, it is best for us to approach the problem in a collective way, particularly when a resource is unevenly distributed. It is in recognition of this uneven distribution that led the region to establish one of its most successful agencies, the Forum Fisheries Agency. Island countries were able to come together under this umbrella to negotiate an arrangement with distant fishing nations who harvest our marine resources. In a similar way, we are addressing the problem of the elimination of poverty and food security in a collective way under the auspices of FAO. In this regard I must make mention of the very generous assistance from the Italian government to the Forum Island countries. To accomplish social and economic progress the Pacific region must come together. Globalization is something which we still need to come to terms with and we're still grappling with trying to understand the effect on small island countries. I am reminded of what one of the early Kings of this country, Thailand, said when he was introducing modem education. In effect what he said was that we should not smother the child's individualism with too much curriculum! There are some countries in my region who feel the same way about globalization. Having said that, however, we recognize that in terms of our size, we need to get together which is precisely what we're doing with FAO under the Special Programme for Food Security. It is accepted that sustainable socio-economic development, where the benefits are evident in all sectors of the population, can lead to the alleviation and ultimately the elimination of poverty and provide security in the supply of food. The basis on which you have built your sustainability ­ what if that was threatened? I speak from personal experience because my small island country is facing that exact same dilemma. Some of you will know that some six weeks ago my island state was devastated by the worst cyclone in living memory with winds gusting up to 300 kilometres an hour and phenomenal seas of up to 60 metres high. In a matter of hours, the basis on which we had built and were continuing to build our sustainable development programme was literally wiped from the face of the earth. Absolutely swamped by high seas. How can we restart? Where can we look for the necessary assistance to start again? This is the reality of small vulnerable island states. My island, Niue, is a high atoll ­ but what of some of my neighbours who are almost at sea level? What hope is there for them? We look to gatherings such as this to give us some answers.
S TAT E M E N T BY THE HONOURABLE M.K. ANWAR, MP, MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, BANGLADESH.
It is a great pleasure for me to participate at this important meeting, being held in this historic city Bangkok. I am happy to see all my distinguished colleagues and the Director General of FAO, Executive Secretary of ESCAP and the Vice President of ADB who have been instrumental in organizing this important roundtable. I am also privileged to be able to utilize this opportunity to share some of my thoughts regarding the role of subregional cooperation for eradication of poverty and food insecurity from this region and particularly from South Asia. Mr Chairman, During the last three decades, Asia has experienced enormous positive changes in terms of economic growth, food production, and decrease in poverty and malnutrition. In the 1960s, South Asia was 23.
deficient in food production. Thanks to the green revolution, now it is a food surplus region. Food production in Bangladesh has made a great leap during the last three decades. Rice production has increased from 9.5 million tons in 1966-67 to more than 25 million tons in 2002-03; Wheat production, increased from 0.06 million tons in 1967-68 to nearly 1.8 million tons the in mid-nineties. The achievements in the agriculture sector of Bangladesh are the result of effective public policy interventions in a market-driven agriculture sector. Public investment for agriculture was made in agricultural research and extension services, seed and other input delivery systems, and irrigation and flood control. Agricultural research in Bangladesh has successfully released more than 350 improved varieties of different crops. More than half of the land is now irrigated and over 65 percent of the rice area and all of the area under wheat have been covered by the high yielding varieties. Strengthening of agriculture extension services, liberalisation of agricultural input markets, and overall efficient governance of the sector have played a defining role in this respect. Domestic efforts were complemented, and in many cases even led, by international efforts, particularly in agricultural research and development. International institutes like IRRI and CIMMYT have also played an important role in this process. Mr Chairman, Increased production of foodgrain has increased per capita availability of foodgrains. Consequently, increased foodgrain production accompanied by a reduction in the per unit cost of production resulted in a decrease in the real price of rice and wheat. This has been one of the mechanisms through which we have been able to reduce poverty, particularly for the landless in rural areas of Bangladesh. The urban poor have also benefited from the decrease in the real price of foodgrains considering the fact that more than 60 percent of their budget is spent on food. The long-term trend in poverty has experienced a notable decline since Bangladesh's independence in 1971. A Household Expenditure Survey (HES) in 1973-74 reported that 71 percent of the population lived below the poverty line. By the year 2000, this share has come down to 40 percent. During the 1990s, poverty declined, as per head count ratio, at the rate of one percent per annum. However, this would look rather meager once compared with the trends in the emerging economies of the Southeast Asia region. Mr Chairman, Even though we have made considerable progress in poverty reduction, hunger still remains one of the elusive challenges before the region. In my own country, Bangladesh, a quarter of the population, i.e. about 30 million people are at present considered as "ultra poor" and they suffer from chronic food insecurity and severe malnutrition. Forty-four percent of the population still cannot meet the minimum required nutrient intake of 2122 kilocalorie per day , though food availability at the national or local level is not a problem. Not only in Bangladesh but also in many other countries of the region or even in the world, hunger and malnutrition remain widespread. Each day 800 million people of the world go hungry. At present 170 million children under five years of age suffer from malnourishment. About 24000 people die every day in the world from hunger or hunger-related causes. Half of the children in the least developed countries are malnourished. More grimly, South Asia has been hosting the highest number of undernourished persons which has increased from 289 million in 1992 to 303 million in 1999, defying the declared MDG. This situation is a human tragedy on a vast scale in the era of globalisation. Paradoxically, the situation has precipitated and is being perpetuated not because of the absence of material resources and not because of lack of social awareness and public policies. I would like to maintain that this is happening largely because of our deficiency in political will to act together and our failure to mount a purposeful, coherent and time-bound regional and subregional effort to end food insecurity and poverty from this region. According to the UNDP Human Development Report 2002, 29 percent of the population in my country, Bangladesh, subsist on the equivalent of US$1 a day and 24.
78 percent on US$2 a day. The increase in food production and enhanced availability of food has a positive impact on the reduction of poverty and hunger. Global leaders are aware about the situation and have committed themselves to solve the problem. You may recall that Heads of States and Governments agreed at the United Nations to a set of Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), the first one which espouses: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger through (i) halving, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people whose income is less than US$1 a day, and (ii) halving, between, 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people who suffer from hunger. At the first World Food Summit (WFS), held in Rome in 1996, Heads of State of countries of the world had "reaffirmed the right of access to safe and nutritious food consistent with the right to adequate food and fundamental right of everyone to be free from hunger". Building on past achievements, we can reduce the share of poor people by half in our region. However, this would require joint efforts and we will not be able to solve the problem if we act alone. These are regional problems rather than problems of one particular country. Therefore, all counties in the region must make a concerted effort. To this end, we would definitely need an effective and participatory alliance of all stakeholders in the region which our international development partners will find worthwhile supporting. Mr Chairman, We have developed a National Strategy for Economic Growth and Poverty reduction in Bangladesh. Our strategy emphasizes pro-poor economic growth for poverty reduction. We believe, "For rapid poverty reduction, the Government's priority is to develop the rural areas where most of the poor people live. This requires accelerated growth of agriculture and the rural non-farm sector. A rapid agricultural growth will sustain high growth with better capacity to reduce poverty through enhancing rural wages, creating synergies for diversifying the rural economy, and enabling the supply of low-cost food to improve nutritional status and food security of the people." Mr Chairman, In Asia, the relationship between water, poverty, and the environment is complex. About 40 percent of Asia's cropland is irrigated and helps produce about 70 percent of its food. In South Asia, water scarcity is increasing over time. Optimum utilization of water resources in South Asia demands concerted action by us. If any country wants to have a larger share of water by depriving others, either by over utilization of water from the river or diverting the water, then it is bound to have a serious negative effect on the ecology and environment. [A neighboring county's] plan to connect more than two dozen rivers, including the Ganges and the Brahmaputra, by digging canals to divert major common river waters unilaterally to its southwest states will, if implemented, put Bangladesh's agriculture under grave threat as 85 percent of its dry season surface water depends on these two major rivers. A study shows an increase in arid zones. Experts view that such an act will destroy not only the delicate ecology of Bangladesh but also its economy, and the livelihood of millions will be jeopardized. The long-term effect of an increase in salinity, caused by droughts resulting from water diversion, will surely wreak havoc among Bangladeshis living in the coastal areas because it will also impact crop pattern and fisheries, which provide livelihood to the poor in that region of Bangladesh. We all know the success story of water sharing in the Southeast Asia region and in our South Asia region too. We can benefit from developing similar water sharing arrangements. Agricultural development in the twenty-first century would depend to a large extent on utilization of biological and remote sensing sciences, and information and communication technology (ICT). Less developed countries in this region have limited resource endowments for this. Therefore, networks and regional collaboration would enable poor countries to successfully use biotechnology, GIS, and ICT for the benefit of the less-advantaged i.e. the poor farmers of this region.
Mr Chairman, I would like to draw your attention to an IFPRI (International Food Policy Research Institute) report which forecasts a regional cereals deficit averaging around 20-25 million tons per year by 2020 in South Asia. Last week, the IRRI Director General, Dr Ronald P. Cantrell, in an interview with Reuter pointed out that many rural rice communities in Asia are growing increasingly restless, as productivity stagnation leaves them trapped in poverty; they urgently need new technologies to make them more productive and competitive and to lift them out of poverty. I strongly feel that these desired technologies would come through the use of biotechnology-assisted breeding programmes. Therefore, countries having limited facilities may augment their limitation through networking, partnerships and collaborative research. Mr Chairman, Hunger and food insecurity can only be fought with the combined efforts of all development stakeholders towards the shared goal of "food for all". If this concern could be shared at the regional level, the partnership will last and will lead towards actual poverty eradication. Participation and partnering will likewise continue to be strengthened with the NGOs and scientific and business communities within this region through structured interchange and enhanced dialogue. Though there are enormous political and socio-cultural diversities among our countries in Asia, common economic interests and shared perspectives and approaches to food security and poverty alleviation have tied our fortunes together, or rather tied our misfortunes together. Our task is to translate the potential adversities into concrete opportunities for our people. Only through a concerted regional effort can we hope to effectively address our difficulties and advance our common interests. Thank you for your attention.
STATEMENT BY H.E. MR Y.B. TAN SRI MUHYIDDIN YASSIN, MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE OF MALAYSIA.
Honorable Chairman, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, May I congratulate you on your election as Chairman of this regional high-level roundtable meeting. I join the other delegates in congratulating the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific (FAO-RAP); the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP); and the Asian Development Bank (ADB) for jointly organizing this meeting. Ladies and Gentlemen, In the Malaysian perspective, food security can be divided into two major components. The first is the right to access to food while the second is to be self-sufficient in food production. Even though Malaysia has been classified by FAO as a low vulnerable country in terms of right to access to food, the government has been giving more emphasis to the agriculture sector. In this respect, the policy thrust for the agriculture sector is to transform it to be modern, dynamic and competitive. This is clearly specified in the Third National Agricultural Policy 1998-2010 (NAP3), which provides the agricultural policy framework for the country. Through the NAP3, we expect to maximize the income of farmers by way of optimizing utilization of resources so as to enhance food security, increase productivity and competitiveness in the sector, deepen linkages with other sectors as well as create new sources of growth for the sector. Although the contribution of the agriculture sector to GDP was only 3.6 percent in 2003, its importance cannot be denied as a source of food and security. Agriculture will continue to remain as one of the major sectors of the Malaysian economy as the sector is expected to increase food production so as to.
reduce imports and increase exports. In fact, Malaysia's greatest challenge is to reduce dependence on imports of agricultural and food products. The 1997/98 economic downturn has enlightened the government on the huge trade deficit in agriculture and food products. In line with the nation's incorporated policy, private sector participation in food production is very important. We have received a favourable response from the private sector in three major subsectors, that is, aquaculture, food crops and livestock. To further encourage private sector involvement in this sector, we have in place permanent food parks and satellite farms specially meant for private sector participation in medium and large scale commercialized food cultivation. Ladies and Gentlemen, Rural development in Malaysia is almost synonymous with poverty eradication. Under the current Eighth Malaysia Plan, poverty eradication strategies are directed towards eradicating absolute poverty and increasing the income and quality of life of the poor and low income groups; increasing the size of middle income groups; targeting specific groups such as the hardcore poor among all communities; and developing remote/interior areas and regions. Through these strategies and poverty eradication programmes, Malaysia has been able to reduce the incidence of poverty from 7.5 percent in 1999 to 5.1 percent in 2002, while the number of poor households declined by 1 percent from 360100 to 267900. Similarly , the incidence of hardcore poverty also decreased from 1.4 percent in 1999 to 1.0 percent in 2002, while the number of hardcore poor households declined from 66000 to 52900. In addition, 92 percent of houses in the rural areas have been provided with electricity, while 86 percent received clean water supply in 2003. Schools, clinics and rural roads were also constructed. Efforts have also been undertaken to diversify the sources of rural income so as to accelerate rural development. Rural development and poverty eradication efforts have been an integral component of national development since independence in 1957 and the government's leading role has certainly contributed to the achievements in poverty eradication. Other critical success factors include continuous budgetary support, full commitment and political will, clear identification of programmes to match the needs of the target groups as well as the target groups' awareness and understanding of their roles and responsibilities. Malaysia will continue with its efforts to further reduce the incidence of poverty. Future poverty eradication programmes will be more target-specific, especially addressing issues of poverty among specific vulnerable groups in both the rural and urban areas. The government hopes to achieve the target of 0.5 percent incidence of poverty by the year 2005. Barring any untoward events, I am confident that we will be able to achieve this target. Malaysia's success in eradicating poverty and food insecurity does not mean that the country can rest on its laurels. Globalization, liberalization and Malaysia's current development policies have a direct implication on poverty. As Malaysia advances further into the information age and with emphasis on the K-economy, as well as the move of the economy towards capital intensive and high value-added activities, the demand for knowledge and skilled workers also increases. It is important that all sectors of the population benefit from the K-economy. To this effect, remedial measures will have to be taken as otherwise it will widen the income disparity and the digital divide between the poor and the non-poor. Ladies and Gentlemen, With globalization and cross-border movement and activities, it cannot be denied that countries can a c h i e v e more through collaboration, either between countries or with regional and subregional organizations. As we are all aware, the Asia Pacific region has various organizations addressing issues on agriculture, trade, marketing, rural development and poverty eradication, fisheries, agricultural cooperatives, economic and rural development as well as financing. It is therefore obvious that there exist varied opportunities and scope for enhancing cooperation in the fields of economic development.
and growth, credit and finance, R&D, cooperatives and commodity development as well as measures to establish and improve food security and eradicate poverty. ASEAN member countries are aware that ASEAN is a very active regional organization in the Asia Pacific region. Through ASEAN and its various subregional organizations such as the ASEAN Ministers of Agriculture and Forestry Meeting (AMAF), the ASEAN Senior Officials Meeting on Rural Development and Poverty Eradication (SOMRDPE) and the growth triangles, a lot of emphasis and attention have been given to enhancing agriculture productivity, food security as well as rural development and poverty eradication. Malaysia has participated actively in activities of ASEAN and its subregional organizations and I must admit that such participation has enabled the nation to reap benefits. For example, in terms of food security, the ASEAN Food Security Reserve Board (AFSRB) has developed strategies to increase the level of food security among member countries, especially for commodities such as rice, soy, maize, sugar and others. Nationally, to further enhance food security, a rice stockpile has been established and a government agency has been entrusted to manage the stock to meet requirements for the duration of 2-3 months. Similarly, the East Asia Emergency Rice Reserve (EAERR) offers opportunities for further collaboration in assuring the supply of rice in times of emergency. Currently, Malaysia has agreed to allocate 6000 metric tones of rice for this regional cooperative ef fort. Malaysia is also committed to providing food assistance in times of natural disaster to member countries. Growth areas avail themselves of opportunities for implementation of projects on a subregional basis a m o n g s t countries. BIMP-EAGA is eyed as a major location in ASEAN of high value-added agro-industry natural resource-based manufacturing and high-grade tourism. Further development of these components will create more opportunities in the field of employment, trade, food production and socio-economic development thereby uplifting living standards and quality of life for participating countries. Collaboration in the fisheries sector is actively pursued through the Southeast Asia Fisheries Development Centre (SEAFDEC). Last month the Centre came up with appropriate responsible aquaculture technologies to help alleviate poverty and ensure food security in rural areas through the Aquaculture for Rural Development Programme. In addition, it has also come up with appropriate and responsible seed production technologies in support of aquaculture and stock enhancement programmes which would eventually contribute to food security and sustainable development in the fishery sector. Beyond the ASEAN region, Malaysia has also collaborated with other Asia-Pacific countries such as Bangladesh, India, Nepal and Pakistan. Through the import of foreign labour from these countries, Malaysia helps contribute to the increase in income and poverty eradication to the countries providing the labour, while Malaysia gets the workforce it requires. Ladies and Gentlemen, These are just but a few examples of regional and subregional collaboration that Malaysia is involved in. Malaysia's participation and involvement in such collaboration with ASEAN and amongst ASEAN countries as well as other countries has enabled it to share its experiences and expertise, whilst at the same time learning from others. I believe that the sharing and exchange of experiences and knowledge will certainly go a long way in helping countries in their development efforts and in developing their own expertise. As countries become dependent on others for their own well-being and development, it is certainly obvious that collaboration will be looked upon as an avenue and opportunity to tap the experience and expertise of others. Moreover, collaboration at the regional level enables countries to discuss issues and share common problems. Through collaboration, issues can be resolved amicably. While I agree that collaboration plays an important role in the world today and remains an important avenue for countries to work together, there must be a commitment from all parties. There must be 28.
sincerity and a common need to share and to assist countries involved. Only then can collaboration achieve the desired objectives and results. Ladies and Gentlemen, Malaysia is aware that collaboration will enable countries to derive greater benefits. Collaboration will allow weaker countries to benefit from the success and experience of others. In this regard, I believe that there is a greater need now for countries in the Asia-Pacific region, and in particular within ASEAN, to collaborate and to work even harder together if we are really serious and committed to eradicating poverty and food insecurity. As it is, about two-thirds of the world's poor live in our region. It is our responsibility to help improve the livelihood of these people. On the other hand, these regional and subregional organizations must also play an active role to ensure that any collaboration will bring benefits to the countries involved. On reflection, while it is important to have regional and subregional collaborative initiatives, it is also more important for individual countries to undertake efforts to address these issues themselves. Some of Malaysia's experiences that have enabled her to achieve success in eradicating poverty and food insecurity have been the political commitment in addressing these issues continuously over a long period of time: the policies, programmes, projects as well as resources that have been in place for the past 40 years, beginning from the era of our New Economic Policy up to the current National Development Policy. In addition, a good delivery system was established to ensure that the resources reached the target groups. We have been fortunate that Malaysia has always been peaceful and politically stable. All these factors have contributed to lowering our incidence of poverty and food insecurity, and to the overall progress of the country as a whole. Ladies and Gentlemen, In conclusion, I would like to state that Malaysia will continue to support regional and subregional collaboration in the Asia-Pacific region in the pursuit of poverty eradication and food insecurity. At the same time, I would like to urge all countries to provide adequate focus and resources for the alleviation of poverty. Thank you.
STATEMENT BY H.E. MAJ. GEN. NYUNT TIN, MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND IRRIGATION OF MYANMAR.
Mr Chairman and Distinguished Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen, I remain deeply honoured for having been given this opportunity of exchanging views and delivering a statement at this meeting. Today's high-level meeting is an initiative to strengthen subregional programmes, in its battle against the eradication of poverty and food-insecurity in the Asia-Pacific region. And the presence of Heads of Government, the Ministers concerned, the high-level representatives of the UN agencies and other Institutions and Organizations, is a testimony to the significance of this meeting. Mr Chairman and Distinguished Delegates, The International Community had in good faith made commitments to combat the scourge. It was done at the Rome Declaration of World Food Security and the World Food Summit of 1996 and again at the World Food Summit five years later in 2002. Tragically, however, the Asia-Pacific region still remains the abode of roughly two-thirds of the world's 1.2 billion poor and hungry people. Under such circumstances, it is our fervent hope that this meeting will foster collaboration and give further impetus to the efforts in the alleviation of hunger and poverty in rural areas.
Mr Chairman, The Government of Myanmar, while pursuing national economic development, has given full support to the development of agriculture and irrigation through national initiatives and with our own resources. And in summarizing the performance achieved for the year 1990-91 to 2000-01, I am glad to inform that the crop sector averaged an annual growth rate of 5 percent; the livestock and fishery sector averaged an even higher rate; and the forestry sector, an environmentally friendly growth. In recognition of the central role rice has played in determining the food security and the welfare of the urban and rural poor, rice had been designated as the National Crop of Myanmar since 1992. And during the last decade, the total area as well as irrigated area of rice increased by 26 percent and 108 percent respectively. Consequently, rice production also rose by 47 percent, reaching 21.8 million metric tons in 2002-03. And with a view to further accelerating the production of rice, the Government terminated the direct purchase of paddy by state agencies last year, and adopted a new rice trading policy to ensure free trade. Rice constitutes a major crop in this region, and I would like to congratulate Dr Jacques Diouf and Dr Cantrell for their earnest efforts and contribution to the successful launching of the International Year of Rice 2004. The IYR 2004 had very effectively generated awareness and interest in the essential role of rice in maintaining food security and inter alia the alleviation of poverty. And in order to sustain the momentum, it will be necessary to work closely with FAO and IRRI to strengthen research and development efforts, and make rice a profitable crop for rice farmers and, in turn, sustain its production. Since the Asia and Pacific region is a major rice producing and consuming region, we should do our best to place rice and rice research at the core of the international development agenda. Mr Chairman, A significant contribution to Myanmar's enhanced crop production was the increasing irrigation coverage made available by the government mainly with its limited own national capital resources. 155 irrigation projects were additionally completed between 1988 to 2003, bringing a further 0.8 million hectares under irrigation. The area under irrigation expanded from 12 percent of the total sown area in 1988 to 19 percent in 2003. Again, in our shift towards a market economy, the livestock and fishery sectors gained substantial benefits, with increasing private, both foreign and indigenous, participation. So far, large-scale commercial livestock ventures still remain minimal, but in terms of meat production, chicken, duck and pigs gave a three-fold increase and beef and mutton a two-fold increase, consequently giving rise to a per capita meat consumption of 4.3 kg (1991-92) to 9.0 kg by 2000-01. And, as a country committed to strengthening its livestock production, we deeply regret the outbreak of avian flu in some of our neighbouring countries, and sincerely hope it will be contained and will soon be a thing of the past. Incidentally, there were more private sector responses to the overtures of the fishery sector. Currently, marine fish production is operated mainly by joint venture companies and, similarly, the large increases in inland fishery production stems from private sector aquaculture farms. As a result, total fish production rose to 1.189 million tons (2000-01) as against only 0.68 million tons in 1985-86, and export earnings that were only US$15.4 million in 1989-90 had increased to US$251.5 million by 2001-02. And, as a corollary, Myanmar's per capita fish consumption at 28.4 kg remained three times higher than its corresponding per capita meat consumption. Mr Chairman, The said achievements undoubtedly contributed to the incomes and welfare of the rural community. At the same time, the government, in providing supplementary support to the measures, also invested heavily in infrastructure, such as irrigation, roads and bridges, information technology and communications, etc. 30.
The government has been according full support to the rural areas through the Ministry for Progress of Border Areas and National Races and Development Affairs, the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation, the Ministry of Forestry and other related ministries. However we are aware that there still remains a lot more to be done. Myanmar's rural population currently stands at 71 percent and rural poverty is estimated around 22.4 percent of its total population. In cognizance, the government of Myanmar has been rigorously engaged in providing rural areas with better and smooth transport; adequate water supply; access to education; access to better health care; generation of off-farm incomes and employment opportunities, while tendering supportive policies for expansion and intensification of food crop production. Mr Chairman, Myanmar joined ASEAN in 1997 and has been subscribing to its intra-ASEAN as well as extra-ASEAN aspects related to food security, food trade policies, agro-industries and industrialization, technology transfer, research and development and investments. Myanmar 's share of industry to its GDP is still low in comparison to most of the countries in the region. Under the evolving global aptitudes, value-added products have come to have more appeal and it is envisaged that investment, economic and technology cooperation within ASEAN and from other sources would be of invaluable assistance in enlarging Myanmar's industrial base. It will in turn offer employment and off-farm income to the rural areas and serve as a mechanism in combating rural poverty. We fully realize the need of food security for international, regional and national stability. We have spared no efforts in enhancing our food production and currently remain contributors to regional food security as a member of the ASEAN Emergency Rice Reserve Scheme. We are also actively participating in the pilot phase for East Asian-ASEAN Rice Reserve activities. Myanmar also actively took part in adopting the first phase of the implementation of the Framework of the ASEAN Plan of Action on Rural Development and Poverty Eradication and the ASEAN Plan on Social Safety Nets, and other related ongoing ASEAN programmes. Mr Chairman and Distinguished Delegates, The United Nations Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) have stemmed from the Millennium Summit 2000, and these noble goals were adopted therein by the largest gathering of Heads of State and Government. The first and most important millennium goal calls for the halving of the number of poor and hungry by 2015 and the other important goals are to tackle pressing issues such as gender inequality, inaccessibility to education, poor health care and lack of clean water; and the MDGs remain the working framework and criteria for measuring the degree of development success. Agriculture and rural development remains central to any strategy geared towards the alleviation of poverty and food insecurity. And if there is a lack of growth in income, food insecurity and poverty will continue to persist and fair trading practices can play an important role in combating both. Currently, globalization and trade liberalization have transcended national boundaries. As such, we highly appreciate that the gathering here today will, in addition to identifying subregional priorities and strengthening the dialogue between nations and Subregional Economic Organizations (SREOs) and regional technical and donor agencies, will also be addressing the pressing needs for the establishment of a level playing field in international trading practices.
Mr Chairman and Distinguished Delegates, We remain gathered here today, with noble aspiration as to the alleviation of poverty and food insecurity and are duty bound to give a helping hand to these millions of poverty stricken fellow-beings, and offer them a decent life on this planet. Thank you.
STATEMENT BY HONOURABLE PRAKASH CHANDRA LOHANI, MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND COOPERATIVES, NEPAL.
Mr Chairman, Excellencies, Distinguished Delegates, and Ladies and Gentlemen, I am delighted to be invited to this high-level roundtable meeting and to be given the opportunity to share my views with you. Given the theme and the level of participation, this is a very important forum and is organized at a time when the memories of the historic SAARC Summit recently concluded in Islamabad are still fresh in that region. I would like to begin with more general remarks first. The world is more prosperous today than it was a decade ago. There are more options and choices available for a better human living now than there were in the past. But this is an aggregate picture and masks the faces of more than 800 million people who do not have adequate access to food, the most basic human right and means of survival. Food insecurity is not only a problem of the food-deficit, poor nations of the world, but it is also a serious threat to the peace, stability and prosperity of other nations, regionally and perhaps, globally too. But, despite accelerated efforts and commitments at different levels towards fighting the problem, progress has been slow; and with business as usual it may take prohibitively long time ­ probably decades ­ to achieve the MDG concerning the food security set for 2015. The past three decades have achieved less than a 20 percent reduction in the number of hungry and under-fed people in the world. This was despite significant expansion of cultivation frontier and large increases in food grain productivity in many countries of Asia during the period. In most of the food-insecure countries, the cultivation frontier is closing and yield gaps are narrowing; and therefore significant increases in domestic food production (food availability) will not be possible without a major technological breakthrough resulting in another, much more successful and evenly distributed, Green Revolution. But an increase in food production or availability is not enough. The world produces enough food for all. Yet, as we know, a large mass goes to bed hungry, not knowing whether and when it will get the next meal. It is important that the poor people have enough income to access the food that is available in the market. Economic poverty is a dominant cause of food insecurity, and unless the present levels of poverty are reduced drastically, the problem of food insecurity cannot be solved permanently. Opportunities for income generation and poverty reduction are there within agriculture; but this w i l l require considerable diversification in agricultural production system, from the traditional subsistence-oriented system to one that involves commercial production of high-value commodities that can increase farm incomes from limited lands. Of course, this will require improvements in access to markets ­ regionally and globally. This is where regional/subregional cooperation and collaboration becomes important.
Mr Chairman, Whose role and responsibility is it to end hunger? A multitude of actors ­ ranging from the hungry people themselves at the local level to the governments at the national and regional levels, and to donors and developed country governments at the international level ­ have a role to play in this. As such, the responsibility to end hunger must be shared by all these actors, and all of them must pursue their respective set of priorities for action. At the local level, there is a need for the poor people to understand their development problems, potentials and priorities and initiate collective actions to implement those priorities. The key is to put people in the center stage and to help them internalize and manage the development process. Social mobilization has proved to be an effective tool for this. At the national level, governance needs to be improved; a participatory, decentralized and pro-poor policy environment needs to be brought in place; the service delivery system needs to be reformed and based on the principle of public-private partnership; and public institutions, including the national agricultural research and extension system, need to be re-oriented, strengthened and made responsive to the needs of women and the poor and marginalized people. At the regional and subregional levels, full and effective implementation of various agreements that are made among the member countries is essential to foster cooperation and collaboration among them to more effectively fight the problem of poverty and food insecurity in their respective region and subregion. In the South Asian context, for example, full and effective implementation of the 12th SAARC Summit agreement and the provisions made therein will accelerate the pace of cooperation and development in that region. At the international level, there is a need for the developed country governments to translate into actions their commitments reflected in the 8th MDG concerning global partnership for development. More specifically, they need to step up their current low level of ODA to the developing countries and reduce (or eliminate) agricultural subsidies to open their markets. Mr Chairman, Allow me to briefly mention the condition of Nepal in relation to the problem of poverty and food insecurity and highlight the key development agenda that we have adopted to fight this problem. Agriculture remains the most important sector for the people and economy of Nepal. It contributes 40 percent GDP, absorbs 70 percent of the labor force and provides livelihood to more than 80 percent of the population, which lives in rural areas. However, despite efforts, agricultural productivity has remained low (US$140 per agricultural worker). Even though land productivity is relatively higher (US$649 per hectare), the small landholding size (0.8 ha) means that average household income is low. As agriculture is the main source of income in rural areas, the link between poverty and food insecurity is very close. Even though the country produces enough food for its people, half of Nepal's 75 districts are classified as food-deficit. This testifies the spatial mismatch between production and requirement. Not only do the poor people lack economic access to food, the internal distribution system is also weak and has failed to ensure physical access to food in a timely and reliable manner. Poverty alleviation has been the single most important goal of development efforts, particularly since the Ninth Plan. Nepal is currently in the realm of the Tenth Plan, which has continued the previous thrust and has accorded highest priority to agriculture, especially through effective and full-scale implementation of the Agricultural Perspective Plan formulated in 1995. The current Plan strategy is to focus on high, sustainable and broad-based economic growth, development of the social sector and rural infrastructure, implementation of targeted programmes and good governance.
The major focus of the current Plan in agriculture is to contribute to achieving high and sustainable economic growth and poverty alleviation and improvement in the food and nutrition status of the people by increasing agricultural productivity through the provision of integrated packages of inputs and services. The strategy is to generate and disseminate agricultural technology, to increase farmers' access to agricultural inputs and credit, and to commercialize and diversify agriculture. A more market-oriented system, decentralization and participation of stakeholders in the design, monitoring, and implementation of agricultural development are major threads of policy framework adopted by the Government to achieve the Tenth Plan goal. Effective participation requires transparency of decision, accountability to stakeholders, and adequate incentives. Targeting of programmes to vulnerable and disadvantage groups is often not achieved because of the lack of operational methods for targeting and lack of local capacity. Successful cases in programmes and projects are not going to be sustained unless institutionalized. Policy implementation is not successful unless it is credible. Credibility requires consistency and compliance with commitments Poverty reduction is also a process closely linked with the political economy of the production system. In most countries a democratic ideology that focuses on the welfare of the masses and assigns a supreme role to the people in deciding on the question of leadership must be able to institutionalize enough checks and balances in the system so that it does not become a vehicle for increasing the welfare of the few at the cost of the many. Many best practices in fact can succeed at the pilot level but upscaling and replicating them at the national level can prove to be difficult unless the political leadership builds a constituency that has a vested interest in pushing the programme in the nation. It is very much a political process and this is a point that needs regular attention.
STATEMENT BY HONOURABLE TUISUGALETAUA SOFARA AVEAU, MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, FORESTS, FISHERIES AND METEOLOGY OF SAMOA.
Mr Chairman, Distinguished Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, I am very honoured and indeed very pleased to be invited to address this Regional High-level Roundtable Meeting on Spearheading Subregional Programmes and Cooperation for Eradication of Poverty and Food Insecurity in Asia and the Pacific, in my capacity as Minister of Agriculture, Forests, Fisheries and Meteorology of Samoa. We thank FAO and the organizers of this meeting for inviting Samoa to participate. Samoa remains committed to the Millennium Development Goals and World Food Summit (WFS) Declarations of fighting hunger through every means possible of alleviating poverty available to us both nationally, regionally and internationally. Samoa retains a highly agricultural society and economy. In 2002 about 80 percent of households were classified as "agriculturally active" with the population of these agricultural active households comprising more than 76 percent of the population in Samoa. An estimated 52.2 percent of the 14778 agriculturally active households derive income from agriculture. During the five year period from 1995-2000, agriculture contributed 9.9 percent average to the GDP at current prices with fisheries average contribution of 8.2 percent to GDP, giving a total of 18.1 percent average contribution to total GDP. Figures for 2001 and 2002 remain at 6 percent and 8 percent consecutively. A favourable Human Development Index (HDI) of 0.700 suggests the absence in general of acute hunger and under nutrition in Samoa. Although national food supply availability appear sufficient, anecdotal evidence points to the high incidence of relative poverty and food insecurity, particularly among youth and some economically disadvantaged households in Apia and the peri-urban areas. A clearer picture of 34.
Samoa's present food situation and a rigorous analysis of likely future food risks at the household and country levels should emerge when national indicators for poverty, food insecurity and income inequality can be successfully compiled. What is obvious is the existence of health problems caused by imbalances in nutrition. Poor nutrition related problems include (a) increase in the prevalence of obesity, hypertension, and diabetics, linked to changes in dietary patterns; (b) (protein) deficient diets among infants; and (c) iron deficiency anemia among pregnant and lactating mothers and children. There have also been recorded cases of chronic micronutrient deficiencies, leading to so called "under nutrition". Mr Chairman, The policies and guidelines outlined in the strategy for the Development of Samoa 2002-2004 reflects the importance of the agricultural sector and the commitment of the Government to programmes for increasing output, in both subsistence and commercial farming, through focused crop research and greater extension support services to farmers, as well as the identification of overseas markets for agricultural produce and fish products. More work also needs to be done to try and meet the often onerous quarantine requirements of export markets. Major institutional strengthening is also being undertaken to enhance policy development, planning and management and service delivery in agriculture. At the community level, urban and rural people are actively encouraged to participate in food production business and enterprises based on agriculture. Developments in Samoa's beef industry, for example, offer new opportunities once self-sufficiency is achieved and business and market opportunities open up for the industry's products. In fisheries, actions are being taken to promote the optimum and ecologically sustainable use of the country's fishery resources and develop suitable alternatives such as aquaculture, inshore management plans and shell-fish farming, to substitute for harvesting depleted resources. The National Forest Policy (1995) aims at restoring the balanced multi-use functions of forestry, strengthening forestry administration, and encouraging customary owners to become more committed to the protection of remaining indigenous forests, and reforestation activities. A community forestry programme has been developed to support reforestation efforts, and to diversify approaches to land use, and to increase community involvement and responsibility for forest management and future forest resource needs. Mr Chairman, At the heart of the policies and actions undertaken by the government of Samoa at the national level, including the agriculture and fisheries sector, is the creation of economic opportunities available to our people and households. This, in the final analysis, is the proven, effective way to combat poverty and food insecurity, as well as address the inequities in income distribution. Mr Chairman, For a small island state like Samoa, a key complement to domestic action is international support. At the regional level, Samoa is firmly committed to organizations that work with Pacific nations in economic and social development. The eradication of poverty and food insecurity in the region involves several broad integrated objectives and specialised technical fields implemented by regional as well as international organizations. Crop protection and integrated pest management activities, comprising mainly research projects, including field testing, analysis of performance and data, and gene bank management, have been spearheaded by regional organizations such as the Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC) and institutions such as the University of the South Pacific (USP). 35.
The sustainable management of natural resources and finding solutions to environmental concerns are integral parts of measures to alleviate poverty and guarantee food security. The work of the South Pacific Regional Environment Programme (SPREP), the Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA) and the South Pacific Applied Geosciences Commission (SOPAC) are all vital in this regard. Drawing attention to problem areas including those related to poverty requiring the intervention of the Pacific leadership is part of the coordination role of the Pacific Forum Secretariat. Another important part of this organization's responsibility is developing and facilitating trade, a necessary part of any comprehensive plan aimed at poverty alleviation and food security. The Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations and, particularly through its regional office and its subregional office, is the catalytic medium in the development of agriculture at the grass roots level. Programmes such as the Regional Programme for Food Security in the Pacific Island countries, CODEX Alimentarius, Food Insecurity and Vulnerability Information and Mapping Systems (FIVIMS), Food Balance Sheets, Special Programme for Food Security (SPFS), TCP's and Telefood, to name a few, have helped island governments implement policies and programmes to reduce poverty and food insecurity in the region. There is no doubt that many people and households in the Asia-Pacific and around the world have been saved or spared from the misery of poverty due to the work of FAO. However, because of country specific needs and priorities in areas beyond the resource capacities of small island nations, the ability of regional and international organizations to help is also limited to what they can do within their own resource constraints. Technical research in protecting crops, improving yields and reducing costs of production is the key to addressing structural causes of poverty and food insecurity, and appropriate assistance at the national level and to regional and international organizations is vital. Besides regional and international organizations, bilateral donors including Australia, Canada, China, Japan, New Zealand and the European Union (and its members such as Italy to name one) continue to provide much needed assistance to Pacific island nations in the development of agriculture and other alternative income opportunities with the ultimate aim of eradicating poverty. As a small island recipient state, we are very grateful to the bilateral donors for their help. I should, however, make a quick note here in the context of the well-known adage that the "lasting solution to poverty is not through providing food but in providing the means to produce food". We find that many times our efforts to diversify agriculture and give farmers opportunities to sell their produce to overseas markets are sometimes frustrated by lack of market access; very often, through non-tariff and administrative barriers, as my country has experienced in the area of quarantine requirements. I hope that these impediments to trade, and our ability to provide opportunities for our farmers, will soon be removed. Samoa is committed to the eradication of poverty and food insecurity in Asia and the Pacific and will continue to contribute to these very noble causes by whatever means possible. Finally, I wish to thank the organizers for the opportunity to speak at this very important conference. Soifua and God bless.
STATEMENT BY H.E. MR ZHANG BAOWEN, VICE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE OF THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA.
Mr Chairman, Dear Delegates, I am very delighted to attend the Regional High-level Roundtable Meeting on Spearheading Subregional Programmes and Cooperation for Eradication of Poverty and Food Insecurity in Asia and the Pacific co-sponsored by the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, the Asian Development Bank and the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific. This Roundtable Meeting will provide us with a good opportunity to understand better about the food situation in this region and programmes of each country for eradication of poverty as well as to further discuss the new areas and modalities for intensifying regional and subregional cooperation. Mr Chairman, Attaching great importance to agriculture and food security, the Chinese government has always put in the important position the development of food and agriculture, and food security and clothing of the Chinese people. With the arduous efforts in the past 50 years or more, particularly more than 20 years since reforms and opening-up, China has obtained achievements that have drawn the world's attention in agriculture and rural economy. The production of grains, cotton, oil-seeds, fruits, meats, poultry and eggs, fishery products, etc. have been at the world's top level for years, while the per capita production has either reached or exceeded the world average level. China has made the historic shift from chronic shortage of major farm products such as grains to the general balance between the total supply and demand with surplus in good harvest years. Since 1996, the Chinese Government has earnestly carried out its commitments it made to the World Food Summit by actively increasing its grain production. The grain production has achieved a record high level, reaching 512.3 million tons in 1998 from the 504.54 million tons in 1996. The production of the following two years stood at 500 million tons and it has maintained at the level of 450 million tons over the past few years. China has also made great progress in poverty alleviation with the population of the poor still suffering inadequate food and clothing reduced from 250 million in 1978 to the current 28.20 million. In general, the Chinese people in both urban and rural areas are living a fairly comfortable life. In spite of considerable progress achieved in food production and poverty reduction, China still faces severe challenges in agricultural development. In 2003, due to last year's frequent natural disasters of various types, the impact of the sudden outbreak of SARS, food production fell below 450 million tons, for the first time in the past eight years, marking a lowest record since 1990. In addition, consumption in the year continued to exceed food production, enlarging the gap between demand and supply. With a view to realizing the long-term stability of food security in China, the Chinese Government adopted a series of policy measures to increase food production capacity. Detailed policy measures include: direct subsidy to grain producers, lowering agriculture tax rate, abolishing special agricultural taxes, subsidizing purchase of quality seeds and agricultural machinery, implementing quality grain projects. The Chinese Government has always attached great importance to and actively participated in the international exchange and cooperation programmes in the field of food and agriculture. The Chinese Government, through multi- and bilateral channels including FAO's South-South Cooperation Programme under the framework of the Special Programme of Food Security, has strengthened its cooperative relations with other developing countries by providing support within our capacities to help them achieve food security. With the parallel development of both economic globalization and regionalization in recent years, the Chinese Government has strengthened its cooperation and exchanges with regional and subregional economic organizations, and initiated full-range agricultural cooperation with ASEAN. China is going to establish a China-ASEAN Free Trade Zone by 2010 when 6000 items of products will enjoy zero tariffs. In 2004, 600 items of products, mainly agricultural products, have enjoyed the "early harvest". In addition, China engages itself in some activities by international, regional and subregional 37.
economic organizations, such as Greater Mekong Subregion (GSM) development programme of the Asia Development Bank, FAO's projects on rice-cotton-vegetable IPM, transboundary animal disease surveillance and control, and other regional activities. Meanwhile, China also promotes bilateral cooperation and exchanges with friendly countries in the Asia and Pacific region, shares technology and resources and, by making joint efforts, makes its contribution to regional food security and poverty elimination. In most developing countries, due to many constraints such as the shortage of capital and technology, weak capability of macro control, small-scale of agricultural and food production, and backward infrastructure, the vast majority of the poor population cannot be guaranteed with food security. Therefore, we hope that developed countries and the international community will increase their assistance to agriculture growth in developing countries, transfer suitable agricultural technologies and help these countries get rid of economic difficulty so as to raise food productivity and improve food security. Meanwhile, developing countries shall continue to give priority to food production, maximize food supply and improve food security. Mr Chairman and Delegates, The Chinese Government will continue to honour its relevant commitments, adopt effective measures in accordance with the Summit's Plan of Action to protect food production capacity, so as to build a solid foundation for economic development and social progress, and contribute to food security in the world. As you all know, China will host the 27th FAO Regional Conference for Asia and the Pacific from May 17 to 21 in Beijing this year, and then the first Ministerial Workshop for Members of Asia Cooperation Dialogue will be held from May 22 to 23. I would like, on behalf of the Chinese Government, to extend our warm welcome to all participants present to come to Beijing in May. We will show our warm hospitality as a hosting country. Thank you.
STATEMENT BY MR R.C.A. JAIN, SECRETARY, AGRICULTURE, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA.
Mr Chairman, It is indeed a great pleasure and privilege for me to address this August Assembly of distinguished Ministers and delegates from various countries in Asia and the Pacific, UN Agencies, SREOs, Financial Institutions and Civil Society Organizations on a subject of utmost relevance and concern to this part of the world. With Asia-Pacific still harbouring some of the most resistant pockets of poverty, this round of consultation has a special significance for accelerating the pace of sustainable agricultural and rural development. It should also be a matter of great satisfaction for the organizers that the Millennium Development Goals adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in September 2000 had, as their necessary backward linkage, the Rome Declaration of the World Food Summit in 1996 in so far as Food Security and Poverty Alleviation are concerned. It is the firm belief of the Government of India that with the increasing integration of economies the concerns of the comity of nations and multilateral institutions have deepened in facing the challenges of poverty, food insecurity, poor public health and mass illiteracy. To the extent the problems of food security and poverty alleviations have, of late, become highly differentiated spatially, the case for their regional and subregional management becomes all the more pressing. In other words, geography clearly dictates a subregional approach in catering to these problems. South Asia is home to more chronically food insecure people than any other region in the world. South Asians account for 22 percent of mankind, 44 percent of the world's poor and 40 percent of all food.
insecure people in the developing world. The large segments of the population of this region are also vulnerable to recurrent natural disasters bringing their food insecurity under aggravated stress. Food insecurity, therefore, has become a multidimensional problem particularly in South Asia. Finding the means by which the people of this region can free themselves from the scourge of poverty and the consequent food insecurity therefore continues to be a pressing issue despite impressive strides made in tackling this scourge. Mr Chairman, Agriculture, contributing around 25 percent in GDP and 58 percent of the employment, remains the key to sustainable development in India. A defining feature of agriculture in India is the very low average holding size of hardly 1.5 hectare per farming family. Nevertheless, Indian agriculture has made impressive progress during the last five decades from a "ship to mouth" scenario in the early sixties when we depended substantially on imports. We have not only become self-reliant in food grains but have acquired sufficient resilience to tide over the adverse conditions in years of drought. Our achievements on the "supply side" would not have made such a major difference had there not been a concomitant extension of a "Public Distribution System" right up to the interior-most village, ensuring availability of 35 kgs of food grains a month to the identified "below the poverty line" families at very affordable rates. Besides, this system also caters to the requirements of other sections of the population including supply of rice/wheat free of cost to those destitute who are not yet availing themselves of the benefits of the social security network. During the year ending 31 March 2003 more than 22 million tons of food grains were distributed through this network benefiting more than 300 million people living below or on the fringes of the poverty line. This network has made a sustainable dent in the food insecurity profile of the country. Mention must also be made of the massive successful mitigation operations mounted during the drought of unprecedented severity that afflicted large parts of the country between July 2002 to June 2003 due to anomalies in the South West Monsoon. The drought resulted in loss of agricultural employment to the order of more than 1000 million man-days, and left more than 1800 million hectares unsown during the autumn or kharif crop of 2002. Massive "relief employment" operations were mounted providing temporary employment to more than 240 million small and marginal farmers and agricultural workers through a "food-for-work approach" which entailed payment of wages part in cash and part in food grains. The result was a transfer of more than 8 million tons of food grains to the most vulnerable victims of drought and generation of more than 1430 million man-days which more than compensated for the loss of employment. We have come a long way in alleviation of poverty. The poverty ratio in the country has come down from 36 percent in 1993 to 27 percent in 2001. The battle against poverty, rural and urban, goes on relentlessly and our Tenth Five Year Plan envisages a total outlay of around US$30 billion to achieve this goal in a holistic manner by emphasising a total human development approach encompassing generation of incomes, public health including primary health care, universal education, shelter and infrastructure. Mr Chairman, our Prime Minister has given a clarion call to synergise the partnership of Central Government, its constituent states and the non-governmental organizations to achieve the sacred mission of a hunger free India by 2007 which marks the 60th anniversary of our independence. It is worth emphasising that this goal is more ambitious than the one envisaged in the MDGs. The goals set out by our Prime Minister and to which I have just alluded, would require considerable interventions of policies, programmes and resources in the sector of agriculture as it continues to sustain almost 70 percent of our billion plus population. The tasks before us are myriad and complex. We have embarked upon major initiatives to make agriculture a more remunerative proposition for our farmers through diversification of crops, market reforms, a more comprehensive and speedy risk coverage mechanism and, of course, enhancement in production through better transfer of frontier technologies.
It is increasingly being realised that, given the average holding size and the overwhelming dependence of our economy on agriculture, agriculture has to be viewed as the principal instrumentality for poverty eradication. To bring this approach into still sharper focus, a National Commission on Farmers has recently been set up to suggest ways and means of reorienting policies and programmes to improve farm incomes, particularly of the small and marginal farmers so that a real dent is made on the resistant pockets of poverty. Mr Chairman, From the foregoing, one can infer that eradication of poverty and food insecurity has come to the centre-stage of the public policy domain in India. While macro level successes and strides have been made, much remains to be done for achieving household level food and nutritional security. The path ahead would require much greater commitment of political will and resources as we enter the realm of the more resistant segments of poverty. Mr Chairman, In a market oriented system, the livelihood of the farmer depends on the income he generates out of his farm operations. In globalised agriculture, the domestic market prices for agricultural products are governed, to a large extent, by the prevailing prices in the international market. The distortion of international prices of almost all agricultural commodities, due in a large measure to the policies of domestic support by the developed countries, has a definite bearing on the agenda of the present forum. The inability of the developing countries to counter these distortional policies and to provide matching or even broadly comparable support needs no reiteration. Given the overwhelming dependence on agriculture and the very small average size of holdings in the developing countries, this aspect has a direct bearing on livelihood, poverty alleviation and food security. It is a matter of great concern that adequate cognizance has so far not been taken of the interests of the resource poor farmers of the countries of the Asia-Pacific countries which does not augur well for the future of sustainable agriculture on our planet. Any trade negotiations which do not take account of the concerns of small and marginal farmers is likely to lead to endangering the livelihood and food security of hundreds of millions of farmers in our countries. I will now come to the core of the present deliberations viz. spearheading subregional programmes and cooperation. At the very outset it must be admitted that there is much unrealised potential and scope in this area. There is, at the same time, an imperative need to also recognise the inherent difficulties in forging cooperative and collaborative ventures transcending sovereign boundaries to address these issues in a programme mode. Our own experience of providing bilateral technical support under treaty arrangements with various countries and through the trilateral route under FAO's Special Programme for Food Security to Low Income Developing Countries has provided us valuable insights on the subject. We realise the strengths and potential of such collaborative efforts. There is, therefore, a very strong case to deliberate at length on the specifics of such cooperative initiatives, particularly with reference to the relevant institutional framework. It must also be recognised that the mainstay of any such cooperation is information and experience sharing in the policy and programme domains. We are convinced that the potential of organizations like FAO and ESCAP, etc. to act as Clearing Houses of such information has not yet been fully utilised. The crucial role which the flow of relevant information plays deserves to be highlighted. While this process of understanding the state-of-the-art in the national drive in the relevant fields has its limitations, particularly in case of countries needing more "hands-on" support, there is a very strong case of the "best" not becoming the enemy of the "good". In South Asia, an important established regional collaborative platform is the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC). This institutional arrangement has proved very useful in engendering mutual support and cooperation between member countries viz. India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Nepal, Bhutan, Sri Lanka and Maldives in diverse fields. We support the concept of cooperation through.
innovative approaches, mutual experience sharing, capacity building and systematic evaluation through the aegis of this organization. It will be in the fitness of things if FAO, other UN agencies and international financial institutions like ADB and the World Bank generate initiatives of inter-country subregional cooperation through such organizations. We in India have a vast network of institutions exclusively concerned with capacity building and action-research in the fields of development; we will be very happy to share such capabilities and expertise within our subregion and beyond. We offer our success stories and experiences in the relevant field for documentation and pilot testing in other "trouble spots" through subregional economic organizations. With these observations, let me once again place on record the appreciation of the Government of India to the organizers for organizing this most topical interface on a subject of crucial significance to our countries in the Asia Pacific region engaged in a relentless campaign against food insecurity and poverty. We have no manner of doubt that such interactions will result in greater conceptual clarity and in evolving specific, pragmatic mechanisms of collaboration in the relevant fields in geographically contiguous areas encompassing similarly situated countries with broadly similar problems. Thank you Mr Chairman.
STATEMENT BY MR RAHUL RATURI, SECTOR MANAGER, THE WORLD BANK.
Mr Chairman, Honorable Ministers, Distinguished Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen: I would like to take the opportunity of this meeting to share with you a few of the major findings coming from the recent work done at the World Bank on the issues of agricultural and rural development, as outlined in a strategy document published last year ­ Reaching the Rural Poor. At the global level, the World Bank has estimated that per capita income in constant prices will need to grow by more than twice the rate it is growing at today ­ 3.6 percent p.a. on average ­ in order to reduce the number of poor people living on less than $1/day from nearly 29 percent of the world's population today to 15 percent by 2015. This compares with growth of 1.6 percent during the 1990s. In this context, as has been stated my many of the speakers earlier this morning, agricultural growth is essential to income growth in most low income countries ­ indeed, agricultural development is at the confluence of the MDGs, hunger and social protection. Growth in agricultural GDP will need to accelerate significantly beyond the present average of 2.5 percent p.a., registered by the low income countries across the world during the 1990s. The challenge we face today is that agricultural based growth strategies will be more difficult than in the past. In much of the developing world:.
The limits to expanding the area under cultivation has been reached; and New areas available to irrigation are extremely limited.
Consequently, increasing productivity from the use of land, labor, water and capital assets will be the key to boosting agricultural output as we look to the future. Achieving the necessary productivity gains will require: a green revolution for the drylands; and improved efficiency of water use, and better water management in irrigated areas. Also, the sources of agricultural and rural growth will be different at least in the near term in most countries of our region ­ not the grain based growth which came from the green revolution of the past, but more from the diversification of agriculture, moving into higher value commodities; and from greater off-farm activities, in many cases associated with agro-processing and related activities. Both of these 41.
factors require Governments to take a closer look at rural development strategies ­ to find better and more efficient ways to deliver services to poor households, making institutions more accountable for overall good governance; and to improve the rural investment climate to encourage increased private sector investment. At the same time, achieving sustainable agriculture will require close attention to a few critical areas, some of which have been alluded to by some of the earlier speakers. These include:.
Land and water degradation Nutrient management Integrated pest management Conservation farming practices Policies and institutions that will engender better practices Adapting to climatic variability.
Achieving agricultural and rural income growth will require:.
Improvements in agricultural technology, but that in itself cannot do the job on its own Improvements in the operation of markets for agricultural products and inputs Increased investments in rural infrastructure (including, among others, investments for irrigation and w a t e r resources management, drainage, rural water supply), rural health, education, energy, telecommunications, and finance, in conjunction with local communities and the private sector An end to policies which discriminate against agriculture in the developing countries, and those which protect and subsidize agriculture in industrialized countries Better governance and improved delivery of services by public institutions, during a period where many of the countries in our region are undergoing fundamental institutional reform associated with decentralization And finally, it will require initiatives to improve the rural investment climate, to ensure the development of the non-farm rural economy ­ to provide for increased incomes and employment in the rural areas.
For the world community, the challenge is to:.
Raise the profile of rural development in national policy, with governments to prepare rural development strategies which guide both poverty reduction strategies and public expenditure programmes Significantly expand investments for supporting rural development ­ in recent years these have been declining significantly ­ responding to the nationally prepared rural development strategies Donors need to work collaboratively together, improving the quality and impact of their operations ­ and in many of the low income countries do much better in building local institutional capacity to manage agricultural policy and investments. And finally, we need to create a rural alliance of interested donors, NGOs and the private sector to help coordinate international efforts ­ the champions of rural development have grown weak in recent years.
STATEMENT BY MR KENG YONG ONG, SECRETARY GENERAL OF ASEAN.
Excellencies, Distinguished Delegates, Ladies and Gentleman, At the very outset, I would like to express my pleasure and honour being accorded this opportunity to participate today at this high-level roundtable meeting to address issues on poverty, food insecurity, sustainable economic growth and rural development. The Meeting, and its topic, could not have been.
timelier as we in ASEAN and indeed all around the Asia-Pacific try to find ways and means to build fruitful partnerships in the region to help countries meet their commitments to address the Millennium Development Goals and World Food Summit Declarations. The World Food Summit: five years later was convened on 10-13 June 2002 to recommit governments, the international community and civil society to the Goals of the Summit. The Summit was also a call for an international alliance to accelerate action beyond the broad commitments and work towards the stepping up of time-bound actions to reduce world hunger. The ASEAN Ministers of Agriculture and Forestry (AMAF) and their counterpart agriculture Ministers of the Plus Three Member Countries, namely China, Japan and Korea, emphasised, at their second joint meeting in 2002 in Vientiane, to collectively and continuously exert themselves in narrowing the gap between member countries and to reduce hunger in the region, as deliberated at the World Food Summit, held in Rome, Italy. They also reaffirmed the importance of actively undertaking regional cooperation through international organizations including FAO. Important and integral to the implementation of the World Food Summit Plan of Action is the mobilisation of partnerships between governments, international organizations and financial institutions to improve performance and strengthen cooperation. We hope to explore the possibilities of how strategic regional partnerships can identify regional priorities and help build local ownerships of development initiatives. ASEAN PRIORITIES FOR POVERTY REDUCTION, FOOD SECURITY AND SUSTAINABLE RURAL DEVELOPMENT IN TANDEM WITH ECONOMIC GROWTH ASEAN was founded in 1967, with the aim to "accelerate economic growth, social progress and cultural development in the region" and "to promote active collaboration and mutual assistance on matters of common interest in the economic, social, cultural, technical, scientific and administrative fields." Based on this fundamental mandate, regional commitments made for social progress and development have called for "the elimination of poverty, hunger, disease and illiteracy" and "improvement of living standards" ­ in the Bali Concord I, 1976; bringing "shared prosperity to all" by "providing greater access to social services, poverty reduction, strengthening the family as the foundation for a strong, caring and cohesive society, capable of meeting new challenges arising from rapid social and economic changes" ­ in the Fifth Summit Declaration, 1995. Founded on the above recognition that people are at the core of development processes, the region's overall strategy to ensure that economic and social progress advance hand-in-hand is best captured in the ASEAN Vision 2020 statement adopted at the 2nd ASEAN Informal Summit in 1997: ASEAN's leaders envisioned the entire region to be, by 2020, a community of caring societies, "... a socially cohesive and caring ASEAN where hunger, malnutrition, deprivation and poverty are no longer basic problems...", in a partnership of dynamic development, "... a stable, prosperous and highly competitive ASEAN Economic region in which there is a free flow of goods, services and investments, a freer flow of capital, equitable economic development and reduced poverty and socio-economic disparities." The rapidity with which the 1997 financial crisis swept through the region, affecting all countries, highlighted that the fate of the ASEAN countries were more seamlessly interwoven than ever. Taking advantage of this reality, ASEAN's principal response to the crisis was to accelerate regional integration and strengthen regional cooperation. The Hanoi Plan of Action (HPA) priorities adopted in 1998 were devised to implement this regional response. Through the HPA process, ASEAN committed itself to faster and deeper regional economic cooperation and liberalisation, closer financial cooperation, and addressing the social impact of the crisis. At the same time, priorities were also highlighted for focused social and human resource development to improve the region's capacity in preparing for future economic downturns, as well as to already put into place measures that would facilitate efforts to manage the impact of closer economic integration and help narrow the gap between the levels of development of ASEAN Members.
Such measures in the area of rural development and poverty eradication, and in food security can be found in the form of forward looking (or proactive) strategic Plans of Action. With relevance to the topic we are discussing today are Plans of Action for Rural Development and Poverty Eradication and on Food, Agriculture and Forestry. ADDRESSING POVERTY ASEAN cooperation in rural development and poverty eradication was first put on the regional agenda through the convening of the Inaugural Meeting of ASEAN Ministers on Rural Development and Poverty Eradication (AMRDPE) in Kuala Lumpur in October 1997. The Ministers signed a Ministerial Understanding on ASEAN Cooperation in Rural Development and Poverty Eradication and adopted a Framework for the ASEAN Plan of Action on Rural Development and Poverty Eradication. The vision, as stated in the Framework, is "towards eradicating poverty, with particular emphasis on promoting the development of progressive, prosperous and self-reliant rural communities, and thus contribute towards creating a caring society in the ASEAN Member Countries." Looking ahead beyond the Framework Action Plan's initial time frame of five years (1997-2003), ASEAN Ministers on Rural Development and Poverty Eradication in December 2002 called for a comprehensive review of ASEAN cooperation on rural development and poverty eradication, to identify "new priorities for ASEAN cooperation in rural development and poverty eradication, particularly with regard to effectively responding to the challenges arising from globalisation, trade liberalisation and regional integration." A new framework plan for the next six years (2004-2010) has been prepared, addressing emerging priorities such as globalisation, narrowing the digital divide, and encouraging local participation in sustainable rural development. ENSURING FOOD SECURITY Agriculture remains an important sector and contributor to the economies of most ASEAN countries. It has profound socio-economic bearings on each of the Member Countries because the livelihood of 45 percent of the population of ASEAN still depends on agriculture. This suggests that agricultural growth in ASEAN is imperative for generating employment, increasing exports, enhancing food security and vitalising domestic economies. Towards this end, ASEAN cooperation in Food, Agriculture & Forestry has focused its programmes and activities on enhancing food security, increasing the competitiveness of ASEAN's food, agriculture and forestry products, promoting sustainable utilisation and conservation of natural resources, encouraging private sector involvement and joint approaches on international and regional issues. In particular, ensuring food security is a major concern in ASEAN and has always been the fundamental goal of ASEAN cooperation as reflected in all major declarations, resolutions and action plans. Generally, the concept of national food security for the ASEAN countries varies from one of self-sufficiency in absolute terms to a more flexible concept of self-reliance, which encourages imports during shortages and bases agricultural production on the principle of comparative advantage. The enhancement of regional food security over the recent past has posed a great challenge to ASEAN. Internationally, steeply increasing demand for food against stable, and in some cases, declining production and supplies in recent times caused by natural disasters have given good lessons to ASEAN on the need to strongly support food production. Within ASEAN, rapid industrialisation and growth of the non-agricultural sector has severely affected the performance of the rice and other food industries, with its implication on food availability, stability and accessibility in Member Countries. ASEAN cooperative efforts in food security have recently strengthened with the ASEAN Plus Three initiatives of the Pilot Project of the East Asia Emergency Rice Reserve and the ASEAN Food Security Information System. The Pilot Project aims to improve existing ASEAN coordinating and monitoring systems and to expand cooperation activities with China, Japan and Korea with a view to strengthening food security in the East Asia region. The Information System sets out to develop a network among 44.
ASEAN and China, Japan and Korea to facilitate a more effective planning of food production and trade within the region. Building on the strength of partnerships among ASEAN countries and its dialogue partners, ASEAN has also established a working partnership with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). In this context a draft Regional Programme for Food Security in ASEAN is under preparation to complement national food security initiatives and take advantage of synergies and complementarities at the regional level. Thus, the emphasis hitherto placed on social recovery in the wake of the economic crisis has gradually taken on the form of proactive preparedness in anticipation of the changes to be brought about in the region as a result of larger global and regional trends such as the realisation of the ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA) and the respective transitions of the region's economies into regional and global markets, and the "social" impact of globalisation. As such, ASEAN cooperation to address rural development and poverty reduction and to ensure food security now has a focus on preparing for and managing changes brought about by global and regional economic integration and trade liberalisation, The element of continuity in change is still present in the overall direction provided by the Hanoi Plan of Action priorities; however, the work undertaken by ASEAN bodies dealing in these areas have gained a new dynamism in managing the process of change. Refocused commitments for ASEAN cooperation in rural development and poverty eradication, among other priorities, stand testimony to ASEAN's recognition of the need to integrate economic and social objectives in preparing for the challenges and opportunities that a globalizing ASEAN region will bring. In fact, recent mandates set by our leaders have highlighted the importance of an integrated approach to achieving regional peace and prosperity. THE 9TH ASEAN BALI SUMMIT The 9th ASEAN Summit held in Bali, Indonesia in October 2003 "pledged to achieve an ASEAN Community by the year 2020 which would rest on the three pillars of ASEAN Security Community, ASEAN Economic Community and ASEAN Socio-Cultural Community." The essence of these three pillars are embodied in the Declaration of ASEAN Concord (or Bali Concord II) adopted at the 9th ASEAN Summit. The Bali Concord II essentially reaffirms ASEAN as a concert of Southeast Asian nations, bonded together in partnership, in dynamic development and in a community of caring societies, as envisioned in ASEAN Vision 2020. All ten ASEAN member states mutually share the belief that the goal of social and economic prosperity in the region can be achieved only with regional peace and stability and reinforces ASEAN's conviction that development of the region encompasses many aspects of civics, economics and politics which cannot be separate from each other because they are fundamentally interconnected. Based on this shared belief, the realization of an ASEAN Security Community is anchored in accomplishing economic and social progress in the region. To achieve economic progress, the ASEAN Economic C o m m u n i t y recognizes that "the realisation of a fully integrated economic community requires implementation of both liberalisation and cooperation measures" and that "there is a need to enhance cooperation and integration activities in other areas" such as "human resources development and capacity building" among others. With this as a link between social and economic development, the creation of the ASEAN Socio-Cultural Community highlights the development and enhancement of human resources as a key strategy for employment generation, alleviating poverty and socio-economic disparities, and ensuring economic growth with equity. Future strategies and actions to be undertaken in addressing poverty and food security challenges will thus draw from the priorities outlined for achieving the ASEAN Socio-Cultural Community, in particular to "foster cooperation in social development aimed at raising the standard of living of disadvantaged groups and the rural population, and shall seek the active involvement of all sectors of society, in.
particular women, youth and local communities." These strategies will be spelled out in the Vientiane Action Plan ­ now under preparation for adoption by the 10th ASEAN Summit later this year ­ to be implemented over the next six years (2004-2010). As a regional organization, ASEAN is working to address the numerous challenges and strives to undertake cooperation activities that are of interest to all Member Countries. As a dynamic organisation, the process of how ASEAN conducts its business is continually evolving. Periodic reviews of activities in the various sectors are undertaken for the purpose of finding ways and means to improve the current structure and modalities of cooperation. The review is also to determine which activities are consistent with prevailing ASEAN priorities and international concerns. Previous reviews have revealed that due to the region's increasing integration and cohesiveness, collaborative efforts among the Member Countries and with the international community have escalated. As this trend is expected to continue, the overlap in the scope of activities covered by ASEAN and the international movements require strengthening in the coordination and working relation among the concerned bodies in addressing certain cross-border or inter-related issues. This will definitely call for more orderly organization and greater responsibility from each of the Members. As ASEAN becomes progressively more active in the international arena, the number of issues that Member Countries will tackle will undoubtedly also increase. Strengthening partnerships beyond ASEAN will streamline the utilisation of resources and provide for broader support of the activities undertaken and better achievement of the international goals. There is congruence in what ASEAN is trying to achieve in 2020 and what the Millennium Development Goals sets out in 2015. Both engage in efforts to alleviate poverty and to enhance food security through achieving overall sustainable socio-economic development. ASEAN has carried out activities that address concerns raised and objectives set forth at the World Food Summit. Although not all aspects have been addressed because of limitations in resources and capacity, the breadth and scope of the activities have expanded and intensified as Member Countries become more experienced and capable. BUILDING PARTNERSHIPS IN THE REGION The issues of globalisation, sustainable development and trade disparities have become more pronounced and dominate the agendas of international fora. ASEAN therefore looks to comprehensive approaches to implement steps taken at the international, regional and national levels in order to work more positively in addressing these issues. In this connection, partnerships in ASEAN are of both internal and external in nature. I am certain that delegates here can agree that development cooperation activities must invite broad participation to increase support and success especially when the issues concern all countries in the Asia-Pacific and even more so when it is about food security in the region. I would highly recommend that expanding partnerships by way of enhancing participation of regional organizations be encouraged over establishing new institutions. This is for the simple reason that by utilising existing forums and mechanisms, priority issues and activities can be immediately addressed. The ASEAN Secretariat can play a role in harnessing the commitment, consensus and communication of information in order to reach the Member Countries. However, the role of the Secretariat is not only to work with their respective Members, but also to enhance cooperation among other Secretariats in the region. This would provide for the exchange of valuable information and experiences. Very recently, H.E. Mr Q.A.M.A. Rahim, Secretary-General of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) Secretariat visited the ASEAN Secretariat to explore closer working relations between the two Secretariats. We welcomed and are encouraged by such interest as it will surely bring the two organizations closer and help facilitate relations between the ASEAN and SAARC countries. As we also look forward to establishing relations with the PIF-FIC Secretariat, I would also like to take this opportunity to extend an invitation to H.E. Mr Noel Levi to visit the ASEAN Secretariat in Jakarta. 46.
In conclusion, the ASEAN Secretariat welcomes the initiative by the ADB, FAO and UNESCAP to establish a dialogue as well as greater cooperation and partnerships among the regional organizations to address hunger and poverty in the region. The cooperation envisaged at this Roundtable Meeting is one that should inspire full support from the partners. We believe the outcome of such partnerships is a mechanism of development cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region that is long-term oriented and sustainable. As such, regional organizations have been identified as significant contributors to the development of the cooperation. We therefore stand ready to assist and participate in the process and activities that need implementation. Thank you.
STATEMENT BY MR Q.A.M.A. RAHIM, SECRETARY-GENERAL OF SAARC.
Mr Chairman, Honourable Ministers, Distinguished colleagues & delegates, At the outset, let me express my thanks to FAO, ESCAP and ADB for organizing this Roundtable on Spearheading Subregional Programmes and Cooperation for Eradication of Poverty and Food Insecurity in Asia and the Pacific, which is attended, among others, by Honourable Ministers of Agriculture from the SAARC Region. Food Security and poverty alleviation remain priority areas for cooperation under SAARC. Successive SAARC Summits emphasized cooperative efforts to enhance food production and to alleviate poverty in the region. As early as in 1995, SAARC Agriculture Ministers formulated a common SAARC position for placing before the World Food Summit in Rome. The Ministers also met in 2002 in Kathmandu to formulate a common SAARC position for the WFS: fyl in Rome in the same year. This demonstrates the importance attached to the issues before us by SAARC and its leadership. This Roundtable will afford us with an opportunity to learn from other regions within Asia in our efforts to deal with the common issues of hunger, food security and poverty. Mr Chairman, Hunger is not only debilitating but it is also destabilizing with serious implications for peace and orderly progress of national societies. Thus it is a threat to the stability of the international community. I believe it should be a top priority at this High-level Roundtable so that this challenge is addressed in all its ramifications. There should also be a conscious endeavour on the part of all concerned here to devise ways and means to expedite all our efforts so that targets and goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, could be realized within the stipulated time frame. Over the past decade, the total number of chronically undernourished in the developing world has fallen by 40 million, but the average rate of decline has continued to slow, reaching only 6 million a year. Consequently, the annual reduction required to reach the target of halving the number of hungry people by 2015 has grown from 20 million to 22 million. Hence the gap between reductions realized and reductions needed is widening. Continuing at the current rate, it would take more than 60 years to reach the target of MDG. Therefore, there should not be any doubt in our minds that we would need to redouble our efforts through strengthening of cooperation among nations and organizations concerned to face this formidable task. Mr Chairman, AARC would like to invite attention to the complex nature of the continued threat posed by food insecurity of a sizeable segment of our populations. The international community at large and the national governments in particular can face this challenge only through sustained increase in agricultural production. This will require, inter alia, improvement of soil fertility, and arresting and reversing of agricultural land degradation and water loss. These objectives cannot be attained without substantial investment, sharing and optimal utilization of appropriate technology and massive efforts to develop human resources. The problems of the SAARC region in the agricultural sector, though different in magnitude, are broadly similar to those of other developing countries. This Meeting can specify the 47.
important parameters within which future efforts of the international community in these key areas should be made. We also look forward to learning from our sister organizations about their various initiatives and priorities in the areas of poverty, food security, agriculture and rural development. It is worth mentioning that under the auspices of UNESCAP, subregional organizations of the Asia-Pacific region have been meeting regularly for the last few years to discuss various issues and strategies. Poverty and hunger have been included in the agenda of these meetings in recent years. Mr Chairman, As is well known, poverty, exacerbated by rapid population growth, has proved to be a daunting element of our food problems and food insecurity. It is, therefore, imperative that any strategy for rapid growth in our food grain production should be accompanied by comprehensive plans and programmes to address the key concern of poverty eradication. Realizing this, the SAARC countries recommitted themselves during the recently concluded Twelfth SAARC Summit in Islamabad to the eradication of poverty from South Asia. The Leaders recognized poverty alleviation as the greatest challenge facing the peoples of South Asia and declared poverty alleviation as the overarching goal of all SAARC activities. The signing of the SAARC Social Charter at the Twelfth Summit is also a watershed development to ensure quality-life for the peoples of South Asia. The South Asian Free Trade Area (SAFTA), establishment of which was decided upon during the same Summit, will also open up new possibilities and opportunities for all sections of the society, including the farming communities of the region. In addition, there are four major regional initiatives in the area of poverty alleviation. First, the reconstituted Independent South Asian Commission on Poverty Alleviation (ISACPA) in its Report set the goals and strategies for accelerated reduction of poverty in South Asia. Second, a Plan of Action on Poverty Alleviation recommended by the Finance/Planning Ministers was endorsed by the Islamabad Summit. Third, SAARC has undertaken preparation of a Regional Poverty Profile (RPP). RPP 2003 had already been submitted at the Twelfth Summit. Work on RPP 2004 is now underway. Fourth, a process is underway to identify suitable regional poverty alleviation priority projects that can be implemented regionally to supplement efforts at the national level to reduce the incidence and severity of poverty. Mr Chairman, It is worth mentioning that as a follow-up of the WFS: fyI, FAO has proposed collaboration with SAARC in the development of regional food security programmes. The proposal is currently under the consideration of SAARC Member States. We hope the next Meeting of the SAARC Technical Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development in May this year will have an opportunity to discuss a Concept Paper on the subject. The SAARC Leaders also directed to make the existing SAARC Food Security Reserve more effective. As you may be aware, the Reserve has not so far proved useful during past occasions of emergencies due to the complexity of its procedures. The last Summit recommended establishment of a Regional Food Bank for which a concept paper is being prepared. This paper will be considered by an Inter-governmental Expert Group. At the recommendation of the SAARC Council of Ministers, the Islamabad Summit proclaimed "Freedom from hunger in the region as an article of faith." With such steadfast commitment from the highest quarters, we are looking ahead towards a more productive and meaningful regional cooperation in these critical areas in the coming years. Mr Chairman, All our national governments have initiated comprehensive programmes to make significant progress to enhance food production and eradicate hunger and poverty. I am convinced that there is a need to create an enabling international environment supportive of our national poverty eradication and food security programmes. We must be mindful of the relevant MDGs in this context. This urgently calls for, among others, a greater flow of development assistance to the developing countries, transfer of technology on preferential and concessional terms to boost agricultural production, significant debt relief, an appropriate reorientation of the economic policies of the major industrialized countries to safeguard the interests of the developing countries, and removal of trade distorting subsidies and other impediments to make agricultural products from developing countries more competitive.
Mr Chairman, Food Security in our countries also requires urgent action to increase the purchasing power of the vulnerable groups to ensure their access to food. For this to happen, income generation through job creation is of critical importance. Actions are also needed to stabilize food prices by minimizing risks and maximizing opportunities of trade based supply. We must also not forget that although chronic hunger should receive most of our attention, food insecurity due to emergencies like natural disasters, to which the SAARC region is particularly prone, should not also go unnoticed. We must be well prepared to face these emergencies through building up of adequate food reserves, development of infrastructure and provision of resources for necessary food imports in times of need. In cases of such emergencies as at other times, the global community must be particularly mindful of the needs of the vulnerable groups. Adequate food assistance and steps to maintain a cost-effective and targeted public distribution system should be a high priority of our national governments, regional and multilateral organizations and our development partners. Mr Chairman, We must place food ­ the first and fundamental requirement for life ­ at the top of our agenda for peace and stability in the world. This Roundtable provides an opportunity to governments, subregional organizations, United Nations agencies, international organizations and our development partners to join the global coalition to eliminate hunger from our planet. I am confident this Roundtable will send a clear message to the international community on the actions required to address the challenges of poverty and food security. Thank you.
STATEMENT BY MR ALEKI F. SISIFA,1 REPRESENTATIVE OF PIF.
INTRODUCTION The need to fast-track elimination of hunger and undernourishment in the world has been at the top of the global agenda in recent years. At the 1996 World Food Summit (WFS), the nations of the world committed themselves to making substantial progress in this area. The world leaders reaffirmed their commitment at the 2002 World Food Summit: five years later, to reduce by half the number of hungry and undernourished people in the world. They also recognised that sustainable progress in poverty eradication is critical to improve access to food. Particular consideration was given to Small Island Developing States (SIDS), which include most of the Pacific Island Countries and Territories (PICTs). One of FAO's first follow-up actions to the 1996 WFS was the preparation of documents on National Strategies for Agricultural Development and Food Security (NSADFS): Horizon 2010 (since updated to 2015). By 2004, with the exception of Nauru, each of the FAO member countries in the Pacific ­ Samoa, Fiji, Tonga, Cook Islands, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, Niue, Kiribati, Palau and Federated States of Micronesia and Tuvalu ­ has produced a NSAFS document. Although Pacific Island governments have endorsed their NSAFS documents, evidence is mixed regarding whether the strategies are influencing prioritisation of agriculture and rural development in the allocation of domestic or donor resources. Furthermore, more recent developments in the international arena need to be considered. Pacific Island Countries and Territories (PICTs) are now formulating strategies and policies to fulfill their Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), which constitute the leading framework for development actions and form the benchmark for measuring development progress. The Millennium Declaration identified the reduction of poverty and hunger as primary development goals for the new millennium. Among the strategies are those aimed at achieving food security.
Director, Land Resources, Secretariat of the Pacific Community.
For the above reasons, FAO has indicated its intention to mount an initiative aimed at co-operating with countries to review and update national strategies for agricultural development and food security. The initiative intends to make use of recent developments that have changed the context in which agriculture operates, such as the World Summit on Sustainable Development and the WFS: fy1 renewal of commitment. In this new context, member countries need to revisit their strategies and policies in order to embody the MDGs and take into account new developments in the international arena. It is at this stage that the involvement of relevant Pacific SREOs/Cs could marshal a broader front of support for PICTs in their effort to implement the policies. Furthermore, their involvement can encourage those that provide policy formulation advice to PICTs to assist PICTs that have yet to formulate such policies. Most PICTs have reported anecdotal evidence of poverty and food insecurity among certain sectors of their societies. Malnutrition has been growing along with increasing incidences of non-communicable diseases. Employment in the rural sector has been declining and social disturbances increasing. However, relevant Subregional Organizations and PICTs have not agreed on indicators of poverty in the context of the Pacific Islands subregion. Suitable indicators have yet to be identified, elaborated and surveyed. Such indicators, when available, would guide Regional and Subregional Organizations in targeting assistance to the more vulnerable groups of their memberships. FAO is presently working with member PICTs using the Food Insecurity and Vulnerability and Information Mapping System (FIVIMS) to help identify food insecure sections and vulnerable members of the population. The South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission is nearing completion of its work to develop a vulnerability index ranking system for countries of the subregion. Concurrently, the Secretariat of the Pacific Community is developing a Geographic Information System that would help map groups affected by poverty and food insecurity at the country level. However, to be of significant use for policy makers of PICTs and for Regional and Subregional Organizations in targeting interventions towards combating poverty and food insecurity, the capacity of national planning and statistics agencies need to be considerably strengthened to regularly gather reliable data and information. International, Regional and Subregional Organizations have therefore not been in a position to specifically target poverty and food insecurity directly where they occur. However, the majority of programmes and projects of the Subregional Organizations involved in assisting rural development and in developing agriculture, forestry and fisheries do help reduce poverty and food insecurity.
PACIFIC SUBREGIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS AND COMMUNITIES Seven inter-governmental organizations have programmes and initiatives supporting rural development and the agriculture, forestry and fisheries sectors in PICTs. They include the Pacific Forum Secretariat (PIFS), Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC),2 the University of the South Pacific (USP)/School of Agriculture (SOA) and Institute for Research, Education and Training in Agriculture (IRETA), Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA), South Pacific Geoscience Commission (SOPAC), South Pacific Regional Environment Programme (SPREP) and the Agriculture Development in the American Pacific (ADAP). FAO, with its Subregional Office for the Pacific Islands (SAPA), is the main international player that provides technical and other assistances to PICTs in the sectors. The Pacific Forum, comprising the Heads of the sixteen self-governing Pacific Island nations, New Zealand and Australia, established the Forum Secretariat (PIFS) as its administrative arm. PIFS undertakes programmes and activities that support and implement decisions of the Forum leaders. In 1995, the Pacific Forum streamlined the role of PIFS into policy advice, programme coordination and advocacy services on development and economic policy, political/international affairs and trade and investment. The Secretariat of the Pacific Community is the subregion's leading technical development agency. SPC work programmes aim to develop the technical, professional, scientific, research, planning and management.
Formerly known as South Pacific Commission.
capability of Pacific Island people. Its programmes are delivered via three major divisions ­ Land Resources, Marine Resources and Social Resources. The University of the South Pacific has three campuses in the subregion and a USP Centre in each member country. The USP has, among others, an Institute of Marine Resources and an Institute for Research, Education and Training in Agriculture (IRETA), which conducts short-term training courses, workshops, seminars, modular training courses in targeted areas and postgraduate research. The Forum Fisheries Agency is concerned with the provision of policy advisory services to its membership on the sustainable management and development of tuna resources in the western and central Pacific Ocean. The FFA staff has a range of technical competencies relevant to the tuna fishery, including national and regional fisheries management planning; economics and marketing; legal services; monitoring, control and surveillance; multilateral treaty management; and information technology and communication. Activities of the South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission directly relating to rural and agriculture development involve water resources use and natural disaster mitigation. The core function of the South Pacific Environment Programme is to provide assistance to protect and improve PICTs' environment and to promote sustainability of development. SPREP's activities that focus on the agriculture sector relate to the impact of agricultural chemical use on the environment. It has technical expertise that assists member countries in dealing with invasive weed species. The Agriculture Development in the American Pacific project serves as a mechanism for the Pacific Land Grant Institutes (universities and colleges) to share and focus resources on priority and common concerns in the "American Pacific" subregion. The Land Grant Institutes include community colleges in American Samoa, Marshall Islands, CMI, Federated States of Micronesia, the Universities of Guam and the University of Hawaii.
COORDINATION OF/AND COLLABORATION AMONG SREOs The differences in membership amongst the Pacific subregional organizations ­ some comprising independent island states only and others including non-independent territories and administrations ­ create potential for duplication and overlap of activities within the mandates of the subregional organizations. The Pacific Forum established the South Pacific Organization for Coordination and Cooperation (SPOCC), now known as the Council of Regional Organizations in the Pacific (CROP) in 1998 to mitigate such problems and in recognition of opportunities that could be achieved through sharing of the region's resources and of collaboration. CROP has an advisory function on policy and operational issues of importance to the region and regional organizations. PIFS is the secretariat of CROP and the PIFS Secretary-General, the Chair. CROP comprises eight intergovernmental organizations: FFA, PIFS, PIDP, SOPAC, SPC, SPREP, South Pacific Tourism Organization (SPTO), and USP. The South Pacific Board for Education Assessment (SPBEA) and Fiji School of Medicine (FSM) are observers. CROP meets annually to discuss its business and reports to the Pacific Island Forum Officials Committee and to respective governing bodies of members. The Land Resources Working Group established by CROP met in 1998 to: determine areas of complementarity and overlap and potential gaps in coverage of existing and proposed regional activities and initiatives in the agriculture sector; recommend procedures for enhancing coordination and cooperation; and review, clarify and advise on development priorities in the agriculture sector. The Land Resources Working Group included the PIF, SPC, USP/SOA and IRETA, SOPAC, ADAP. The FAO Subregional Office for the Pacific Islands is an observer. T h e Land Resources Working Group, in setting guidelines for delineation of activities of the inter-governmental organizations involved in agriculture and forestry research and development, identified lead agencies for specific thematic areas. PIFS was identified as the lead agency for policy and matters relating to trade. USP and IRETA were to lead particularly in the area of education and SPC was to lead 51.
in the other areas and particularly in: plant protection; crop production and diversification; animal health and production; soils; and farming systems.
PROGRAMMES OF PACIFIC SUBREGIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS New initiatives Two new initiatives directly target interventions at rural communities in PICTs and assist in reducing poverty and food insecurity. They are briefly described below. Development of Sustainable Agriculture in the Pacific (DSAP) SPC Land Resources Division (LRD) began implementing this EU funded 6.2 million euro project in November 2003. The overall objective is to improve food security and contribute to developing sustainable agriculture for farm families in participating countries. Initially, participation was limited to the eight Pacific ACP countries of the Lome era (Fiji, Kiribati, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga and Tuvalu), together with two French territories, French Polynesia and Wallis and Futuna. Recently, the EU made available additional funds to include the six new members (Federated States of Micronesia, Cook Islands, Niue, Marshall Islands, Palau and Nauru) of the ACP group that have become signatories to the Cotonou Agreement. The project's purpose is to increase sustainable agricultural production for farm families in participating countries. The purpose would be achieved through activities in four major result areas: establishing improved systems to identify farmers' production problems and solutions; identifying appropriate technologies through on-farm demonstrations; upgrading farmer participatory extension methods and technical skills of NARES and NGOs; and promoting and enhancing capacity in extension communications. DSAP takes an innovative approach to rural development assistance by subregional organizations at the national level. The project adopts a "process approach" leaving specific activities to be formulated through a participatory process involving representation from all stakeholders in national groups to guide project activities in each of the participating countries. Each participating country has a DSAP Research/Extension Assistant (some undertaking formal graduate studies) to spearhead project work. Each country establishes a steering committee that develops, in a participatory manner, a logical framework matrix for national project activities and identifies sites of the interventions. Centrally, a Project Team Leader manages and a Participatory Extension Specialist and Extension/Communication Specialist provide technical support guided by a Regional Steering Committee. Regional Programme for Food Security in the Pacific Islands (RPFS) This initiative in support of poverty reduction and food security of FAO member countries in the subregion has been planned and implementation is about to start. The project is funded by a contribution of the Italian Government of about US$4.5 million to the FAO Trust Fund. The project has two components. The major component of the RPFS is Enhancing Food Production and Security, activities to be implemented in member countries particularly at the community level, on supply side activities identified by them as of highest priority in the agriculture, forestry and fisheries sectors, are to reduce food insecurity. This approach of applying direct development assistance to farmers and communities reflects the wish of PICT governments, expressed in the Communiqué issued by Pacific Ministers of Agriculture at their Fiji meeting in 2003 and by their officials at various meetings convened during the planning of the project. The second component is Strengthening Agricultural Trade and Policy, which focuses on building institutional capacity in trade facilitation related to the establishment of sanitary and phytosanitary standards for agricultural exports. Establishing linkages between relevant regional CROP academic and research/development institutions and specific counterpart institutions in the donor country and involving them in joint implementation will be actively pursued by the project. 52.
DSAP project participation of PICTs (and thus their enhanced ownership of activities) in RPFS will be facilitated by involvement of national steering committees in the planning and implementation of national interventions. A regional steering committee will guide project management. Furthermore the project will benefit significantly from technical assistance provided to participating countries under FAO administered South-South Cooperation (SSC) initiative. The rationale for, and mode of operation of, these two projects are closely related. In addition, the same fourteen PICTs participate in the two projects (French Polynesia and Wallis & Futuna participate in DSAP but not in RPFS, Nauru participates in RPFS but not in DSAP). There are therefore many areas where collaboration between SPC and FAO would add value to, and facilitate implementation of, the two initiatives. Furthermore, the current strength of SPC LRD in Plant Protection makes LRD's collaboration in the second component of RPFS of mutual benefit to the outcomes of both projects. In 2003 the two implementing agencies, FAO and SPC, signed a Memorandum of Understanding to guide collaboration. Other programmes assisting PICTs in the agriculture, forestry and fisheries sectors are as follows. Agriculture Programmes Plant Protection: LRD has always provided major support (more recently with AusAID and EU funding assistance) to PICTs in this area. Currently, the LRD Plant Protection Service (PPS) is active in five areas: Entomology; Plant Pathology; Weed Management (collaborating in some activities with SPREP); Information and Extension with special small groups for fruit fly control and taro beetle management. There are also two regional plant protection groups ­ a separate one for, and with two staff based in Federated States of Micronesia to serve the northern island countries of Micronesia and another takes care of the New Zealand affiliated nations (Cook Islands, Niue and Tokelau). Funds for the PPS have been provided mainly by AusAID, EU, NZAID, ACIAR and SPC core funds. Plant pathology activities include: diagnostic support for PICTs aiming to establish at least one "enabled" technician in each country; pest surveys ­ information gathered facilitate trade; assistance with establishment and operation of plant pathology laboratories in four PICTs; integrated disease management focusing on working with communities on farmer-driven solutions. Entomology activities include: pest surveys to develop pest lists for trade/potential trade commodities; management of major Pacific pests, fruit flies, taro beetle and whitefly; home garden IPM, taro mite control, pheromone control of rhinoceros beetle, and assistance with trading countries in developing pest risk analysis protocols. The Weed management function develops regional and national strategies for control of agricultural and invasive (forestry, environmental) weeds; develops national weed databases and prioritisation for their control. Fruit fly management (formerly supported by UNDP and FAO) is one of PPS's best-known and most successful projects. Current activities include: back-up support for production and use of fruit fly baits; fruit fly eradication has been attempted in the Cook Islands and French Polynesia. Through development of HTFA (High temperature forced air) disinfestations protocols, export constraints have been removed for several key crops ­ Samoa (papaw, breadfruit), Vanuatu (grapefruit), Fiji (chilli), New Caledonia (papaw and lime). The PPS has a dedicated information service. The major current project is the development of a pest list database for the Pacific. The PPS also puts the information on CD and provides ICT training and equipment for national quarantine staff. A Publications service produces a monthly newsletter, information on new incursions and leaflets on specific pests and diseases. New areas of emphasis include development of country ­ specific quarantine awareness materials and pest/weed extension manuals. A plant protection curriculum has been developed for high schools as a way of getting messages through to parents. The Extension group has started the move to participatory extension work, including the identification and management of diseases from the farmers' perspective. The shift has been to carrying out a participatory rural appraisal to establish needs before commencing IPM training. FAO provides technical support and advice to national plant protection and quarantine services of member countries. The FAO regular programme provides support and advice on: the International Plant Protection.
Convention (IPPC); Integrated Pest Management (IPM); Pesticide Management, also promoting the use of Bio-Agents and Bio-pesticides in the region; and EMPRESS, focusing on migratory pests. Crop Improvement: The LRD Crop Improvement Service undertakes development work on planting materials for the most important crops in the Pacific. Collection, conservation and multiplication of banana, taro, coconut and yam planting materials are key activities. The AusAID funded Taro Genetic Resources Conservation and Utilisation (TaroGen) project is implemented by LRD and there are related ACIAR and NZAID funded projects to support development and exchange of disease-resistant taro germplasm. The Regional Germplasm Centre (RGC) provides training on tissue culture methods to scientists in PICTs, as well as distributing upon request tissue-culture germplasm. Duplication of the collection at the USP Alafua campus, Samoa for security purposes is being implemented. Animal Health and Production: LRD's service in this area is small relative to its services in other areas. There are no trained veterinarians in 11 Pacific countries. LRD's Regional Animal Health and Production Service (RAHPS) therefore provides direct veterinary advice and clinical support services to the smaller countries and has initiated a NZAID-funded Para-vet training programme. This latter programme aims to have a number of modular distance-learning units and they have collaborated with USP in trialing its delivery. Other activities of the RAHPS include: animal quarantine; drafting regulations and import protocols; developing animal health databases; disease surveillance activities; and disposal of animal waste. There is a general shift from disease surveillance work to public health. Zoonotic diseases, such as Leptospirosis are the highest priority. Agriculture Policy: FAO provides support to its member countries in their ongoing effort to establish achievable agriculture policies. Key activities have been the development of documents on National Strategy for Agricultural Development and Food Security: Horizon 2015 for member states; convening roundtable meetings on WTO Agreement Provisions, in collaboration with other donors; and providing policy advice to members when requested. Farming Systems and Marketing: An FAO SAPA based Farming Systems Development and Marketing Officer implements regular programme activities to improve farming systems and marketing in support of sustainable livelihoods of farm households in member countries. Within the framework of UNDP projects and FAO TCP projects, advisory and supervisory services (ATS/STS) have been provided to selected countries. Food and Nutrition: The FAO Food and Nutrition regular programme activities cover Food Safety and Quality, Codex Alimentarius, Food Insecurity and Vulnerability Information and Mapping Systems (FIVIMS) and Nutrition Policy. The Food and Nutrition Officer also provides supervisory technical services (STS) and technical advice to member countries on FAO TCP projects. Forestry Programmes The SPC LRD Regional Forests and Trees Programme provides a focal point for collaboration, coordination and implementation, working together with other regional initiatives, towards strengthening national capacity in promoting sustainable land-use, forest management and utilisation in the region. AusAID/NZAID Forests and Trees Project: This project covers all 22 PICTs. The Project closely collaborates with the South Pacific Regional Initiatives on Forest Genetic Resources (SPRIG 2) and the Regional Forests Health Surveillance Project. Other collaborators include USDA Forest Service, CIRAD-Forest, USDA Natural Resource Conservation Service and FAO SAPA. This project contributes to planning regionally and assists countries in drafting relevant regulations. It provides training workshops on agroforestry, non-timber forestry products, forest management and watershed management in various member countries. GTZ Pacific German Regional Forestry programme: This project involves a set of different participatory development activities in defined districts in each of five partner countries ­ Fiji, Samoa, Vanuatu, Niue and Cook Islands ­ with Tonga, Solomon Islands and PNG joining in 2004. In Fiji, the emphasis is on 54.
sustainable forest management in one district and agroforestry elsewhere. In the Cook Islands, the focus is on community management of agroforestry tree resources. In Niue, it is on management of indigenous forests. In Samoa, the focus is on sustainable management of indigenous forests in one district. In Vanuatu, the project works with landowners on managing forestry resources in one island. FAO's effort in forestry concentrates on supporting member countries in their national forest programmes (NFPs). The FAO SAPA Forestry Officer disseminates technical information, advises on specific forestry related development issues and assists in developing projects to strengthen forestry programmes. Fisheries Programmes Oceanic and Coastal Fisheries Programmes: The Oceanic Fisheries Programme of SPC provides a scientific advisory service to PICTs on the status of highly migratory species, primarily the tuna stocks and the pelagic ecosystems that support the major offshore fisheries operating in the region. The programme also provides a broad range of services to assist PICTs in the establishment of sustainable local-based fishing enterprises. The programme has recently been broadened with the addition of a regional aquaculture focal point with AusAID support, and a major subregional enhancement of its reef fisheries assessment capacity through EU support. The focus of FAO assistance in fisheries in the subregion is on conservation, development and management of the subregion's fisheries and aquaculture resources in a sustainable manner. Recent activities have included improvement and consolidation of fisheries statistics, the distribution of publications and in particular, the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries. SUBREGIONAL PRIORITIES AND GAP AREAS IN SUBREGIONAL SUPPORT Priority areas for development at the Pacific subregional level in the agriculture, forestry and fisheries sectors are periodically reviewed and gap areas identified in the biennial meetings of Ministers of Agriculture, the Permanent Heads of Agriculture and Livestock Services (PHALS) and other technical forums. In all PICTs, agriculture plays an important role to varying degrees, in food security and in export trade. In the bigger countries ­ Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, Fiji, Tonga and Samoa ­ agriculture is the backbone of their economies, providing significant foreign exchange earnings and the predominant preoccupation of the rural populations. In the smaller island and atoll countries ­ for example, American Samoa, CMI, Cook Islands, FSM, French Polynesia, Guam, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Nauru, Niue, Palau, Tuvalu and Wallis and Futuna ­ agriculture mainly provides for food security through production at the subsistence and semi-subsistence levels. Similarly, the economic relevance of forestry on the larger high island states ­ Fiji, New Caledonia, PNG, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu ­ is substantial. In the smaller high island states and territories ­ American Samoa, CMI, Cook Islands, FSM, French Polynesia, Guam, Palau, Nauru, Niue, Samoa, Tonga, Wallis and Futuna ­ although economic importance is much less forestry is very important for the population's quality of life through providing construction material, fire wood, food, medicine, raw material for handicraft, erosion control, protection from wind etc. In the atoll countries ­ Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Tokelau and Tuvalu ­ the importance of forests and trees for life quality is even higher, although significantly underrated in macroeconomic indicators than in the other groups. The priority needs in larger countries include, in Plant Protection, strengthening the biosecurity situation and the facilitation of trade (export and import) through harmonising in-country procedures and standards (quarantine, food quality and safety etc.) with those that are internationally accepted. In smaller countries, priority needs are in the prevention of entry of exotic pests and in the control, preferably through organic, IPM or bio-control, of pests that damage food crops. For the larger countries, priority areas in crop production include identifying new crops that have good export market potentials, improving existing genetic material and upgrading the ability to rapidly multiply 55.
planting material of selected crops. Priority needs of smaller island countries lie primarily in encouraging the populations to engage in local food crop production followed by the need to identify potential export crops/markets and to build capacity to multiply selected genetic material. Reflecting the lack of veterinary capacity in PICTs, the priority needs across countries and territories lie in improving the general health of animals. Implementing animal pest surveys to establish national animal health status is of special interest to PICTs that export animal products (Vanuatu and PNG). Building country capacity through training of para veterinary workers is considered of utmost importance by most PICTs. All countries and territories place relatively high priority on animal production, with the larger countries targeting local production of animal feed as a priority development need. In many countries, animal welfare, in particular relating to control of dog populations, is high in the national priority listing. In terms of improved management of soils, the needs of the larger countries are in the development of operations whereby specific fertilisation regimes can be established to improve input/output outcomes of commercial and semi-subsistence systems. For smaller and atoll island countries, the needs encompass sustainability of natural resources and protection of the environment. Given the ever-changing environment of international trade brought about by the creation of the WTO, associated loss of price stabilisation and support schemes for sugar and other commodities by the bigger PICTs, as well as the fragility of many natural resources in all PICTs, comprehensive agricultural policy and strategy development is high in the priority lists of the majority of PICTs. In order to formulate achievable policy and strategy, PICTs need to have access to reliable agricultural statistics and information. Three PICTs (Fiji, PNG and Solomon Islands) are members of WTO, three (Samoa, Tonga and Vanuatu) are in the process of acceding and a number of countries are considering applying to be members. All PICTs are members of the Pacific Island Country Trade Agreement (PICTA). To take advantage of opportunities offered by these trading agreements, PICTs need to identify good opportunities for export trade, and develop capability in complying with the provisions of relevant agreements. Pre-harvest, there are important needs in the areas of identifying new commodities for new and established markets and technologies to improve productivity. Kava and Noni are emerging high-value crops that can play important roles in diversifying the agricultural base. Identifying niche markets, research and establishment of organic crop production and markets are thus priority areas. Equally important are priority needs, expressed in various subregional meetings, in developing value-adding, post-harvest technologies. An important need of atoll island states relates to the lack of interest by the younger people in actively participating in the agro-forestry farming system on which food security of these nations had depended for generations. Furthermore, these countries have expressed in regional meetings the need to improve their atoll farming systems in order to be more productive while remaining friendly to the environment. In forestry, the gradual loss and degradation of forests, forestlands and trees to timber production, agriculture, fuel wood and other local uses are causing serious concern to all PICTs. Concerns include the sustainability both of economically valuable forest and tree resources and of fundamental life support systems such as agricultural land, watershed and habitable terrestrial environments. A recent review of the SPC LRD identified the following as main gap areas:.
Agricultural and natural resource policy research and advice. This is a critical area given the entry to WTO and loss of price stabilisation support schemes for sugar and tree crops by many Pacific economies, along with the fragility of many natural resources in the Pacific. There are opportunities to collaborate with USP Suva economists on agriculture, with F AO bilateral activities and with PIPS on trade. SPC's role could be on agriculture-specific inputs and information dissemination and cross cutting linkages with biosecurity. Agricultural statistics. Good statistics underlie sound policy formulation. Support provided should have the primary purpose of building the capacity for collection, analysis and use of agricultural statistics in PICTs. 56.
Agricultural marketing (complementary to PIFS trade related activities and closely coordinated with the FAO market and farming systems development work) ­ emphasising value-adding technologies and opportunities and post-harvest technologies research to underpin development of export markets. The current focus of crop improvement programmes is on staple root crops and bananas. But these crops have a comparatively minor role in exports of PICTs. Greater focus could be provided on marketing and tissue culture work relating to agricultural diversification and emerging, high-value crops (squash, vanilla, ginger, melons, Indian vegetables, spices and tropical fruits) that are likely to be important in niche export markets.
ASSOCIATION OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS (ASEAN) Mr Keng Yong Ong Secretary General ASEAN Secretariat Mr Rony Soerakoesoemah Senior Officer ASEAN Secretariat H.E. Y.B. Tan Sri Dato Haji Muhyiddin bin Haji Mohd Yassin Minister for Agriculture of Malaysia MALAYSIA Dato Syed Norulzaman Ambassador The Embassy of Malaysia MALAYSIA Dato Siti Balkish Bt Shariff Deputy Secretary General Development Ministry of Agriculture MALAYSIA Haji Milatusamshi bin Imam Nawawi Deputy Director General Farmers Organization Authority (LPP) MALAYSIA Mr Mohd. Zarudin Abdul Razak Director Fisheries Development Authority (LKIM) MALAYSIA Dr Abu Hassan bin Muhammad Ali Senior Veterinary Officer Department of Veterinary Services MALAYSIA Ms Wan Azizah Wan Jaffar Principal Assistant Secretary Ministry of Agriculture MALAYSIA Mr Suleiman bin Ibrahim Senior Principal Private Secretary Office of the Minister of Agriculture Kuala Lumpur MALAYSIA 59 Mr Wan Hanafi bin Wan Mat Senior Assistant Director Economic Planning Unit Prime Minister's Department MALAYSIA Ms Zazali bin Salehudin Principal Assistant Secretary Ministry of Rural Development (KPLB) MALAYSIA H.E. Major General Nyunt Tin Minister for Agriculture and Irrigation of Myanmar MYANMAR Mr Tin Htut Oo Director General, Department of Agricultural Planning, Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation MYANMAR Mr Tun Than Managing Director Myanmar Agriculture Enterprise c/o Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation MYANMAR S O U T H ASIAN ASSOCIATION FOR REGIONAL COOPERATION (SAARC) The Honourable Prakash Chandra Lohani MinisterforAgricultureandCooperatives of Nepal NEPAL Mr Q.A.M.A. Rahim Secretary-General SAARC Dr Hari Krishna Upadhyaya Member (Agriculture) National Planning Commission NEPAL Mr M. Momen Director Office of Secretary General SAARC Mr Yadav Khawal Charge d'Affaires Royal Nepal Embassy NEPAL.
Mr M. Nafees Zakaria Counsellor/Deputy Chief of Mission The Embassy of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan PAKISTAN The Honourable M.K. Anwar Minister for Agriculture of Bangladesh Bangladesh Secretariat BANGLADESH H.E. Mr Shahed Akhtar Ambassador The Embassy of the People's Republic of Bangladesh BANGLADESH Mr Ahdur Rahman Administrative Officer The Embassy of the People's Republic of Bangladesh BANGLADESH PACIFIC ISLANDS FORUM (PIF-FIC) Honourable Young M. Vivian, MP Premier of Niue Office of the Premier NIUE H.E. Hima Takelesi High Commissioner of Niue to New Zealand NIUE Mr Aleki Sisifa Director Land Resources Department Secretariat of the Pacific Community FIJI THAILAND H.E. Mr Somsak Thepsutin Minister of Agriculture and Cooperatives of Thailand Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives THAILAND Dr. Virachai Virameteekul Vice Minister Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives THAILAND Mr Pote Chumsri Thai Mission for FAO Royal Thai Embassy THAILAND.
Dr Adisak Sreesunpagit Secretary-General Agricultural Land Reform Office (ALRO) Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives THAILAND Mr Pinit Korsieporn Deputy Secretary General National Bureau of Agricultural Commodity and Food Standards THAILAND Mr Chaiwat Sittibush Deputy Director General Land Development Department Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives THAILAND Ms Tritaporn Khomapat Director Foreign Agricultural Relations Division Ministry of Agricultural and Cooperatives THAILAND Mr Kasem Prasutsangchan Senior Officer Foreign Agriculture Relations Division Ministry of Agriculture & Cooperatives THAILAND Mr Vichai Vongskul Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives THAILAND Mr Veeris Ammarapala Ministry of Agriculture & Cooperatives THAILAND Mr Boonrod Pattanapaisarn Veterinarian THAILAND Ms Thitiya Panmanee Ministry of Agriculture & Cooperatives THAILAND Ms Benjarai Dharelat Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives THAILAND Ms Pojamaln Leelayoova Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives THAILAND Ms Rungnapa Rungrod Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives THAILAND.
Mr Binoi Suwanahatree Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives THAILAND Mr Noppon Srisuk Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives THAILAND Mr Kitikun Pongnakpan Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives THAILAND Mr Bopitr Amaraphibal Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives THAILAND Mr Thanaporn Sriyakul Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives THAILAND Mr Supawat Khunprarat Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives THAILAND Mr Banphot Hongthong Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives THAILAND Mr Siam Suksomyai Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives THAILAND Mr Paitoon Chetthamrongcha Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives THAILAND SAMOA The Honourable Tuisugaletaua Sofara Aveau Minister for Agriculture, Forestry, Fisheries and Meteorology SAMOA Ms Temukisa Ape Rimoni Assistant Chief Executive Officer for Corporate Services Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, Fisheries and Meteorology SAMOA PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC CHINA H.E. Mr Zhang Baowen Vice Minister of Agriculture 11NongzhanguanNanli Beijing 100 026 CHINA 61.
H.E. Mr Yan Ting'ai Ambassador The Embassy of the People's Republic of China Mr Li Zhengdong Deputy Director General Department of International Cooperation Ministry of Agriculture CHINA Mr Wang Feng Deputy Division Director General Office Ministry of Agriculture CHINA Mr Wang Jinbiao Deputy Director Division of International Organizations Department of International Cooperation Ministry of Agriculture CHINA Mr Qiu Guozhu Officer The Embassy of the People's Republic of China CHINA Ms Sun Liping Interpreter Department of International Cooperation Ministry of Agriculture CHINA INDIA Mr Ramesh Chandra A. Jain Permanent Secretary Department of Agriculture & Cooperation Ministry of Agriculture INDIA THE WORLD BANK Mr Rahul Raturi Sector Manager Rural Development and Natural Resources Department East Asia and Pacific Region World Bank U.S.A.
INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT (IFAD) Mr Cyril Enweze Senior Vice President IFAD Mr Frank Fariello Special Adviser IFAD R E G I O N A L UNIVERSITIES/RESEARCH INSTITUTES UNIVERSITY OF THE SOUTH PACIFIC (USP) Mr Mohammed Umar Director Institute for Research, Extension and Training in Agriculture (IRETA) USP SAMOA I N T E R N AT I O N A L RICE RESEARCH INSTITUTE (IRRI) Mr Ronald P. Cantrell Director General IRRI Mr Duncan Macintosh Spokesperson IRRI A S I A N INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY (AIT) Prof. Jaen-Louis Armand President of Asian Institute of Technology Prof. Gajendra Singh Dean AIT Extension NGOs Mr Nathaniel Don Marquez Deputy Executive Director Asian NGO Coalition for Agrarian Reform and Rural Development (ANGOC) PHILIPPINES.
Mr Biplab Halim Executive Director Institute for Motivating Self-Employment (IMSE) INDIA Mr M. Abdus Sabur Secretary General Asian Resource Foundation THAILAND Ms Sarojeni V. Rengam Executive Director Pesticide Action Network for Asia and the Pacific MALAYSIA E M B A S S I E S AND UN AGENCIES IN THAILAND France Ms Carole Enguehard Assistant to the French Regional Counsellor and Deputy Permanent Representative of France to ESCAP Italy Mr Riccardo Smimmo First Secretary The Embassy of Italy Mr Crescenzo Dell'Aquila Public Relation INEA ITALY Japan Mr Hisao Azuma Executive, Japan FAO Association President, Equine Cultural Affairs Foundation of Japan and Former Senior Vice-President, Japan International Cooperation Agency JAPAN Mr Yoshitake Tsuzuki First Secretary and Deputy Permanent Representative of Japan to ESCAP The Embassy of Japan UN AGENCIES International Labour Organization (ILO) Ms Yukiko Arai Poverty Reduction Analyst ILO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific.
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) Mr Apichai Sunchindah Manager Inter-Agency Support Unit UNDP Ms Tongta Temboonkiat Programme Manager MDG Advocacy & Human Development Analysis UNDP World Food Programme (WFP) Ms Kaori Kawarabayashi Consultant United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Mr Malama Meleisea Regional Adviser, Regional Unit for Social and Human Sciences in Asia and the Pacific UNESCO Principal Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific (PROAP) United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) Mr Bhairaja Panday Deputy Regional Representative for Thailand, Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam UNHCR ORGANIZERS OF THE MEETING ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (ADB) Mr G.H.P.B. van der Linden Vice-President, Knowledge Management & Sustainable Development ADB Mr Yuen-Loh Yee Principal Sector Economist, RSAN, RSDD ADB UNESCAP Mr Kim Hak-Su Executive Secretary ESCAP Mr Raj Kumar Chief, Poverty and Development Division ESCAP.
Mr Yap Kioe Sheng Chief, Poverty Reduction Section ESCAP Mr Miguel Perez-Ludena Poverty and Development Division ESCAP FAO Mr Jacques Diouf Director-General FAO Headquarters Mr He Changchui Assistant Director-General and Regional Representative for Asia and the Pacific FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific (RAP) Mr Hiroyuki Konuma Deputy Regional Representative FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific (RAP) Mr Vili A. Fuavao FAO Subregional Representative and FAO Representative FAO SAPA Mr N.M. Hla Chief Management Support Unit Mr Fillippo Alessi Senior Programme Monitoring Officer Field Programme Development Service Policy Assistance Division (TCA) FAO Headquarters Mr E. Valenzuela Liaison Officer (World Food Day) Unit for Liaison with National Committees (GIDN) General Affairs and Information Department FAO Headquarters Mr S. Syed Chief Policy Assistance Branch for Asia and the Pacific (RAPP) FAO RAP.
Mr D.B. Antiporta Senior Policy Advisor Policy Assistance Branch for Asia and the Pacific (RAPP) FAO RAP Mr S.L. Kang Policy/Programme Officer Policy Assistance Branch for Asia and the Pacific (RAPP) FAO RAP Mr P.K. Mudbhary Senior Policy Officer a.i. Policy Assistance Branch for Asia and the Pacific (RAPP) FAO RAP Mr Hans G. Wagner Senior Animal Production and Health Officer FAO RAP Mr D. de Vleeschauwer Information Officer FAO RAP Mr Kevin McKeen Information Technology Officer FAO RAP Mr H. Carandang Consultant Policy Assistance Branch for Asia and the Pacific (RAPP) FAO RAP.
Mr Sachin Chaturvedi Consultant Policy Assistance Branch for Asia and the Pacific (RAPP) FAO RAP Ms Melissa Mattingly c/o Policy Assistance Branch for Asia and the Pacific (RAPP) FAO RAP Ms Cristina Sriratana Administrative Assistant FAO RAP Phra Atit Road Mr Wichai Nomkhuntode Administrative Assistant FAO RAP Ms Umpaiwan Pipatanavilai Secretary Policy Assistance Branch for Asia and the Pacific (RAPP) FAO RAP Ms Kanjerat Boonyamanop Secretary Policy Assistance Branch for Asia and the Pacific (RAPP) FAO RAP.
