FAO/FishCode Review No. 7.
FIP/FCR7(En).
Creating legal space for community-based fisheries and customary marine tenure in the Pacific: issues and opportunities.
Based on the work of: Blaise Kuem langan Legal Officer Development Law Service FAO Legal Office.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Rom e , 2004.
The designati ons employ ed and the presentation of the m ater ial in this information product do not imply the ex pr ession of any opinion whats oever on the part of the F ood and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the l egal status of any c ou ntr y, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerni ng the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
All rights res er ved . Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information pr oduc t for educ atio nal or other non-commercial purpos es are authorized without any prior written permission fr om the c opyr igh t holders provi ded the sourc e is fully ack nowle dg ed. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purpos es is prohibited without written permission of the c opyr igh t holders. Applicati ons for s uch permission shoul d be addressed to the Chief, Publishing Management Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org.
FOREWORD This document reviews legal aspects of community-based fisheries management (CBFM) and the role of legislation in enhancing CBFM and customary marine tenure in the Pacific. It was prepared on the basis of a literature and legislative review and site visits to the Cook Islands, Fiji, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu in 2003, undertaken by Blaise Kuemlangan (FAO Development Law Service). The visits were made immediately before and following the Secretariat of the Pacific Community Regional Policy Meeting on Coastal Fisheries Management, which was held 17-21 March 2003 in Nadi, Fiji. Legal technical assistance in support of the meeting and preparation of this study was provided through the FAO FishCode Programme under component project GCP/INT/823/JPN, "Responsible Fisheries for Small Island Developing States." The FishCode Review series publishes results of studies, missions, consultations, workshops, meetings and other project activities undertaken through the Programme, in furtherance of its objective of facilitating implementation of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries and related international fisheries instruments and plans of action. Individual numbers in this series are distributed to appropriate governments, regional bodies, meeting participants and Programme partners. Further information on Programme background, publications and activities is available at www.fao.org/fi/fishcode. J. Eric Reynolds Programme Coordinator, FishCode Fisheries Department FAO/UN Rome, Italy www.fao.org/fi/fishcode.
FAO/FishCode Review No.7, Distribution: RAPI SAPA LEGN FI Divisions and Services FI Branch Library.
Interested Nations and International Organizations Interested Non-governmental Organizations.
Acknowledgements.
This study would not have been possible without the valuable assistance of many people in the countries visited by the author and at FAO Headquarters. Special thanks go to the following individuals and groups who facilitated the field visits to undertake research and collect material for the study and for their helpful insights on the subject of CBFM and CMT. In the Cook Islands: Barbara Munro and Nooroa Roi (Ministry of Marine Resources). In Fiji: Maciu Langibalavu (then Director, Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Fisheries and Forestry); Peniasi Kunatuba; participants of the SPC Regional Policy Meeting on Coastal Fisheries Management (Nadi, Fiji,17­21 March 2003, and particularly Semisi Fakahau (Commonwealth Secretariat), Kenneth Mackay (Canada-South Pacific Ocean Development Program), Michael King, Ueta Fa'asili and Aliti Vunisea (SPC), and those who gave overviews at the Nadi Meeting on CBFM in their countries ­ namely, Terry Keju (Marshall Islands), Alifereti Bogiva (FLMMA, Fiji), Sione Leolahi (Niue), Nooroa Roi (Cook Islands), Fatima Sauafea (American Samoa), Etuati Ropeti (Samoa), Kenneth Bulehite (Solomon Islands), Tevita Latu (Tonga), and Graham Nihomo (Vanuatu). In Papua New Guinea: Molean Chapau (Executive Director), Lamiller Pawut (Manager, Monitoring and Enforcement), Augustine Mobiha (Management Advisor), Leban Gisawa (Inshore Manager) and Phillip Polon (Sedentary Manager) of the National Fisheries Authority; Masio Nidung (Senior Legal Officer, Department of Justice and Attorney General); Matthew Wela (Secretary), Anton Benjamin and Twain Pambuai of the Department of Agriculture and Livestock; and Gai Kula (Country Director, Conservation International of Papua New Guinea). In Solomon Islands: Albert Wata (then Permanent Secretary) and Sylvester Diake of the Department of Fisheries and Marine Resources; Gabriel Suri (Lawyer and Chairman of Environment Conservation Action Network, Solomon Islands); and Feleti Teo (Director) and Joel Opnai (Fisheries Management Advisor) of the Forum Fisheries Agency. In Vanuatu: Dorosday Kenneth (Director of Department of Agriculture); Ernest Bani (Head of Environment Unit) and Naviti William (Senior Fisheries Resource Manager) of the Department of Fisheries; Francis Hickey (Vanuatu Cultural Center), and Wan Smolbag. The author is also grateful to: Masanami Izumi (FAO Subregional Office for the Pacific Islands) for facilitating field visits); Eric Reynolds (Programme Coordinator, FishCode) for his consistent effort and encouragement in finalizing the study; Henning Teigene (FAO Development Law Service) for his technical contribution; and to Alacoque Martin for editing the final manuscript. Any errors in this document, however, are solely those of the author.
Kuemlangan, B. Creating legal space for community-based fisheries and customary marine tenure in the Pacific: issues and opportunities. FishCode Review. No. 7(En). Rome, FAO. 2004. 65p. ABSTRACT The legal environment within which community-based fisheries management (CBFM) will function should be examined to determine whether it supports or will need necessary enhancement to support the implementation of CBFM. The question as to whether CBFM is legally sustainable must be asked with regard to the whole legal framework of the State ­ from fundamental laws, such as the constitution, to subsidiary legislation. Amendments to existing legislation or new legislation may be necessary to implement CBFM. There is no blueprint for a CBFM legal framework what number of rights with respect to fish resources should be accorded and what should be the level of participation by the local community. It is important, however, to ensure that the constitutionality of all these aspects is ascertained, and to ensure that enabling legislation for CBFM consider the following issues: security, exclusivity and permanence of rights vested; flexibility of its provisions so as to allow states to exercise choices that reflect their unique needs, conditions and aspirations for CBFM; and the way CBFM harmonizes with the overall fisheries management legal framework. Attaining the right balance in the CBFM legal framework, however, is difficult and depends largely on local circumstances. There is much interest in using customary marine tenure (CMT) as a basis for CBFM in the Pacific Island Countries (PICs). The laws of PICs lend general support to the use of CMT or tradition in fisheries management. Still, only modest efforts in the use of CMT-based community fisheries management in the PICs are observed. Further legislative action can enhance CMT use in community fisheries management. Broad lessons can be drawn from the experiences of some PICs in legislating on CMT or certain of its aspects to enhance CMT use. Government commitment to CBFM generally, and for the role of CMT in the CBFM context with support from interested entities and stakeholders including communities, will complement efforts for promoting sustainable utilization of fisheries resources and improved livelihoods in the PICs. Keywords: community-based fisheries management, customary marine tenure, fisheries legislation, legal frameworks, Pacific Island Countries.
Abbreviations and Acronyms.
CBFM CBNRM CCA CMT FAO FCP FLMMA FSM FSP IAS-USP IMA ITQ LMMA MCS PIC MMR MPA MRAG NGO PNG SIDS SMA SPC SPREP WWF Community-based Fisheries Management Community-based Natural Resources Management Community Conservation Area Customary Marine Tenure Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Fiji Country Programme Fiji Locally Managed Marine Areas Network Federated States of Micronesia Foundations of the Peoples of the South Pacific Institute of Applied Science Programme of the University of South Pacific International Marine Alliance Individual transferable quotas Locally Managed Marine Areas Monitoring, Control and Surveillance Pacific Island Countries Ministry of Marine Resources Marine Protected Area Marine Resources Assessment Group (MRAG Ltd) Non-governmental Organization Papua New Guinea Small Island Developing States Special Management Areas Secretariat of the Pacific Community South Pacific Regional Environment Programme World Wide Fund for Nature.
INT RO DUCTIO N There is increased interest in innovative approaches to fisheries management including the use of limited access regimes and increased stakeholder participation in fisheries management. Limited access regimes include property or rights-based regimes (FAO 2002). The collective property regime may involve the communal management of resources whereby a community collectively enjoys the rights to access and extraction of the resources. Creation and assignment of rights to communities create economic concerns w hic h in turn stimulate an interest in sustaining and protecting these rights w ith the view to achieving, inter alia, sustainable resource use. The institutionalization of a collective property rights regime or increased stakeholder participation, such as in community-based fisheries management (CBFM see Box 1) in any jurisdiction, raises legal issues that should be addressed (Kuemlangan and Teigene 2003). There has been much discussion of community- or village-based management of fisheries in the Pacific Island Countries (PICs) 1 for comparatively the same amount of time, if not more, as there has been discussion on CBFM w or ld-w ide. Of particular significance in the Pacific context is the documented existence of customary marine tenure (CMT) or traditional management of the resources in the marine areas, in most if not all PICs. Indeed, the existing body of literature trumpets the potential role of customary marine tenure in PICs, or generally recommend that traditional practices form the basis of management approaches in the Pacific, particularly in coastal fisheries. Yet other reports herald the success of use of CMT in a number of these countries. Generally, it can be said that CMT or traditional management practices as found in the PICs w ould be relevant and should play a pivotal role in fisheries management. The push for use of CMT in contemporary fisheries management in the Pacific is consistent w ith global trends in CBFM. This is a brief study that primarily looks at the legal aspects of CBFM and the role of legislation in enhancing CBFM and CMT. It w as prepared on the basis of a literature and legislative review and site visits to the Cook Islands, Fiji, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu in 2003. The visits w er e made immediately before and follow ing the SPC Regional Policy Meeting on Coastal Fisheries Management, w hic h was held 17-21 March 2003 in Nadi, Fiji. Legal technical assistance in support of the meeting and preparation of this study was provided through the FAO FishCode Programme under component project GCP/INT/823/JPN, " Res pons ible Fisheries for Small Island Developing States." The study is presented in three main parts, together w ith an Introduction and Conclusion. Part A discusses the broader subject of CBFM and the significance of considering associated legal aspects. It is a synopsis of the findings by Kuemlangan and Teigene (2003), ho elaborate the argument that it is important to ensure that CBFM is legally grounded or w ill otherw is e need legislative support in implementation. 2 At this general level of discussion, legal aspects of resource governance in PICs are draw n on, w her e appropriate, to demonstrate how consideration of these issues could be dealt w ith at the country level.
PICs here refers to the dev eloping countries members of the Forum Fisheries Agency viz the Cook Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Marshall Islands, Kiribati, Nauru, Niue, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuv alu, and Vanuatu.
2 The f irs t section of this study, from the introduction to the discussion of the legal aspects of CBFM, is an adapted v ers ion of the paper entitled, "An ov erv iew of legal issues and broad legislativ e considerations for community based f is heries management" by Kuemlangan and Teigene (2003) presented at the Second Large Riv er Symposium (LARS2).
FAO/FishCode Review No.7.
Part B briefly review s the status and progress in pursuing CMT-based community fisheries management in selected PICs. The review is carried out in the context of brief legislative history and the current fisheries management framew or k. It provides a synopsis of the policy, legal and physical environments w ithin w hic h CMT regimes are established and operate and analyses how the recognition and application of CMTs are adapted to the unique situations of each country. Part C of the study identifies possible strategies for enhancing the use of CMTs. Proposals are also submitted in respect of the role of legislation in facilitating the desired progress in enhancing use of CMT in contemporary fisheries management.
Community-based fisheries management.
For the purposes of this study, community-based fisheries management is used to refer to the com an a gem e nt arrangement whereby villages or other communal groupings are the primary partners and principal initiators of management action for the inshore fisheries in a specified locality. Com an a gem e nt is a generic term covering a variety of management arrangements that involve resource users or owners in the management process. Such arrangements will have varying degrees of intervention by the government. These arrangements may include: the control of decision-making at the local level by government; management authority is delegated or transferred to resources users; resource owners exercise management authority with technical advice or assistance of government. The form of partnership depends on the desired long-term objectives. Benefits normally associated with participatory approaches to management include: (a) greater reliability and accuracy of data and information; (b) more suitable and effective regulations; (c) enhanced acceptability of and compliance with management measures; (d) reduction in enforcement costs; (e) reduction in conflicts; and (f) strengthened commitment to and participation by stakeholders (FAO 1997).3.
Section 3.3 of FAO Fisheries Technical Guidelines for Responsible Fisheries on Fisheries Management, No. 4, Rome, 1997. See also def init ion of co-management by Abdullah, Kuperan and Pomeroy, Transaction Costs and Fisheries Co-Management, Fisheries Co-Management - A Worldwide Collaborativ e Research Project: http://www.co-management.org/ and Fikret Berkes, Robin Mahon, Patrick McConney, Richard Pollnac, and Robert Pomeroy, Managing Small-Scale Fisheries ­ Alternative Directions and Methods.
PART A. OVERVIEW OF L EGAL ISSUES AND L EGISLATIV E CONSIDERATIONS FOR CBFM.
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF CONSIDERING L EGAL ASPECTS OF CBFM.
The implementation of any community-based natural resource management (CBNRM), including CBFM, requires that the legal environment w ithin w hic h CBNRM functions be examined to deter mi ne w hether such legal environment supports or w ill need enhancement to support the implementation of CBNRM. It is best that such examination take place before or w hen CBNRM is being considered for utilization or trial (Lindsay 2001, Kuemlangan and Teigene 2003). 4 The need to have prior examination of legal issues is supported by findings indicating the follow ing. · · Effective implementation of CBFM systems depends on supporting legislative framew or k (Berkes 1994, Ruddle 1994); CBFM systems are successful in jurisdictions like The Philippines and Japan w her e a favourable legal environment exists (Alcala and Vande Vusse 1994, Ruddle 1994). In respect of traditional community-based marine resource management systems, the functional systems recorded exist in jurisdictions that accord them legal recognition and are protected by government (Karlsen 2001, Pomeroy et al 2001, Ruddle 1998). Prior examination can pre-empt and avoid legal challenges that could have adverse consequences.5 Constitutional Basis for CBFM.
A principal consideration in implementing CBFM is to ascertain w hether there is legal basis for CBFM in the fundamental law s of the land, (e.g. the Constitution or organic law). If the fundamental law s stipulate that CBFM in general, or certain prerequisites of CBFM are not possible, then CBFM in its fullest sense cannot be established legally. The question of constitutionality particularly relates to certain aspects of CBFM such as, for example, w hat number of rights, access or powers and responsibilities w ith respect to management of the fish resources (i.e. level of participation) should be accorded to the local community. One of the principal considerations of such review is whether the fundamental law s allow for the allocation of property and use rights. The answ er is often found in national Constitutions, either addressed directly or indirectly. Where a Constitution neither states explicitly the validity of allocating property or use rights nor prohibits such allocation, it can be safely deduced that property and use rights may be allocated under subsidiary legislation for as long as these legislation are gauged in ter ms that are not inconsistent w ith the Constitution.
See also The World Bank. 1999. Report from the International CBNRM Workshop, Washington D.C., 10-14 May 1998. URL: http://www.worldbank.org/wbi/conatrem, which discusses considerations f or establishing community bas ed natural resource management (CBNRM). The report underscores the legalising of institutions as a basic requirement for establishing CBNRM. For example, in Iceland the ITQ-based fisheries management system introduced by the 1984 Fisheries Act was f ound to be unconstitutional. This may be an extreme example and one that relates more to the issue of indiv idual transf erable quotas. Howev er, it holds a valuable lesson for policy- and decision-makers that innov at iv e approaches to management, including rights-based management, are rev iewed f rom all perspectives and that they are f ound to be legally functional in the national context before they are comprehensiv ely applied.
On the other hand, it w ould naturally be problematic to allocate property rights or other use rights ow ing to constitutional constraints. Where the Constitution or fundamental laws stand in the way of the allocation of such rights the political w ill to amend these law s must be mustered. The task w ould be less onerous if it were to be already decided as government policy that CBFM be established. The question of w hether Pacific Island Constitutions support CBFM, or the broader issue of whether w ider public participation is encouraged by Pacific Constitutions, w ill generally receive a positive answ er . As w ill be demonstrated later, a majority of Pacific Constitutions expressly allow some form of CBFM, or otherw is e do not expressly prohibit CBFM systems to be established. A1.2 The Fundam ent al Legal Basis and Decentralization.
CBFM could be implemented through a decentralization framew or k. Decentralization is normally sanctioned by fundamental law s such as the Constitution. Where such law s exist, it should be ascertained as to how CBFM is facilitated through the decentralization structures in place. In the Pacific Islands region, countries like Papua New Guinea (PNG), Solomon Islands and Vanuatu that have a decentralized form of government w ould need to consider how their Constitution and laws relating to decentralization distribute pow ers for resource management, and how CBFM could fit into these legal structures. The same can be said of countries w ith federal government systems, such as the Federated Stated of Micronesia (FSM), Marshall Islands and Palau, particularly w her e the state governments rather than the central (federal) government have jurisdiction over coastal fisheries areas where CBFM is most likely to be utilized. A1.3 The Need for Enabling National Legislation: Principal Considerations.
Enabling legislation or enhancement of existing legislative framew or k is vital to implementation of CBFM if there are no provisions that clearly provide for the operational implementation of CBFM. As is noted above, such legislation or enhanced legislative framew or k should be consistent w ith fundamental law s and should elaborate basic constitutional principles relating to CBFM. The legislation must ensure security and enforceability of a right and provide for site-specific delegation of some management responsibility, either on an indefinite basis or for a finite period. 6 The CBFM legislative framew or k should set out the rules by w hic h local institutions can interact w ith an outsider. CBFM must naturally exist inside its larger legal environment and be linked w ith sovereign authority, w hic h is the State, and thus needs a legal status w ith which outsiders can recognize and interact. CBFM legislation should provide protection for local institutions from trespass and the criminal behaviour of outsiders. The CBFM gives legal recognition to community-based rules, and commands conformity by the public to those rules.
A balance is normally sought through this mechanism f or ensuring that the State-lev el concerns f or efficiency in f is heries management and the local-level concerns f or self -gov ernanc e, self-regulation and active participation are realised while defining the extent of their mandates.
Community rules, w hic h are hierarchically low er , can not define the limits of State pow er . Such a role w ill have to be performed by national CBFM legislation. The extent to w hic h the State w ill respect local autonomy, and w her e and under w hat conditions it w ill retain the pow er to intervene, should be spelled out in CBFM legislation. 7 CBFM law must also provide protection for individuals against the abuse of local power. It should provide basic guidelines for protection of wider social interests, such as environmental protection. Where a broad spectrum of rights are allocated to the local community, this question surfaces strongly. In a nutshell, specific legislative issues relating to CBFM include the need to ensure that the legal framew or k clearly states: (a) security and enforceability of a right; (b) the creation of ability and opportunity for rights-holders to seek redress for violation of security and interests in the rights allocated; (c) the nature and extent of recognition of locally promulgated rules; (d) rules for interaction w ith other stakeholders; (e) rules for interaction w ith the State which includes the limits and conditions for State intervention; (f) protection of individuals against abuse of "local" power; and (g) protection of wider interests, e.g. environment. These issues need to be addressed to ensure that the required features of a legal framew or k for a rights-based management regime, namely security, exclusivity and permanence of rights, are incorporated (Box 2).
Main features of CBFM legislation Security is the ability for the holder of rights to withstand challenges to such rights. It involves: the nature of rights allocated, which cannot be alienated or changed unilaterally and unfairly; the enforceability of rights against the State, including local government institutions; the boundaries of the resources to which the rights apply; who is entitled to claim membership in a CBFM group; and recognition of the holder of the rights. Exclusivity is the ability to hold and manage the right without unlawful interference, which can also occur through regulations, license conditions, gear, area and time restrictions etc; Permanence is the time span of rights allocated. The term for holding the rights allocated could be perpetual but if the right is not held in perpetuity, the duration of rights should be clearly spelled out and is sufficient for the benefits of participation to be fully realized.
Security, exclusivity and permanence features of CBFM legislation are briefly described as follows.
An optimal legislative framew or k for CBFM should be flexible. Legislations must enable community-based managers to exercise choice that reflects their unique needs, conditions and aspirations. Regulators must be able to decide and review management objectives in CBFM and the rules used to achieve those objectives, the manner in handling recognition of local groups, the definition of CBFM units and areas of jurisdiction. Ultimately, a flexible CBFM legislative framew or k must allow for the reflection of change in policy and is preferably a framew or k law which allow s ease of amendment or detailed mechanisms to be set out in regulations. Finally, the legislative framew or k must integrate CBFM in the general fisheries management legal framew or k. This sets out, inter alia, the clear status, relationship and role of CBFM in the overarching policy framew or k and decision- mak ing process, management planning, the decision rules for total fishing effort (e.g. national and local total allow able catch), regulatory pow ers and structure of the management author ity , and local monitoring, control and surveillance (MCS) pow ers in the context of national MCS programmes.
7 From a property rights regime perspectiv e, this touches upon the f undam ent al question of who owns the natural resources. Most fishing nations that implement a rights-based regime retain the power to allocate, and withdraw rights and change the regulations governing their administration. If the rules gov erning a rights-based regime are explicit in the form of legislation, it is less problematic in administering them and def lec t ing legal challenges.
Summ ar y of Legal Issues and Im plicat ions of CBFM.
The prevailing lesson here is that it is best that all implications of CBFM, including policy, technical, institutional and legal aspects are review ed before CBFM is implemented. Plans, trials and the results of the trials in the application of CBFM are site-specific. Given this, any law that is enacted for establishing CBFM should preferably be a "framew or k" law . The framew or k law must primarily enable the use of CBFM through its provisions that ensure security, exclusivity and permanence for any rights that may be allocated. How ev er , the legal framew or k should also, as a minimum, ensure that pow ers are vested or entities are designated to invoke CBFM w hen the need arises. The provisions of the framew or k law that provide for these must allow : · the designation of communities that w ill be involved in CBFM and that such communities may be allocated rights and responsibilities in fishing and fisheries management; choices in the manner in w hic h designation of communities w ill be effected; choice in demarcation of areas for CBFM; and choices in the institutional or organizational framew or k for CBFM.
Above all, the legal framew or k for CBFM must be practical and flexible in effect to respond to changing needs and priorities. Ultimately, it is a question of balance. Attaining that required balance how ev er is difficult and depends largely on local circumstances (also see Box 3). It is advisable that the implementation of CBFM is undertaken through a multidisciplinary approach. Such approach implies that projects for the introduction of CBFM should entail, inter alia, sound planning, trials and review s of the results of the trials, plans and objectives which w ill need a generous time period for project implementation. The CBFM initiative w ill also require the commitment of adequate financial and other resources for its activities.
The process and result of legislating CBFM: The Tonga case (Kuemlangan 2000).
The review of the Tonga fisheries legislation in 2000 incorporated a framework for CBFM. The legislative review and drafting process took into account, inter alia, the following facts and considerations: · · The Constitution was silent on the issue of CBFM but it did not expressly prohibit the establishment or implementation of CBFM. Lack or absence of authoritative literature or documentation on customary marine tenure (CMT). These was a study done on traditional shell collection practices which was of limited relevance only to guide the potential use of CMT in fisheries management. Lack of comprehensive programmes or strategies for implementation of CBFM. One trial project only on CBFM had been carried out in a region of Tonga implemented by the government authorities responsible for environment. Strong support for CBFM was noted but there were no clear instructions on the institutional or operational aspects of for implementing CBFM. There was also no clear understanding of what the CBFM concept was in the Tongan context. No capacity and resources to initiate and manage CBFM within the Ministry of Fisheries. Existing local-level governments in the form of Town and District Officers (who were an extension of central authority) governed by the Town Officers Act and the District Officers Act, respectively. Town and District Officers had powers to make by-laws at town and district level. The issue was whether to formulate a new institutional arrangement or use/involve the existing local-level institutions.
The legislative provisions in the principal Act (the Fisheries Management Act 2002) merely vest powers to establish CBFM and facilitate future detailed regulation. The provisions concerning CBFM are as follows: Section 4 (l) - Principle of practicable, broad and accountable participation (conducive to CBFM) to be taken into account in the exercise of management powers under the Fisheries Management Act. Section 7 - Consultation with "coastal communities" in preparation and review of fisheries management plans. Section 13 ­ Creation of Special Management Areas (SMA). An SMA or part thereof can be allocated to be under the management responsibility of coastal communities. Section 14 - Designation of coastal communities ("coastal community" is not defined so as to allow use of existing community organizations, inclusion of non-coastal communities or a change to a prevailing definition of "coastal community"). Consultation is also required in the designation of coastal communities. Section 15 - Regulations can be made for management of a specific SMA or part thereof which is allocated and which is designated to a coastal community. Section 16 ­ Any authorization (e.g. licence) for fishing in a SMA which has been designated to a coastal community is issued only after prior consultation with the coastal community concerned. Section 101 (b) - Regulations for administering CBFM (i.e. that relates to the general administration of coastal communities etc.) can be promulgated in the future.
PART B. CUST OM ARY MARINE T ENURE AS T HE BASIS FOR CBFM IN T HE PACIFIC Many prominent scientists and w r iter s have testified on the prevailing existence of customary marine tenure (CMT ­ see Box 4) in the PICs. They have noted its co-existence with formal fisheries management regimes and its relative success in areas w her e formal fisheries management regimes often fail, ow ing to shortcomings of these conventional top-dow n management approaches.
Customary marine tenure.
In the context of this study, "customary marine tenure" has the meaning given to it by Ruddle, K. Hviding, E. & Johannes, R.E. (1992), where: "customary" refers to a system that emerges from firmly traditional roots and has continuous and meaningful links with the past as it adapts to handling contemporary issues; "marine" refers to the system as dealing with coral reefs, lagoon, coast and open sea and including islands and islets contained in this overall sea space; and "tenure" refers to a social process of interacting activities concerning control over territory and access to resources.".
It is now widely agreed that CMT, as found in the PICs, holds valuable lessons for tropical fisheries management elsew her e. It is also argued that CMT should play a pivotal role in contemporary fisheries management in the Pacific.8 The basic formal recognition of CMTs provided by the legal framew or ks of many of the PICs, as partly summarised the Annex to this document, adds impetus to the argument that they can play a valuable role in contemporary fisheries management across the region. Such recognition provides the primary basis for use of CMT in the respective jurisdictions. It is reasonable to expect that CBFM, as may be implemented in PICs, w ould be founded on or influenced by CMTs in these countries. Pulea (1993) also provides a fair overview of the legal provisions of the Pacific relating to CMT and management systems. That overview remains relevant. How ev er , the question of how use of CMT can be enhanced in contemporary fisheries management in the Pacific and further facilitated by legislation remains largely unansw er ed. This study also presents elements and options for advancing the case of CMT-use through legislation in the Pacific, and hopefully elsew her e, through desk case studies of the legal framew or k of the selected jurisdictions supplemented by the findings made in short site visits. The choice of particular PICs' experiences w ith CMTs for review in this study is deliberate and is based on the fact that few of the PICs have implemented new legislation 9 or use CBFM. For example, Palau has potent provisions in its legal framew or k dealing w ith recognition of customary laws and the role of traditional governance systems. This presents an adequate basis for going to the next level of implementing fisheries management through communities using a mix of scientific information to influence management decisions and actual fisheries management or conservation measures that are issued and enforced through the traditional governance structures. Despite this optimal legal setting in Palau, the importance of CBFM based on traditional governance systems w as not seriously considered.
See f or example Johannes 1981, Hv iding and Ruddle, 1991, Johannes and MacFarlane 1991, Doulman 1992, Ruddle, Hv iding and Johannes 1992, Fong 1994 and Ruddle 1998 who argue that CMT should be an integral part of f is heries management in the PICs.
Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Nauru, Marshall Islands and Tonga enacted new fisheries legislation in the late 1990s and early 2003.
until recently, w hen attempts w er e made to involve communities in establishing marine protected areas. This study encourages a closer look at w hat legal framew or ks provide for use of CMTs, such as in the case of Palau, and provides some suggestions as to how this basic foundation can be harnessed for actual utilization of CMT in contemporary fisheries management in PICs.
OVERVIEW OF SEL ECT ED CASES OF RECOGNITION OR UTILIZATION OF CMT IN THE PACIFIC The Cook Islands.
B1.1.1 Legal recognition of CMT and significant traditional m anagement practices in the Cook Islands The Cook Islands Constitution, the supreme national law , makes no mention of custom or traditional laws and their role although the Cook Islands Act 1915 refers to the recognition of "the ancient customs and usage of the Natives of the Cook Islands" in deter min ing native title and rights in land 10 as w ell as land succession rights.11 The Act does not recognize that Cook Islanders can ow n land below the line of high water mark. This is a significant derogation of the role of custom and the concept of land ow ner s hip in custom w hic h, in the Cook Islands, includes ow ner s hip over land, w ater , sea areas, reefs and shelves (Munro 1996, Crocombe 1961). Despite the substantial lack of formal recognition in fundamental law , island custom or traditional nor ms are part of the social fabric of society and influences every day life mannerisms of Cook Islanders, particularly in the outer islands. For mal but indirect recognition of the value of traditional forms of governance and laws is accorded through legislation in relative ter ms . Such recognition is provided inter alia by the Constitution, in establishing the house of Arikis, 12 the enactment of the Rarotonga Local Government Act and the Outer Islands Local Government Act. Of more relevance to fisheries management is the Marine Resources Act which accords powers to Island Councils to pass by-laws for the management of fisheries. While the institutional structures for governance as established by the Rarotonga Local Government Act, the Outer Islands Local Government Act and the Marine Resources Act are introduced institutions, many individuals that are elected to hold offices within these structures are often traditional Chiefs and other titled persons, although this practice is diminishing. 13 The noticeable re-emergence and use of customary forms of fisheries management, particularly Ra'ui (Cook Islands traditional seasonal closure)14 have occurred only recently in Rarotonga although it has been practiced along w ith other forms of traditional-based management measures in the outer islands for years, both prior to and since first contact.15.
Cook Islands Act, section 422. Ibid, section 446 Constitution, Article.
Munro B, 2003, Personal communication.
"Ra'ui" is a Rarotongan word f or a seasonal closure or ban. In the context of this study, it is effectiv ely a marine protected area or reserve.
Crocombe notes in 1961 that Raui is used occasionally in Rarotonga and quite f requent ly in the outer islands. See Crocombe 1961 page 118-119.
The Ra'ui today is described as a traditional form of community-based resource management that has similarities to marine reserves whereby the harvesting of marine species in an area is prohibited for a designated period. Ra'ui w as often used as a customary prohibition on the taking of certain products from all lands of the tribe and the taking of lagoon fish in order to preserve and accumulate supplies for a coming festivity (Crocombe 1961). Ra'ui is put in place by the traditional Leadership Council, the Te Koutu Nui in response to low stocks of fish and invertebrates so as to allow these stocks to rejuvenate (Raumea 1999, Sayw ood et al 2000). When a Ra'ui is declared, there is a traditional ceremony, w her e signs are unveiled. The signs declare an area to be Ra'ui and are placed on the road side at the boundar ies of the Ra'ui and also in the w ater .16 Compliance w ith Ra'ui is achieved through basic aw ar enes s and pressure on people to fish in other areas w hic h are easy to establish ow ing to the fact that the community lives on a small island and w or d of mouth is an effective medium of communication. Today, a w ider public aw ar eness of the Ra'ui is accomplished through the media. The use of the Ra'ui in Rarotonga17 in 1998 w as at the initiative of Island Councils. The last recorded Ra'ui in Rarotonga prior to 1998 w as in the 1950's. In February 1998 five Ra'ui were put in place around the island of Rarotonga most of w hic h lasted for tw o years. The 1998 Ra'ui were opened briefly to allow some harvesting and then re-closed. The Rarotongan Ra'ui areas increased to eight in 2002 and some previously established ones expended in size. There has also been similar use and expansion of the Ra'ui to outer islands. Aitutaki established their Ra'ui in 2000 w hic h covers 12 percent of the lagoon. There are recordings of earlier use of Ra'ui in other outer islands. Pukapuka for example, is noted to have used Ra'ui in post contact years in the 1980s (Allen 1980, Andrews 1987) and in 1996 (Munro 1996).
Map of Rarotonga, Cook Islands show ing declared Ra'ui in 2002*.
*Source: Say wood et al 2002.
The use of signs f ollows custom but current practice and materials are modern v ers ions of the old practice of using a coconut leaf tied to a tree on the path leading to the prohibited area. See Crocombe 1961, p. 118.
Rarotonga is the largest island of the Cook Islands group and is also the capital of the Cook Islands.
The Ra'ui is an effective marine resources conservation and management mechanis m. The resource assessments that w er e done on the Rarotonga reef areas in 1998, 1999, and 2002 covering also the Ra'ui areas showed a significant increase in reef fish and commercial fish resources (e.g. Trochus) in the Ra'ui areas compared w ith control sites (non-Ra'ui areas).18 At the moment Ra'ui is not enforced through the formal law enforcement system. Compliance is achieved through community pressure and respect for customs w hic h are perpetuated by legal recognition and continued role of traditional governance institutions. In Pukapuka, the village law s or village-imposed Ra'ui are endorsed by the legally established Island Council. The same law s and Ra'ui, if breached, are similarly enforced, particularly if they affect the whole island as opposed to affecting only one village. The sanctions used are traditional sanctions.19 Opportunity exists to impose fines and other penalties under Island Council bylaw s or national laws but it appears that it is often unnecessary to resort to this option due to a high incidence of compliance or effectiveness of traditional sanctions (Munro 1996). B1.1.3 Current fisheries m anagement framework and the role of CMT in the Cook Islands.
The Marine Resources Act 1989 is the cornerstone of the Cook Islands' management framew or k for the exploitation and management of the fisheries resources. The Act governs the management of fishing primarily through the mechanis ms of designated fisheries and management plans, and the control of fishing by both domestic and foreign fishing vessels through licensing. The Act also provides for conservation through prohibition of fishing for certain species or using certain fishing methods, leasing of land for aquaculture, scientific research and test fishing operations and broad regulation making pow er s to give effect to the Act. The Ministry of Marine Resources administers the Act. The most interesting and significant features of the Marine Resources Act are the provisions relating to designated fisheries, local fisheries committees and the establishment and functions of the Island Councils. These features are briefly explained as follow s . · Designated Fisheries. The Minister may author iz e a fishery as a "designated fishery" where it is determined that such fishery: (a) is important to the national interest; and (b) requires management and development measures for effective conservation and optimum utilization. For each designated fishery a fisheries plan for management and development must be prepared and kept under review . Local Fisheries Comm it tees . The Secretary may appoint a Local Fisheries Committee in any island to advise on the management and development of fisheries in relation to that island. The functions of a Local Fisheries Committee shall be to: (a) advise the Secretary on issues related to the management and development of fisheries in relation to the island; and (b) make recommendations to the local Island Council w ith respect to the adoption or amendment of by-laws regulating the conduct of fishing operations and the issuing of fishing licences for any designated fishery of the island. Power of Island Councils to recommend the promulgation of by-laws. Each Island Council may recommend the promulgation of by-law s in respect of any designated fishery of the island in accordance w ith the procedures set out in Section.
See: Ponia, Raumea, R oi, Maki kir iti and Turua 1998; Raumea 1999; and, Saywood, Tur ua and Maki kir iti 2002.
Munro (1996) reports that the harshest traditi onal s ancti on that may be us ed is akatamariki, which is to reduce a person's adult status to that of a child. The features of the child's status are: the offender's share of food, money, etc are under the control of the adult man or women (mother/father); the offender is not allowed to participate in village acti vities; the offender is not allowed to attend village meetings; the offender is not allowed to speak or contribute ideas; the offender cannot hol d any island/village title; and the offender cannot participate in elections of a leader or repres ent ati ve.
15 of the Outer Islands Local Government Act 1987. Every by-law recommended for promulgation under this section must be consistent with the relevant provisions of the fisheries plan and the Marine Resources Act 1989 and any regulations made under the Act. The by-law recommended for promulgation under this section must be officially approved by the Minister. There is opportunity w ithin the management framew or k established under the Marine Resources Act to formalize all fisheries management arrangements w hic h will in turn establish management measures (including Ra'ui) through delegated authority in Island Councils, or through the national fisheries administration by w ay of local fisheries committees. No reference in the Act is made to the use of CMT, or traditional know ledge generally, as a basis for the management measures or regulations adopted by Island Councils through by-law s or the Local Committees. How ev er , ample opportunity exists through these formal mechanisms for decisions or by-laws to be influenced by such traditional practices, or for the incorporation of CMT concepts such as Ra'ui into by-law s . For example, village laws based on CMT that affect the w hole island and w hic h w er e established by traditional governance institutions are also recognized and enforced by the Island Council in Pukapuka (Munro 1996). The prevailing practice of the Ministry of Marine Resources (MMR) is to focus national fisheries management effort on offshore fisheries, particularly tuna. Coastal fisheries fall under the aegis of Island Councils. It is left largely to the Island Councils to take initiatives in fisheries management although, as pointed out above, it is possible in theory for MMR to intervene on the basis of the Marine Resources Act. Indeed, the involvement of the MMR in coastal fisheries management to date w as on the initiative of the representatives of the Island Councils and traditional leaders w ho make the first approaches to MMR for technical assistance. The Island Councils have often relied on MMR for such advice. 20 The MMR's role in the context of the Ra'ui, has been to perform coordinating and support services to traditional conservation. The most important contribution is providing technical and scientific data through research and surveys on resources in areas under Ra'ui. It should be noted that the Ra'ui system in the age of contemporary fisheries management in the Cook Islands has been successful because it also received considerable support from MMR. Allow ing the practice of traditional fisheries management systems that w or k w ithout having to exert control or influence appears to be the principle upon w hic h the MMR operates in dealing w ith fisheries management issues in coastal areas. Observations Despite the limited or indirect reference to CMT or aspects thereof in Cook Islands law , there appears to be de facto acceptance of application of certain aspects of custom in contemporary fisheries resources conservation and management. Current fisheries legislation provides the opportunity for modern fisheries management to be influenced by CMT through the recognition of established local governance institutions in the form of the Island Council w hic h is most likely to comprise traditional leaders. This is evidently the case as can be seen from the establishment of Ra'ui by certain Island Councils and by-law s that have been adopted by these Island Councils ( Munr o 1996). The current fisheries legislative and management situation imply a comfortable co-existence and application of modern formal laws and customary norms in the Cook Islands. There is acceptance of a formal contemporary fisheries management framew or k that is prescriptive, and the re-emergence and application of CMT or aspects of CMT at the initiative of Island Councils or communities.
Official Ministry of Marine Resources Pamphlet 2000, Barbara Munro and Nooroa Roi 2003, Personal communication.
In practice, MMR has provided, and w ill continue providing, technical assistance to the Island Councils in fisheries management and encouraging use of the Ra'ui but only on the invitation of the Island Councils. There appears to be no desire at the moment to change the status quo although it is expected that in the future, by-laws promulgated by Island Councils w ill formalize some aspects or principles of CMT but that the flexibility to resort to pure forms of CMT w hic h is not formalized is possible. The ready reception of legal incorporation of customary decision-making institutions, such as the house of Ariki, and existing local government institutions, such as the Island Councils that can be constituted by traditional title holders, may be evidence of continued respect for and relevance of these institutions among modern Cook Islands. These legal incorporations also ensure a certain degree of relevance and future use of CMT in the Cook Islands. The success seen in the use of Ra'ui in inshore fisheries management further strengthens the chances for continuation of CMT use. This does not mean that the survival of traditional management systems in Cook Islands w ill not be tested ( Munr o 1996). External pressures and influences including adopted lifestyles could erode respect for traditional leadership and communal organization, leading to a disregard for traditional management measures. More effort is needed to enhance the profile and relevance of traditional management systems, in particular in the national policies for coastal fisheries management, w hic h could eventually become legislated policy.
Fiji Background to the recognition of CMT in Fiji.
Fiji, compared w ith many PICs, has had a longer history of dealing w ith and implementing CMT. The recognition of CMT rights in law dates back to the mid-1800s.21 The point of departure for this review is the time of cession of Fiji to Britain in 1874. It is said that at the time of cession, the Chiefs were assured that "the Queen as their sovereign and Highest Chief w ould return to them all or w hatev er part of their gift she may think right" and that "[t]hey must also trust her to govern them righteously and in accordance w ith native usage and customs" (Hornell, 1940). The Deed of Cession, signed in October 1874, gave possession of and full sovereignty and dominion over the w hole of the group of Fiji islands together w ith the possession of the waters adjacent thereto, as well as over all ports and harbours, rivers, estuaries and other w aters and all reefs and foreshores within or adjacent thereto. Further, the Deed of Cession promises that the rights and interests of the ceding parties, the High Chiefs, shall be recognized, in so far as they are consistent w ith British Sovereignty and the colonial form of government. 22 The right interpretation of the relevant articles of the Deed of Cession and w hether ow ner s hip over islands' waters, reefs and foreshores has been accorded to the Chiefs, or whether they can merely exercise use rights in those domains, remains a matter of contention. Certain laws passed after cession, such as the 1880 Rivers and Streams Ordinance, affirmed the then official view along the lines that "all w ater s in Fiji w hic h the natives have been accustomed to traverse ... shall, w ith the soil under the same, belong to the Crow n and be perpetually open to the public for the enjoyment of all rights...".
See Fong (1984) f or a comprehensive description of and discussion on the traditional Fijian Management sy st em and the history of legislative dev elopm ent concerning CMTs. The rev iew on the Fiji legislativ e history on CMTs herein is based largely on Fong (1998) unless indicated otherwise. Deed of Cession of 10 October 1874.
The Birds, Game and Fish Protection Ordinance further confirmed the position that the Chiefs, and in particular their sub-clan or lineage groups (mataqali), w ill enjoy user rights only in their traditional fishing areas. Section 16 of the Bird, Games and Fish Protection Ordinance states, inter alia:.
"Notwithstanding anything contained in the Rivers and Streams Ordinances 1880 it shall be unlawful for any person to fish on any reef or on any kai (cockle) or other shellfish bed in any water forming part of the ancient customary fishing ground of any matanqali unless he shall be a member of such matanqali or shall first have obtained a licence so to do under the hand of the Colonial Secretary.".
The same Ordinance in Section 17 sow ed the seeds of a mechanis m for determination of the boundaries of traditional fishing right areas (qoliqoli) and a dispute settlement mechanis m with respect to claims over such areas. The Fisheries Ordinance of 1942 superseded the Bird Games and Fish Protection Ordinance and contained equivalent provisions. The Fisheries Ordinance is now referred to as the Fisheries Act 1992, w hic h is the principle fisheries legislation. The Fisheries Act retains the same provisions in Sections 13 to 20. In particular, Section 13 restates, in almost identical fashion, Section 16 of the Bird Games and Fish Protection Ordinance as follow s :.
"13. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Rivers and Streams Act, it shall be an offence for any person to take fish on any reef or on any kai (cockle) or other shellfish bed in any area in respect of which the rights of any mataqali or other division or subdivision of the Fijian people have been registered by the Native Fisheries Commission in the Register of Native Customary Fishing Rights unless he shall be a member of such mataqali, division or subdivision of the Fijian people who does not require a licence under section 5 to take such fish or shall first have obtained a permit to do so from the Commissioner of the Division in which such area is situated: Provided that (a) such permits shall not be necessary in the case of persons taking fish (other than by way of trade or business or a s the employee of a person carrying on the trade or business of a fisherman) with hook and line or with a spear or portable fish trap which can be handled by one person; and (b) any such permit may exclude fishing for particular species of fish, or may exclude fishing in any particular areas, or may exclude fishing by any particular methods, or may contain any combination of such exclusions. (2) The grant of a permit shall be in the discretion of such Commissioner who shall consult the Fisheries Officer and the subdivision of the Fijian people whose fishing rights may be affected thereby, prior to granting the same. (3) A permit may be granted for any period not exceeding three years, but every such permit shall expire on the 31st day of December in any one of such years.".
The result of the legal situation described above is that Fiji's coastal w aters and foreshore areas and use rights are shared under a dual ow ner s hip system. The ow ners hip of the foreshore, including all land below the high-w ater mark (the sea bed) and extending to its territorial limits and continental shelf rests w ith the State. The State exercises sovereign rights in the area beyond its territorial limits in the exclusive economic zone. The rights of Fijians are confined to exclusive fishing rights in the recognized customary fishing grounds, including those fringing reefs on the coastal w aters and around isolated islands. The fact that the Fisheries Act is interpreted to mean that the r ight of the vanua to fish in the traditional fishing area is exclusive (Fong 1994) and w hic h is confirmed by current practice, are indeed a significant developments. These developments should not be under-valued because.
FAO/FishCode Review No.7 15.
exclusivity, as a characteristic of rights-based regimes, 23 if implemented, guarded and enforced vigorously, allows the benefactor of the right to enjoy benefits that may be as good as those derived from ow ners hip. Sections 14 to 20 of the Fisheries Act 1992 establish the Native Fisheries Commission (also referred to as the Native Lands and Fisheries Commission) and the rights and procedures relating to deter minat ion of traditional fishing area boundaries. The Commission has now determined and registered all traditional fishing areas (qoliqoli) totalling 410 parcels.24 These determinations and registrations w er e based on the inquiries held during 1890 to 1996. B1.2.2 Overview of traditional fisheries m anagement practices in Fiji.
Customary fishing areas and the right to regulate use and exploitation in that area belong to different, but closely related social groups, namely the vanua 25, and the yavusa26. The vanua is said to be embodied in the Chief which is one of the principal aspects of the Fijian w ay of life.27 The yavusa comprises the people of the same village divided into mataqali and tokatoka. People w ithin these groups are expected to use their ow n customary fishing area location. Those from outside the group w ho w is h to use the customary fishing area of another group must obtain per mis s ion of the ow ners . Ow ners of customary fishing areas may from time to time, establish closed areas to preserve the resources for an intended purpose. Decisions of a group are conveyed through social channels of communication, w hic h ensures that all interested parties are made aw ar e of such decisions. Enforcement of decisions and traditional management measures is done by traditional authority and through strict adherence to protocols. Compliance w ith the management measures is normally assured through the combined effect of respect for the Fijian traditional authority system (the Chiefly system), respect for tradition, including observance of Vakaturanga (in the Chiefly manner) 28 and other people, and reverence for sacred grounds or the supernatural w hic h require adherence to certain rules or practices. Contraventions of established management measures attract harsh punishments, w hic h included executions or banishment in ancient times (Veitayaki 1998). 29.
See supra page 3 and f oot not e 7.
The registration of traditional fishing areas is made in the Register of Native Customary Fishing Rights of the Nativ e Lands and Fisheries Commission.
The vanua is the largest grouping of kinsmen structured in a number of social units and is "the human manif est at ion of the physical environment which the members hav e since claimed to belong to them and to which they also belong." (Rav uv u 1983).
26 The yavusa is the next social unit down the scale and consists of groups of people who are divided into various social groups according to blood and other kinship ties. 27.
The traditional leadership system, the Chiefly system, is central to Fijian way of life (Fong 1994). "A Fijian chief is, most importantly, a member of a lineage in which he occupies a position of authority primarily through his relativ e seniority in terms of decent... In the Fijian culture, ev ery member of the Vanua is not only identified with the chief, but is also the embodiment of the v anua" (Ravuv u 1983).
The concept of Vakaturanga is another important aspect of the Fijian way of lif e. Vakaturanga "embodies respect and deference, compliance and humility, loyalty and honesty." (Rav uv u 1983).
The ov erv iew of the traditional management practices is based on the synopsis of the Fijian traditional management practice by Veitay ak i (1998). For a detailed description of the Fijian social groupings and way of lif e in the context of CMT, see Fong (1994). A comprehensive description of the Fijian traditional way of lif e is prov ided by Ravuv u (1983).
Current Fisheries m anagement framework and CMT as a basis for CBFM in Fiji.
The Fisheries Act is the principal fisheries legal framew or k for the management of marine resources in Fiji. 30 The main features of the Act important to this study are: · · · · the recognition of traditional use rights in traditional fishing areas and their exclusive use to members of the mataqali; the provisions w hic h establish a Native Fisheries Commission charged w ith the duty of ascertaining the customary fishing rights in each province of Fiji; prohibitions for the taking of fish in Fiji fisheries w aters by w ay of trade or business without a licence; the requirement that every licence granted under the Act terminates on 31 December of the same year as the day of issue, licenses are personal to the holder, and licenses are not transferable; the pow er of the Minister to empow er any licensing officer, police officer, customs officer, honorary fish warden and any other officer to enforce the Act; the pow ers of the Minister to make regulations: (a) prohibiting any practices or methods, or use of equipment or devices or mater ials w hic h are likely to be injurious to the maintenance and development of a stock of fish; (b) prescribing areas and seasons when fishing is prohibited or restricted, either entirely or w ith reference to a named species; (c) prescribing limits to the size and w eight of fish of named species which may be taken; (d) prescribing limits to the size of nets or the mesh of nets w hic h may be used for fishing; (e) regulating procedures for issue and cancellation of licences and the registration of fishing boats; (f) prescribing the fees to be charged upon the issue of licences and the registration of fishing vessels; and (g) regulating any other matter relating to the conservation, protection and maintenance of a stock of fish which may be deemed requisite.
Several fisheries regulations have been made under the Fisheries Act which are consolidated into the Fisheries Regulations 1992 except for the Fiji Vessel Monitoring System Regulations 2002. The regulations cover licenses, registration, prohibited fishing methods, mesh limitations, size limits, and exemptions. The Fisheries Act and its subsidiary legislation vest the pr i mar y responsibility of the management of living marine resources in Fiji in the Fisheries Department of the Ministry of Fisheries and Forests. Entry into fisheries is regulated primarily by the fishing license system. All fishing licences to fish in Fijian w ater s are granted by the designated licensing officers. Recently and w ith respect to tuna fishing, the licensing system operates together with the Tuna Management Plan. Pursuant to the legal situation established under the provisions of the Birds, Game and Fish Protection Ordinance as contained in the Fisheries Act, fishing in traditional fishing areas (the qoliqolis) is exclusive to the members of the vanua and yavasu. Any fishing that is to take place in the qoliqolis by non members of the vanua and yavusa is possible only under per mi t.
Fisheries Act 1992, Chapter 158 of the Laws of Fiji. The Marine Spaces Act (Cap. 158A) establishes the archipelagic waters of Fiji and a twelv e nautical mile territorial sea. The Marine Spaces Act also establishes a 200 nautical mile exclusiv e economic zone ov er which Fiji has sovereign rights f or the purposes of exploring and exploiting, conserv ing and managing the natural resources of the seabed, subsoil and superjacent waters. Formal declaration of the archipelagic waters and the exclusiv e economic zone is contained in the Marine Spaces (Archipelagic Baselines and Exclusiv e Economic Zone) Order.
granted by the District Commissioner, based on the approval of the Chief responsible for the qoliqoli. To obtain a permit, the person approaches the Chief, w ho will consider the request. Upon approval, the Chief grants a letter of consent which is taken to the District Commissioner, w ho then grants the permit upon verification of ow ner s hip. Fishers seeking fishing licences w ithin qoliqolis pay goodw ill money in addition to the nominal licence fee that is paid to the Government (Veitayaki 1998, MRAG 1999). Veitiyaki (1998) claims that this system is open to abuse as anybody could be allow ed to fish for as long as they can pay particularly large sums. Although commercial fishing has increased in Fiji, an increasing number of customary fishing ow ners are now restricting the number of licences issued for fishing in their qoliqoli due to grow ing awareness of the need to consider the interests of all members in the use of the qoliqoli. As a result of such concern, CBFM ­ w hic h utilizes the communities' ow ners hip over fishing rights ­ has begun to take root in Fiji. The movement has expanded through the initiatives of NGOs, institutions and other conservation agencies. Community-based management developed by NGOs and other institutions w as established in five communities, most of which are now collectively know n as Fiji Locally Managed Marine Areas (LMMA). The LMMA is now the leading programme for facilitating the revival of traditional resource use practices in Fiji in order to improve management, ensure the sustainability of fisheries resources, and maximize benefits to local communities (Veitayaki et al 2003). The recently established Fiji LMMA netw or k (FLMMA), a collaborative effort among Government authorities, NGOs, learning institutions, conservation practitioners and communities has added impetus to the community-based fisheries movement in Fiji. 31 The netw or k was established w ith the aim of developing partnerships in order to strengthen relations among NGO's and the government for better management of local marine areas and, as a consequence, for improved local community livelihoods. Members of the FLMMA Netw or k have project sites w ithin the country w her e they have w or k with local communities to help establish Marine Protected Areas (MPAs). Each member, once selecting a site, w or ks w ith the site community to develop a community-based marine resource management plan and to reach consensus on declaring and enforcing a no-take zone w ithin community fishing grounds. Each member then monitors its site to ascertain the extent to w hic h management efforts have been successful. One of the highlights is the sharing of human resources and information. Through the FLMMA, members can discuss site-specific problems, solutions and achievements. This not only helps to improve management strategies, but also to ensure that goals are clearer and members' resolve for success is strengthened. The netw or k operates on the basis of a social contract32 and through a common vision that conservation and local community livelihoods can be improved by developing and implementing effective means of resource management. The FLMMA also w or ks with government to obtain endorsement and recognition of the community-based approach to fisheries management. Recently, the Fisheries Department has pursued its objective of implementing LMMA's management plans at the national level to enable the communitybas ed management initiatives to have a w ider influence and impact. This initiative w as.
The network was established in March 2001. Currently the six main organizations that make up the FLMMA network are the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) Fiji Country Programme (FCP), Institute of Applied Science Programme of the Univ ers ity of South Pacific (IAS - USP), Foundations of the Peoples of the South Pacific (FSP), International Marine Alliance (IMA) and Ministry of Fisheries and Forests.
Under the Social Contract the FLLMA network partners agree to collaborate to improv e conserv at ion both f or the people inv olv ed and the marine env ironm ent. The Social Contract is not legally binding but demands that the members observe common values that emphasize good social relations. These v alues include commitment, teamwork, transparency, empowerment, respect and the belief that practitioners can make a difference.
incorporated into strategies and policies of the Department of Fisheries for the 2002-2006 period. A new and encouraging development is that the Government has decided that it w ill grant ow ners hip of the foreshore areas to indigenous Fijians through legislation. 33 If this undertaking is implemented, it w ill remove the controversy over the ownership of the qoliqoli and should give further impetus to the CBFM movement in Fiji. Observations In ter ms of the date and time frame w ithin w hic h ow ner s hip over traditional fishing areas or the rights to their use w er e dealt w ith, and in ter ms of the institutions and actions put into determining and recording of traditional fishing right areas, the Fiji case represents the most systematic legal recognition and record of the traditional fishing rights and areas in the Pacific ­ if not the w or ld. It w as not made clear in days of cession in the Birds, Game and Fish Protection Ordinance and in current law whether recognition of claims over marine areas is a claim of ow ner s hip (title) or merely ow ners hip over user rights. For the moment, the Native Fisheries Commission, w hic h has the mandate to consider, demarcate and register claims, considers mataqalis hold user rights and not title over registered areas. Naturally, the mataqali's claim the opposite to be true ­ that is, that mataqalis have ownership over the registered marines areas.34 The conflicting claims arising out of different interpretations of the law w ill no longer remain a moot point if the Government of Fiji stays true to its commitment to give ow ner s hip over the foreshore to indigenous Fijians through legislation. How ev er , even if this does not happen and the mataqali's do not have title but mere ow ners hip or exclusivity over fishing rights, that right recognized by-law is not an insignificant one. There is ample opportunity to build on the current legal situation to establish an effective fisheries management regime, including the drafting of regulations that w ill make this right operational. This opportunity has been seized in practice by local communities and conservation practitioners. On the basis of the limited provisions of Sections 13 to 20 of the Fisheries Act, the people and their conservation partners w er e able to push for effective protection of their marine resources as evidenced by the LMMA initiative. Studies of access to marine areas for fishing also show that traditional conservation and management practices of fish resources are largely maintained. They are how ev er increasingly being challenged ow ing to pressures of population grow th and the related need to harvest more to feed household members, as well as pressures to earn money in an ever expanding cash economy. Despite these challenges, the fisheries management author ity and its partners remain hopeful that renew ed interest in fisheries management through CMT w ill promote better utilization of age old conservation and practices, and that respect for rights of control exercised by mataqalis over marine areas w ill lead to innovative solutions for sustainable use of fisheries resources while addressing community needs. The recently completed registration of all claims over marine areas by mataqali and the LMMA system driven by the FLMMA strengthens the movement for community fisheries management based on CMT in Fiji. Recent international recognition of the FLMMA efforts at conservation can only add to this effort.35.
See Veitiy ak i et al. 2003, PACNEWS April 1999 and ABC Radio Australia News internet site: http://www.goasiapacific.com/news/GoAsiaPacif ic BN P_1019518. htm Langibalav u 2003, Personal communication.
Veitay ak i et al. 2003 and South Pacific Currents, a quarterly newsletter for WWF South Pacific Programme staff and f riends (No. 17, September 2002).
The strength of the Fijian legislative framew or k relating to the use of CMT for fisheries management, like the Cook Islands, is derived from the legal incorporation of traditional decision-making institutions, and better still, the actual recognition of traditional fishing rights in legislation. It is this continued relevance of and respect for culture and tradition in Fiji that has largely contributed to the success of CBFM initiatives, based on CMT. The approach in establishing and locally managing MPAs, not only to achieve conservation but also to increase yields, is w or thy of note. It lends support to the notion that fisheries management action through CBFM should not only dw ell on resource conservation but should also be economically sustainable for the community. As CBFM becomes entrenched as a vital part of fisheries management in any jurisdiction, costs of fisheries management are shifted from the fisheries management authority to the communities. These costs should be offset by incentives such as improved livelihoods and benefits or privileges to communities who invest time and effort in CBFM. 36 In other w or ds , communities involved in CBFM should be the net benefactors of the alternative management approach so that there can be reinvestment of resources, including community time and effort, into the CBFM approach. Present moves to grant ow ners hip over foreshore areas to indigenous Fijians, through legislation, w ould further assure the continuation of traditional forms of fisheries management, through CBFM. They w ould also add impetus to the efforts of the institutions who are promoting CBFM in Fiji. Legislation that introduces recognition of ow ner s hip over traditional fishing areas to indigenous Fijians ( me mber s of the vanua, yavusa, mataqali and other sub lineage groups) should be clearly drafted in the context of a thorough review of the current fisheries management environment in Fiji. In particular, the drafting of legislation should, inter alia, consider the developments so far in establishing and operating communitybas ed fisheries and other resource management efforts based on traditional management practices, partnerships established to promote such management practices, lessons learned in operating these management initiatives and existing mechanisms such as the Native Lands and Fisheries Commission 37 that have determined and kept records of traditional fishing areas. Clear and full ow ners hip over land and the resources therein by any group and the pow er s that come w ith it may have undesirable consequences. If the pow ers through ow ners hip over foreshore areas promised by the Fijian Government are misused by traditional leaders or communities so that personal gain and profit prevail over sustainable utilization of fisheries resources and the collective good, the demise of community fisheries based on CMT and waste of gallant efforts and substantial resources invested in CBFM, w ould be real prospects. Efforts to ensure that such results do not ensue would be a worthy investment in sustainable fisheries resource management in Fiji.
For more reading on transaction costs, see Abdullah, Kuperan and Pomeroy supra note.
See also David G. McGrath, Alcilene Cardoso and Elias Pinto Sá, Community Fisheries and Co-Management in the Lower Amazon Floodplain of Brazil, Paper presented at the International Symposium on the Management of Large Riv ers : Sustaining Liv elihoods and Biodiv ers ity in the New Millennium, Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia, 12 - 15 February 2002.
It should be noted also that the Nativ e Lands and Fisheries Commission is established under the Ministry responsible for Fijian Affairs. The linkages between Native Lands and Fisheries Commission and their constituting legislation and administration should be reflected or accommodated in the f is heries legislativ e f ram ework if the Nativ e Lands and Fisheries Commission is to continue to be relevant to f is heries management in Fiji.
Sam oa Background to the legal recognition of CMT and traditional governance systems influencing fisheries m anagement in Sam oa.
The Samoan Constitution as the supreme law of Samoa defines "law " in Article 111 to mean:.
Any law for the time being in force in Western Samoa; and includes this Constitution, any Act of Parliament and any proclamation regulation, order, by-law or other act of authority made thereunder, the English common law and equity for the time being in so far as they are not excluded by any other law in force in Western Samoa, and any Custom or usage which has acquired the force of law in Western Samoa or any part thereof under the provisions of any Act or under a judgement of a court of competent jurisdiction.
Section 2 of the Land and Titles Act 1981 adds only a little more to the definition of the term "custom and usage" in the follow ing manner:.
"Custom and usage" or "Samoan custom and usage" means the customs and usages of Western Samoa accepted as being in force at the relevant time and includes: (a) The principles of custom usage accepted by the people of Western Samoa in general; and (b) The customs and usages accepted as being in force in respect of a particular place or matter.
Other than the above references, no elaborate statement of custom as law exists. This how ev er cannot disguise the fact that in Samoa, many important decisions are made according to, or are influenced by, w hat is referred to as the Samoan w ay (Fa'a Samoa). Fa'a Samoa, founded on custom, is perpetuated by the continued relevance of the traditional forms of social groupings and decision- ma kin g institutions, particular ly the Matai (Chiefly) system and the Village Fono (Council). The legal recognition of the traditional governance system w hether directly or indirectly also facilitates an easier adoption of contemporary fisheries management systems based on CMT or the community-based approach. The deeply ingrained natures of traditional forms of governance and norms that perpetuate the Fa'a Samoa are manifested in the follow ing w ays . · The National Government institutions described in the Constitution, despite its w es ter n origins, closely resemble the traditional governance system. The Parliament is a national Fono and the members are elected from the village Matai in the 11 districts. Until 1990, only registered Matai could vote for Parliament. The 1990 referendum approved universal suffrage but only Matai can run for the 47 Samoan seats. Constitution Section 100 recognizes Matai titles w hic h shall be deter min ed according to Samoan custom and usage. The head of state is chosen from one of four royal families, and, like the village High Chief, does not play an active role in government, acting only on the advice of the Prime Minister and cabinet. The head of state is The Paramount Chief of Samoa, His Highness Malietoa Tanumafili II. He appoints as Prime Minister the member of the legislative authority w ho has the majority of support of the 47 members. The Prime Minister then selects an 8- me mber cabinet from the parliament. Samoan villages are traditional and are therefore sensitive to outside interference in their affairs. Each village has a number of clans and there is a titular High Chief (Ali'i) and an orator or Talking Chief (Tulafale). The orators can be real sources of authority in the village and conduct debates and speeches on all subjects. But in the end, everyone must agree on the decision or no decision is made ( Peter u 1993).
Resource use and development decisions are also addressed by the Samoan sociopolit ic al netw or k. This netw or k begins w ith the Matai System on the local level and is reflected in the structure of most political and social organizations ( Peter u 1993). The Matai and Fono system have great influence on day to day community life. The Village Fono decides on all matters pertaining to the village and its land and sea resources. Decisions are reached by consensus follow ing a great deal of discussion by concerned parties. The Village Fono Act 1990 formally recognized the Village Fono by validating and empow er ing the exercise of power and authority by Village Fono in accordance with the custom and usage of their villages, and to confirm or grant certain pow ers . Fono decisions are based more on a sense of social justice, custom and usage than written laws and regulations. Enforcement of laws is also undertaken by Village Fono. Village Fono penalties imposed on law br eaker s can be more severe than those provided by national law and range from fines to ostracism from the village in extreme cases. Current fisheries m anagement framework and CBFM in Sam oa.
Article 104 of the Constitution vests all land lying below the line of high w ater in the State. This has important implications for fisheries as it means that legally all Samoans have open and equal access to sea resources. This right is regulated by the Fisheries Act 1988 w hic h is the principal legislative framew or k relating to fisheries in Samoa and provides a system for distributing access rights to fishers guaranteed by the Constitution. The Fisheries Act governs the management of fishing primarily through the control of entry into fishing by both domestic and foreign fishing vessels. The other stated purposes of the Act include the conservation, management and development of marine resources, the promotion of marine scientific research and the protection and preservation of the marine environment. The responsibility for managing fisheries and marine resource is vested in the Fisheries Division of the Department of Agriculture, Forests, Fisheries and Meteorology. The Fisheries (Fishing Licence) Regulations 2001 made under the Act provides the requirements and process for applying for fishing licenses including the upper limits of fishing licenses that can be issued, special considerations for local and foreign license applications, transferability of licenses, offences and penalties. An important provision of the Fisheries Act 1988 is that the Director responsible for fisheries "may, in consultation w ith fishermen, industry and village representatives, prepare and promulgate by-law s not inconsistent w ith this Act for the conservation and management of fisheries". The ingenious use of this provision, in connection w ith the Village Fono Act and the underlying relevance of indigenous socio-political and decision- mak ing institutions has allow ed community-based fisheries management or co- manage ment to become w ell established in Samoa. Many villages now have by-laws to assist in managing village fishing grounds. As w ill be demonstrated below , this CBFM system for fisheries is now an important integral feature of the predominantly successful inshore or reef fisheries management in Samoa. B1.3.3 The use of village by-laws in CBFM in Sam oa.
In the mid-1980s, it w as noted that over-exploitation, use of destructive fishing methods and environmental disturbance caused serious declines in catches in the inshore fisheries. The situation w as of grave concern not only to the Government, but also to a large number of the village communities. Village communities through their Village Fono took initiatives to make village rules and publicise these rules through media to prevent further decline of their fishery resources. Notices announced bans on the use of explosives, chemicals and other.
22 FAO/FishCode Review No.7.
destructive fishing techniques and prohibited nearby villages to fish in their respective lagoon areas. The notices also indicated penalties to be paid to the Fono for any breach of their village rules by their ow n residents, and threats of legal action for breach of by-laws by outsiders (Fa'asili and Kelekolio 1999). The pow ers of Fono to make rules are based on the Village Fono Act. Section 3 (2)­(4) relating to the continuation of the pow ers of the Village Fono states as follow s :.
"(2) Every Village Fono in the exercise of any power or authority shall exercise the same in accordance with the custom and usage of that village. (3) The past and future exercise of power and authority by every Village Fono with respect to the affairs of its village in accordance with the custom and usage of that village is hereby validated and empowered. (4) In addition to the power and authority granted under this Act, every Village Fono shall have other powers, authorities and functions as may be provided in any other Act.".
The scope of jurisdiction of the Village Fono is established under section 9 of the Act. Section 9 reads:.
"The jurisdiction of any Village Fono shall not extend to include(a) Any person who does not ordinarily reside in its village; or (b) Any person who not being a Matai of its village ordinarily resides in its village on Government, freehold or leasehold land and is not liable in accordance with the custom and usage of that village to render tautau to a Matai of that village.".
While the enforcement of village rules w ithin individual communities w as relatively easy, problems w er e experienced w ith enforcement on outside communities. This comes as no surprise as the jurisdiction of the Village Fono, according to Section 9, is to make laws that apply only to persons w ho ordinarily reside in the village and not to a person w ho lives outside the village and is not liable to render tautau to a Matai of that village, in accordance with custom and usage. Problems of enforcement also arose ow ing to the inconsistency of some village rules to manage and conserve fishery resources w ith existing Government law s . This resulted in several Fono not being able to pursue court action against breaches by neighbouring villages. (King and Fa'asili 1999) Despite initial problems, the Fisheries Division recognised that the initiative taken by the village communities provided an excellent avenue to introduce effective management regimes for the inshore fisheries. An important first step in the view of the Fisheries Division was to give the Village Fono assistance by enhancing the legal recognition of village rules for conservation and management of fisheries resources. To this end, the Fisheries Act introduced provisions that provided the process w her eby village by-laws are promulgated and enforced as national laws. Section 3 (1), of the Act sets out the pow ers for making bylaw s , as follows:.
"The Director shall have such powers, rights and authorities as may reasonably be necessary or expedient to carry out the Director's functions, and in particular may ­ ... [d] in consultation with fishermen, industry and village representatives, prepare and promulgate by-laws not inconsistent with this Act for the conservation and management of fisheries; ...".
Section 3 (4) of the Act relates to the procedure for publication upon promulgation, alteration or revocation of by-laws:.
"With respect to by-laws under this section, the following provisions shall apply [a] by-laws shall be signed by the Director; [b] they shall be published in the Gazette and in a newspaper circulating in Samoa; [c] they shall come into force on a day fixed in the by-law, which day shall not be earlier than 7 clear days after the date of publication in the Gazette; [d] any by-law may in like manner be altered or revoked; [e] any by-law affecting or applying to the conservation and management of fisheries in lagoon waters shall be issued to the Pulenu'u of adjacent villages at least 7 clear days before it shall come into force; [f] a by-law may leave any matter to be determined, applied, dispensed with, prohibited, or regulated by the Director, from time to time, either generally or for any classe s of cases, or in any particular case; [g] no by-laws made by the Director shall bind the Government; and [h] by-laws must be reasonable or consistent with this Act.".
Section 3 (5) sets out penalties for breach of any by-law :.
"[5] Every person who commits a breach of any by-law made under this section is liable to a fine not exceeding 100 tala and, where the breach is a continuing one, to a further fine not exceeding 20 tala for every day on which the breach continued.".
It is said that "the Fisheries Act was specifically designed to include provisions dealing w ith procedures whereby a village fono could declare its ow n rules as by-laws." (King and Fa'asili 1999). In reality, as can be seen from the provisions restated above, the pow er to make by-laws under the Fisheries Act 1988 is vested in the Director for Fisheries and not the village Fono. How ev er the impression conveyed even now , which is that it is the Village Fono that makes the by-law s , is vital for ow ner s hip and legitimacy of the by-laws. This in turn contributes to ensuring respect of and compliance w ith such laws. Ow ner s hip and legitimacy is assured in part by the by-law making process (see Box 5). The main requirement is set out under Section 3 (1) (d) of the Fisheries Act w hic h states that the Director shall promulgate by-law s in consultation w ith fishermen, industry and village representatives. The mechanis m for introducing village by-law s under the Fisheries Act also ensures that the village rules apply equally to village residents and outsiders and no Samoans can be differentially excluded as w as the case under the Village Fono Act. The advantage of village rules in the form of by-law s under the Fisheries Act is that it can now be enforced in a court of competent jurisdiction like any other national law of Samoa. Current village by-law s are broad and cover any measure that assists the management and conservation of the fishery resources. These may include the restriction of the sizes of fish and shellfish (but not low er than the minimum limits in the Fisheries Regulations 1996), bans on certain types of fishing gear and methods, allocation of fish quotas, restriction of mesh sizes for nets and fish traps (but not low er than the minimum limits in the Fisheries Regulations 1996) and closure of fishing seasons or areas to allow fish to reproduce. Importantly, the by-laws apply to all citizens equally (Faásili and Kelekolio 1999).
The Samoa by-law Process38.
Step 1: By-law formulation Members of the Fono (Council of Chiefs), which is the highest village authority (that determines village rules, sets village policies and imposes traditional punishments on village residents for contraventions of rules), consult among themselves first on the rules to be introduced as village by-laws, bearing in mind that the rules must be related to the conservation and management of the fishery resources. Step 2: Consultation process Upon agreement by the Chiefs on the proposed rules, representatives of the Chiefs are sent to the Fisheries Division for consultation to ensure appropriateness of the proposed rules to avoid in particular inconsistency of the proposed rules with existing Government legislation. The Fisheries Division may suggest improvements, alterations, and in extreme cases, recommend complete deletion of the proposed by-law. The Fisheries Division may also redraft the by-laws to better reflect the wish of the Fono. Step 3: Final checking and clearance by the Office of the Attorney General The agreement reached in Step 2 is then submitted to the Office of the Attorney General for final checking and clearance and to ensure that the by-laws are written into their legal and proper forms. Step 4: Signing The cleared by-laws are returned to the Fisheries Division for the signature of the Director of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forests, Fisheries and Meteorology. Step 5: Gazetting, publishing and distribution process The signed by-laws are then passed to the Legislative Assembly to be gazetted. At the same time they are published by the Fisheries Division in the local newspaper and copies are distributed to Pulenu (nominated Government representatives) of neighbouring villages. The by-laws come into force on a day fixed in the by-laws which should be 14 clear days after the date of publication in the Government Gazette.
Monitoring and enforcement of the by-laws are largely done by village communities. The communities nor ma lly put signboards along roadsides and beaches to inform the public of the areas only where their respective by-laws apply. Communities variously build w atc h houses, patrol canoes and routinely use watchers to monitor illegal activities in their coastal zones and marine protected areas. Breaches by individuals from the village sponsoring the by- laws are dealt w ith by the Village Fono. Traditional fines such as provision of pigs, taro and others may be imposed by the Fono. Breaches by an outsider are handled through the formal court system. Fines imposed by the formal court system shall not exceed $100, and not more than $20 for each day the breach continues. 39 If the offence involves an existing Government law or fisheries legislation, applicable fines under those laws, w hic h may be higher, w ill apply. Observations The main advantage of the village by-law s in Samoa reflect the justifications put forward for use of the CBFM approach. The involvement of communities ensure that by-laws concerning fisheries management are monitored more effectively than the monitoring and enforcement of regular national laws, which are severely compromised by limited resources and personnel of the Government. By-law s are initiated by villages and people w ith real interest in the management and conservation of the fishery resources in question. These stakeholders are.
This is a synopsis of the Samoa by-law process by Fa'asili and Kelekolio, 1999. Section 3 (5) of the Fisheries Act.
more likely to respect and abide by the rules initiated by them compared w ith the rules set by a government authority. Village by-law s are now an important feature of village Fisheries Management Plans created under the community-based Fisheries Extension Programme operated in Samoa (King & Fa'asili 1999). To the Fisheries Division, village by-laws represent an effective fisheries management tool, w hic h has great potential for solving many problems involving the conservation of the inshore marine environment ( Fa'as i li and Kelekolio 1999). In Samoa, as is the case in Cook Islands and Fiji, existing legislation does not directly refer to the use of CMT or specific traditional or indigenous custom. How ev er , it seems unnecessary in the three jurisdictions that customary law or traditional practice is preserved by direct reference to them in the Constitution and legislation. Preservation or contemporary use of custom and practice can also occur through legal recognition or contemporary use of traditional forms of social organization, leadership, governance or, as in the case in Fiji, fishing rights. This augers w ell for the community-based natural resource management based on custom and usage.
Vanuatu Background to the legal recognition of CMT in Vanuatu.
The current community-based fisheries management in Vanuatu influenced by CMT can be legally supported by several provisions in the Constitution of Vanuatu and other legislation and governance institutions. The first legal provision relating to custom as a source of law is found in Article 95(3) of the Constitution w hic h states:.
"Customary law shall continue to have effect as a part of the law of the Republic.".
The second Constitutional provision concerning the determination of a matter in court in the absence of applicable law is Article 47 (1) of the Constitution. The provision reads:.
"...If there is no rule of law applicable to a matter before it, a court shall determine the matter according to substantial justice and whenever possible in conformity with custom.".
An institution that directly perpetuates the use of custom is the Island Courts established by the Island Court Act Chapter 127. Section 10 relating to the pow er of an Island Court to apply custom states:.
"10. Subject to the provisions of this Act an island court shall administer the customary law prevailing within the territorial jurisdiction of the court so far as the same is not in conflict with any written law and is not contrary to justice, morality and good order.".
The other Constitutional provision and perhaps the most important in securing the ability of the indigenous peoples of Vanuatu to deter min e resource management approaches in a certain area is Article 73. This article states:.
"all land in the Republic belongs to the indigenous custom owners and their descendents".
Complementing Article 73 of the Constitution is Section 2 of the Land Reform Act Chapter 123, w hic h defines land as including "... land extending to the seaside of any foreshore reef but no further". The combined effect of the recognition of custom as a source of law and the ow ners hip of all lands extending to the seaside of any foreshore reef enables any land-ow ning individual or group in Vanuatu to undertake management of resources in these areas in the manner deemed appropriate. For those lands beyond the seaside of the foreshore reefs, it is conceivable to apply management approaches based on custom, provided that there is no.
26 FAO/FishCode Review No.7.
applicable law or that the measures or regulations made are not inconsistent w ith applicable law . The Constitution also establishes the Vanuatu National Council of Chiefs, also know n as Malvatumauri.40 The Malvatumauri is an important advisory body to the Government in all matters. It is composed of Chiefs elected by their peers sitting in the district Councils of Chiefs. The Council advises on custom and tradition as w ell as on the preservation and promotion of the country's culture and indigenous languages. The Decentralisation and Local Government Regions Act 1994 (the Decentralisation Act) and its subsidiary legislation compound the legal situation concerning mandates for resource management pow ers in the marine areas up to the seaside of the foreshore reefs. The Decentralisation Act vests powers in regional governments to make laws w ithin the provincial boundaries w hic h may apply to areas that extend to and beyond the foreshore reef. The recently enacted Environmental Management and Conservation Act 2002 empow er s the Director of the department responsible for environment to negotiate w ith custom landow ners to protect and register community conservation areas. The Fisheries Act empow er s the Minister for Fisheries to establish marine reserves. These create a situation w her e the national government (and betw een authorities w ithin the national government), provincial governments and land ow ning groups have shared pow ers in respect of natural resources conservation and management. In this situation, questions arise as to w hic h laws apply and prevail over the others. It is important that these issues are considered and solutions identified to address them in the establishment and implementation of CBFM, as submitted in Part A of this study. It suffices to summarise here that the laws of Vanuatu facilitate the application of custom and the role of custom landow ner s in mar ine resources management at least in the marine areas up to the seaside of the foreshore reef. This opportunity has been put to good use, as has been demonstrated in part by the effectiveness of the CBFM movement in Vanuatu. B1.4.2 Current fisheries m anagement framework and CBFM in Vanuatu.
The main legislation dealing w ith the management of fisheries in Vanuatu is the Fisheries Act 1982, as amended in 1989. The Act sets out a comparatively adequate management framew or k w ith provisions relating to: · development and management of fisheries through establishing conditions for encouraging foreign investment in fisheries, fisheries management and development plans, fishery access arrangements, foreign fishing and local fishing vessel licenses for regulating fishing access and encouraging scientific research operations; monitoring control and surveillance through the Minister's pow ers to enter into agreements or arrangements on harmonization of licensing and enforcement, authorized officers to carry out observer and enforcement duties and recognition of a regional register of foreign fishing vessels; conservation, such as the prohibition of fishing for marine mammals in Vanuatu waters, the use of explosives and poisons for fishing and the protection of fish habitat through the Minister's pow er s to establish marine reserves; and requirements for fish export processing establishments to ensure fish and fish product safety.
Constitution, Chapter 5.
The Fisheries Act vests the responsibility for the development and management of Vanuatu's fisheries in the Fisheries Department of the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Forestry and Fisheries. An interesting aspect of the Fisheries Act is that the Minister is empow er ed under Section 20 to establish marine reserves in consultation w ith ow ners of adjoining land and the appropriate local government Council. As regards what areas can be established as a reserve, a possible interpretation is that the area w ould be marine areas or lands that do not belong to custom ow ner s (land on the seaw ar d side of the foreshore reef). Section 20 makes it an offence to undertake certain activities in the established marine reserves without the permission of the Minister. These activities are: fishing; the taking or destroying of coral; dredging or the taking of any sand or gravel; the destruction of natural habitat; and the taking or destruction of a wreck or part of a wreck. The other notable legislation relating to fisheries management include the Decentralization and Local Government Regions Act 1994, the Environmental Management and Conservation Act 2002, the Maritime Zones Act 1981, and various land laws. As noted above, the Environmental Management and Conservation Act 2002 empow er s the Director for the department responsible for environment to negotiate w ith custom landow ners to protect and register Community Conservation Areas (CCA). Division 2 of Part 4 of the Act provides a mechanism for conservation of community areas that have national biodiversity significance. Once a CAA is registered, the landow ners or Management Committee w ill be responsible for developing and implementing a conservation protection or management plan. It is an offence for a person to contravene a term or condition of a management plan for a registered CCA. Clearly, the CAA approach under the Environmental Management and Conservation Act 2002 is conservation-oriented and can be separated from the general fisheries management framew or k under the Fisheries Act. The potential for conflict how ev er is real w her e the area for the CAA is a marine area, and if the conservation and management plan for the CAA also sets out fisheries management measures. On the other hand, the marine reserve concept under the Fisheries Act appears to be conservation orientated so there could be overlap in conservation mandates under the Fisheries Act and the Environment Management and Conservation Act in marine conservation areas. Both options are open to the appropriate government authorities to pursue. It is how ev er desirable to avoid duplication of effort by allow ing the authority best suited in terms of capacity to undertake conservation action. Thus, conservation should be undertaken by the Department responsible for environment. Fisheries management action on the other hand should be undertaken by the Fisheries Department although there w ill be need for good communication, planning and coordination to ensure that there is cohesiveness in management action w hether it is conservation or management driven. B1.4.3 Village-based m ar ine resource m anageme nt.
The Vanuatu village-based marine resource management began in 1990 w hen it was announced that the Department of Fisheries w ould provide technical advice on trochus management to fishing rights ow ners who requested it. The enthusiastic response to the announcement led to trochus surveys carried out by the Department of Fisheries along w ith the provision of advice on desirable minimum size limits for harvests and optimum closed seasons to rebuild stocks. No requirement for rigid management plans w er e forced on villages based exclusively on biological considerations. The success stories of the trochus management led to a further study on the strengths and weaknesses of the cooperative management approach and its potential for w ider application, although Johannes (1998) had already made the claim then that the modest village-based trochus management programme of the Department of Fisheries "offered a basic general.
28 FAO/FishCode Review No.7.
approach to cooperative management that could be applied both over a wide range of species as well as elsewhere in Oceania." This proved to be a sound prediction as the author actually w itnes s ed the same village-based management units and their meetings being utilized by other conservation and management organizations and entities to promote turtle conservation and as an entry point for dissemination of other socio-economic issues that impact on village lives. The study provoked by the trochus management programme of the Fisheries Division confirmed the existence of CMT and indeed specific village claims of exclusive rights to harvest marine resources from the adjacent shallow w aters , through its Chief or its constituent clans or families under a CMT system. These rights in coastal w aters are contiguous to traditional land holdings. The study also established that promulgations of village-based conservation taboos including closures for various species, restrictions on fishing methods, an aw ar eness of the relationship betw een excessive fishing pressure and declining stocks, the benefits of recent regulations on fishing, and the rights to exclude outsiders from fishing. CMT is not only the foundation for all village-based marine resources management measures in Vanuatu; it also contributes to the equitable distribution of the harvest and spreads fishing effort (Hickey and Johannes 2002). Enforcement of marine resources taboos imposed by the villages ranged from simple admonition to fines in the form of money, food and kava or a combination of the three. Where reverence of traditional authority is still high, compliance w ith taboos w as achieved for fear of shame and embarrassment at being caught and fined in a village court. In a 2001 resurvey of the marine resource activities in 21 villages, Hickey and Johannes (2002) observed that village-based marine management measures more than doubled betw een 1993 and 2001. In addition to the continuation of the exemplary extension w or k of the Fisheries Department in the villages w hic h ensured the increase in the mar ine resources management activities, the increase in aw ar enes s for better conservation and management of fisheries resources was also attributed to the spread of awareness by a travelling theatre group called Wan Smolbag. 41 Wan Smolbag spread the conservation message for sea turtles which led to introduction of regulations relating to banning or restriction on harvesting of turtles. While CMT, perpetuated by legal recognition of custom ow ner s ' title over certain marine areas, is the foundation for the success of marine resources management activities in villages, it is not the only reason for the continued success and exists in isolation of other factors that contribute to this success. Cultural nor ms including respect for others and their areas and respect for rural community organization, leadership and collective behaviour allow s for non- intrusion into taboo areas. In addition, most of the taboo areas are small and located close to villages w hic h facilitate surveillance. Alternative food sources extracted from traditional land, the export of cash crops and the establishment of other income activities w ith outside assistance also contribute to the compliance w ith established regulations. Recently, support in enforcement of traditional Chiefs' rulings w er e provided by the police in cases where the Chief had exhausted other possibilities w ithin the village to bring an individual into compliance. Outside assistance in providing, inter alia, technical information in conservation and management, focussed conservation effort on one species to ensure success so that conservation effort could be replicated for other species and education, not only for villages.
Wan Smolbag brought to v illages a play about the plight of sea turtles which resulted in the banning or restricted harv es t ing of turtles by villages. Wan Smolbag also encouraged many villages to select turtle monitors to tag turtles and to help oversee the conserv at ion of turtles and eggs in their villages. The author had the opportunity to witness Wan Smolbag in action in f urt her education of turtle monitors with the support of SPREP as well boosting awareness on other issues such as AIDS.
but also for national governments, can also enhance community-based fisheries conservation and management effort (Hickey and Johannes 2002).42 Observations Community-based management of fisheries in Vanuatu, unlike those in Cook Islands, Fiji and Samoa, began as an initiative of one individual, that of Moses Amos. This is an anecdote worthy of attention as it shows that individual intervention and commitment can also contribute much to the introduction of a different and effective approach to fisheries management. Although there w as already in 1985 legal recognition of ow ner s hip by Ni-Vanuatu of land (including marine areas) w hic h is an important aspect of CMT, real activity to promote fisheries management based on traditional marine tenure in Vanuatu occurred only in the 1990s on the basis of the individual initiative noted above. That initiative has progressed w ith various other factors, contributing to the success of CBFM as evidenced by increased village-based marine resource management regulations today. The Constitution read in conjunction w ith the Land Reform Act recognizes ow ner s hip over significant tracts of marine areas which provide a solid legal basis on w hic h indigenous communities can take fisheries management and conservation action. The late establishment of CMT-based management in Vanuatu shows that legal recognition of ow ners hip of marine areas by indigenous communities is a valuable asset but it is not enough to enhance CMT use. There is a need for further legislative framew or k for the conservation and management of resources that not only gives cognisance to ow ner s hip rights but also establishes mechanis ms that operationalize communities' rights. There is already de facto acceptance of community-based fisheries management in Vanuatu. Indeed, customary marine tenure in Vanuatu is now going through a period w her e exercising the right to exclude outsiders and to regulate one's ow n group activity on the fishing grounds is intensifying. Any revision of the principal fisheries legislative framew or k can only add to this development by giving formal recognition through its provisions and to facilitate CBFM implementation in the context of the w hole fisheries management framew or k. Indeed Johannes (1998) made a w or thy recommendation that Vanuatu should w or k tow ar ds ensuring that national law supports local authorities in their regulation of fishing by means of village-based prohibitions and enforcement mechanisms, but that such law s should not define procedures too narrow ly .43 The developments from the recent review of the decentralized government system in Vanuatu44 should be closely observed for potential impact on fisheries management in general and village-based fisheries management in the coastal areas. Future fisheries management policies should set out strategies for ensuring harmonized implementation w ith clear roles for villages, the provincial or regional government system and the national government authorities. B1.5 Summ ar y of Observations and Important Lessons.
Main observations and some broad important lessons can be highlighted immediately from the review of the legal framew or k and implementation of CMT in community-based fisheries management in the four jurisdictions. These are as follow s .
See Hickey and Johannes 2002 at page 19. See Johannes 1998, p. 184.
See Decentralization Rev iew Commission ­ Gov ernm ent of Vanuatu, Constitutional Rev iew Commission Reports (2001).
The im port ance of legal recognition of custom or aspects of CMT, including ow ner ship and custom ar y fishing rights. The vesting or recognition of ow ner s hip over marine areas or fishing rights through legislation (as in the case of Vanuatu and Fiji, respectively) are obviously more substantial than mere recognition of custom (as in Cook Islands and Samoa) but this does not mean that there should be limited scope in the application of custom in fisheries management. As can be observed in all cases, but more prominently in the case of the Cook Islands and Samoa, the minimu m reference to custom could be translated into support for the use of effective traditional practices for the conservation and management of marine resources. It w ould be helpful if fisheries legislation elaborate practical means by w hic h these rights are applied. For example, in Fiji, customary fishing rights are primarily exclusive to the mataqali but the manner in w hic h these rights are utilized is also built into the fishing access mechanisms (i.e. the licensing regime). Additional support to these rights is provided by a formal registration mechanism. Legislation can further facilitate CMT in fisheries management by providing a regime w her e there is a role in the context of the wider fisheries management framew or k for communities to directly or indirectly influence management decisions or initiate local regulations. Legal recognition of custom , CMT or aspects thereof does not necessarily m e an codification of specific custom or traditional practice. Indeed, as cautioned by many, the codification of specific practices may be restrictive and may have the undesirable effect of freezing aspects of CMT. It is observed that CMT in PICs is dynamic. This valuable characteristic should be maintained. In order to avoid freezing custom, a general recognition that custom can be applied in fisheries management or recognition or ow ner s hip over marine areas or fishing rights may be the entire necessary legal basis required. " Codif ic ation" or legislative incorporation of traditionally-based governance structures and their role in community decision- ma kin g in the context of the w ider government framew or k is a factor that can perpetuate custom, as show n in the Samoan context. If direct recognition of traditional governance institutions is not possible, adoption of introduced institutions that can be influenced by traditional institutions, or leadership can be used effectively such as in the case of the Cook Islands. National legislation should incorporate CBFM and com pleme nt comm unit y initiated regulations. A noted concern about the four jurisdictions' legal regimes is the lack of legislation that expressly provided for broad participation in fisheries management including through CBFM. Many legislated fisheries policies in the w or ld have incorporated the principle of broad participation in fisheries management. 45 Suc h broad participation may include CBFM. If this approach is adopted by many PICs, it will provide a minimum legal basis to implement CBFM, including those that incorporate or are influenced by CMT. The Samoa case demonstrates how legislation, in the form of the provisions of the Fisheries Act on village by-law s , complement village- made rules based largely on traditional w is dom, practice and leadership. The Fisheries Act gives universality and enforceability to rules that or iginat e from villages in conventional law enforcement institutions, such as the courts. For m ar ine fisheries, CMT-influenced comm unit y fisheries m anageme nt or CBFM in general is most suited for inshore coastal areas. This finding is not a novelty as it is consistent w ith the proven CBFM systems globally. In the PICs, inshore coastal areas is w her e monitoring control and surveillance activities are easier to execute and the legal situation w ith respect to rights in or ow ner s hip over these marine areas is relatively clearer. This does not mean that the ow ners hip issues over coastal areas is settled or that the current legal situation regarding these issues is satisfactory.
to indigenous communities, as is evident in the case of Cook Islands, Fiji and Vanuatu, where there are sentiments about limited areas of recognized land ow ner s hip rights. · Long term effort to prom ot e CBFM is vital. Any external programme for assistance should be for a longer term duration than normal technical assistance or development projects. CBFM projects should envisage the eventual transfer of the ow ner s hip of the programme and its outcomes to the community and the country or government. It is obvious that CBFM activists should work in partnership w ith local communities to assure ow ner s hip and respect for and compliance w ith regulations. Long ter m effort in promoting CBFM w ill be sustainable also if CBFM activists work closely with government to ensure that such a vital aspect of community governance institution is not sidelined. The sustainability of the CBFM is also assured if government is educated on the value of CBFM, recognizes successful outcomes and integrates into its national fisheries policy and strategies. Eventual legislation to support these policies and strategies w ould add security to the sustainability of CBFM initiatives. Econom ic sustainability of CBFM is im port ant . The issue of improving livelihoods, in addition to improving fisheries resources conservation or management, should be an integral part of CBFM. This is illustrated by all the four jurisdictions studied ­ a finding consistent with global trends that ensure that fisheries management action through CBFM does not emphasize resource conservation or management alone but should be economically viable. As CBFM becomes entrenched as a vital part of fisheries management in the jurisdiction, costs of fisheries management are shifted from the fisheries management authority to the communities. These costs w ill need to be offset by incentives such as improved livelihoods and benefits or privileges to communities w ho invest time and effort in CBFM. Individual initiative is as im port ant as collective effort in prom ot ing CBFM. This is demonstrated clearly in the Vanuatu case but collective effort is vital to build on and sustain CBFM initiatives of individuals. Netw or king activities that promote coordination, cohesiveness and effective delivery, review, assessment and highlighting of outcomes are also vital, as is demonstrated clearly in the Fiji case. Programme tailored to each country's peculiarities. Above all, the CBFM initiative or programme should be tailored in design and delivery to the individual country circumstances. Some flexibility should be maintained so that it responds to emerging issues or to use options that are effective, such as the use of the Wan Smolbeg travelling theatre group in the case of Vanuatu, for aw ar eness campaigns. All the jurisdictions how ev er demonstrate that, w hile objectives and outcomes are similar if not identical, the w ays in w hic h the objectives or outcomes are achieved are rich in their variations.
Certain aspects of the broad lessons highlighted above, particularly the legislative aspects, are further elaborated in the next part of this study.
PART C. SOME SUGGESTIONS FOR ENHANCING CMT USE IN THE PACIFIC It is apparent that despite the consensus that CMTs should be utilized in contemporary fisheries management and the substantial legal recognition of CMTs in the Pacific, only a few PICs (Fiji, Cook Islands, Samoa, Vanuatu) have made notable progress in enhancing such use. Reasons for this rather unimpressive performance of CMT utilization in PICs cannot be fully accounted for through a desk study and short site visits. How ev er , various contributing factors may be suggested, aspects of which have been highlighted by the case studies. · There is a lack of clarity on how to operationalize CMT-based fisheries management, ow ing to insufficient information and advice and appreciation of the need for trials in order to glean lessons for w ider application nationally. There are difficulties associated w ith standardization, w hic h are compounded by the complexities of CMT w ithin a context of ethnic and cultural diversity, as is the case in the Melanesian countries of Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu. These create practical application problems, including the high levels of costs and technical capacity required to implement CMT systems. 46 CMT systems and community-based regimes in jurisdictions w ith decentralized governance w ill need to deal w ith the complexities of decentralization and decentralization laws. Questions abound as to the extent of conservation management legislative pow ers and functions to be exercised by provincial and local level governments, 47 and w hether these government entities have the capacity and resources to implement such functions. This is compounded by a lack of trust in national and local governments, w hether well founded or not, due to their alleged preoccupation w ith revenue generation to the exclusion of the values and practices needed for sound conservation and management. Legislative support for elaboration of the role of traditional management systems or traditional leadership, organization and governance can be weak, due to apprehensions about rigidifying custom through legislation. There may be fear of eroding custom by creating reliance on formal institutions. Uncertainty may exist as to how and at what level to legislate (i.e. w hether legislation should codify a specific customary management measure or practice or w hether it should merely provide a framew or k to facilitate recognition of such practice and allow for changes to occur). Conflict betw een current law s and mandates may create uncertainty as to w ho should take initiatives or implement CMTs or CBFM; 48.
See Simon Foale and Bruno Manele, Priv at is ing Fish? Barriers to the use of Marine Protected Areas f or Conserv at ion and Fishery Management in Melanesia, Resource Management in Asia-Pacif ic , Working Paper No. 47, Research School f or Asia Pacific Studies, The Australian National University, 2003.
For example in Papua New Guinea, Organic Law on Provincial and Local Lev el Gov ernm ents , the Fisheries Management Act and in Vanuatu the Decentralization and Local Gov ernm ent Regions Act 1994.
48 For example, in Vanuatu the Env ironm ent al Management and Conserv at ion Act 2002 empowers the Director of the department responsible f or env ironm ent to negotiate with custom landowners to protect and register Community Conserv at ion Areas while the Fisheries Act empowers the Minister f or f is heries to establish fishing reserv es.
CMT-based CBFM projects are sometimes mounted on an ad hoc basis w ithout sufficient attention to high implementation and maintenance costs, especially for larger countries.
The underlying lesson that can be draw n from the variety of difficulties identified above is that the situation in each jurisdiction is review ed thoroughly to identify the problems and to address them through identification of appropriate solutions. The same difficulty is confronted in presenting options for enhancing use of CMT in this brief study. How ev er , some factors w ill be identified by presenting below w hat experts in CMTs in the Pacific have identified and w hat this study demonstrates as the necessary prerequisites for utilizing CMT in contemporary fisheries management in the Pacific. The overview of the few functioning CMT systems in Part B and information collected from site visits also highlight possible opportunities for enhancing the use of CMTs in CBFM. The role of legislation is provided in this context.
A BETT ER UNDERSTANDING OF CMT SYST EM S AND T HEI R POT ENTIAL ROL E IN FISHERIES MANAGEM ENT.
Hviding and Ruddle (1991) underscore the need for the better understanding of the social, economic and legal dynamics of CMT systems to raise awareness, recognition and application of CMT in the Pacific.49 The need to evaluate benefits of CMTs as viable fisheries management tools w hic h must involve social scientists are also advocated by Johaness, Ruddle and Hviding (1991). It is noted in this regard that there is already a high level of appreciation for the potential role for CMT systems in contemporary fisheries management in the global and regional contexts. The understanding and evaluations advocated should not only be accomplished for individual CMT systems but results should also be shared and aw ar eness should be achieved at the national level. Increasing the aw ar enes s for the potential role of CMT in fisheries at the government policy and management level is vital. As stated by Hickey and Johannes (2002), education is not just for villages but also for government, particularly in promoting aw ar eness of the value of subsistence fisheries and the importance of CMT-based community fisheries management to such fisheries. It is also noted that at the national level, fisheries management officers have demonstrated an inherent and acute appreciation of the potential role that CMT systems can play in fisheries management due to having been brought up in fishing communities as w ell retaining strong links w ith their rural roots (Hviding and Ruddle 1991). 50 In this context, minimal effort is required to educate government officials in the value of CMT in the framew or k of contemporary fisheries management and therefore leading to an enhanced use of CMT in community fisheries management.
49 See also Ruddle 1998 at page 122. See also page 123: "before any action is taken, it is imperative that the nature of existing f is hing rights systems be documented, particularly those that have been or are being exercised". MRAG has attempted to f ollow this recommendation in studies of CMT sy st ems in Fiji and Vanuatu. See MRAG 1999a, p. 17. 50.
See also Hv iding and Larsen 1995, p. 15.
COMMITMENT, GUIDANCE AND RESOURCES FOR ENHANCING CMT USE IN FISHERIES MANAGEM ENT.
The general impression gained during brief site visits to certain PICs, along w ith documented experiences from the know n cases of CBFM in the Cook Islands, Fiji, Samoa and Vanuatu and trials of CBFM in Marshall Islands, point to inadequate commitment, guidance and allocation of resources as basic underlying causes for the slow progress in enhancing CMT use in fisheries management. Efforts should now be directed also at mainstreaming CMT systems at the national level to ensure that policies directly relating to CMT systems use in fisheries management are established w ith strategies and guidelines to implement them. Strategies w ould include renew ed effort to remind stakeholders in each jurisdiction of the value of CMT systems and deliberate and phased programmes, beginning w ith trials and continuing through to programme adaptation and replication on a w ider scale. The Fiji case demonstrates the effectiveness of mainstreaming CMT. Mainstreaming of community fisheries based on CMT w as achieved through the FLMMA. The main components of the approach were: (a) to involve local communities through a method w hic h instils goodw ill, trust and commitment; (b) training to use the agreed method and to ensure continuity; (c) field w or k to set the CBFM w or k in context; and (d) follow - up to ensure that not only conservation is achieved but that there is also an increased resource yield. Further dow n the process, but not least of all, is the goal of eventually influencing the government's development policy. There is no better w ay to convince government to adopt a management approach than to showcase a true success story. This is illustrated by the follow ing excerpt concerning the FLMMA in Fiji.
The accomplishments of the FLMMA partners were presented to the policy makers in Government in a workshop in 2001. The Ucunivanua clam monitoring had shown a 300% per annum increase in the no-take area and 100% per annum increase in the surrounding areas, as well as increased household income and greater catch per unit effort. After the policy makers got over their surprise at being given scientific findings by community members, they informed FLMMA of their desire to adopt the use of traditional Fijian customs to manage marine resources. As a direct result of FLMMA's work, the Government recently developed a full time program focusing on the use of locally managed marine reserves within coastal waters.51.
The importance of ensuring increased yields from resources and household incomes cannot be understated. Economic viability of the CBFM initiative is vital to the acceptance and survival of CFBM in any jurisdiction w hether it be Fiji or Brazil. 52 The programme for CMTbas ed community fisheries systems should therefore include components that ensure economic sustainability of the CMT-based fisheries management by addressing improved livelihoods of communities. Alternative activities to fishing, like aquaculture in Samoan villages, assist w ith conservation by taking fishing pressure off resource areas such as reefs. Where alternative economic activities can be encouraged, the future of CMT-based community fisheries initiatives becomes more secure. Johannes (1998) provides some helpful suggestions for the strategies necessary for successful fisheries management based on community-level approaches, w hic h w ould in turn employ CMT systems (Box No.6 ). Optimally, community-level approaches to fisheries management initiatives should be supported by government.
Veitay ak i et al. 2003, p.5. See McGrath, Cardoso and Pinto Sá 2002. See also Abdullah, Kuperan and Pomeroy, supra note 3.
· · · · · ·.
A strategy checklist for CBFM implementation (Johannes 1998).
Announce government's willingness to collaborate with villages on management issues, and invite requests for assistance from interested villages. Start small, and not with a comprehensive plan to address many types of fisheries or many villages. Concentrate initially on villages where local marine tenure, local authority and community cohesion are strong. Concentrate initially on villages where fishing ground geography facilitates effective village surveillance. Focus initially on a singular type or limited number of fisheries (e.g. beech de mar). Ensure that national law supports local authorities in regulating of fishing by means of villageb a se d prohibitions and enforcement mechanisms, but does not define these procedures too narrowly. Provide formal legal assistance in disputes only where local dispute resolution or enforcement has clearly failed. Train fisheries extension personnel in the skills necessary to help the community effectively combine local customs and knowledge with scientific knowledge for the purpose of marine resource management by: - studying local management procedures and relevant local knowledge concerning marine resources; and obtaining relevant literature; and - providing research-based management information and disseminating it in forms that can be readily understood by the community.
Leave final management decisions and enforcement to village authorities.
Certain useful sources of information can also be cited for mainstreaming and implementing CMT-influenced CBFM or general CBFM in PICs. Among these sources are a set of useful guidelines on the broad issues that should be addressed in directing policy, strategy and programme for CBFM in a co-management context, as presented in "Guidelines tow ar ds Effective Co-Management of Coral Reef Fisheries in the Pacific Region" ( MRA G 1999b). Another valuable source of information is a manual for actual implementation of CBFM in a co-management context, although it also contains useful general information on subsistence fisheries and fisheries management in the PICs. This is entitled, "Fisheries Management by Communities ­ A manual on promoting the management of subsistence fisheries by Pacific Island Communities" (King and Lambeth 2000).
ENHANCING CMT-BASED COMMUNIT Y FISHERIES THROUGH L EGISLATIO N: "CODIFICATION" OF CUSTOM?.
Much debate has ensued on w hether or not customary marine tenure should be legislated. Recently, w ithin the context of Vanuatu, the need to further examine the desirability to formally incorporate customary marine tenure in legislation w as questioned again. (Govan 2002). Those w ho caution against codification often regard the subject of legislating on customary laws or rights as codifying traditional practice or measures so that these are rigidified and cannot be changed later. This is a genuine concern but it depends on what it is that one wants to codify and the sense given to the term "codification". It is submitted that the act of legislating and legislation can have the attribute of rigidity only in circumstances w her e:.
emphasis is placed on translating specific customary principles and practice explicitly into "thou shall" or "thou shall not" statute forms, w ith little regard for the need to maintain the flexibility of custom or CMTs; and, one chooses the form and nature of statute that can only be promulgated or changed by the recognized highest law-making body (the National Parliament or Assembly), instead of choosing forms of law s , such as regulations, rules or by-laws that can be easily initiated or amended by traditionally-based local communities more closely linked to the site or issue that needs regulation.
Law or rule making is not an exclusive domain of the national legislature. Decentralization (through provincial or district level government or through delegation of the rule-making authority to the Minister or other administrative or local authority) allows site specific rules to be promulgated). Whereas bills for law s to be enacted as Acts of Parliament (the legislature) are put through onerous screening and debate procedures and require a substantial majority vote to pass bills into law , the power to make regulations or by-law s are normally delegated to a Minister (the executive), statutory authority, or a legally recognized local authority w her e rule-making processes are less stringent and are easily influenced by those familiar w ith the subject matter to be regulated. These qualities are essential to retain the flexibility of traditional laws and practices and to ensure that regulations and by-laws can change and evolve to reflect shifts in objectives, prior ities and concerns. As can be noted from the cases of the Cook Islands and Samoa, by-law s are passed by the Minister or Island Council respectively. In Samoa, even if in the end it is the Minister that promulgates regulations, administrative arrangements are established to allow villages to initiate by-laws so that the significant end result is that law s are seen to have been established and "ow ned" by the villagers. In the light of sluggish advances in preserving or promoting use of CMTs in the Pacific, Graham (1994) forcefully argues that where traditional tenure systems are collapsing ow ing to the inability of traditional authorities to effectively allocate, arbitrate and enforce use-rights, codification can enhance traditional law by replacing or re-enforcing the pow er of traditional authorities. Codification can range from mere recognition of custom, 53 as can be seen in many Constitutions and principal fisheries legislation of the PICs, to explicitly defined rights for access to or use of marine space. Codification therefore, is not necessarily bad or tantamount to rigidity. Fong (1994) stresses that codification should not be given the "connotation that that piece of legislation contains the w hole on the subject" but rather that it.
"recognizes an existing system of customary tenure" and "enables the customary marine tenure system to be not just congruent with, but also integrated, into the formal legal system, ... provide for basic rules and principles at the national level whilst retaining the flexibility which allows for a variety of specific local level management measures, and does receive explicit support from the wider legal ­political system".
Moreover, the legislation should allow for a system of consultation betw een government and resource authorities w hic h is necessary in contemporary fisheries management. Based on the scenario of the prevalence of minimum levels of codification of custom (i.e. the simple recognition of custom) in the PICs and the need to enhance use of CMTs in contemporary fisheries management, the important issue should no longer be the choice betw een codification or not. Rather, it should be the determination of the appropriate degree of elaboration through codification referred to by Graham (1994) as a "continuum of options" 54 These may include choosing the type of authoritative structure necessary to give.
The si mple recognition of custom is codification according to Graham 1994.
Graham 1994 also gives some examples of the matters that can be codified and how.
right holders the degree of security necessary to meet their purposes w ithout losing the necessary flexibility to adapt to changing circumstances, objectives and priorities. C3.1 Degrees of CMT Codification.
The options highlighted below on legislating custom, CMT or aspects thereof for fisheries management purposes do not by any means constitute an exhaustive list of choices. No model law or provisions are provided, given the multiplicity of PIC jurisdictions and cultures involved (despite their relatively homogenous legal history and systems). Nor is there any attempt to present options through a comprehensive assessment of legislation for CMT or through a discussion on the minutiae of CMT implementation. The aim is rather to provide a selection of examples and commentary on how PIC jurisdictions have dealt w ith codification of CMT or certain of its aspects. These may be useful as guidelines to managers and drafters familiar w ith individual countries and their law s and drafting practices, who can tailor- make laws for such specific cases. C3.1.1 Legislative prescription of the recognition of custom , custom ar y rights or the application of custom A short legal statement on the recognition of custom, customary rights or the applicability of custom as law or as a basis for certain decisions ensures further application and elaboration of the same in many PICs. In certain jurisdictions, it may be all the legal basis required and from w hic h a whole range of implementation action or options w ill ensue. Such legal statements are often found in national Constitutions and principal legislation. Indeed, as highlighted earlier, many PIC jurisdictions already recognize the application of custom generally, or as a basis for decision-making, customary rights or the applicability of custom as law , without elaborating on w hat is custom or customary law . It is left up to other laws, a low er law-making institution or judicial institution, such as courts, to prescribe the circumstances for application of custom and the w ay s to determine or apply custom. These types of legal statements, as found in the Constitutions of the Cook Islands, Samoa, Fiji and Vanuatu, have been described in the ear lier part of this study as examples. Article 73 of the Vanuatu Constitution, in addition to other provisions relating to the recognition of customary law, is of course an example of a clear and strong statement of customary rights in land held by the indigenous peoples of Vanuatu, the custom landow ners . This basically allow s the custom landow ners to deal w ith natural resources on their land subject only to the confines outlined in the Constitution. The rights over land extending to the seaside of the foreshore reef allows for custom landow ner s to utilize CMT in managing fisheries resources w ithin their lands, and is now the foundation for community-based fisheries in Vanuatu. Clear legal basis for rights-based in custom are also provided for in the Fiji Constitution through the tracing of Fiji's legal history and foundation for such recognition to the Deed of Cession. 55 The Constitution also restates the rights of Fijians to land as w ell as the ability to make law s that favour Fijians w her e such laws concern land or fishing rights. As regards fishing rights, Section 13 of the Fisheries Act restates the legal situation in the Deed of Cession and w hic h was earlier restated in the Birds, Game and Fish Protection Ordinance. Section 2 of Article X of the Marshall Island's Constitution is explicit in designating the Nitijela (the Legislature) to declare by an Act w hat the customary law shall be, as follows:.
"(1) In the exercise of its legislative functions, it shall be the responsibility of the Nitijela, whenever and to the extent considered appropriate, to declare, by Act, the customary law in the Marshall Islands or in any part thereof. The customary law so declared may include any provisions which, in the opinion of the Nitijela, are necessary or desirable to.
The Fiji Constitution 1987 as amended, Preamble.
supplement the established rules of customary law or to take account of any traditional practice.".
It is noted that Section 2 of Article X also uniquely states that the Legislature can add provisions that are necessary or desirable to supplement the established rules of custom. A bill for an Act made for declaring customary law or amendments thereto shall not be deal with by the Legislature w ithout the consideration of a report of a joint committee of the Legislature and the Council of Iroij. 56 Section 1 of Article X of the Marshall Islands Constitution specifically provides for rights in respect of land in a different manner, as follow s :.
"(1) Nothing in Article II shall be construed to invalidate the customary law or any traditional practice concerning land tenure or any related matter in any part of the Marshall Islands, including where applicable, the rights and obligations of the Iroijlaplap, Iroijedrik, Alap and Dri Jerbal.".
Many of the PICs' Constitutions how ev er follow the approach that matters of custom, customary rights and application of customary laws w ill be elaborated by other legislation. The differences betw een the jurisdictions are noted only in the degree of cognisance of custom or aspect of custom and extent to w hic h the individual PIC has pursued legislative prescription. For example, the preamble of the Kiribati Constitution provides for the recognition of custom in the follow ing manner.
"In implementing this Constitution, we declare that1. the will of the people shall ultimately be paramount in the conduct of the government of Kiribati;.
the principles of equality and justice shall be upheld;.
the natural resources of Kiribati are vested in the people and their Government;.
we shall continue to cherish and uphold the customs and traditions of Kiribati.".
Unlike the Vanuatu case, the Kiribati Constitution does not recognize specific customary rights but it created an opportunity seized by legislature to state in clear ter ms through the Law s of Kiribati Act 1989 that custom shall regulate certain matters. These include:.
"(a) the ownership by custom of or of rights in, over or in connection with native land (within the meaning assigned by the Native Lands Ordinance); or (i) any thing in or on native land; or (ii) the produce of native land, or the determination of, or rights in relation to, the boundaries to native land or rights in connection with the transfer of title to native land; or (b) rights in respect of the possession or utilisation of native land, including rights of hunting or gathering on, or taking minerals from, native land; or (c) the ownership by custom of rights in, over or in connection with any sea or lagoon area, inland waters or foreshore or reef, or in or on the seabed, including rights of navigation or fishing; (d) the ownership by custom of water, or of rights in, over or to water.".
The Marshall Islands Constitution, Section 2 of Article X.
The Laws of Kiribati Act, Schedule 1 section.
The matters set out in section 4 of Schedule I are civ il matters. In accordance with section 2 of the Laws of Kiribati Act, customary law is part of the law of Kiribati and can also be used f or: the determination of boundaries of, and titles to, customary land under section 58 of Magistrates Ordinance 1978; f or the determination of civil and criminal proceedings in Magistrates' Courts, 1979 ­ 1989; prov ided the custom was not repugnant to natural justice, equity and conscience or inconsistent with any.
The Constitution and other laws of Tuvalu provide for recognition and application of Tuvaluan custom and tradition in a manner similar to the one adopted by Kiribati. The preamble of the Constitution of Tuvalu has the only provision that refers to the w is h of the Tuvaluan people to "constitute themselves as an independent state based on Christian principles, the Rule of Law , and Tuvaluan custom and tradition". Parliament has built on this limited reference to custom by enacting the Laws of Tuvalu Act 1987 which designates "customary law" as having effect as part of the laws of Tuvalu, describes "customary law " as comprising "the customs and usages, existing from time to time, of the natives of Tuvalu"58 and provides for a number of matters to be regulated by custom rather than the imported common law . These matters include:.
"(b) the ownership by custom over or in connection with any area of the territorial sea or any lagoon, inland waters or foreshore, or in or on the seabed including rights of navigation, fishing or gathering; ... (c) ownership by custom of water or of rights in over or to water.59.
The Papua New Guinea Constitution provides for custom to be applied and enforced as part of the underlying law so long as it does not conflict w ith the Constitution or is repugnant to the general principles of humanity. An Act of Parliament may provide for the proof and pleading of custom, regulate the manner and the purposes for w hic h custom is recognized and provide for the resolution of conflicts of custom.60 In implementing the Constitution, the Custom Recognition Act Chapter 19 restates that custom can be pleaded in court except where its recognition or enforcement w ould result in injustice or w ould not be in the public interest or, in a case affecting the rights of a minor, its recognition or enforcement w ould not be in the interest of that child. 61 Relevant to fisheries and CMT is the follow ing provision:.
"Subject to this Act and to any other law, custom may be taken into account in a case other than a criminal case only in relation to ­ (a) the ownership by custom of or of rights in, over or in connexion with customary land or ­ (i) any thing in or on customary land; or (ii) the produce of, customary land, including rights of hunting or gathering; or (b) the ownership by custom of rights in, over or in connexion with the sea or a reef, or in or on the bed of the sea or of a river or lake, including rights of fishing; or (c) the ownership by custom of water, or of rights in, over or to water;"62.
Papua New Guinea recently added to its effort on developing the underlying law by enacting the Underlying Law Act 2000. In relation to customary law as underlying law , the Act defines "customary law" as "the customs and usages of the indigenous inhabitants of the country existing in relation to the matter in question at the time w hen and the place in relation to which the matter arises, regardless of whether or not the custom or usage has existed from time immemorial". 63 The Underlying Law Act 2000 how ev er adds little else to the principles.
Ordinance or other law f or the time being in f orc e in the country (s.42(2) Magistrate's Courts Ordinance 1978); and f or all civil or criminal proceedings in all courts except to the extent that it is inconsistent with the Constitution, or legislation or subsidiary legislation in force in Kiribati (s.5 Laws of Kiribati Act 1989).
Laws of Tuv alu Act 1987, Section 5 and Schedule 1.1.2 Ibid, Schedule 1.4 (b) and (c). See also Schedule 1.3 for the application of customary law in criminal cases. The Constitution of the Independent State of Papua New Guinea, Schedule 2.1 (1) and (2). Customs Recognition Act Chapter 19, Section.
Ibid Section.
The Underly ing Law Act 2000 Section 1.
and rules of application of customary law as has been developed through case law concerning Schedule 2.1 of the Constitution and the Customs Recognition Act even though it seeks to replace Schedule 2.1 of the Constitution. 64 It certainly offers little operational help on the issue of "the ow ners hip by custom of rights in, over or in connexion w ith the sea or a reef, or in or on the bed of the sea or a river or lake, including rights of fishing". Evidently, there is room for legislature to make specific laws concerning the matters listed in Sections 4 and 5 where custom may be considered, although the pr inc iples and manner in w hic h custom w ill be pleaded are now set out in the Underlying Law Act 2000. Nevertheless, custom has generally been important to deter minatio n of title over customary land in the land disputes dealt w ith by the Land Courts and in criminal and civil disputes arising in villages through Village Courts. Another way in which custom can be used to determine the manner in w hic h resources are used or managed is through the formation and operations of a customary land group incorporated under the Land Groups Incorporation Act.65 There is little or no information how ev er on how these groups have been involved in CMT and general fisheries management in the country. The principal legislation relating to fisheries in Papua New Guinea, the Fisheries Management Act 1998, also adds little to the use of CMT. While customary fishing rights w as an important issue at the time of development of the Fisheries Management Act 1998, the Act only declares that customary rights shall be recognized and respected in the area w her e the right operates 66 and to exempt customary fishing from the application of the Act unless expressly stated otherw is e.67 In subsequent sections, the Act only states that ter ms and conditions of access agreements and fishing licences shall be subject to and observance of customary fishing rights. Opportunity exists under the provincial and local-level government system for provincial governments to make laws on fisheries and to employ CMT in fisheries management. 68 How ev er , the Fisheries Management Act 1998, being a national Act of Par lia me nt prevails in respect of regulating how fisheries are managed. The limited use of custom as is prescribed under the Fisheries Management Act therefore prevails. It can be stated as general observation that w hile the legal system and laws of Papua New Guinea allow for wide use of custom and customary law , the prevailing use of custom is generally in the area of dispute settlement. The peoples of Solomon Islands, through the preamble of the Constitution, pledge that they shall "cherish and promote the different cultural traditions". Section 75 of the Constitution provides for Parliament to make provisions for the application of laws including customary law , as follow s :.
"Subject to this paragraph, customary law shall have the effect as part of the law of Solomon Islands.".
Until such act of Parliament is passed, Schedule 3 of the Constitution shall apply in relation to application of laws. Schedule 3 provides that customary law shall have effect as part of the law of Solomon Islands for as long as it is not inconsistent with the Constitution or an Act of Par lia me nt. Section 3 of Schedule 3 provides as follow s :.
"(3) An Act of Parliament may: (a) provide for the proof and pleading of customary law for any purpose;.
Ibid Section 24 (2).
J.S. Fingleton, Legal Recognition of Indigenous Groups, FAO Legal Papers on Line, 1998. See the internet site: http://www.f ao. org/ Legal/ prs -ol/ lpo1. pdf.
Fisheries Management Act Section 26. Ibid Section.
See Organic Law on Prov inc ial Governments and Local Level Governments, Section 42.
(b) regulate the manner in which or the purposes for which customary law may be recognized; and (c) provide for the resolution of conflicts of customary law.".
It w as only in 2000 that Solomon Islands enacted the Customs Recognition Act to apply custom. In relation to the consideration of custom in relation to fisheries resources, Section 8 provides as follow s :.
"Subject to provisions of this Act, the High Court (Civil Procedure) Rules, 1964, and to any other law, custom may be taken into account in a case other than a criminal case only in relation to(a) the ownership by custom of rights in, over or in connection with customary land of(i) anything in or on customary land; or (ii) the produce of customary land, including rights of hunting or gathering; (b) the ownership by custom of rights in, over or in connection with the sea or a reef, or in or on the bed of the sea or of a river or lake, including rights of fishing; (c) the ownership by custom of water, or of rights in, or over water;".
Although the Customs Recognition Act 2000 is recent, the Solomon Island's legislature w as already active in the area of fisheries management and in prescribing certain roles for customary fishing rights. In this connection, Section 10 (3) of the Fisheries Act 1998 on the law-making responsibilities of Provincial Governments and provincial ordinances states as follow s :.
"Ordinances made under this section may provide for any or all of the following (a) measures for the development of fisheries in provincial waters and the approval of fisheries development projects; (b) the registration or recording of customary fishing rights, their boundaries and the persons or groups of persons entitled under those rights; (c) open or closed seasons for fishing for all or any species of fish or other aquatic organisms in all or any areas of provincial waters based on scientific advice; (d) the closure of areas in which fishing for all or any species of fish or other aquatic organisms may be prohibited;".
Section 12 of the Fisheries Act 1998 gives further support to customary fishing rights by making commercial fishing subject to customary fishing rights, requires compensation to be paid for breach of customary fishing rights and makes it an offence for failing to comply w ith an order for compensation for breach of customary fishing rights. In the Solomon Islands therefore, the principal national legislation relating to fisheries has, w is ely or otherw is e, left the matter of further elaboration of the recognition and application of fishing rights to the Provincial Governments. No provincial ordinance to this effect is noted. Also in Palau, the responsibilities for areas where traditional fishing rights are normally exercised and therefore the pow er to elaborate law s relating to traditional fishing rights are granted to decentralized levels of government. Article 1(2) of the Constitution of Palau provides that "Each state shall have exclusive ow ners hip of all living and non- liv ing resources except highly migratory fish, from the land to tw elv e (12) nautical miles seaw ar d from the traditional baselines; provided, how ev er , that traditional fishing rights and practices shall not be impaired." Article V of Palau's Constitution further provides that:.
"Statutes and traditional law shall be equally authoritative. In case of conflict between a statute and a traditional law, the statute shall prevail only to the extent it is not in conflict with the underlying principles of the traditional law".
It is therefore possible in Palau that custom, traditional fishing rights and the traditional mechanisms through w hic h they operate shall function w ithout impediment. In practice, the application of these bold constitutional provisions has been fraught w ith difficulties and some undesirable consequences. The Court in interpreting and applying the law "has not only affected custom but has also become part of it", redefined customary processes and rules, made customary practices less flexible by codifying custom and "distorted w hat it w as mandated to preserve." (Graham and Idechong 1998). This is hardly the effect that numerous observers have cautioned ­ i.e., that codification and formalization of custom through statute w ill fossilize them and dilute their ability to adapt to changing circumstances. It is w or th considering the merits of recommendations by Graham and Idechong (1998) that in Palau, further national legislative action is required, not only to sort out the ambiguities and conflicts in the Constitution to avoid the courts from giving narrow interpretation to Constitutional provisions requiring custom, but also to preserve and recognize the usefulness of traditional authority particularly in implementing and enforcing rules, and to support states in clarifying and expanding the states' jurisdiction and enforcement pow ers concerning marine resources. Observations It is noted from the cited examples above that the legislative option of simple recognition of custom in fundamental law s , such as the Constitution, and allow ing legislature to elaborate the application of custom through other legislation, is w ell established in the PICs. Many legislatures in PICs have legislated on how custom shall be considered in a uniform fashion by enacting principal legislation for recognition of custom in almost identical style and substance, whether it is the Laws of Kiribati Act, the Laws of Tuvalu Act, the Custom Recognition Act of Papua New Guinea or the Customs Recognition Act of Solomon Islands. The marked difference is in how much further legislature and other law-making bodies in each country have taken recognition of custom beyond the basic "recognition of custom" legislation. Fiji and Solomon Islands are the only jurisdictions that have further legislated on the recognition of customary fishing rights although Fiji has a more prescriptive operational approach to recognition of custom than Solomon Islands. In addition, Fiji established a functional institutional structure to determine and record customary fishing right areas in the form of the "Native Lands and Fisheries Commission". In some countries, recognition and application of custom for purposes other than fisheries management is w ell advanced, such as in dealing w ith land disputes or in general maintenance of peace and order through village or community courts, which make decisions on certain criminal and civil matters on the basis of custom. The application of custom w ithin dispute settlement mechanis ms is to apply custom in a reactive rather then a proactive dispute prevention setting. Using custom in dispute settlement only seems a rather limited application of custom and is not desirable in natural resource management w her e communities are encouraged to be proactive by initiating rules that w ill promote ow ners hip of regulations and therefore ensure compliance w ith management measures. Unfortunately in countries like Papua New Guinea and Vanuatu, not much effort is made to operationalizing customary fishing rights and to establishing the place for such right in the overall fisheries management legal framew or k, despite the opportunity to do so and established precedents in other areas of law which apply custom. Lack of further legislative imitative how ev er is generally prevalent in all PICs. One notable commonality of all PICs' legislation relating to recognition and application of custom or fishing rights is that no particular principle or aspect of custom is described and recognized by the national legislation. Even the dispute settlement mechanis ms established in Papua New Guinea and Vanuatu do not specify the customary rules that shall apply. Decisions in dispute settlement fora in these jurisdictions are no doubt influenced by custom but no formal record or a finding of customary law is made. Where conservation rules are formally promulgated, such as in the case of Samoa, they are not specified to be customary.
FAO/FishCode Review No.7 43.
rules although there is opportunity for custom and usage to influence the establishment of specific measures. This preserves the dynamic nature of custom or CMT and should be the approach to pursue rather than attempting to describe customary rules in detail w hic h reduces their dynamis m and flexibility through detailed prescription. Any further prescription by reducing to w r iting customary practices such as has been done by the Courts in Palau so that custom becomes universal and inflexible is not recommended. Another encouraging feature in PIC's legislations relating to custom is the designation of low er levels of authority to make or apply laws. This approach provides the opportunity for decisions and rules to be made by institutions and persons w ith more concern w ith the subject matter in issue, and greater familiarity w ith the environment w ithin w hic h the decisions or rules are implemented. The chances for making more relevant decisions and rules are better at these levels of authority and promote better compliance. There is still room for national legislation to provide guidance for preservation and incorporating traditional authority, particularly in implementing and enforcing customary rules in the w ider fisheries management framew or k, and to support low er levels of authority in clarifying and expanding their mandates and enforcement pow er s concerning marine resources. C3.1.2 Establishing socio-political institutions that are constituted by traditional leaders or influenced by indigenous governance structures and custom through legislation It is not necessary for customary law or traditional practice to be preserved only by direct reference to them in Constitution and other legislation. Preservation or contemporary use of custom and practice can also occur through legal recognition or contemporary use of traditional forms of social organization, authorities and governance. This is certainly the approach taken in Samoa ( Mata i System and village Fono), the Cook Islands (House of Arikis), and Federated States of Micronesia (the Chamber of Chiefs), Fiji (Boselevu Vakaturanga), the Marshall Islands (Council of Iroij), Palau (Counsel of Chiefs) and Vanuatu (National Council of Chiefs or Malvatumauri). These institutions have the opportunity to influence the recognition of custom, including customary forms of marine resource management ( Pu lea 1993). Many of the traditional organizations in the jurisdictions mentioned above are recognized by the country's Constitution and nor mal ly have an advisory role on matters relating to custom, although some of them have other roles such as the ability of the Council of Iroij of the Marshall Islands to screen and request reconsideration of bills relating to customary law and traditional practice, 69 and the role of Fiji's Bose Levu Vaka Turanga to advise on the appointment of a certain number of senate members, and appointment and removal of the President and the Vice President. 70 Vanuatu's Malvatumauri, formed prior to independenc e and now accommodated in the Constitution, also plays a judicial role in addition to the advisory role that it has on custom matters relating to bills that come before Parliament. (Bolton Lissant 1999). The Constitutions of the Federated States of Micronesia and Palau have interesting provisions relating specifically to the continuity of roles and functions of a traditional leader. Article V of the Federated States of Micronesia Constitution provides, in addition to providing for the preservation of traditions through statute, the possibility for traditional leaders to be given formal roles in government, and preserves the ability to form a Chamber of Chiefs.
Indeed, the Constitution of the Marshall Islands relating to the Council of Iroij is one of the most detailed of Constitutional prov is ions on similar matters in the PICs. Article III on the Council of Iroij has ten sections that deal inter alia with the establishment of the Council of Iroij, its composition, offices, procedures and privileges.
See Constitution sections 90 and 92 to 93.
similar to the collective Chiefly entities created in other jurisdictions. Article V provides as follow s :.
"Section.
Nothing in this Constitution takes away a role or function of a traditional leader as recognized by custom and tradition, or prevents a traditional leader from being recognized, honoured, and given formal or functional roles at any level of government as may be prescribed by this Constitution or by statute. Section.
The traditions of the people of the Federated States of Micronesia may be protected by statute. If challenged as violative of Article IV, protection of Micronesian tradition shall be considered a compelling social purpose warranting such governmental action. Section.
The Congress may establish, when needed, a Chamber of Chiefs consisting of traditional leaders from each state having such leaders, and of elected representatives from states having no traditional leaders. The constitution of a state having traditional leaders may provide for an active, functional role for them.".
Article V of the Palau Constitution reads:.
"Section.
The government shall take no action to prohibit or revoke the role and function of a traditional leader as recognised by custom and tradition which is not inconsistent with this Constitution, nor shall it prevent a traditional leader from being recognized, honoured, or given formal or functional roles at any level of government.".
The level of specificity in the FSM and Palau Constitutions in preserving roles and functions of traditional leaders appears to be possible only w ith territorially and demographically small jurisdictions, ow ing to the relative homogeneity of cultures despite the diversity in their minute features. Unfortunately, as observed in the case of Palau, such explicit and potent legal provisions that recognize the value of traditional leadership have not effectively translated into governance action, particularly the potential for its application to natural resources management (Graham and Idechong 1998). In addition to the provisions for recognition of customary law , the Solomon Islands Constitution in section 114 (2) (b) of Chapter 12 provides Parliament to make law for the government of Honiara and provinces and "consider the role of traditional Chiefs in the village". The other PIC constitutions create possibility for recognition of traditional leadership institutions in broad ter ms through references to upholding culture and tradition. 71 The Papua New Guinea and Tuvalu Constitutions refer broadly in the preambles to the maintenance of culture and traditional communities or social organizations. For example, the Papua New Guinea Constitution refers in the National Goals and Directive principles "to achieve development primar ily through the use of Papua New Guinean forms of social, political and economic organization". 72 Observations Regardless of the style and substance of the Constitutional provisions for the incorporation or recognition of traditional governance institutions or establishment of formal institutions that are influenced by traditional leaders or custom, experiences show that effective use of such institutions in preserving and applying custom occur where PIC legislatures also supplement Constitutional provisions by enacting legislation to deter mine the functions and extent of the mandates for such institutions.73 This is clearly seen in Samoa w her e authority of the Village Fono is recognized through the enactment and application of the Village Fono Act.
For example in the Niue and Kiribati Constitutions. Constitution of the Independent State of Papua New Guinea. National Goal and Directiv e Principle 5.
Exampl es of si milar approaches in legislation abound in areas other than fis her ies management where cus to m is r eadil y applied and enforced through clear but flexibl e mandate. T he Village Courts of Papua New Guinea largely keep cus to m relevant.
The main features of the Village Fono Act of Samoa are: 74 · its stated purpose and objectives in the long title w hic h is to "validate and empow er the exercise of power and authority by Village Fono in accordance w ith the custom and usage of their villages and to confirm or grant certain pow er s , and to provide for incidental matters."; Clear deter min ation of the jur is dic tional scope of the Village Fono w hic h does not apply to non-village members or persons who, not being a Matai of its village, resides on Government freehold or leasehold; Clear definition of a Village Fono w hic h is, "in relation to a village means the assembly of the Alii ma Faipule of that village meeting in accordance w ith the custom and usage of such village and includes the plural"; Clear statement of pow ers , including exercise of pow ers based on custom and usage, validation of past exercise of powers, sweeping pow er s with respect to the affairs of the village, the exercise of powers granted to it by any other Act , specific law-making pow ers in relation to maintenance of village hygiene and economic development; Clear statement of pow ers to enforce village rules or direction; Right of Appeal against decision of a Village Fono and related procedures; Grant of economic incentives, such as exemption from income tax; Ability to delegate Village Fono pow er s ; The absence of description of a specific customary practice that should be applied by the Village Fono.
The pow ers accorded under the Village Fono Act are w ide enough to enable the Village Fono to pass village rules relating to fisheries management. The Samoan legislature further buttressed sound tradition-influenced decisions by formalizing through the Fisheries Act a mechanism for village conservation and management rules by closing the gap in jurisdiction under the Village Fono Act to extend regulation over outsiders w ho are not bound by village rules or directions. The ability of the Island Councils of the Cook Islands to make custom-influenced rules or recognize the traditional conservation system of Ra'ui for fisheries conservation and management can also be traced back to the legal author ity in legislation in the form of the Marine Resources Act. The Marshall Islands has legislated for decentralized fisheries management through Local Government Councils. Part IV of the Marine Resources Act provides for the pow ers of the Local Government Councils to manage and develop fisheries, designate local fisheries areas, establish local fisheries committees, prepare fisheries management plans and adopt ordinances. In the preparation of fisheries management plans, the Local Government Council "has a duty to consult w ith all those w ho may be directly affected including traditional leaders, fishers and holders of traditional rights". Part IV also provides for the right of appeal against the decisions of the Local Government Council. The legislative framew or k for decentralized fisheries management is observed to have facilitated a necessary process which is the development of a community-based fisheries management programme in the Marshall Islands (Faásili 2002).
because village court legislation el abor ates a dispute settlement mec hanis m where decisions are made based on c usto m of the community to which the Village Court belongs.
See the Village F ono Act, secti ons 3 (2), 3(3), 3(4), 5, 6, 9, 10 and 11.
Traditional practices for management of the qoliqoli in Fiji is sustained to some extent by the Fisheries Act w hic h restates traditional fishing rights vested in the mataqali and elaborates a system w her e authorization to use the qoliqoli by outsiders is given only on the agreement of the traditional leader. There is opportunity for and a need to enhance legislation for CMTbas ed community fisheries as it is observed that the current mechanism is not adequate for guiding effective community fisheries management in Fiji (Veitiyaki et al. 2003). The undertaking by government to enact legislation to accord ow ner s hip of the foreshore to the Vanua offers a good opportunity also to develop legislated guidelines on implementing Vanua-based marine resources management that could also draw from the Village Fono Act of Samoa. C3.2 Possible Next Steps.
For fisheries management the Samoan experience clearly can be replicated only in jurisdictions w her e similar characteristics exist. Such characteristics may include continued reverence for traditional leadership, cohesive traditional socio-economic and political groupings and, not least, the w ill of government to divest pow er and responsibilities. A guess is hazarded here that small jurisdictions, such as FSM, Palau and Vanuatu, could be able to use the Samoa model. It must be cautioned how ev er that the models are simply guidelines and w hatev er legislative framew or k is developed to enhance CMT, use in each PIC must reflect national circumstances and address the concerns and needs peculiar to that jurisdiction. The numerous experiences and lessons learned from trials, collective effort and partnerships built to promote community fisheries in other PICs, can only be part of the body of guidelines to develop better elaboration of roles of traditional leadership systems and custom for the better conservation and management of fisheries resources in individual countries. The studies of the CBFM initiatives and experiences show that there are various ways to go about implementing CMT-based community fisheries. There are valuable practical lessons that should be learned from these experiences. It is clear, how ev er , that prospects for recognition and application of CMT in contemporary fisheries management can be enhanced if national governments elaborate further the role of CMT and the traditional institutions that sustain it. In this context, efforts to promote participatory approaches to fisheries management, w hether based on CMT or not, could, as a start, take the form of government policy statements. They w ould be strengthened w er e such statements to become legislated policy. To this end, it w ould be advantageous for governments directly to provide, through fisheries legislation, the ability or pow er s to utilize, w hen it is deemed appropriate, broad participation in fisheries management by creating an institutional framew or k and procedures to implement CBFM, and the ability to regulate it. This w ould be in line w ith the noted global trend in fisheries legal framew or ks where fisheries legislation sets out principles or policies that are used to guide the implementation of statutory management pow er s and functions (FAO 2001). An example of legislative initiative is demonstrated by the Tonga case. Despite the lack of reference to custom and usage in the Constitution of Tonga and years of moderate results from centralized fisheries management, there w as a clear government w ill to create the opportunity in legislation for use of participatory forms of fisheries management that could benefit from traditional know ledge and practices. In 2002, the Assembly enacted the Fisheries Management Act, w hic h incorporates a basic framew or k for community fisheries management. Section 14 and 15 of the Fisheries Management Act clearly states the ability of the Minister to designate communities for community-based fisheries management and to set out their rights and responsibilities. The provisions maintain flexibility for future agreement on the organizational structure of the designated community, but clearly they w ill be influenced by existing community organizations and established formal institutions such as the Tow n and District authorities constituted by legislation. Designated communities w ill have the opportunity to initiate management measures and community regulations. The Tonga.
FAO/FishCode Review No.7 47.
approach in CBFM is based on the Samoan system but maintains enough generality so that a w or kable CBFM system w hic h responds to Tonga's peculiar circumstances and needs could be developed (Kuemlangan 2000). Tonga w ill how ev er need, inter alia, a CBFM implementation strategy and enhanced institutional capacity to implement its CBFM policy. In the Cook Islands, the Marshall Islands and Sam oa, legislation provides a broad institutional framew or k to w or k w ith in establishing CMT-based community fisheries. While Samoa's CBFM system appears w ell entrenched, the first tw o countries may need strategies and programmes, w ith a corresponding commitment of adequate resources, to realize CBFM, including a CMT-based CBFM system. It is noted that Marshall Islands has developed a strategy to implement CBFM but, as is highlighted by Fa'asili (2003), the CBFM initiatives w ill require Marshall Islands to enhance its institutional capacity and other resources. In the Federated States of Micronesia, Palau and Solom on Islands, w her e coastal or inshore fisheries management areas or mandate is clearly decentralized to the State or provincial governments, it appears essential for a nation-w ide strategy and programme to guide and assist states in establishing CMT-based CBFM. In Palau and Solomon Islands, it appears possible for the national government also to establish a further legislative framew or k, separately or incorporated into fisheries legislation, w hic h establish essential components for CMT-based CBFM to compliment existing legislation. The national government should w or k closely w ith states and provincial governments to establish and implement CBFM programmes and further legislation, particularly in designating the roles of traditional institutions in implementing CBFM. Vanuatu decentralized governments w ill have to collaborate closely w ith the national government and custom landow ners to build on the clear title over marine areas up to the seaside of the foreshore reef and formalize the village-based fisheries management system by establishing a national legislative framew or k with components similar to Samoa, Marshall Islands or Tonga, or draw from all these jur is dic tions . Fiji can build on the clear fishing rights of indigenous Fijians and the limited but valuable interaction betw een traditional leadership and fishing access (licensing) system and elaborate its CBFM policies into its fisheries legislative framew or k. The findings from the numerous CBFM projects, studies and the work of the FLMMA and indigenous communities should be draw n on in developing such legislative framew or k. Consultation w ith all current CBFM activists and stakeholders in developing the legislative framew or k is essential. Papua New Guinea also has a decentralized government system but the national government has consistently designated fisheries management a matter of national interest through legislation, thus w r es ting fisheries management and related opportunities to establish a CBFM aw ay from provincial and local-level governments. The government has also consistently exempted customary fishing from the ambit of the fisheries legislative framew or k. How ev er , the national government, through the National Fisheries Authority, could now be w ell positioned to develop a nationw ide decentralized fisheries management policy including CBFM w hic h can later become legislated policy through its national fisheries legislative framew or k. The elaboration of such policy and associated implementation plans must be based on a w ell thought-out strategy that should include extracting results from executed and planned studies and projects in CBFM, w ide consultation w ith all stakeholders including provincial and local-level governments and communities, and draw ing valuable external experience and assistance from entities such as SPC. Other autonomous PIC jurisdictions (Kiribati, Nauru, Niue and Tuvalu) should also develop their CMT-based CBFM policy and strategy, w hic h would be eventually incorporated into their fisheries legislative framew or k. As suggested in the case of Papua New Guinea, the national governments of these jurisdictions should initiate the elaboration of such policy and associated implementation plans based on a carefully planned strategy that should include extracting results from studies and projects in CBFM. Wide consultation w ith all stakeholders.
48 FAO/FishCode Review No.7.
and external assistance from specialized entities, such as SPC, w ould be essential to the policy elaboration exercise. Clearly, the commitment of resources and enhanced institutional capacity is required in these jurisdictions to develop and implement their CMT-based CBFM policy.
CONCL USI O N Increased use of CBFM, including those based on CMT in the Pacific, w ill only materialize if there is concerted effort by government, non-governmental institutions, stakeholder groups and individuals to promote their use. A cursory examination of PIC Constitutions, fisheries legislation and general natural resource management practice indicate that the PICs have the necessary minimum legal basis for application of CMT, and are receptive to or already practise participatory approaches to fisheries management including those based on CMT. This does not mean how ev er , that further enhancement of the use of CMT-based CBFM in PICs cannot be carried out. Clearly, the effectiveness of a CBFM system does not depend solely on establishing a legal basis for such a system but also on how it is implemented. Effective implementation of CBFM will require the commitment of substantial resources by government, interested groups and stakeholders at the initial phase of implementation, an extensive national campaign to w or k with communities and government authorities to motivate them to make CBFM w or k, and a programme that ensures continuous engagement and involvement of coastal communities in management of the inshore fisheries resources. There is accumulated literature that directly or indirectly discusses the subject of utilizing CMT in fisheries management in the Pacific. This stresses the need to develop the institutional framew or k to facilitate the use of CMTs. General developments in the efforts on promoting the use of CMTs in the Pacific can be grouped into three areas and timeframes, namely: · · · focussing attention on CMTs from the late 1970s to 1980s; arguing CMT potential through evaluation of its role and the examination of its implications from the early to mid 1990s; and trialling, implementing and establishing guidelines on use of CMTs from mid 1990s to this decade.75.
The trend in these developments and recent efforts to establish CBFM systems highlight the need for: · · · a systematic approach to utilization of CMTs; country-focused programmes for implementation of CBFM and the utilization of CMTs in this context; and the need to keep the momentum tow ar ds appropriate utilization of CMT in contemporary fisheries management.
In this regard, the efforts of organizations, such the Secretariat of the Pacific Community, in enhancing sound community fisheries and the role CMT in that context is lauded and should be supported. 76.
Notable exceptions in the actual utilization or implementation of CMTs outside these time frames, whether by design or chance, can be seen in the case of the Fiji (1873) and the Cook islands (1989). Noteworthy developments at the regional level in support of CBFM by SPC or with SPC involv em ent are: South Pacif ic Commission 23rd Regional Technical Meeting on Fisheries, Noumea, New Caledonia August 1991; Community Management and Common Property of Coastal Fisheries in Asia and the Pacif ic 1994 (Traditional Management Workshop); Rights-based Management Workshop; SPC Traditional, Marine Resource Management and Knowledge Inf orm at ion Bulletin; and establishment of Community Fisheries Section and implementation of CBFM projects under the Section.
REFERENCES Abdullah, N. M .R,, Kuperan, K. and Pomeroy, R. S. 1998. Transaction Costs and Fisheries Co-Management, Marine Resource Economics 13: 103-114.pp. Alcala, A. C. and Vande Vusse, F.J. 1994. The role of government in coastal management. In R. S. Pomeroy. ( Ed.) . Proceedings of the Workshop on Community Management and Common Property of Coastal Fisheries and Upland Resources in Asia and the Pacific: Concepts, Methods and Experiences. Manila: ICLARM, 12-19.pp. Andrews, G.J. 1987. Marine Ecological Survey of Pukapuka Atoll. The Australian Institute of Marine Science. Tow ns v ille. Berkes, F. 1994. Property rights and coastal fisheries. In R. S. Pomeroy. ( Ed.) . Pr oc eedings of the Workshop on Community Management and Common Property of Coastal Fisheries and Upland Resources in Asia and the Pacific: Concepts, Methods and Experiences. Manila: ICLA RM. pp. 51-62. Berkes, F., Mahon, R., McConney, P., Pollnac, R. and Pomeroy, R. 2001. Managing Small-Scale Fisheries: Alternative Directions and Methods. International Development Research Center. 2001. 309p. Bolton, L. 1999. Chief Willie Bongmatur Maldo and the incorporation of Chiefs into the Vanuatu state. Technical Report Discussion Paper 99/2, State, Society and Governance in Melanesia Project, RSPAS, ANU. Crocombe, R.G. 1961. Land Tenure in the Cook Islands. A thesis submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in the Australian National University by Ronald Gordon Crocombe. Canberra. 1961. Decentralization Review Commission - Government of Vanuatu. 2001. Decentralization Review Commission Report, Volumes 1 and 2: June 2001. Doulm an D.J. 1992. Community-based Fishery Management: Towards the Restoration of Traditional Practices in the South Pacific. A paper prepared for presentation at the FAO/Japan Expert Consultation on the Development of Community-based Coastal Fishery Management Systems for Asia and the Pacific, Kobe. Japan. 1992. Fa'asili, U. and Kelekolio, I. 1999. The use of Village By-laws in Marine Conservation and Fisheries Management. Information Paper 17. Secretariat of the Pacific Community. 1st SPC Heads of Fisheries Meeting, Nomea, New Caledonia. 9 - 13 August 1999. Fa'asili, U. 2002. Technical Assistance to the Republic of Marshall Islands on setting up a Community Fisheries Programme and Advice on a Small Scale Tuna Development Project. Field Report No.
Secretariat of the Pacific Community, Noumea, New Caledonia. 2002. FAO. 1997. Fisheries Technical Guidelines for Responsible Fisheries, No.4: Fisheries Management. Rome. 1997. FAO. 2002. Law and sustainable development since Rio ­ Legal issues and trends in agriculture and natural resources management. FAO Legislative Study 73. Rome Fingleton, J.S. 1998, Legal Recognition of Indigenous Groups. FAO Legal Papers on Line. 1998: http://www.fao.org/Legal/prs-ol/lpo1.pdf Foale, S and Manele, B. 2003. Privatising Fish? Barriers to the Use of Marine Protected Areas for Conservation and Fishery Management in Melanesia. Resource Management in Asia-Pacific. RMA P Working Papers. Working Paper No. 47.
FAO/FishCode Review No.7 53.
Fong, G. M. 1994. Case Study of a Traditional Marine Management System: Sasa Village, Macauta Province, Fiji. South Pacific Forum Fisheries Agency and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Project RAS/92/TO5 Case Studies on Traditional Marine Management Systems in the South Pacific. Field Report 94/1. Rome. Govan, H. 2003. Notes on village-based marine resource management in Efate, Vanuatu. (unpublished draft report). Graham , T. 1994. Flexibility and the codification of traditional fisheries management systems, SPC Traditional Marine Resource Management and Know ledge Information Bulletin, No. 3, January 1994. Graham , T. and Idechong, N. 1998. Reconciling customary and constitutional law : managing marine resources in Palau, Micronesia. Ocean and Coastal Management 40. pp. 143-164. Hickey, F. R. and Johaness, R. E. 2002. Recent evolution of villagebased marine resource management in Vanuatu. Traditional Marine Resources Management and Know ledge Information Bulletin, Number 14. October 2002. Hviding, E. and Jul-Larsen, E. 1995. Community-Based Resource Management in Tropical Fisheries, First Edition. University of Namibia, Windhoek. Hviding, E. and Ruddle, K. 1991. A regional Assessment of the Potential Role of Customary Mar ine Tenure Systems (CMT) in Contemporary Fisheries Management in the South Pacific FFA Report 91/71. Hornell, J. 1940. Report on the Fisheries of Fiji. Johannes, R. E. 1998. Government-supported, village-based management of marine resources in Vanuatu. Ocean and Coastal Management 40. pp.165-186. Johannes, R. E., Ruddle, K. & Hviding, E. 1991. The Value today of Traditional Management and Knowledge of Coastal Marine Resources in Oceanea. Paper presented at the South Pacific Commission's Tw enty - thir d Regional Technical Meeting on Fisheries, Noumea, New Caledonia, 5-9 August 1991. SPC/Fisheries 23/WP.11. 4 August 1991. Karlsen, G. R. 2001. Can formalisation help? The introduction of fisheries co-management in the inshore fisheries of Dingle, Co. Kerry, Ireland. In Marine Policy 25 (2001), pp. 83-89. King, M. and Fa'asili, U. 1999. Community-based management of subsistence fisheries in Samoa Fisheries Management and Ecology 6, pp, 133-144. King, M. and Lambeth, L. 2000. Fisheries Management by Communities ­ A manual on promoting the management of subsistence fisheries by Pacific Island Communities.Co mmunity Fisheries Section, Secretariat of the Pacific Community, Noumea, New Caledonia.. Kuem langan, B. 2000. Report On Assistance To Tonga. In Fisheries Legislation, Final Report of TCP/TON/8923: Assitance in Fisheries Legislation. FAO. Rome. 2000. Kuem langan, B. and Teigene, H. 2003. An overview of legal issues and broad legislative considerations for community-based fisheries management. Unpublished paper submitted and presented at the Second Large River Symposium (LARS2), 11-14 February 2003. Phnom Penh, Cambodia. Kurien, J. 1999. Community Property Rights: Re-establishing them for a secure future for small-scale fisheries. In FAO Fisheries Technical Paper 404/1. Use of Property Rights in Fisheries Management. Rome.
54 FAO/FishCode Review No.7.
Leria, C. and Van Houtte, A. 2000. Rights-based fisheries: A legal overview. In Current fisheries issues and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the Unites Nations, pp 263300. A publication in association w ith the Center for Oceans Law and Policy, University of Virginia School of Law. Lindsay, J. 1998. Designing Legal Space: Law as an enabling tool in community-based management. International Workshop on Community-based Natural Resource Management, Washington D.C. 10-14 May, 1998. Munro, D. M. 1996. A Case Study of Traditional Marine Management Systems in Pukapuka Atoll, Cook Islands. Case Studies on Traditional Marine Management Systems in the South Pacific Field Report 96/2. South Pacific Forum Fisheries Agency and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome. McGrath, D. G., Cardoso, A. and Pinto Sá, E. 2002 Community Fisheries And CoManagement In the Lower Amazon Floodplain of Brazil. Paper presented at the International Symposium On The Management Of Large Rivers For Fisheries: Sustaining Livelihoods And Biodiversity In The New Millennium, Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia, 12-15 February 2002. MRAG. 1999a. The Performance of Customary Marine Tenure in the Management of Community Fishery Resources in Melanesia. Final Technical Report. MRAG. 1999b. The Performance of Customary Marine Tenure in the Management of Community Fishery Resources in Melanesia, Volume.
Guidelines tow ar ds Effective Co- Manage ment of Coral Reef Fisheries in the Pacific Region. Peteru, C. 1993. Environmental Legislation Review - Western Samoa. South Pacific Regional Environment Programme (Apia). Pomeroy, R. S. Katon, B.M. and Harkes, I. 2001. Conditions affecting the success of fisheries co-management: lessons from Asia. In Marine Policy 25 pp.197-208. Pulea, M. 1993. An Overview of Constitutional and Legal Provisions Relevant to Customary Marine Tenure and Management Systems in the South Pacific, Pacific Law Unit, University of South Pacific, Vanuatu. FFA Report 93/23, Honiara 1993. Ponia, B. Raum e a, K. Roi, N. Makikiriti, N. and Turua, T. 1998. Inshore Invertebrate Resources of Rarotonga Island. Ministry of Marine Resources, Cook Islands. 1998. Raum e a, K. 1999. 2nd Monitoring of the Raui at Nikao and Matavera, November 1999. Report for the Data Analysis and Report Writing Training Workshop, Cook Islands.1999. Ruddle, K. 1994. Changing the focus of coastal fisheries management. In R. S. Pomeroy. (Ed.). Proceedings of the Workshop on Community Management and Common Property of Coastal Fisheries and Upland Resources in Asia and the Pacific: Concepts, Methods and Experiences. Manila: ICLARM, pp.63-86. Ravuvu, A. 1983. Vaka I Taukei: The Fijian Way of Life. Institute of Pacific Studies, University of South Pacific, Suva, Fiji. Ruddle, K. 1998. The context of policy design for existing community-based fisheries management systems in the Pacific Islands, pp. 105­126. In Ocean & Coastal Management Special Issues 40, Numbers 2-3, 1998, A modern role for traditional coastal marine resources management systems in the Pacific Islands. Sayw ood, A. Turua, T. and Makikiriti, N. 2002. Ministry of Marine Resources. 3rd Monitoring Survey of the Rarotonga Raui, Government of Cook Islands. Taua, A. 1999. Community-based Fisheries Management in Samoa. FishRights99 Conference, Fremantle, Australia. 1999.
FAO/FishCode Review No.7 55.
The World Bank. 1999. Report from the International CBNRM Wor ks hop, Washington D.C., 10-14 May 1998. URL: http://www.worldbank.org/w bi/c onatr em/ Veitayaki, J. 1998. Traditional and Community-based Marine Resources Management System in Fiji: An evolving Integrated Process. Coastal Management, Vol. 26, 1 January- March 1998, pp. 47­60. Veitiyaki, J. Aalbersberg, B. Taw ak e , A. Rupeni, E. & Tabunakaw ai, K. 2003. Mainstreaming Resource Conservation: The Fiji Locally Managed Marine Area Netw or k and its Influence on National Policy. Resource Management in Asia-Pacific Working Paper No. 42 Resource Management in Asia-Pacific Program, Research Schools of Pacific and Asian Studies, The Australian National University. Vunisea, A. 2002. Community-based Mar ine Resource Management in Fiji: The challenges. SPC Women in Fisheries Information Bulletin No. 11, November 2002.
Cook Islands · The Cook Islands Constitution · Cook Islands Act 1915 · Constitution of the Federated States of Micronesia · Constitution of the State of Chuuk · Yap State Constitution · The Phonpei Constitution · The Kosrae Constitution Fiji · The Constitution of the Republic of Fiji · Deed of Cession of 10 October 1874 Islands 1997 · Cession of Rotuma to Great Britain in November 1879 · Fisheries Act · Fijian Affairs Act · Native Lands Trust Act Kiribati Marshall Islands Palau Papua Guinea New · The Constitution of Kiribati · Constitution of the Marshall Islands · Constitution of the Republic of Palau · The Constitution of the Independent · State of Papua New Guinea · · · Customs Recognition Act Ch. 19 Underlying Law Act 2003 Fisheries Management Act 1998 Village Courts Act · Laws of Kiribati Act 1989 · Customary Law Commission Act · Customary Law (Bikini Atoll) Act · Marine Resources Act · Outer Islands Local Government Act · Rarotonga Local Government Act Federated States of Micronesia.
· The Constitution of the Independent · Village Fono Act State of Samoa · The Fisheries Act · The Constitution of Solomon Islands · The Tokelau Act 1948 (as amended) · The Fono Act · The Constitution of Tuvalu · Constitution of the Republic of Vanuatu · The Laws of Tuvalu Act 1987 · Decentralisation and Local Government Regions Act · Fisheries Act · Environment Act · Land Reform Act Chapter 123 · Island Court Act Chapter 127 · Customs Recognition Act 2000 · Fisheries Act 1998.
Solomon Islands Tokelau Tonga Tuv a lu Vanuatu.
* Based on Pulea (1993), with updates by the author.
