United Nations Food and Agricultural Organisation.
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit.
Disaster Mitigation for Sustainable Liv e l i hoods Programme (DiMP).
THE ROLE OF LOCAL INSTITUTIONS IN REDUCING VULNERABILITY TO RECURRENT NATURAL DISASTERS AND IN SUSTAINAB LE LIVELIHOODS DEVELOPMENT.
Case study Assessing the Role of Local Institutions in Reducing the Vulnerability of At-Risk Communities in Búzi, Central Mozambique.
Zefanias Matsimbe Disaster Mitigation for Sustainable Livelihoods Programme (DiMP) University of Cape Town October 2003.
Co-financed by the Rural Institutions and Particip ation Service of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarb eit (GTZ).
T he designations employed and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression o f any opinion whatsoever on the part of FAO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not imply any opinion whatsoever on the part of FAO.
M ap of Mozambique showing the study area.
Acknowle dge me n ts.
The Disaster Mitigation for Sustainable Livelihoods Programme at the University of Cape Tow n (DiMP) w ould like to express its appreciation to a number of key people and organisations w ho generously gave of their time and support in the course of this research. We are grateful to all those w ho set aside time from their busy schedules to participate in interview s and to provide information relevant to Assessing the Role of Local Institutions in Reducing the Vulnerability of At-Risk Communities in Búzi, Central Mozambique. In this context w e would like to thank specifically community members, traditional and administrative authorities w ithin the Munamícua and Boca, Bândua and Estaquinha, and Búzi districts, and the Sofala provincial authorities in Búzi and Beira respectively, the national government in Maputo, the UN family, the INGC (Maputo and Beira) the Mozambican Red Cross (CVM) in Beira and Búzi, GTZ-Proder, as w ell as NGOs and individuals that directly or indirectly contributed in different w ays and at different stages of the research. In particular w e w ould also like to thank individually Nicolas Lamade from the GTZ and Franziska Steinbruch from CIG-UCM, w ho supported the research both intellectually and logistically. Special thanks are also due to the principals of the Estaquinha and Bândua secondary schools w ho provided accommodation for the team.
Figures, tables, boxes and appendices ...................................................... Abbreviations and acronyms ...................................................................... Executive S um m a r y ..................................................................................... PART 1 Introduction, background, study site identification and methodology.
PART 2 Dealing with natural hazards in Mozambique: the case of the 2000 floods.
PART 3 Institutional assessment.
PART 4 Lessons learnt and recommendations.
Appendices .................................................................................................... References and Selective Bibliography ...................................................... Glossary .........................................................................................................
Figures, table s , boxe s and appendice s.
Appendix 1: Tropical depressions betw een January and April 2000 ......................... Appendix 2: Level of appeal and response ................................................................ Appendix 3: Summary of assistance recei ed as result of appeal v ... Appendix 4: Main policies and legislation after 1990 Appendix 5: Map indicating the concentration of institutions in basin during the 2000 floods ........................................................................... Appendix 6: Institutions and their role during the emergency ....................................
Abbrev ia tions and acronyms.
CCM ­ Mozambique Christian Council CIG-UCM ­ Centro de Informação Geográfica da Universidade Católica de Moçambique (Geographic Information Centre of the Catholic University of Mozambique, Beira) CVM ­ Cruz Vermelha de Moçambique ( Moza mb ic an Red Cross) DiMP ­ Disaster Mitigation for Sustainable Livelihoods Programme DNA ­ Direcção Naçional das Águas (National Directorate for Water Management representing the Ministry of Public Works and Housing), DORCAS Aid ­ International Christian Aid and Development Organisation ESMABAMA ­ A Catholic charity organisation w or king in four mission of southern Sofala (Estaquinha, Machanga, Barada and Mangunde) FAO ­ Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations FCF ­ Foundation Against Famine GRC ­ Committee for Risk Management GTZ ­ (Deutsche) Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (Ger man Technical Cooperation Corporation) INA M ­ Instituto Naçional de Meteorologia ( Natio nal Institute for Weather Forecasting) INE ­ Instituto Naçional de Estatistica (National Statistics Institute) INGC- Instituto Nacional de Gestão de Calamidades (National Institute for Disaster Management) KULIMA ­ Mozambican NGO w or king on agricultural and rural development NGO ­ Non-governmental organisation MADER ­ Ministério da Agricultura e Desenvolvimento Rural ( Ministr y of Agriculture and Rural development) MISAU ­ Ministério da Saúde Ministry of Health ORAM ­ Rural Mutual Assistance (Mozambican NGO w or king on agriculture and Rural Development) PMA ­ Programa Mundial para Alimentação (World Food Programme).
UCM ­ Universidade Católica de Moçambique (Catholic University of Mozambique) UCT ­ University of Cape Tow n UN ­ United Nations UNDP ­ United Nations Development Pr ogr amme UNEP/HABITAT ­ United Nations Environment Programme UNESCO ­ United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization UNFPA ­ United Nations Population Fund UNHCR ­ United Nations High Commission for Refugees UNICEF ­ United Nations Children Fund USA ­ United States of America USA ID ­ United States Agency for International Development WFP ­ World Food Programme WHO ­ World Health Organisation.
Executive Summary.
From December 1999 to March 2000, Mozambique recorded the highest rainfall rates since 1951. They w er e associated w ith tw elv e meteorological systems, and triggered massive flooding in the southern and central regions of the country, w ith disastrous consequences, including human, physical and economic losses. This event, reported as a `flood event', w ith more people affected by flooding than directly by the rain, had a considerable affect on the livelihoods of over a million people. The heavy rains in other southern African countries such as Botsw ana, Zimbabw e, South Africa and Sw az iland, caused in part by the cyclones Connie and Eline, w ere precursors to the flooding in Mozambique. Neighbouring countries w er e forced to open their dams, resulting in excessive volumes of w ater entering the Mozambique catchment areas. The Búzi catchment in central Mozambique w as one of those affected by w aters released from the Chicamba Dam, causing rising levels in the Búzi River, w ith consequent flooding. This helps explain w hy floods in that area occurred some days after the cyclones had passed. Most communities in Búzi Province w er e declared disaster-affected. With limited resources to respond to such an event, the Mozambique government w as forced to seek assistance from the international community. They launched tw o international appeals, which resulted in aid being supplied for both evacuation and rehabilitation. This study aims at understanding the role of local institutions and organisations in reducing people's vulnerability to natural hazards. It w as based in Búzi District, w her e tw o villages, namely Munamícua and Boca, w er e selected for the fieldw or k. Both sites still reflect the impact of the events of 2000 in the highly vulnerable livelihoods of their households. The research methodology involved multidisciplinary methods and techniques. Data w as gathered from a number of institutions before the fieldw or k w as conducted. The 2000 floods: Early w arnin g , emergency response and recovery in Búzi The uncharacteristic nature of the 2000 flooding event had serious implications for the earlywar ning system mechanis ms , since riverine communities did not respond appropriately. The flooding in the Búzi catchment, triggered by the Búzi River inundation, w as uncharacteristically higher than normal cyclone-triggered flooding. The Búzi administrative authorities w er e alerted to the rapidly rising river w ater by the Chibabava administrative authorities in the Búzi upper stream. Communities surrounding the Búzi headquarters w er e w arned, but w ar nings failed to the reach remote zones of the district on time. How ev er even the alerted communities did not take the w ar ning seriously because the rain had stopped some days before, and as a result no measures w er e taken to reduce the impact of w hat w as later reported as one of the most intense floods in the communities' history. In Búzi no formal rescue w as provided at the beginning of the flooding, so that by the time rescue measures w er e provided by official authorities or external agencies, households had already evacuated themselves to safer locations. Both case studies show the prevalence and importance of informal social netw or ks , local institutions and local authorities (traditional and.
administrative) and locally-based organisations (e.g. churches) for disaster mitigation, response and recovery, using local natural resources. The limited capacity of the national government to respond to the emergency w as clear from the outset. Many of the emergency relief organisations provided immediate assistance that lasted almost six months and satisfied only immediate needs. Emergency aid relief consisted mainly of food, clothing, medicines and ­ in a few cases ­ money. This assistance w as provided after a rapid needs assessment, conducted by the donors and the administrative authorities. The relief distribution encountered several problems because of the limited and non-standardised needs assessment, together w ith inefficient coordination of distribution. This meant that there w as no coverage of many places, especially in the more remote areas. After the immediate emergency situation w as over most of these organisations disappeared, with only a few left, running reconstruction programmes for affected households. Unfortunately these w er e far from sufficient for the needs of the villagers, considering the level of destruction suffered. Most of the organisations assisted the communities for less than six months after the floods ­ the only organisations still w or king in the Búzi basin w er e those whose main activities were related to disaster risk management, such as the GTZ 1, CVM2 and some organisations working on food and seeds distribution (CCM3, ESMABA MA4) .
Re co mme nd at ions.
The study in the tw o villages highlighted the critical importance of both traditional authorities and informal social netw or ks in mitigating the impact of recurrent disasters. Some problems did, how ev er , arise because of corruption and nepotism betw een traditional authorities, as w ell as due to internal conflicts in the local traditional structures. This affected local communities after the 2000 floods because traditional authorities participated in the identification and assessment of flood-ravaged households w ithin their area of jurisdiction. In order to strengthen local capacity for reducing the people's vulnerability to natural hazards through efficient early w ar ning and through adequate response and recovery action, the study presents the follow ing specific recommendations: Early warning and emergency planning To include: a) Development of local management plans involving the local authorities and the most influential people w ithin the community; b) Promotion of the local community radio station in Búzi to disseminate early w ar nings ; c) Distribution of solar or w ind- up radios, as villagers often cannot afford batteries; d) Active involvement of GRC members to complement the information broadcast from local radio to local communities, especially in remote locations along the Búzi catchment; e) Working w ith communities to inform them of the recurrence of extreme w eather events, so that all w ar nings issued by government are taken seriously;.
A German gov ern ent -owned corporation f or interna ional cooperation. m t The Mozambican Red Cro s. s 3 The Mozambique Christian Council (Protestant). 4 A Catholic charity organisa ion working in four missions of southern Sofala (Estaquinha, Machanga Barada and t , Mangunde).
f) Promotion of national and provincial teams for monitoring, recording and evaluating indicators of natural hazards, and subsequently disseminating information to potentially affected communities; g) Facilitation of environmental education programmes w ithin local communities, to increase their know ledge of natural hazards, and especially to increase their capacity to understand uncharacteristically extreme events; h) Design of evacuation plans w ith at-risk communities, specifying locations to w hic h they should evacuate in case of emergency, and w her e to access necessary resources; i) Integration of the scientific understanding of natural hazards w ith local "conventional w is dom" or traditional beliefs. Designing of evacuation, search and rescue plans T include: o a) Development, for the youth in all vulnerable zones, of ongoing training programmes in emergency first aid and in evacuation and search-and-rescue procedures. Impact assessment and relief distribution To include: a) Standardisation of assessment procedures; b) Pre-assessment and monitoring of food relief distribution by the local authorities to avoid community conflicts; c) Encouragement of partnerships betw een the Mozambican government and external agencies to overcome the external agencies' mistrust of local authorities, and promotion of collaborative w or k to avoid haphazard assessment and distribution of relief; d) Design of emergency food aid interventions, not only to provide immediate relief, but also to support mitigation activities; Recovery and rehabilitation To include: a) Establishment of long­ter m rehabilitation processes involving all community members; b) Design of planning and recovery programmes w hic h take into account local cognitive factors that w ill influence their effectiveness; c) Support local informal support netw or ks . Reducing the vulnerability of at-risk communities by strengthening and diversifying community livelihoods To include: a) Focus on extensive and diverse sustainable utilisation of the natural resource base (agriculture, livestock, w ildlif e, fishery, forestry) and efficient utilisation of river basins for crop production; b) Focus on female-headed households w hos e livelihoods are agriculturally dependent; c) Encouragement of local seed exchange betw een farmers from different communities (local seed is more resilient as is has adapted to local soil and climate conditions); d) Promoting local agrarian extension officers to help communities improve agricultural production; e) Encouragement of NGOs in implementing s mall projects for livestock production as a second means of livelihood.
Strengthening the coordination role of local institutions to reduce the vulnerability of at-risk communities To include: a) Increased coordination betw een government institutions at national, provincial, district and local levels; b) Per ma nent operation of disaster committees at each level of government; c) Strengthening coordination betw een the Mozambican government and other southern Africa countries, especially in w ater management; d) Setting up a database of all institutions and organisations w or king on disaster management at local level; e) Establishment of communication mechanis ms among local institutions to ensure better coordination; f) Strengthening of initiatives such as the GRC (Committee for Risk Management) set up by the Red Cross and GTZ; g) Strengthening the organisational capacity of local organisations; h) Government collaboration w ith NGOs and other agencies that have already understood the importance of local organisation. Need for integration of disaster m an agemen t in the sectoral policies To include: a) Increased sectoral engagement betw een government departments on disaster risk management; b) Integration of disaster risk reduction principles into government programmes; Promoting multidisciplinary research into vulnerability reduction To include: a) Adoption of a multi-disciplinary approach to assess communities at-risk; b) Encouragement of government and local institutions to development an interdisciplinary "vulnerability index"; c) Work by local authorities on a long-term basis to persuade communities that extreme events like the 2000 floods can occur again.
Introduction, background, me th odo logy.
1.1 Introduction5 From December 1999 to March 2000, the highest rainfall rate since 1951 w as recorded, triggering the w ors t flooding ever recorded in southern and central Mozambique. This rainfall was associated w ith twelve meteorological systems, namely cyclones and tropical storms (see Appendix 1) which originated in the Mozambique Channel in the Indian Ocean. The Mozambican Government assessed the dramatic consequences of this disaster over three dimensions: ! Human dimension: a total of 5.2 million people w er e affected (30% of the Mozambican population): 699 people died, 491,000 w er e displaced and 95 disappeared. ! Physical dimension: roads, railw ays and other infrastructures w er e destroyed; an area of 30,000 square kilometres w as inundated from the Umbelúzi, Incomáti, Limpopo and Save River basins in southern Mozambique to the Búzi River basin in the central region of the country; ! Economic losses: economic losses w er e estimated to have totalled USD 600 million, with a reduction in the country's economic grow th from 10 per cent to 3.8 per cent (GOM, 2000). This event w as reported as a `flood event' because more people w er e affected by flooding than by rain. No exact data are available, but it affected the livelihoods of millions of people In central Mozambique about 1,730,600 people w er e affected. In Sofala, a province w ith an 87.9% poverty index, 257,908 people w er e affected: 101 died and 94,200 w er e displaced (ibid.). The high level of poverty exacerbated existing conditions of vulnerability and impeded recovery. The heavy rains in other southern African countries6, caused in part by cyclone Connie (w hic h hit the area on 4th and 5th February 2000), and cyclone Eline (21st and 22nd February), w er e precursors to the Búzi flooding. This w as in part because the extremely heavy dow npour forced neighbouring countries to open their dams, resulting in excessive volumes of w ater entering Mozambique catchment areas. This exacerbated the local flooding triggered by the tw o successive cyclones. The Búzi basin, for example, w as affected by w ater s released from neighbouring Zimbabw e, w hic h forced the Chicamba Dam to be released, causing rising levels in the Búzi River and consequent flooding. This helps explain w hy floods in that area occurred some days after the cyclones had passed. Most communities in Búzi w er e declared disaster-affected. With limited resources to respond to such an event, the Mozambique government w as forced to seek assistance from the international community. From February to March 2000, they sent out international appeals w hich elicited a response of about USD 162 millions (GOM, 2000).
Most of the data reported in this section were taken f rom GOM (2000). We clearly acknowledge the source and the copyright. 6 Botswana, Zimbabwe, Sou h Africa and Swaziland. t.
identification.
This assistance w as destined mainly for food, infrastructure reparation and rescue material (see Appendix 2). This assistance made it possible for people to buy essential goods, and funded services for the emergency operations being undertaken by state institutions, NGOs, UN agencies and religious organisations. The involvement of several organisations in the reception and distribution of aid made the operation more flexible and efficient. It w as also possible to rescue 53,000 people, to provide emergency assistance to about 676,700 people in the established accommodation centres, and to start the process of population resettlement. Assistance w as distributed using criteria based on the declaration of items lost. This study aimed at understanding the role of local institutions and organisations in reducing people's vulnerability to natural hazards in Búzi. To explore institutional coordination, the 2000 Mozambique disaster (floods and cyclones) w as taken as a point of reference. To reach our goal, a research methodology involving multidisciplinary methods and techniques, previously discussed at UCT w ith the South African team, w as applied. This w ill be discussed later in Part 1, as w ell as the criteria for selecting the study sites. This report is structured as follow s : Part 1 presents a general introduction to the study, background on Mozambique, and identification of study sites. It also presents the methodology used for data collection. Part 2 describes how early-warning mechanis ms w er e operated, the role of informal social netw or ks in emergency response, emergency assistance itself, the role of institutions in longter m recovery and risk reduction of at-risk communities. Part 3 deals w ith institutional assessment at national, provincial and district levels. Part 4 presents the lessons learnt from the 2000 floods, and addresses some recommendations to improve emergency responses and to reduce the vulnerability of at-risk communities. 1.2 Background on Mozam biq ue Mozambique is one of the southern African countries most disposed to hydrometeorological hazards (Boudreau et al, 2002). In the last tw o decades climate-related shocks have tended to increase in frequency and severity, resulting in catastrophic damage to livelihood (ibid.). Data gathered during the last tw o decades suggest that, throughout the country, more than 8 million people w er e affected by natural phenomena ( ibid.) , the most frequent being droughts, floods and cyclones. They had a devastating impact on the most vulnerable 80% of the population, living in the rural areas. The state of vulnerability of these people is aggravated by their extreme poverty, itself compounded by their limited access to essential services, by fragile infrastructures and by low productivity levels. Mozambique is one of the w or ld's poorest and most in debt countries (Abrahamsson & Nilsson, 1995), occupying position 170 out of 174 in the w or ld poverty ranking ( UNDP, 2002). The extreme vulnerability of rural livelihood w as generated in part by the Mozambican civil w ar that lasted for 17 years after the country became independent in 1975. This w ar caused demographic upheavals, especially in the rural areas. About 3.5 million people w er e internally displaced or became refugees in bordering countries (Devereux & Palmero, 1999). Other.
consequences included the loss of lives of approximately one million people ( Pitc her , 1996), and landmines placed throughout the countryside made it almost impossible for rural people to access their cropping lands. The civil w ar destroyed significant parts of the physical and commercial infrastructure in rural areas. Numerous roads, bridges, shops, schools and health-care institutions w er e destroyed (Devereux & Palmero, 1999; Pitcher, 1998) and caused US$15 billion w or th of damages (Pitcher, 1996). According to calculations made by the UN, the cost of the physical destruction during the 1980s amounted to 250 years' worth of exports at the 1992 level, and tw ice the annual influx of foreign aid (Devereux & Palmero, 1999 and Abrahamsson & Nilsson, 1995). With the uncontrolled dispersion of communities, rural households lost their social netw or ks , families w er e split up, and individuals w er e taken aw ay from a context in w hich they could draw on mutual support, an important base for rural livelihoods. Mechanis ms such as local norms and values, traditional rules, taboos and ceremonies that had influenced the sustainable use of natural resources and environmental protection w er e all abandoned, and traditional authorities that had been responsible for the dissemination of values and know ledge, especially to the younger generation, collapsed and lost their legitimacy. Indigenous know ledge of farming techniques, livestock production, and disaster prevention and preparedness w ere lost completely or replaced by others acquired from abroad or from other areas w ithin the country, not alw ay s suitable for the local physical environment (Watson, et al, 1999). As an indirect consequence the vulnerability of rural livelihoods increased, placing these communities at greater risk to natural hazards. The economic and political changes introduced in the early 1990s also exacerbated the situation of vulnerability. In 1987 w hen structural adjustments w er e introduced, state enterprises w ere privatised, leading to a decrease in the provision of goods and services to the poorest people, w ith negative impacts mostly on poor Mozambican households. Politically, the country observed changes of legislation in response to global economic and political changes. Several policies w ere amended and some new ones approved specifically to include a livelihood component, especially in rural communities, but most of these policies did not have the desired results. The most important policies and legislation are indicated in Appendix.
The 2000 floods that affected the country opened a w indow of opportunity for the government to move faster tow ar ds the definition of a legislative framew or k on disaster management. By 2001 the Law of Disaster Management w as finally approved. This law aimed at establishing strategies, plans, legal nor ms and operational programmes for disaster prevention, aid and rehabilitation. It w as also intended to reduce communities' vulnerability through a continuous, integrated, multidisciplinary and multi-sectoral process, based on an adequate information and communication system (Bill of the Law of Disaster Management, 2001). This legal tool recognises the role of local governance in reducing the vulnerability of communities at-risk, but its focus is still predominately on the protection of state resources. Indeed, national strategies are still based on disaster management or on strengthening the state's capacity to respond to disasters, w ith a limited focus on increasing the community's capacity to prepare for and respond to disasters or to reduce risk conditions. The challenge for local government is to strengthen local communities' capacity to cope, w hils t linking them to external support at both local and national levels.
1.3 Reasons for selection of case study sites The case study w as to take place in the Búzi River basin, in central Mozambique. This region was chosen for the follow ing reasons: · This part of the country is one of the areas most subject to flooding; · Since the floods of 2000, the area has been continuously affected by cyclones, affecting the livelihoods of thousands of people reliant on subsistence agriculture. · During the floods of 2000 this region w itnes s ed the arrival of hundreds relief workers from national and international organisations, both governmental and non-governmental. Although problems emerged from the lack of coordination betw een these organisations, the role of local institutions in disaster management became a significant issue of debate. It should be noted that, although the Búzi basin w as one of the areas most affected by the 2000 floods, the disaster situation has not been as extensively profiled as the flooding in the Limpopo basin, in southern Mozambique. Initially tw o study sites w er e selected along the Búzi basin: the Búzi district in Sofala province, and the Mussorize district in Manica Province. Ow ing to unforeseen administrative circumstances it w as , how ev er , not possible to conduct research in the Mussorize district. The main reason for choosing these tw o sites was that, although the tw o districts were affected similarly by the 2000 floods, they w er e not covered in the same w ay by early w ar ning information, rescue operations, assistance measures (sanitation, medical assistance and shelter) and resettlement and reconstruction programmes. Most of the aid supplied w as concentrated in the Búzi district rather than in Mussorize. (See the map in Appendix 4). Another reason for choosing these study sites w as their geographical position: up t ill now most studies carried out in Mozambique have taken place in the south. This is a result of historical regional inequalities ­ infrastructure and accessibility are better developed in southern Mozambique, w her e the capital of the country is located. Central Mozambique, especially Sofala Province, is the poorest region of the country and has been neglected by the national government because it is considered as being dominated by opposition forces. It is also the area most affected by the recent civil w ar . In addition, this region presents an historical picture of the influence of traditional authorities. After independence, pow er w as removed from traditional authorities w ho w er e seen as the product of colonial rule. People unfortunately did not recognise the important role of existing local authorities in allocating resources to sustain their means of livelihood. How ev er , these authorities continue to play important role in reducing people's dependence on natural resources, as they replace absent state institutions. An administrative circumstance in the Mussorize district required a shift in the initial research design, and in the end research w as undertaken only in Búzi. In this district tw o study sites, Munamícua and Boca, w er e selected. The first criterion for selection of these sites w as that both w er e affected by riverine flooding (natural events), although the intensity and impacts differ betw een the sites. The second criterion w as based on geographical situation: Munamícua is situated w ithin the Bândua administrative area, w hile Boca falls under the Estaquinha administration. The proximity of Munamícua and the remoteness of Boca from the Búzi headquarters w er e considered important elements in this selection. The underlying assumption w as that, with Munamícua closer to the Búzi headquarters, there w ould be more efficient institutional coordination and communication. This w as understood as being a major factor in the rate of response and recovery, influencing the vulnerability of these communities.
In the case of Boca, w her e there are only limited social infrastructure and facilities, the vulnerability of the communities w as considered higher. It also important to note that information collected in previous interview s w ith people in Maputo and Beira helped to choose these sites. Some organisations that had already w orked in these areas provided us w ith basic information about the area, including the presence of local institutions, conditions of accessibility and w or king conditions. 1.3.1 Description of study sites The Búzi district, w ith a population of about one and a half million (INE, 1999), covers an area of a little over 7000 square kilometres and is divided into three administrative posts namely Búzi, Estaquinha and Nova Sofala (see Figure 1 below ) . The tw o communities taken as study sites are situated along the low er part (floodplain) of the Búzi River. The river is 379 kilometres long, w ith its catchment in eastern Zimbabw e. Búzi is characteristically a very poor district w ith households basing their means of livelihood on agriculture and livestock. In order of importance the most important crops are maize, sorghum, rice, beans, sw eet potatoes, groundnuts and vegetables. Livestock is the second main activity that guarantees the subsistence of most of the households studied. Goats, chickens and ducks are the most common livestock produced in both areas. Livestock is partly used for consumption but mostly it is sold, especially in today's situation w hen diverse and regular sources of cash-based income are considered a more appropriate indication of w ealth (Kepe, 2002). Money from these transactions is used to access health assistance, to buy food in time of hunger and to pay children's school fees. 1.3.1.1 Munamícua (Bândua) Munamícua falls under the Bândua local administration in the Búzi administrative post. In terms of traditional structure7 it is a Povoação falling under the Bândua Regulado. According to the latest population census, there w er e 3,634 inhabitants in 1998, divided into 753 households (INE, 1999). The main activity of the population is small scale agricultural production, follow ed by livestock farming. Agriculture is seasonally based, w ith maize, sorghum, rice, beans and fruit constituting the main crops. In terms of livestock production (at household level) the most commonly reared animals are cow s , goats, ducks and chickens. The impact of flooding on the livelihood of this community w as very significant as a large part of the population use the floodplain for agricultural production and livestock farming.
To be explained later in this report.
1.3.1.2 Boca ( Es t aq u inh a) Boca falls under the Estaquinha local administration, w ith 13,922 dw eller s divided into 287 households 8 In ter ms of traditional structure it falls under the Boca Regulado. The main means of livelihood of the population are based on agriculture and on livestock rearing. They too produce maize, sorghum, rice, beans and fruit. Many households also farm livestock, such as goats, ducks and chickens. Differing from Munamícua, in Boca the cattle production has been problematic due to the prolific presence of tse-tse fly. In 2000 the Boca community w as affected mainly by the tropical cyclones and not by flooding, as they are positioned aw ay from the Búzi River. 1.4 Summ ar y of methodology 1.4.1 Overview of research team and coordination Preparatory meetings to discuss the research design and methodology w er e held w ith the Disaster Mitigation for Sustainable Livelihoods Programme (DiMP) of the University of Cape Tow n. Follow ing the initial meetings, a profile of the study site w as prepared and submitted to the FAO ( United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation) for approval. Subsequent meetings w er e held w ith the DiMP research team, w ho w ere conducting an assessment of the March cut off low in Montagu, South Africa, to streamline the research and ensure that approaches and methods w ere consistent.
Source: local traditional leaders; confirmed in INE (1999).
Coordinating the Mozambique team w as Zefanias Matsimbe 9, a Masters student from the University of the Western Cape. Assisting him w er e tw o researchers, Lúcio Chiteve and Chabane Injoma 10, recommended by Franziska Steinbruch of the CIG- UCM. In the field, Nicolas Lamade of the GTZ provided logistical support, including the identification of institutions in Beira and Búzi w orking in disaster management, identification of the study sites, and transport. 1.4.2 Overview of the methods and techniques used for data collection The Mozambican team used different methods for data collection in the field, from national, provincial and district structures, and from the local community (study sites). For a better understanding of the methods used, w e divided these into tw o categories. The first category relates to institutional assessment of national and local government, international agencies and community leaders, and the second deals w ith community assessment. The follow ing subsections give details of the methods used for data collection in both categories. 1.4.2.1 Institutional assessment from national to local government The institutional assessment involved interview s at both national and local level, before community-based assessments w er e undertaken 11. At the national level several government departments w er e contacted, including the INGC, the UNDP, FAO, Save the Children (UK), UNICEF, the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, the National Directorate for Water Management, Eduardo Mondlane University and the Land Studies Centre at Eduardo Mondlane University. Within each institution the internal emergency unit or section dealing with disaster management and emergency w as contacted. For data collection, semi-structured interview s w er e conducted w ith the coordinator of the section or unit. Interview s concentrated on the follow ing three areas: · the role of the w hole organisation in reducing people's vulnerability to natural hazards; · intra- and inter-institutional coordination betw een departments w or king on disaster management at national, provincial, district and local levels; · assessment of the level of success and the challenges faced in terms of institutional coordination and the integration of disaster management plans into governmental development plans or programmes. In each department visited, documents and reports relating to disaster management w er e collected for future analysis. In some of these departments preliminary information on the study sites w as requested, especially in those that had developed activities in Búzi through their provincial branches in Sofala Province.
Hav ing conducted related research in Mozambique on a number of occasion , Zef anias Matsimbe has been s working with the Eduardo Mondlane Univ ersity f or the past three years, as well as with international institutions such as the Institute of Development at the University o Sussex, UK. f 1 0 Studen s at Beira Pedagogic University, Mozambique. t 1 1 A recognised constraint was that the institu ions were still highly bureaucratic. It is important to understand that t ov er the prev ious decade Mozambique had been a communist country, chara t eris ed by a heav ily stru t ured c c institutional bureaucracy. Although this is no longer the official status of the country, it is still a reality deeply entrenched within gov ernm ent institu ions. t.
In Maputo, the team attended a meeting betw een the government ­ represented by the Foreign Affairs Minister, government departments 12 ­ and the partners, donors and NGOs working on emergency programmes. This meeting provided insight into the inter-departmental and inter-agency coordination of disaster relief in Mozambique. A similar approach w as applied at provincial level in Beira, the capital of Sofala province, where interviews w ere held w ith the Head of the Provincial Department of Agriculture, Members of the Provincial Disaster Management Committee, researchers from the Catholic University of Mozambique, the Provincial Department of INGC, the Mozambican Red Cross (CVM), GTZ, and the Provincial Statistical Department. Fortunately, in Beira there w er e greater opportunities to interview government agencies and the Provincial Commission for Emergency Response than there had been in Maputo. Semi-structured interview s were conducted in Beira w ith key members representing the government at the provincial level. The aim w as to ascertain their role in disaster management, assess the challenges faced, and determine w hat w er e the institutional mechanisms for interdepartmental and interagency coordination at the local level. During these interview s , reports and government documents w er e requested. To complement these reports, local new s paper articles relating to disaster incidents w er e collected and analysed. At the district level, in Búzi district headquarters, local administrative authorities and some government departments w ere interview ed using semi-structured interview s . The aim w as to assess the coordination betw een the district- and provincial-level authorities, and betw een district and local authorities or local communities, as regards disaster management and r is k reduction. With the district administrative authorities, interview s w er e centred on profiling the district in terms of `disasters', their impact on people's livelihoods, the most affected areas, organisations involved in disaster management (pre and post-disaster), the main problems faced by local communities, the role of the local government in disaster management and r is k reduction (prevention, mitigation and relief coordination and recovery). Within the government departments, emphasis w as placed on understanding their role in disaster management, and the mechanisms for coordination w ith provincial authorities on risk reduction. Current vulnerability and risk reduction initiatives w ith local communities w er e also explored. 1.4.2.2 Institutional assessment of international agencies At a national level, UN agencies and one NGO (Save the Children) w er e assessed. Ow ing to time constraints it w as how ever not possible to contact the CVM (Red Cross), a humanitarian institution that w as actively involved in rescue and assessment after the floods of 2000. At provincial and district levels, the Red Cross branches w er e the most important sectors in providing essential information as they had been actively involved in the management of the 2000 floods. They w ere in fact still running key projects on disaster prevention and livelihood improvement at local level. Other local NGOs and church-based organisations w er e also contacted. Interview s were conducted using semi-structured questionnaires.
Weather Forecasting, Wa er Management, Agriculture & Rural Development, Health, Trade, and the INGC. t.
1.4.2.3 Comm un it y assessment: Boca and M u n am ícu a communities Within the Boca and Munamícua communities interview s w er e carried out w ith the local traditional author ities (community leaders) and randomly selected households. In both areas tw o group discussions meetings w er e arranged w ith men and w omen separately. This decision came after a discussion w ithin the team, taking into consideration the cultural reality of the community. The team concluded that the probability of hearing ideas from w omen in joint group discussion w as limited, because men traditionally monopolise discussion, preventing the expression of gender-sensitive issues. The idea of conducting interview s w ith separated groups w as successful because all people w er e free to talk. In both gender meetings the focus w as on the follow ing: · frequency and intensity (taking the 2000 floods and cyclones as points of reference); · impact on people's livelihoods; · the role of local institutions in prevention, preparedness, mitigation and recovery before and after an event; · institutional coordination w ithin the community, and betw een the community and local administration. In assessing the impact of natural hazards on the community livelihoods, the follow ing w er e considered: resources available locally, access to and control over main livelihood strategies, and the challenges faced by the community in improving their livelihoods w ithin the cycle of the agriculture calendar. With a central focus on the 2000 event, the aim of the interview s w ith the community w as to recreate their experiences of the event, to understand w hat had really happened, how they had survived, w ho had intervened and, if they had, how long after the disaster, w hether organisations that intervened w er e still w or king w ithin the community and, if they w er e, w hat kinds of programmes they w er e implementing to reduce vulnerability to natural hazards, and what w as the role of traditional and administrative author ities in disaster management. In each local community ten households w er e interview ed to understand in-depth the livelihood aspects of activities, assets, strategies, opportunities and the impact of natural hazards in the context of household coping mechanisms. How ev er due to time and accessibility limitations it w as not possible to cover more households. In the Boca community particularly, households are very dispersed around the forest and accessibility w as very difficult and dangerous, due to w ild animals. Some areas w er e only accessible by bicycle. In Boca, five of the ten households lived on upper ground and five alongside the Búzi River. In Munamícua, five households were interview ed in the Zindoga sub-area, the most flood-prone area close to the river, and five in Inhankondo, a less vulnerable area to w hic h people w er e moved during the 2000 floods. At both sites interview s w er e also conducted w ith members of different organisations w or king locally such as teachers, church members, and rural agrarian extension officers, to assess their role in emergency response and risk reduction. Further more the challenges that they faced and the level of collaboration w ith and acceptance by the local communities w as also assessed. Transect w alks and participant-observation w er e used as complementary research methods to understand physical aspects that could not be expressed by the interview ers .
1.5 Limitations In conducting the fieldw or k a range of local factors limited research. The main constraints were: · Bureaucracy: Due to an unforeseen administrative circumstance (no letter of permission) it w as not possible to conduct research in Mussorize (Manica province); · Political atmosphere: As the study w as carried out in the year of municipal elections, in some cases team members carrying out fieldw or k w ere misinterpreted as being members of a political party in the pre-electoral campaign; · `Disasters' and false expectations: Both study sites w er e affected by drought and famine w hile fieldw or k w as being carried out. The arrival of the research team (by car) gave the starving villagers false expectations: they assumed that they w er e members of a non-governmental organisation or government agency bringing aid assistance. · Long period after the event: The fact that the research w as undertaken tw o and half years after the event meant that many people could not remember exact details. This w as exacerbated by high levels of illiteracy in the rural areas, w hic h inhibited w r itten documentation of the event. Both communities confirmed that they had received external assistance from many organisations, but most people could remember only a few of them. To name the organisations involved w e had to use data from previous studies, especially that of the CIG-UCM (2003) who provided an overview of the institutions and organisations involved; · Physical inaccessibility: Both study sites w er e situated in areas w her e, ow ing to poor road accessibility and the danger of w ild animals, it became difficult to conduct interview s w ith the dispersed households. · Health Conditions: The fieldw or k w as carried out during the peak of a measles and malaria epidemic, w hic h had caused several deaths in the communities visited. In Munamícua, for example, several interview s had to be cancelled because the potential interview ees had to attend funerals of relatives, neighbours or friends. In certain cases the team w as involved directly in these events, for example w ith a family w hic h had lost four children in tw o weeks due to measles. The situation w as very risky and by the end of the fieldw or k period all the team members w er e infected w ith malar ia.
De a ling with natural hazards in Mozambique: the case of the 2000 floods.
2.1 Introduction.
From December 1999 to March 2000, Mozambique w as affected by extreme w eather , w ith excessively heavy rains caused by tw elv e meteorological systems. In Mozambique this triggered flooding in both the southern and central parts of the country. In Búzi particularly, cyclone Connie w hic h moved over Mozambique on February 4th and 5th and cyclone Eline from February 21st to 22nd 2000, triggered minor flooding in the catchment. How ev er , due to the intense rainfall in the Zimbabw ean Eastern Highlands, the Chicamba Dam filled rapidly, resulting in the emergency release of w ater from the dam. As a result, flooding in the Búzi catchment w as uncharacteristically higher than normal cyclone-triggered flooding. In this case the major Búzi River flooding w as caused not by heavy rains in the region, but by the river inundation caused by the dam release. The uncharacteristic nature of this event had serious implications for early-w arning system mechanis ms since riverine communities did not respond appropriately by evacuating their homes and moving their livestock. The national government, w ith limited resources to respond to such a disaster event, w as forced to seek emergency assistance from the international community. It issued tw o appeals, the first on 10th February and the second on 24th February 2000. The objective of the appeals was to fill the gap betw een short-term humanitarian and recovery responses and the implementation of a portfolio of rehabilitation projects. The government provided a coordinated framew or k, and ensured the continuation of emergency assistance to those w ho had lost crops and houses, which marked the beginning of the transition tow ar ds rehabilitation in several sectors (GOM, 2000). The appeal w as responded to positively by 55 countries, the United Nations, 52 NGOs and 56 different enterprises or institutions operating in Mozambique, and 27 religious organisations (ibid.). These institutions provided support in both central and southern Mozambique. The financial aid provided w as destined mainly for six months' food assistance to victims, for the repair of public infrastructures and for rescue material.
2.2 Impact of the 2000 event on the livelihoods of Búzi residents.
The flooding of the main river catchments in south and central Mozambique w as a serious obstacle to the economic progress that the country had reached over the years follow ing the civil w ar w hic h ended in 1992. The small-scale agriculturalist farming sector w as the most affected, w ith estimates from the Mozambican government indicating that 126,600 rural households had been affected by the flooding. In these affected areas a large proportion w er e farming families w ho had been displaced and lost their fields, homesteads, agricultural equipment, livestock and other assets. About 139,000 hectares of planted crops w as estimated to have been destroyed or seriously affected, and this w as compounded by the damaging of food and seed stocks. It is estimated that 70-80% of livestock (mainly cattle, goats and sheep) w er e seriously affected. There w as also an increase in vector-borne diseases. Approximately 20,000 hectares of irrigation schemes w er e destroyed. Public.
infrastructures did not escape: bridges, schools, hospitals and other public buildings w er e sw ept aw ay , forcing residents to abandon their homes (GOM, 2000). As result of poor recording of the impact of the 2000 flood disaster, no definitive estimates were available for Búzi. How ev er , fieldw or k in both study sites permitted an understanding of the impact on community livelihoods, w hic h is still visible today. The impact of the 2000 floods differed in our different study sites, but the general understanding w ithin the visited communities w as that riverine communities w er e the most severely affected, especially in Munamícua w her e households are more exposed to the risk of both flooding and cyclones, resulting in lost household structures, household assets, livestock and crops. This w as exacerbated by the fact that their homesteads and their fields w er e both at risk from the inundating river. The impact caused by flooding in Boca w as relatively low because most of the people live on high ground, although the cyclones destroyed more houses, infrastructure and livestock here than in Munamícua. The 2000 events caused serious damage and disruption to crops w ith resulting food scarcities within both communities (Boca and Munamícua). What made the situation w or s e is that these events came a few w eeks before the harvesting, w hen there w er e high expectations of a good harvest after almost six months of food insecurity. In Búzi the average annual crop production only lasts three to six months, w ith chronic food insecurity even during nor mal years (GOM, 2000). Compounding the food scarcity after the flooding w as the absence of a second harvest. In the aftermath of the disaster, both communities faced serious food shortages, increasing the need for emergency assistance.
Box 1: The impact of successive floods on food security.
Since 2000 w e have been living in a state of grow ing hunger, w ith w inds [cyclones] and floods destroying our crops before they have been harvested. We w ere hoping for a good harvest so that w e could survive the drought. Hunger is high. The w inds destroyed all the crops, especially maize and sorghum. The possibility of having something to eat is very limited, and w e have to depend on donations or labour-for-food strategy. We have no time to increase the potential of our land. This has put us in a situation of permanent shame because w e do not rest. We do not know w hat w e have done to be punished like this. Our children leave school because w hen they come from school they do not find anything to eat at home; so they prefer to stay at home or move around the forest collecting w ild fruit. Local communities at both sites described the situation as having had a critical impact on food security. The story reported in the box on the previous page, told by a w oman (almost 60 years old) in Munamícua, reflects how people see the impact of the 2000 floods and how it marked the start of, or exacerbated, chronic food insecurity. As w ell as the very serious food insecurity there w er e high levels of housing destruction, displacement of flood-affected households and, in some areas, increased health risks due the emergence of w ater- bor ne diseases. Disease outbreaks w er e associated w ith the spreading of w as te by floodw aters , the disruption of safe w ater supplies and the persistence of w ater in low - ly ing areas creating breeding grounds for mosquitoes. Compounding health risks w as the disruption of what little in the w ay of health services had been available in the district. The.
implications w er e that household recovery rates w er e reduced substantially, w ith increasing water-borne diseases, malnutrition and limited access to health services all impacting negatively on household resilience. As Blaikie et al. (1994) point out, people facing cyclical flood hazards live in a situation of permanent vulnerability; the disruption to assets and livelihoods by one event often makes households yet more vulnerable to future flood hazards. In Búzi after each flood, the same families tend to lose their homes, possessions and means of livelihood, increasing their vulnerability to the next disaster event (Few , 2003). This is because local communities insist on living in the low er areas close to the river, w her e good soils and w ater conditions are made available for crops production and livestock farming. They move to safe places w hen a disaster (especially floods) comes, but once the threat passes the tendency is to return back. In these areas homesteads and their fields w er e both at risk from the inundating river.
2.3 Early warning in Búzi.
The Búzi administrative authorities w er e w ar ned about 48 hours beforehand by their Chibabava counterparts in the Búzi upper stream that river w ater levels w er e rising rapidly. The Búzi authorities w ar ned at least the communities surrounding their headquarters, but ow ing to the inefficiency and w eaknes s of institutional coordination and communication betw een the district authorities and low er levels structures, the early w arning failed to reach the remote zones of the district on time. How ev er even the alerted communities did not take the w arning seriously. In the Munamícua study site, one of the communities most affected by floods, people confirmed that the traditional authorities issued the early w ar ning, but they w er e not believed because the rain had stopped some days 13 before, after cyclone Eline had passed on the 22nd February 2000. As a result, no preparedness measures were taken to reduce the impact of w hat was later reported as one of the most intense floods in the communities' history. 2.3.1 Factors influencing early warning In the Búzi basin, communities anticipate and prepare for flooding w ith the encroachment of a tropical cyclone, but this flooding is typically a low and gradual inundation, w ith limited impact on community livelihoods. For this reason, these communities did not take seriously the warning issued by the local authorities since they related flooding w ith cyclones. In both study sites (Munamícua and Boca) local villagers w er e aw ar e of their vulnerability to floods but nobody imagined the scale of these particular events. The 2000 flooding, although the w or s t in the last five decades, w as not the first that year. Tw o floods of low intensity, triggered by cyclones, had already occurred in early 2000 in Búzi. The case of Búzi is an important example for reflecting on early-w ar ning mechanis ms w ithin communities vulnerable to w eather events. A better understanding of how people interpret and respond to w arnings is needed (Montz & Gruntfest, 2002). For example, people are less likely to respond to a w ar ning if the previous w ar ning did not result in a serious disaster or if they have never experienced an event of considerable magnitude and intensity. In Búzi people did not take the w ar ning seriously because the previous tw o w ar nings had resulted in floods of low intensity w ithout any large impact on people's livelihoods. They assumed that this case.
No data on how long.
would be the same. The message w as also not clear in that it lacked information about w hat to do and w her e to go. In Munamícua, due to the proximity of the Búzi administrative headquarters, people w er e warned of the impending flood, but Boca is so far from the centre of decision-making and information flow ­ the Búzi headquarters ­ that no w ar ning w as received. It is hypothetical, but likely that this village w ould have responded to a w ar ning in a w ay to similar Munamícua. How ev er , according to comments from a researcher w or king for the UCM Beira (Franziska Steinbruch), the lack of early w ar ning for Boca in 2000 cannot be used as an example of the failure of the early-w ar ning system in Búzi because Boca is not a flood-prone area. 2.3.2 Community based early-w ar ning systems It w ould be an error to assume that before 2000 Boca and Munamícua had no early w arnings at all. In conducting the research it became evident that, using their traditional know ledge, people knew the period of the year w hen floods, cyclones and droughts occur and w hic h places are most at risk. In response, households have developed a number of strategies to reduce flood impact. For example, a man about 50 years old14 explained as follow s :.
"By the tenth month w start to improve our houses, putting stones on the roof to avoid e our houses being destroyed by strong winds, because we know that the rainy season is coming.".
Rural communities have a traditional mechanism for predicting natural hazards through the interpretation of natural signs such as the movement of birds, the appearance of insects or the position of the new moon. How ev er , the uncharacteristic nature of the 2000 event marked a change in the perception of natural hazards by Búzi communities. It also marked changes in terms of community organisation and mechanis ms for local institutional coordination. 2.3.3 Early w arn in g systems after the 2000 event From 2000, community based early-w ar ning systems have become more sophisticated, w ith new scientific equipment provided by external organisations such as the GTZ and CV M. Technical assistance from these organisations is helping local communities improve their early-w ar ning systems. In both communities (Boca and Munamícua) disaster committees now involve local members in forums for disaster prevention. The GTZ has been w or king w ith traditional leaders to improve their capacity to integrate scientific early-warning systems into their planning, and both villages now have new cyclone early-w ar ning equipment. The GTZ has provided local traditional authorities w ith three flags of different colours and meanings: - blue means that w ithin 24 to 48 hours the area might be affected by a cyclone; - yellow means that the cyclone might be affecting the region w ithin 24 hours; - red means that the area might be affected almost immediately. These signs have been displayed in public places, especially w her e the court or the community assembles to discuss public matters. When one of these signs is displayed, people warn each other to take preventive measures. An old man from Munamícua explained the preparations adopted by his family in case of a cyclone early w ar ning:.
"When we receive information that the wind or rain is coming, we store enough food (maize meal and dry fish) inside the house to last until the end of the event, which normally takes two.
Interviewed in Boca, 15/05/03.
to three days. We only try to protect our lives and not our houses. We know they are very fragile because they are built with insecure material. We want to improve them to avoid such situations in the future, but we face problems of lack of zinc and nails to protect the roof against winds.".
In Boca, a cyclone-prone zone, other preventive measures include mobilising or advising people to: - use stronger building materials (e.g. steel w ire instead of ropes extracted from trees); - remove the roofs from their houses at the beginning of a cyclone to avoid their being destroyed by winds; - build houses in higher-lying areas or to build houses w ith upper floors - plant bamboos around their houses to protect them from w inds ; - build s ma ll huts to protect their livestock; - avoid using canoes to cross the river by small boats and avoid w alking under big trees. Although improvements have been introduced at local level, there are still some problems that we observed in the field. (i) A man of about 47 years said that since 2000 he has received early w ar nings from the traditional authorities but, because cyclones usually start at night w hen people are sleeping, all the preventive measures become useless. (ii) A w idow ed w oman of about 44 years from Boca explained that sometimes she receives information that a cyclone is coming, but sometimes it is w hen the cyclone it is already blow ing in the area. "I don't do anything to minimise the event; I just w ait for miraculous help from God," she said. (iii) A man of about 50 years from Boca said, "Sometimes the régulo warns that a cyclone is coming but they are not sure exactly w hen. We stay at home w ith some food provided, but w e end up finishing the food because no cyclone happens. The consequence is that w hen it comes at last w e have to face the danger of looking for food in rain and strong w inds.".
2.4 Local responses to the event: The role of informal social networks in emergency response.
In Búzi no formal rescue w as provided at the beginning of the 2000 flooding because of unavailability of resources. By the time the means for rescue w er e provided by official authorities or external agencies, households had already evacuated themselves to safer locations. In the Búzi headquarters, the administration used Búzi Community Radio to w ar n flood-prone households about the rising river, and suggested safe places for people to evacuate to, such as the Búzi Company 15 infrastructures (now inoperative). In Munamícua people evacuated to the Bândua local administration headquarters, w her e medical assistance, food, temporary shelter (tents), blankets and clothing w er e later provided. Informal social netw or ks played an important role in 2000 in Búzi. In most cases the emergency response w as initially taken by people organising their ow n informal social netw or ks (neighbourhood, friendship, kinship, church, etc.). Small private boats belonging to the fishermen along the river w er e used for evacuation, especially of so-called vulnerable.
The Búzi Company was an agricultural company whose main activity consisted of sugar cane cultiv at ion and the production of sugar and other products extracted from sugar cane. The company was closed in 1992 due to financial problems, which were mainly as a result of the long civil war, which increased production costs.
people (elders, w omen and children), from the flooded areas to safer places, w her e they later received assistance. Both case studies show ed the extent and importance of informal social netw or ks , local institutions and local authorities (traditional and administrative), and locally-based organisations (e.g. churches) for disaster mitigation and response using local natural resources. This occurred largely because the formal evacuation process started late. This w as undertaken by the Mozambican Army, the South African Air Force, Beira MIL, A IRS ERV and the Mozambican Air Force, and countries like Portugal, Belgium, the United Kingdom, the USA, Ger many and Spain sent rescue helicopters. Unfortunately the research team could not access the numbers of people evacuated or rescued. In both communities w e found that, before the 2000 floods, villages already had strong netw or ks to reduce the impact of extreme w eather events as w ell as for subsequent recovery. For example, to minimise the problem of lack of seeds after floods, people activate social netw or ks based on kinship, friendship or neighbourhood ties ­ they help each other by exchanging vegetable or cereal seed free of charge, or w ith merely symbolic pay ment. People with no seed at all acquire it by w or king for those w ho do have seed, and also give part of their harvest to these donors. The same applies to mutual food assistance in field cultivation, or "kulimila" and "likuku". How ever the chronic need for food during the 2000 event could not be provided for solely through these informal social netw or ks , necessitating emergency food relief. Many of the emergency relief organisations provided immediate assistance that lasted almost six months. Such assistance w as directed at satisfying immediate needs as w ell as at addressing the underlying vulnerability to chronic food insecurity in the region. The emergency aid relief consisted mainly of bulk supplies of food, clothing and medicine and, in a few cases, money. CIG- UCM (2003) has identified the role of some of the institutions involved in disaster relief in 2000 in Búzi. (See Appendix 5.) This information w as obtained from interview s at the study sites and other locations.
2.5 Coordinating the emergency assistance.
In 2000, the Mozambican government established a national emergency coordination mechanism chaired by the INGC. Flood committees w er e established at provincial and district levels, w ith NGOs and religious organisations evaluating the needs of the affected people. In a WFP development project, some of the district administrators w er e trained in how to receive, store and distribute relief items, and in how to arrange transport from w ar ehouses to transit centre committees (GOM, 2000). The INGC (National Institute for Disaster Management) w as appointed to coordinate the w hole process of assistance. Its main roles w er e: to assess the needs of affected people; to coordinate the distribution of food and clothing by the organisations that had responded to the government appeals; to provide temporary accommodation in accommodation centres16, and to provide medical assistance to the victims, especially in accommodation centres.
Temporary camps, consisting mainly of tents, to accommodate the people affected by floods.
The government w or ked collaboratively w ith UN agencies (UNDP, FAO, WHO, UNESCO, UNICEF, WFP, UNFPA, UNEP/HABITAT), as w ell as w ith major NGOs and the private sector. At the beginning of the disaster event, in agreement w ith the government of Mozambique, the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) developed a UN Disaster Assessment and Co-ordination ( UNDA C) team to assist the INGC and the UN Disaster Management Team. In facilitating the INGC's disaster response, the UNDA C team helped in the establishment and functioning of Coordination Centres in all the regions affected by the flooding. The UNDP, through its Emergency Response Division immediately made US$50,000 available to the Coordination Centre, for office equipment and human resources. The WFP established a food distribution programme comprising a total of 53,000 tons of food, to meet the needs of 650,000 people over the follow ing six months. A total of 99 transit camps w er e established nationw ide, each camp housing anything from 3,000 to 60,000 people (GOM, 2000). The main assistance provided by the UN to the affected people consisted of rescue, clothing, temporary shelter (tents), high-energy food, medical assistance, sanitation, w ater and vaccination against the w ater- bor ne diseases. The table below show s the roles played by some of the UN agencies. Table 1: The role of the United Nations during the 2000 floods in Mozambique Institution WFP Activity - Distributed 53,000 tons of food to cover the needs of 650,000 people for six months UNICEF, WHO - Water supply for 29 tow ns - Disinfecting and major clean-up operations WHO, UNICEF, - Health (immunisation campaigns and medical treatment) and UNFPA nutrition UNESCO, UNICEF, - Education (reconstruction of schools, teaching material and WFP equipment) and food FAO - Agricultural sector and rural communities: immediate response and rehabilitation of essential services.
Source: Adapted from GD (2000) M.
2.6 Assessing need and the distribution of relief.
Although the 2000 floods affected the w hole Búzi basin, not all the administrative areas received the same attention. Due to the lack of a formal assessment procedure there w er e no solid criteria for a needs assessment. The Búzi district w as the most assisted district w ithin the Búzi basin (see map in Appendix 4). The research team tried, w ithout success, to discover the reasons for this preference of Búzi and exclusion of others. The Provincial Director of Agricultural and Rural Development in Chimoio said that Mussorize had been excluded from relief assistance, as it w as not considered in need because it is a high-lying district w ith good soil and good rainfall throughout the year, and thus had a high level of food security. This w as the only explanation that w as forthcoming. Despite this assumption by the local authorities, the extreme nature of.
the flood event had a recordable impact in Mussorize. The flooding turned h ills and mountains into islands, w her e people gathered w aiting to be rescued by helicopter. Households in both Munamícua and Boca w er e considered as disaster-affected. How ev er , there w er e no criteria for selection. People living on higher ground w er e also considered affected because cyclones had an impact on the area as w ell as floods. This tendency of view ing hazard victims as homogeneous in ter ms of vulnerability and generalisable in terms of their needs has been seriously criticised17. In fact, communities or even households are not necessarily homogeneous, and present variations in level of vulnerability. Within a community, vulnerability variations could depend on socio-economic status, gender, age, political or even religious affiliation ( Few , 2003). Villagers in Munamícua and Boca confirmed that they received assistance from different organisations, for between three to six months. How ev er , many households stated that the quantities w er e not sufficient to cover their high levels of need until the next harvest. The assistance w as provided after a rapid needs assessment conducted by the donors or administrative authorities. In other areas local traditional authorities w ere involved in listing affected households. The listing process sometimes w as falsified because traditional leaders registered more than the actual number of households, in order to get more assistance. According to some interview er s , the numbers of affected people w er e inflated for this reason, even by the national government and some NGOs. As a result, w hile this study w as taking place, the CCM w as busy with an independent assessment, for food assistance, of the number of `vulnerable' people w ithin the Boca community. The difference in numbers betw een the tw o assessments w as substantial. The CCM also show ed disappointment w ith some administrative authorities w ho took advantage of the fact that people gathered in one place for food distribution, and used this as an opportunity for political mobilisation. 2.6.1 The role of traditional authorities in assessing households' needs and distributing relief In both communities it w as recognised that traditional authorities played an important role during the 2000 event, but they w er e sometimes limited by not know ing precisely w hat w as going to happen, especially in Boca. In some cases it w as reported that they appeared primarily interested in securing their ow n household assets as opposed to assisting the community. Since the 2000 events, the w ay traditional authorities have been looked at by the government and other organisations w or king at local level has undergone a s ma ll positive change. At the Estaquinha administrative post, traditional authorities are now invited to attend monthly meetings w her e they are encouraged to report to the head of administration on problems and progress in their area of jurisdiction. The problem they report most frequently is hunger. All local state organs, especially the agriculture, health and education sectors, are involved in this meeting to discuss what to do an emergency, and how to mobilise communities to take seriously the information they are given. During the fieldw or k for this study, Estaquinha and Boca w er e seriously affected by drought; the message from this small committee to the villagers w as to tell them to avoid selling crop stocks because their hunger w as likely to continue for a long time. In Bândua, w her e Munamícua is situated, w e heard that a similar committee w as w or king locally but w ith some problems in ter ms of frequency of meetings. In.
See f or example Few (2003) quoting Bhatt (1998) and Maskre (1999). y.
Boca, local authorities also play an important role in land distribution, especially in areas close to the river, w ith fertile soil. At both study sites there is conflict betw een administrative authorities (the President of the locality) and traditional authorities (régulos) regarding the apportionment of pow er. At the local level there is no clear definition of hierarchy betw een these authorities; they all use the same state symbols and report to the same level of administration ­ the chief of the administrative post. The situation is clearer in Bândua, w here the geographical boundaries of the administrative and traditional authorities coincide. Within the regulados, conflicts also arise involving the régulo and his co-w or ker s (chefe da povoação and sagutas): the régulo is paid by the state, so the co-w or kers also claim for state payment, alleging that they have been doing the same w or k as the régulo, including disaster early w ar ning and mitigation, and the establishment of order w ithin the villages. It is important that the state authority to avoid conflict that can undermine order, security and people's livelihood in rural areas investigate this aspect. Although there are positive aspects as regards the role of the traditional authorities, they have been accused of nepotism w hen food assistance arrives. When they enrol people for food assistance, the names of their relatives or friends have been first on the list, and sometimes they register more than one member from the same household. 2.6.2 Institutional limitations and challenges in distributing relief During the relief distribution, several constraints emerged in the field. There are many possible reasons for this. Firstly there was a severe scarcity of fiscal resources on account of the lack of institutional capacity to act quickly to solve emerging problems. Second w as the problem of inefficient flow of information about w hat w as happening at different administrative levels. The limited capacity of the national government in ter ms of resources (human, material and financial) to respond to the emergency w as clear from the outset. Although there was a positive international response to the government appeal, the lack of coordination of national and international agencies, and of governmental and non-governmental organisations, constituted a major limitation in addressing the needs of the rural population. This problem was especially bad at provincial level in Sofala, although the INGC played an important role in institutional coordination and relief distribution. According to a senior worker of the FAO, Sofala w as notorious for very poor coordination. In other provinces things did go a little better. Due to the inefficient coordination of relief distribution by the government entity, and because of a lack of trust that formal authorities w ould be able to deliver relief aid to households in need, some organisations and donors decided to distribute relief independently. In southern Mozambique a similar problem occurred w hen people, including the so-called most vulnerable (elders, w omen and children) w er e forced to struggle for food and resources from relief agencies, sometimes being involved in physical violence. This happened because the external organisations providing assistance did not w or k in coordination w ith the established authorities in the provisional accommodation centres. In Búzi, similar social tensions arose w hen USA ID distributed financial relief to w omen only. USA ID had decided to allocate money to the community using selection criteria based on gender, w ith only w omen receiving the 1,500,000.00MZ M18 (about US$60) designated per.
Foreign Exchange Rate: 1USD  21,000.00 MZM (2000).
household. According to district author ities , the objective w as to promote gender balance. USA ID recognised that w omen w er e the most vulnerable and generally in a better position to manage financial resources, but men misinterpreted this decision, seeing it as a challenge to their authority w ithin the household, thus creating social problems betw een men and w omen. Box 2: The social influences of USAID w it h in households The financial aid provided by USAID caused many social problems w ithin the community and w ithin households: · Divorce ­ some w omen, w ho had been forced to live w ith their husbands due to the lobola19 paid to their parents, after having received aid money, decided to repay their husbands an amount corresponding to the lobola, in order to end a `forced' marriage. Such cases w er e reported at both study sites. This contributed to social instability w ithin the communities and households. · Suicide ­ some husbands forcibly took the money from their w iv es and used it for lobola to marry another w oman. One case w as reported in Munamícua, w hich had resulted in the suicide of the first w if e. · Entertainment ­ in both sites several cases w er e reported w her e husbands took the money from their w iv es to buy traditional beer and tobacco; · Hom icid e ­ in a community outside our study sites, a member of the community killed a traditional chief because he w as blamed for the exclusion of that community from the USAID financial donation. Another criticism can be levelled at the w ay USAID w as distributed: the organisation did not prepare local communities on how to use the money distributed in improving their lives. This resulted in misuse of resources ­ most of the money w as spent on food and not on replacing household assets or w eather pr oof ing houses to resist future extreme w eather events. Most of the villagers interview ed, including w omen (w ho benefited directly from the donation) stressed the negative side of the monetary assistance on the social relationship w ithin the community, especially w ithin some households, but it is completely true to assume that the donation brought more problems than solutions. In fact, the team observed on the ground that some households had opportunities to replace the lost households' assets and in some cases the money w as used for increasing the portion of cultivated land as a w ay to increase the crops production. It is also important to emphasise that the mechanis ms for resource (money) distribution involved in this process: by giving directly to the w oman in the domestic sphere it became possible to expand the number of benefited people among the households because women focused on goods for family consumption, including children and elderly (the most vulnerable people). From this donation it w as also possible to access certain services such as health and education, improving their living conditions. It w as difficult to link this relief w ith development because the majority of the donated people used the money for goods for immediate consumption, rather than applying the funds in activities that could allow then receiving future benefits. Other problems that emerged can be summarised as follow s:.
An amount paid in cash, livestock or goods to the parents of the wif e as compensation for the loss of their daughter.
(i) (ii) (iii) (iv).
Limited government capacity to monitor relief distribution: at national level the government lacked capacity to coordinate the different organisations involved in relief distribution, resulting in a number of agencies w or king independently. Lack of institutional coordination resulted in limited identification of affected households. Limited disaster assessments: not all affected areas received relief; coverage of the more remote areas w as particularly poor; Agencies and NGOs assisted w ith the immediate response and relief but left soon afterw ards : Tw o years after the floods, many community members could not remember which agencies w er e active at the time, w ith the exception of the CVM, GTZ and INGC. Most organisations w orked in Búzi for no longer than three months; Lack of consideration of local traditions, culture or gender issues: This resulted in conflicts instead of alleviating the suffering of local communities. The information in the box on the previous page highlights some of the negative consequences of the financial aid offered by USAID.
2.7 Local perceptions of increasing disaster risk.
The 2000 event mar ked the lives of most villagers in rural Mozambique. Most of the people interview ed reflected on how they had never experienced such a destructive phenomenon. They also said that since 2000 floods and cyclones had increased. Community perceptions of risk varied, w ith some villagers considering drought as having the worst impact because takes a long time to pass, w hils t the impacts of cyclones and floods are short-lived. Others defined floods and cyclones as the most dangerous because they are very difficult to mitigate, due to their rapid onset. A man of about 55 years explained that mitigating the effect of drought is very easy because people just plough in the w etlands close to the river to produce food, especially vegetables. Droughts can also be mitigated through activities such as the sale of livestock to purchase food. Hunting and fishing are also used to generate alternative sources of food. In an attempt to understand the perceptions of local communities of the increased prevalence of disasters since 2000, the question "Why have extreme events increased in frequency over time?" w as asked. The box below summarises some of the answ ers to this question. Box 3: Different interpretations for the increase in disasters.
Change of customary rules and taboos, resulting in the anger of the spirits of the local ancestors: young people engaging in relationships outside of marriage; bush burning and cultivation close to sacred places; fathers taking daughters as w iv es ; Natural phenomena must change ­ because of the social, political and economic changes in the world; Apocalyptic changes (new things w ill happen, to mark the end of the w or ld): w e have to believe that each moment has its destiny; disasters happen to make people believe in God; if w e accept good gifts from God, w e have to accept the unpleasant ones also (sisters from the Catholic Church in Estaquinha). Political injustice: the floods happened a few months after the general elections ­ why? We w er e asked this question by an interview er in Bândua, a prominent member of Renamo, the opposition party that claims to have actually w on the general election in December 1999. According to this interview er , the floods w er e a sign that the election results w er e due to intimidation. The increase in disasters since.
2000 is a w ay [for God] to punish Frelimo, w hic h some believe came to pow er without w inning the election. According to the interview er , this situation w ill persist until Frelimo allow s others to rule the country. Scientific reasons: more extreme w eather is just happening.
2.8 The role of institutions in long-term recovery and risk reduction in at-risk communities.
Emergency response and relief w as largely designed to be a temporary solution to the crisis, and this actually impeded the sustainable recovery of at-risk communities. Although communities have developed some mitigation strategies, these are often very limited, increasing the need for local institutions to support these communities on a long-term basis. Reconstruction programmes for aiding affected households after the flood w er e implemented by a number of internal agencies and non-governmental and church organisations, but considering the level of destruction suffered, they were far too small to address the needs of the population. The government w as mainly occupied w ith the reconstruction of public infrastructure such as hospitals and health centres, schools, roads and small bridges, but the level of these services is still far from adequate. For example, people in Munamícua are still far from any hospital or clinic, and to get medical assistance need to w alk about 15 kilometres in each direction to the Bândua or Búzi administrative headquarters. The Boca community benefited considerably because of its proximity to the Estaquinha administrative post w her e the Catholic Church took over the local primary school and the health centre after the w ar. After the emergency w as over most of the aid organisations disappeared. The only ones left working in the Búzi basin w er e those w hos e main activities w er e related to disaster risk management, such as the GTZ, CVM and some organisations w or king on food and seed distribution ( CCM, ESMABAMA). Other s mal ler NGOs w er e w orking on projects related to agricultural development. The GTZ and the CVM are how ever the only organisations that have been actively involved in disaster prevention from after the 2000 event until 2003. How ev er , they face certain constraints, mostly associated w ith financial and human resource limitations, which do not allow them to cover the extensive areas w here people are living in permanently `at-risk' situations. The GTZ has been w or king to strengthen the community-based organisations and now is attempting to draw on traditional coping strategies in its risk reduction (e.g. using traditional boats for rescue, floods simulation activities). These tw o organisations appear to be w ell- plac ed for playing a significant role in the mitigation of disasters resulting from natural events, as w ell as in preparing poorer and marginalised groups to cope w ith them Some other local organisations have been w or king on livelihood improvement. These include the PACDIB ( Pr ogr amme for the Development of the Búzi District), w hic h w orks on micro credit and livestock replacement in rural communities, the CCM20, w hic h works with seed and food distribution, and the ESMABA MA, w or king on labour-for-food strategies. A list of the organisations that were involved in Boca and Munamícua in 2003 is given here. They are discussed in detail below.
The majority of the protestant chur hes are members of this council. c.
ESMABAMA (housing, food distribution, education, health centre, early w ar ning) ; Red Cross (temporary shelter, food (biscuits and salt), w ater cleaning, fight against malaria and other diseases); FCF (food distribution); PMA (road rehabilitation); Kulima (agricultural tools); ORAM; DORCAS Aid; Methodist church (housing and food distribution).
INGC The INGC is a per manent state institution funded in 1999, acting as a coordinating body under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation. This national disaster authority consists of tw o main departments, the planning and operation departments. Functions reserved to the planning department consist of proposing programs and projects on prevention, relief and infrastructure rehabilitation; production and dissemination of climatic and other disasters management information; implementation of early w ar ning, preparedness and mitigation systems; proposing procedures for emergency situations and organisation of documentation centre w ith a database, the operation department is responsible for the contingency plan and coordination of the implementation of relief programmes. During the 2000 floods the INGC and the CVM w er e responsible for coordination and distribution of emergency assistance nationw ide. How ev er , in Sofala province, due to problems related to high corruption and lack of effective coordination the INGC failed to reach its main. Due to the same reasons some donors organisations ignored the legitimacy and the role of the INGC, deciding to distribute emergency assistance directly to the affected people. In the visited areas the INGC is almost an unknow n institution and w hen asked about the role played by any government institution most of our interview ers responded `none'. It is not completely true that the INGC w as not there, but comparing w ith actions and impact of the presence of other NGOs it w as not visible. Since 2000 the tasks of the INGC go beyond the institutional capacity. Various NGOs have been w orking collaboratively or assisting the INGC to develop activities targeting the improvement of professional and administrative and technical skills. CVM (Cruz Verme lh a de M o çam b ique ) ­ the M oz am b ican Red Cross A district commission of the Mozambican Red Cross is situated at the Búzi district administrative headquarters, w ith small branches ("nuclei") in most localities around the district. The Búzi district commission reports to the provincial commission and this reports in turn to the national headquarters. The Red Cross is developing projects in Búzi in areas such as early w ar ning, health, w ater treatment and sanitation. Through the use local volunteers, the Red Cross w or ks in coordination w ith the local administration and health author ities to combat w ater - borne diseases such as malaria and cholera. The Red Cross convenes meetings w ith the local communities to discuss matters such as natural hazards and mechanisms of prevention of w ater - bor ne disease, and assists in mobilising communities to abandon high-risk zones.
GRC ­ Gestão de Risco de Calamidades (Disaster Risk M anag em en t) , a GTZ Project attached to GTZ-Proder21 The GTZ played an important role in Búzi during the 2000 floods, especially in terms of response and post-disaster assistance. After the floods, through its Proder project (Rural Development Project in Sofala), the GTZ participated in school and health centre rehabilitation, and assisted the government in implementing local disaster risk management. The GTZ w as the first organisation to implement a disaster management strategy based at community level, by establishing local committees for risk management in Búzi. Other important activities of the GTZ include: - Providing local communities w ith basic kits for improved early w ar ning, rescue and response; - Promotion of w or ks hops and training for local activists for disaster prevention, preparedness and better response; - Introduction of new agricultural techniques and new crops, or the re-establishment of local crops, to reduce people's vulnerability to natural hazards. According to members of the Red Cross in Búzi, the idea of creating the GRC came from a senior GTZ w or ker in Sofala province, in May 2000. The GRC has since expanded to include all localities of the district. In each community a nucleon or committee, consisting of seven volunteer members, represents the GRC. This committee w or ks in coordination w ith local traditional authorities, mobilising people living in low - ly ing areas to move to safer places. Among other activities the GRC: - promotes seminars w ith local authorities on risk management; - monitors radio w eather forecasts and gives this information to the local authorities w ho activate mechanis ms to inform the community. GRC members themselves also disseminate early w ar nings to local communities; - searches for the safest places for habitation; - mobilises the ow ner s of boats to participate in evacuation processes; - evacuates the most vulnerable people to safe areas; - mobilises people to abandon flood-prone regions in favour of higher-lying areas. These committees face a number of constraints, w hic h include the follow ing problems: - A lack of means, especially transport, to spread their activities to other areas through small nucleons, especially in remote areas. Although local initiatives have emerged from the communities to repair roads, some roads are still in need of engineering w or k. - Although communities are being mobilised to seek safer places, some people refuse to leave the low er lands. The argument is that they cannot leave their crop trees (cashew nuts and other trees) unprotected. They also do not believe that a disaster similar to the 2000 floods w ill occur again. To try to convince the villagers that this is not necessarily the case, GRC w or ker s use the example of lunar eclipses, which can occur tw ic e in tw o years after not appearing for many years. What is really behind this refusal is that, although the risk is understood, people still prefer to stay in their original homes rather than move to new places w ithout any certainty that conditions w ill improve. - Only a few GRC agents have been given training in disaster management. The Catholic Church and the CCM These organisations use the Christian message to promote solidarity and a spirit of brotherhood for mutual assistance in cases of emergency. The Catholic Church commissions.
A rural development proje t, in Sofala Province, of the GTZ. c.
within the church have developed a range of different assistance procedures. The Charity Commission is the most important of these, and is responsible for collecting goods for distribution to affected people. The church also w orks as an important instrument for disaster early w ar ning, and for encouraging people to adopt preventive measures. The local Catholic school in Estaquinha also w or ks as an important institution for disaster management. When teachers receive an early w arning via radio from the w eather services, they transmit it to their students, w ho inform their parents back home. In Estaquinha, teachers also participate in the meeting held monthly at the administrative headquarters, w her e they discuss how to solve or minimise the problems of natural hazards. ESM ABAM A ESMABAMA is a project created in 1995 by the Catholic Church to deal w ith post-conflict situations, but from 2000 it turned its focus to emergency food relief, and the distribution of seed and agricultural tools to flood victims along the Búzi River. This organisation has been working collaboratively w ith other organisations locally such as GTZ and the traditional authorities. During the fieldw or k, ESMABAMA w as focused on labour-for-food strategies to assist the local villagers against the drought that w as affecting the study site. Other main activities of this organisation include: - Training local communities in the care of livestock and the production of droughtr esis tant crops. Students also have a role in transmitting this know ledge to their parents and relatives back home and around the community. - Promoting labour-for-food, in conjunction w ith the WFP: using w or k in road clearing and repair as a w ay to help people affected by drought.
Institutional assessment.
3.1 The changing role of disaster-risk related institutions after the 2000 event.
The 2000 flood event presented an opportunity for the Mozambican government to develop a new strategy for managing `disaster' events and for better coordination of operations w ithin government and betw een the government and other organisations such as the United Nations, international agencies, NGOs and civil society. A benefit of assessing these changes, made in the context of the 2000 event, three years later was that the changes could be mapped at national, provincial and district level. Furthermore, the changing roles of the UN, international agencies and NGOs in the light of these policy developments could be assessed. In Part 3 of this report, the changing roles of the Mozambican government and disaster-risk management related agencies w ill be assessed, providing insight into how the 2000 event presented this opportunity for institutional change.
3.2 National level.
The national institutional response to the 2000 event w as centred largely on the coordination of international agencies, as resources to initiate an emergency response and relief operation were limited. This coordination w as not efficient, as many agencies acted independently from the Mozambican government. After the 2000 event, the Mozambique government developed a new strategy to ensure better coordination for prevention of, mitigation of and response to future similar events. The government saw that it w as time to redefine its role and improve its multi-sectoral coordination role. This strategy involved the strengthening of the three national-level state organs falling under the National Policy for Disaster management. These are the National Board for the Coordination of Disaster management (CCGC), the Technical Council for Disaster Management ( CTG C) and the National Institute for Disaster Management (INGC). CCGC The CCGC, operating at national, provincial and district levels, is headed by the Prime Minister, and integrates input from NGOs, the UN and civil society. This board meets monthly or, in an emergency, more regularly. Its main role is to ensure better coordination of emergency operations. CTGC The CTGC is a technical multi-sectoral organ reporting directly to the national government. It is comprised of technicians representing all the state ministries, especially the departments working on natural hazards, for coordinating emergency operations. The UN, NGOs and representatives of civil society are on its board. This board is divided into seven w or king groups, namely (i) coordination, (ii) early w ar ning, (iii) sensitisation of people for disaster management and risk reduction, (iv) rescue and evacuation, (v) logistic, (vi) shelter, w ater and sanitation, and (vii) food security and agriculture. In terms of division of roles each w or king group is responsible for designing operational plans, simplified instructions and procedures to.
ensure flexible actions tow ar ds effective assistance to affected people. Important measures to be taken include the releasing of some migration and customs rules to facilitate the movement of humanitar ian assistance and people to help the victims of a disaster. INGC The INGC is the third organ established at national level, but has branches in all ten provinces and in some districts. In the districts w ithout INGC branches it is replaced by a district emergency committee, w hic h integrates the w or k of all locally represented state ministries, for multi-sectoral coordination for prevention, mitigation and response for disasters. This is the case in Búzi District. The INGC is responsible for the development of a contingency plan at national and provincial levels. Each one of the ten has its ow n contingency plan based on multi-sectoral information and according to the kind of the disaster likely to occur in the province. This contingency plan is a document containing strategic guidelines for disaster prevention and mitigation. It also identifies necessary and available resources for immediate response in case of an emergency. Although important tools for disasters management, the nature of contingency plans has been criticised because they are based on generalized information from national or provincial levels, w hich does not reflect the reality at the local level,. It is therefore problematic at the local level to address the real needs of the affected by disasters, most of them living in rural communities. The discourse has been that provincial contingency plans must be based on information from the districts and different government sectors. Taking into consideration the Mozambican reality, characterized by poor mechanis ms of communication and dissemination of information, the level of province seems to be very high to design effective contingency plans because there is no means for collecting accurate and up to date data that reflects the situation on the ground. Our experience show ed that even the district authorities in Búzi are not aw ar e of the content of the provincial plan, making it difficult to w or k collaboratively w ith the provincial authorities. The actions to be taken are designed together w ith the UN, NGOs, donors, local authorities and civil society. At national level these members have annual meetings w her e each sector presents developed and planned activities, and assesses sectoral capacity for intervention in case of emergency.
Box 4: M ain points from the meeting between the government and its partners (see below) (i) A senior member of the Mozambican Health Department condemned the current natural hazard management strategy since it w as based on relief rather than on prevention. In addition, he emphasised that the relief given by the government and other organisations arrives too late for affected households. (ii) The Mozambican Minister of Foreign Affairs (chairperson of the meeting) also condemned the current response to natural hazards and appealed for preventive action, saying: "We do not w ant to w ait until spectacular images are displayed on TV to take action. That is not good. We should be w or king at local level before an event occurs. We have to w or k w ith a longter m perspective. To make the country more resilient to natural hazards w e have to work on small and modest activities to help the community be more resilient in order to avoid responding alw ay s to an emergency situation. We have to be proactive; it w ill be easier for us because w e have the basic data to w or k tow ar d prevention, because w e know about each hazard before it happens...We also need to be very careful about issuing an appeal now , just to avoid [being seen as having] a culture of mendicity 22 and dependency on external aid." (iii) The UN, represented by the UN Disaster Management Technical Group, defended the need for a shift in disaster management approach from sectoral to more integrated actions based on information-sharing betw een NGOs, the UN, government, donors, the private sector and civil society. The UN supported the strengthening of partnerships in disaster management and stressed the need for mapping humanitarian responses in case of emergency.
In late April 2003, a meeting betw een the government 23, the UN, NGOs and donors took place in Maputo to evaluate the progress of each sector towards the reduction of community vulnerability to natural hazards. At the meeting, entitled " Pr e li minar y Assessment of the Emergency Situation 2002/2003" each sector presented its progress report and planned actions regarding disaster risk management. During the meeting, three important aspects were discussed in depth (as show n in the box above).
3.3 Provincial level.
At the national level there is an apparently good indication of the governments' engagement in disaster risk management through the coordination of different state departments, the UN, NGOs and even the private sector. How ev er at a provincial level this changes substantially as the provincial board or committee representing the Technical Council for Disaster Management (CTGC), w hic h combines input from all provincial government departments, has a rather tenuous existence and questioned functionality. The committee w or ks w ithin and is.
Gov ernm ent Institutions represented included: INAM (National Institute for Weather Forecasting), DNA (National Directorate for Water Management as part of the Ministry of Public Works and Hou ing), MADER (Ministry of s Agriculture and Rural dev elopm ent ), Ministry o Health, Ministry of Trading and the INGC. f.
led by the INGC, but has no regular meetings to discuss mechanis ms of prevention, mitigation and response for disasters resulting from natural events. According to a senior member of the committee interview ed in Beira, this commission meets regularly immediately before the season know n for the occurrence of natural hazards24 and ceases its activities as soon as the threat is over. According to our interview er , the lack of financial and material resources forces this committee to w or k only inter mitt ently and w ithout being able to implement sound prevention programmes or projects that w ould help communities to decrease their vulnerability to future hazards. The provincial department of INGC believes that only coordinated w or k betw een different government departments, NGOs and civil society can prevent future losses. Preventive measures and initiatives for strengthening community capacity to w ithstand natural hazards are apparently still limited, especially as regards implementation. Most provincial departments are facing serious financial shortages that do not even allow them to implement their current activities. Our general perception w as that disaster risk management is still a secondary priority and not w ell integrated into governmental development plans or programmes. In addition, integrating the disaster committee into other state departments is problematic due to the double subordination of the committee members w ho have to report simultaneously to their corresponding provincial departments (that they are presenting w ithin the committee) and also to this committee as a provincial coordinating body. What happens is that these state departments represented in this committee end up receiving tw o commands or orientations, w hic h sometimes contradict each other; one is from the provincial department representing and another one from the coordinating committee. These situations make it difficult to these representatives and to the committee itself to w or k efficiently. This problem of double subordination is reproduced at district level as w ell. The provincial authorities appointed for resource allocation in natural hazard management considered double subordination as a constraint. Because of the centralisation of Mozambican public administration, some departments w or king at local level (for example, the Provincial Directorate of Agriculture and Rural Development, w or king in agricultural development and food security) do not coordinate w ith corresponding provincial departments. At the provincial, district and local community levels, the presence of other organisations, including the UN25, w or king on disasters is limited. Some of these organisations w or ked only during the emergency, w ith their activities ceasing soon afterw ar ds . Búzi is, how ev er , an exception, w ith the Red Cross, the GTZ and some NGOs still doing extensive w ork on disaster risk management w ithin the local communities.
3.4 District level.
In Búzi the INGC has no representation, resulting in the local administration having created a district emergency committee, composed local representatives of all the ministries, maritime authorities, police and NGOs. The role of this committee includes the activities show n in the box below .
This period, with some variation, coincides with the wet and hot period f rom O t ober to April. In this period the c probability of cyclones and high rainfall occurring is high, resulting in floods. The UN generally works in coordination with local NGOs.
Box 5: The role of the district emergency comm ittee - coordination of evacuation procedures; - supervision of the affected areas during the time of emergency; - pre-evaluation of the situation after the event (especially floods) to see if conditions are suitable for households to return. If this is not possible, people are required to choose a safer zone where they can build their houses, w hile continuing their farming activities in the low er area; - post-disaster assessments (each administrative sector assesses the damages caused in its sector). The coordination betw een district and provincial authorities is considered to fully be operational, w ith district authorities providing information on disasters to the provincial authorities, w ho in return provide assistance w hen needed. In the Búzi administrative headquarters, the team w as informed that a Búzi Basin Management Committee had been launched in 2001. This committee marked the limits of the river flooding in 2000, to be used as an indicator of flooding severity. This committee coordinates w ith the Chicamba Dam for efficient w ater management, in an attempt to avoid future disasters in the Búzi basin.
3.5 The role of the UN in coordinating a strategy for disaster management in Mozambique.
The role of the United Nations in reducing community vulnerability to natural hazards w as clearly visible at national level, w ith the UN acting as the main partner of the government in disaster management. Three UN organisations (UNDP, FAO, and UNICEF) w er e visited by this project's researchers and some interview s conducted, to understand the role of the UN and their mechanis ms of intra- and inter-institutional coordination. In the late 1980s, the UN formed, under the United Nations Development Assistance Framew or k (UNDAF), a coordinated strategy for disaster management in accord w ith the Mozambique government. This agreement aimed to assist and enable the Government of Mozambique to: - manage disasters effectively through preventive measures designed to mitigate the threat and impact of future disasters; - increase preparedness in the form of preparedness plans, regulations, and resources for effective and efficient disaster response; and - provide a timely response to the affected population w hen disaster strikes, to reduce loss of life (PNUD, 1998) The UN also assisted the government to: (i) prepare a national disaster management policy and complementary legislation, (ii) establish a disaster management information system to inform decision- makin g, and (iii) implement the disaster management plan. Some UN agencies sponsored and supported the insertion of a disaster management component in the plans of their counterpart ministries, and they provide technical support in important activities to sustain the global strategy for disaster management. For example, UNICEF provides technical support in the area of w ater and sanitation; the FAO in food security; WHO in epidemiological surveillance, and the UNHCR and WFP in strengthening.
regional linkages in disaster management ( PNUD, 1998) ­ especially w ith those SADC countries w ith w hich Mozambique shares river waters. The UNDP w or ked particularly for the creation of the INGC and has allocated experts to the INGC to w or k on institutional capacity building. A mini-office w ithin the INGC has been established for better coordination of activities related to disaster risk management. To ensure good coordination betw een UN members, a UN Disaster Management Theme Group, composed of focal points from each agency (including the World Bank), has been created.
Le s son s learnt and recommendations.
4.1 Introduction.
The 2000 flood event presented a number of key lessons not only on how to coordinate an emergency better, but also on how necessary it is to integrate prevention, relief assistance, and rehabilitation into long-ter m r is k reduction programmes. In Part 4 of this report these lessons are presented, follow ed by some recommendations based on w hat w as observed in the field and, in some cases, draw n from reports and literature review s about Mozambique and other regions around the w or ld that face similar disaster risks.
4.2 Lessons learnt from the 2000 events.
The 2000 floods and cyclones tested the Mozambican government capacity to respond efficiently; exposing its institutional w eaknes ses and limited capacity. At the onset of the event there w er e no clear programmes or plans for responding to the emergency ­ including preparedness, evacuation and response. Existing plans did not take account of an event of such magnitude nor the type of impacts that resulted. A main argument presented w as that communities also did not anticipate an event of such magnitude, inhibiting appropriate responses, particularly to early w ar ning. The 2000 event did how ev er represent an opportunity for the government to understand its institutional vulnerability expressed in: - lack of institutional coordination to respond situations of extreme need; - weak mechanisms of communication betw een different levels of the administration; - lack of efficient channels and mechanis ms to disseminate information on natural hazard management to communities that really need that information; - centralisation of decision-making at national level and nonflexible mechanisms for information flow from bottom-up. As result, most of the decisions taken do not reflect the needs and expectations of the people on the ground; - fragile and incompatible links betw een the different pow ers created in a context of new democratisation. At the local level there is no clear definition of roles betw een the traditional and administrative authorities; this sometimes results in conflict, w hic h can have a negative effect on institutional coordination in disaster management. The 2000 event provided the means to evaluate infrastructural vulnerability, especially as critical public infrastructures (roads, bridges, social infrastructures) are still in a state of disrepair, most of them destroyed during the recent civil w ar . Several million US dollars are reported to enter the country every year for development programmes and projects, but this is not reflected on the ground, probably due to an inefficient mechanis m of monitoring the activities of private companies, NGOs or international agencies. High levels of corruption and misuse of funds also exacerbate this. In other cases the government finds itself incapable of challenging donors' imposition of conditions for the application of the funds provided. Donors in many cases decide w hat to give or to build, in w hic h community or area, w hen and how , w ithout coordinating w ith government authorities or even the local authorities of the beneficiary communities. As a result, in some.
cases their initiatives or projects fail to reach their goal. For example, in Búzi w e knew that dozens of boreholes for w ater supply had been constructed by NGOs but they have no water because they were constructed in inappropriate zones w her e the w ater table is very deep. Those NGOs decided on their ow n w her e to build, w ithout consulting the local authorities w ho know the region w ell. A similar situation happened regarding the emergency assistance during the 2000 floods, where the CV M and INGC had been nominated to coordinate the reception and distribution of assistance. How ev er , some organisations ignored these entities and their legitimate role, deciding, at their ow n discretion, w hic h communities w er e in need. The result w as that assistance w as distributed outside of coordination w ith the Mozambican government. This happened, for example, in Chókw è District in the Limpopo River basin, specifically in the Chiaquelane accommodation centre. The government had to intervene to stop this process in this particular point, but w e are sure it happened in some other points around the country. The lesson here is that the government should strengthen local institutions and establish mechanisms for facilitating the emergence and maintenance of grassroots organisations w ith the capacity to become valid coordinating partners w ith international agencies in the case of an emergency. Internationally the Mozambican case w as considered one of the most successful in terms of international coordination of assistance, but at local levels this w as not alw ay s the case. In terms of disaster prevention and mitigation, the Mozambique government recognised that strategies and programmes for addressing these issues are still far from reaching the necessary efficiency, and policies and programmes for addressing extreme poverty are still inadequate. The extent of the impact w as due not only to the intensity and magnitude of the event, but also to the high levels of vulnerability w ithin rural communities, compounded by HIV/Aids and chronic food insecurity.
4.3 Recommendations.
The high levels of vulnerability w ithin Mozambican rural communities present a challenge in reducing their risk to natural hazards or poorly managed natural resources (e.g. the Chicamba Dam). Prevention and mitigation strategies therefore need to focus closely on reducing vulnerability through sustainable development initiatives. In both Munamícua and Boca study sites, the role played by local authorities (traditional and administrative), local institutions and organisations (church based organisations, schools, etc.) in rescue and recovery during the time of crisis was significant. Informal social netw or ks based on neighbourhood, kinship, friendship, and church ties w er e identified as important elements that replaced formal institutions in reducing the impact of the disaster in places w her e these institutions w er e limited or altogether absent. This role of the informal netw or ks needs to be strengthened within local communities. The follow ing paragraphs present some recommendations based on fieldw ork experience. In each section, specific focus is given to the role of institutions, from a national to local level, w ith suggestions as to how they could be strengthened.
4.3.1 Emergency m anagem en t of an extreme event 4.3.1.1 Early warning and emergency planning A new tendency in the last decade has been to decentralise early-w ar ning mechanisms, to introduce emergency planning at the local level, allow ing communities to contribute local know ledge. The follow ing recommendations are presented as means for strengthening early warnings and emergency planning in Búzi: Development of local m an agem e nt plans involving the local authorities and the most influential people w ith in the community. The participatory development of these plans is critical, as the local communities know when to anticipate extreme weather events such as drought, floods and cyclones. Similarly, they know w hich are the most at-risk areas. Local management plans should also reflect local know ledge to ensure appropriate local buy-in of the procedures presented. Prom o tio n of the local comm un ity radio station in Búzi to disseminate early warnings. One example of this is the role played by the Búzi Community Radio station in the Búzi administrative headquarters in 2000; w her e people w er e informed in good time about the rising of the Búzi River, w ith some people moving to safer places recommended in the bulletins. People w ho could not imagine the intensity of the event were seriously affected, as they did not evacuate in time. The GTZ has an interesting project for radio dissemination in Búzi that should be put in place as soon as possible. Radio is an important means of early w ar ning because using the local language to disseminate information gives more opportunities to the many illiterate people to understand w hat is happening regarding natural hazards in their areas and to find out what to do or w her e to go. Distribution of solar or wind-up radios, as the villagers often cannot afford to purchase batteries. Active involvement of GRC m em bers to com p lem e nt the inform at io n broadcast by the local radio to local communities, especially in remote locations along the Búzi catchment. Working with comm un it ies to inform them of the recurrence of extreme weather events, so that all w ar nings issued by the government are taken seriously. What exacerbated the disastrous impact of 2000 w as that no one, including the government, could imagine the magnitude of the event. Prom o tio n of national and provincial teams for monitoring, recording and evaluating indicators of the natural hazards and subsequent dissem in at ion of inform at ion to potentially affected communities. The GTZ, through its Proder project, is financing assessment studies and informative posters for the dissemination of information, to improve communities' know ledge of the nature and intensity of potential disasters and to improve prevention and preparedness mechanis ms . Facilitation of environmental education programmes w it h the local community to increase their know led ge of natural hazards. This w ill increase the communities' capacity to understand unusually extreme events.
Design of evacuation plans w it h at-risk comm u nit ie s , specifying w her e they should evacuate to and w her e to get access to the necessary resources in case of emergency. Integration of the scientific understanding of natural hazards with local `conventional wisdom' or traditional beliefs. Technological advancement of early warnings must not be used to undermine the traditional know ledge of local communities about disasters. Efforts should be made to integrate these tw o kinds of know ledge, taking the better aspects of the traditional know ledge into the modern system, to enhance community understanding of the causes of disasters and improve mechanisms for prevention, mitigation and response. Traditional authorities can w or k as channels of communication betw een technical experts and government entities, and rural communities. The advantage of this is that as traditional authorities are largely legitimised in their communities, the probability of conflict or rejection of information disseminated through them is very low .
4.3.1.2 Evacuation, search and rescue T avoid a situation similar to 2000, w her e the country had to depend on external forces for o evacuation, search and rescue, ongoing training programmes for the youth resident in each vulnerable zone should be developed, providing them w ith the know ledge needed to conduct first aid in an emergency situation. The GTZ has initiated such a programme, but the number of people involved is still low. Other organisations should be encouraged to get involved in these initiatives, and if possible some tax relief should be given to organisations involved in these kinds of initiatives. Programmes such as these can reduce the vulnerability of communities at risk to small and medium scale recurrent events. 4.3.1.3 Assessing the impact and distributing relief In Mozambique, damage and needs assessments w er e undertaken largely by external experts, w hile the government and aid agencies took responsibility for providing aid and made all distribution decisions. In addition, many of the agencies, w ho mistrusted the local authorities, conducted their ow n assessments. As a result of this uncoordinated assessment procedure, relief w as distributed haphazardly, and not all affected communities w er e assisted. Need for standardised assessment procedure. From the experience of 2000 it is clear that the local authorities (including Búzi district) have no methods for assessing impacts. Each state department in Búzi did an assessment of its ow n infrastructure or goods; for example, the education department w as interested only in the number of schools affected. So it is necessary to establish a standardised assessment, w hic h focuses not only on structural impacts such as loss of physical assets but on impact on livelihoods. This assessment should be conducted by the traditional authorities because they live close to the households affected, and they are themselves part of the affected people. Conduct pre-assessment and monitoring of food relief distribution by the local authorities to avoid comm un it y conflicts Supporting local support networks. The role played by local support netw or ks is more important than just `simple relief'. Local netw or ks are durable, more efficient and can guarantee longer-term food security than external simple relief, w hic h normally.
lasts no longer than six mouths follow ing an emergency. Developing local netw or ks avoids dependency of local communities on external donors. Encourage partnerships between the Mozam bican government and external agencies. Good relationships betw een these tw o entities should be built up permanently for better coordination in case of an emergency situation. This w ould overcome the external agencies' mistrust of local authorities and promote collaborative work, thus avoiding haphazard assessment and distribution of relief. Design of emergency food aid interventions to support m it igat io n activities as well as sim p ly providing immediate relief, for example river bank protection, soil and w ater conservation, rural infrastructure rehabilitation w hic h w ould reduce exposure to impact of future risks (MAF et al., 1998).
4.3.1.4 Recovery and rehabilitation The recovery and rehabilitation phase is critical in reducing the long-ter m vulnerab ility of at-risk communities, w hen undertaken w ithin a long-ter m time frame. The w ay in w hic h post-disaster recovery and rehabilitation w ill be carried out determines the vulnerability or resilience of the local community to recurrent hydrometeorological hazards. Establishment of long-term rehabilitation processes involving all community members. Recovery programmes should not consist of simple clean ups and restoration of community status quo, but should be integrated w ith long-ter m rehabilitation programmes. Design of planning and recovery programmes that take into consideration local cognitive factors that will influence their effectiveness. To reduce levels of vulnerability and avoid perpetuating pre-disaster conditions, recovery planning should involve all members of civil society. It should take account of horizontal relationships to ensure that decision-making is not divorced from local level reality, including gender issues.
4.3.2 Reducing the vulnerability of at-risk communities.
Mozambique is know n to be one the most cyclone-prone countries in southern Africa. Natural events occur almost annually dramatically affecting the livelihoods of thousands or even millions of people. The negative impact of these natural events is not mainly due to the high intensity or large magnitude of these events, but because of the high level of vulnerability of the people. Unless social, economic and political conditions are improved, these people w ill remain vulnerable to recurrent natural events. 4.3.2.1 Strengthening and diversifying community livelihoods The livelihoods of more than 80% of the Mozambican population are based on agr ic ultur e. This sector is frequently seriously affected by natural hazards, especially droughts, cyclones and floods, w hic h destroy the means of livelihood of local communities and impact severely on their food security. The situation is exacerbated by the limited capacity of local communities to diversify their livelihoods using the available natural resources. In.
order to strengthen and diversify community means of livelihood, the follow ing are recommended Focus on extensive and diverse sustainable utilisation of the natural resource base (agriculture, livestock, w ild life , fishery and forest resources) and efficient utilisation of river basins for crop production to reduce chronic vulnerability (M AF et al., 1998). Focus on female-headed households whose livelihoods are agriculturally dependent. Observation during the fieldw or k show ed that the number of femaleheaded households in Búzi is high. Most of these w omen lost their husbands during the civil w ar or due to prolonged sickness, probably linked to HIV/Aids. Administrative as w ell as traditional authorities should support these households, w hic h depend mostly on agriculture ­ not by giving food but by helping them improve their livelihood strategies, based on land resources. What makes the situation yet w ors e for these families is that their heads are illiterate, w ith limited possibilities of livelihood diversification. Encourage local seed exchanges between farmers from different communities because local seed has adapted to local soil and climate conditions and is thus more resilient. An example w ould be some fruit trees (e.g. banana, paw - paw) and sw eet potatoes, w hic h are considered of great importance to local communities, due to their high resistance to drought. Prom o tin g local agrarian extension officers to help local comm un ities improve agricultural production. The GTZ, in collaboration w ith the Búzi agricultural authorities, is promoting local agrarian extension officers, but in many cases they still require training before w or king in the filed. Encouragement of NGOs in implementing sm all projects for livestock production as a second means of livelihood. The advantage of this is that it introduces communities into the cash mar ket, through the sale of chickens or goats. With cashbas ed income during crises, households can purchase food, replace lost assets or pay medical bills. This in turn decreases a community's dependency on external food aid and w ill incidentally support the grow th of local markets during and after crises.
4.3.2.2 Strengthening the coordination role of local institutions in reducing the vulnerability of at-risk communities Examples from different parts of the w or ld show that communities w ith strong institutional coordination are likely to be less vulnerable than those w ith w eak institutional coordination. More than ever it is clear that w hat turns a naturally-occurring hazard into a disaster is not the natural event itself, but the social context, the level of coordination betw een the different institutions that exist to reduce the effects of hazards. Increased coordination between government institutions at national, provincial, district and local levels should be strengthened. The information exchange betw een these different levels is very important for ensuring better coordination and more informed decision- ma king. They can also help international agencies or organisations because they w ill be informed as to w hat is.
happening, w her e, how many people are involved and w hic h local structures can be used as focal points. Perm ane n t operation of disaster committees at each level of government. These committees should integrate at least one specialist in natural hazards, w ho would facilitate the understanding of natural hazards and design mechanisms to ensure good communication betw een government authorities and local communities, especially those related to early w ar ning; Strengthen coordination between M oz am b ique and other southern African countries. Cooperation should be strengthened, especially as regards w ater management information, to avoid situations like that of 2000, w her e excessive volumes of water were released from Zimbabw e w ithout the Mozambican authorities being notified. Expansion of the database identifying all institutions and organisations w ork in g on disaster m an ageme n t at the local level. The UN has been actively involved in helping the government create such a database, and in information sharing betw een organisations working on disaster management, but more w or k needs to be done. Administrative or traditional authorities at local level should be involved to ensure adequate coverage of the country, especially the rural areas. Establishment of communication mechanisms and inform at io n exchange among local institutions to ensure greater coordination. A set of common standards should be developed for assessing performance tow ar ds the shared goal of risk reduction. There should be regularly scheduled reviews of existing conditions, w her e feedback from all participants w ould help in the regular reassessment of contingency plans. Strengthening of initiatives such as the GRC, by the CVM and GTZ. The Red Cross and GTZ should empow er local communities to take over actions that until now they have carried out. The advantage of involving local community leaders is that they are know n locally and uphold the same values as the community; so the probability of having a message accepted is higher than if it had been come from somebody outside the community; Strengthen disaster comm ittees to support comm un it ies in managing their ow n risk. This could include support for traditional coping strategies based on local resources (for example traditional boats). This w ould be important since the Mozambican context is characterised by a weak capacity of governmental institutions in risk reduction. Strengthening the organisational capacity of local organisations. This can be achieved through increasing communities' resilience and resistance to hazards through sharing food, w orking animals, farm tools and other resources. Decision- ma king ability and know - how in managing community-w ide activities, organising evacuations and managing emergency responses also need to be strengthened (Heijmans & Victoria, 2001).
The government should take advantage of collaboration with NGOs and other agencies that already understand the im por t an ce of local organisation. In Búzi, for example, the GTZ is one of the NGOs that have been w or king on creating new community-based organisations and strengthening those already existing (e.g. disaster committees composed of local villagers trained by the GTZ and CVM).
4.3.2.3 Integrating disaster management in sectoral policies There are tw o policy framew or ks that have the potential to reduce exposure to risk and increase the coping ability or resilience of households. The first is the Poverty Reduction Strategy (PARPA), w hic h deals, among other things, w ith creating a disaster safety net to cope w ith natural hazards, and the second is the Disaster Management Policy, w hic h seeks to ensure that disaster prevention, mitigation and response are integrated into sectoral policies and programmes. Although integrated in some sectoral policies (for example, the land and environment law s) these are still only w eakly enforced. Increased sectoral engagement between government departments on disaster risk m an ageme nt . Integration of disaster risk reduction principles into government programmes. For example, the PARPA should focus on disaster reduction as its main target before becoming involved in developmental programmes. The impact of the 2000 floods should be taken as an example, to show that if developmental programmes do not take disaster risk into consideration they may fail.
4.3.2.4 Promoting multidisciplinary research into vulnerability reduction In the past few years some progress has been made in Mozambique regarding vulnerability assessment (see for example MAF et al., 1998) and hazard risk assessment (see CIG-UCM, 2003). These assessments represent a positive attempt to understand the conditions that make communities more vulnerable to natural hazards, but their focus is still mostly onedi mens iona l. Adoption of a multi-disciplinary approach to assess at-risk communities. This should involve assessing the economic capacity of communities or households to resist the impact of a hazard event, and their ability to recover from it (asset levels, mechanisms of access to natural resources, access to credit), the resistance of its physical structures (mainly housing) and infrastructures when an event occurs, the levels of social cohesion (informal social netw or ks ) and organisation (formal and informal), and cultural understanding (Few , 2003). Encouragement of government and local institutions to develop an interdis cip lin ar y "vulnerability index'. This w ould provide a reliable measure of the differences betw een communities exposed to similar ranges of hazards (Comfort et al., 1999). Local authorities should w ork on a long-term basis to persuade local communities that extreme events like the 2000 can occur again.
All w ar nings issued by government should be taken seriously. The problem of how to make people understand the probab ility of recurrence of extreme events is an issue of global concern.
Appendix 1 Tropical depressions between January and April 2000 Order 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Designation ASTRIDE BABIOLA CONNIE DAMIENNE ELINE FELICIA GLORIA 0919992000 9 1119992000 10 HUDAH 11 1319992000 12 INNOCENTE Source: GDM (2000) Appendix 2 Level of appeal and response Sector/Activity Food Emergency Transportation Roads Reparation Electricity Reparation Health and Nutrition Education Child Protection Gender Issues Water a Env ir onment Rescue Material Agriculture Land Mines Coordination Cash Others Big Total ( Cash).
Source: adapted from GOM (2000).
Classification Tropical stor m Tropical cyclone Tropical cyclone Tropical stor m Tropical cyclone Tropical stor m Tropical stor m Tropical stor m Tropical cyclone Tropical cyclone Tropical depression Tropical stor m.
Beginning 99/12/25 00/01/06 00/01/25 00/02/01 00/02/08 00/02/19 00/02/29 00/03/12 00/03/06 00/03/25 00/04/11 00/04/13.
Dissipation 00/01/03 00/01/12 00/02/01 00/02/02 00/02/23 00/02/24 00/03/02 00/03/07 00/03/08 00/04/08 00/04/14 00/04/19.
Appeal 35,585,828 10,993,842 36,095,000 14,000,000 7,621,000 2,850,400 622,150 800,000 6,586,630 27,774,600 13,190,000 2,865,000 1,590,500 160,575,65.
Response 19,519,767 30,228,852 2,387,798 10,720,493 903,207 3,909,545 5,494,996 1,237,640 908,403 70,714,532 16,200,644 162.225.87.
% R/Appe 54.85 274.96 6.62 140.66 31.69 59.36 19.78 9.38 31.71 101.03.
Appendix 3 Summary of assistance received as result of appeal.
COUN TRI E S COUN TRY /INSTI TU TI ON South Africa Spain Japan Libya Portugal Italy Namibia Swaziland T hai la nd UN AGENCIES OCHA/UNDP WFP UNICEF FAO ACNUR NGOs ADRA CARITAS DFID- UK LWF OXFAM USAID WVINT TO TAL (in USD ) 1,713,347.39 5,224,617.41 1,333,042.30 1,500,000.00 2,495,794.58 816,441.45 800,000.00 832,995.00 794,565.95 826,687.66 7,747,722.63 12,782,435.64 721,260.73 1,096,728.00 913,875.47 2,115,251.95 708,099.52 1,108,136.72 1,988,268.92 649,311.44 1,993,836.10.
FOREIGN COMPANIES WORKING IN MOZAMBIQUE BAXT ER 13,413,921.81 PARMALAT 110,666.31 CMA 95,000.00 SPEDITUR 30,000.00 MOZAMBICAN ORGANIZATIONS UGC C. Muçulmana KULIMA MEDIMOC - MISAU CVM RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATIONS Jesus Alive Christian Aid MOZ. Presbyterian Church MOZ. Evangelic Association CCM (Mozambican Christian Council) Source: adapted from GDM, 2000. 153,382.90 368,262.43 226,966.99 88,616.28 1,804,109.56 442,335.32 1,032,629.96 388,460.00 112,086.91 151,392.65.
Appendix 4 Main policies and legislation after 1990.
Policies POLICY Land Policy 17.
DESCRIPTION (KEY ASPECTS) (i) (ii) (iii) (iv) ensure the populations and investors' access to land; ensure women's access to and use of land; enforce an ecologically-sustainable use of the resources; promote national and foreign private investment without prejudicing (v) the resident populations, and ensuring benefits to the state; and ensure active participation by nationals as partners in private enterprises.
(Resolution 10/95 of October, 1995).
Forestry Resolution 10/97 April).
and T he main objective of this policy is the conservation, utilization and development of forestry and wildlife resources for social, ecological and economic benefit of present and future 7th i) ii) generations of the Mozambican people. Other key aspects include: Establishment of an economic value for Mozambique; rural development through involvement of the communities in the management of profits obtained from forestry and wildlife exploration; iii) iv) ecologically sustainable use of resources; strengthening and organisation of the institutional capacity within the processes of decentralization and community handling of natural resources.
Wildlife Policy of.
Agrarian Policy (1995) Water (Council Ministers Resolution 7/95 of 8th August)27 Policy of.
It defends the sustainable use of natural resources for the development of agriculture It postulates the rational and economical use of water resources, with involvement of local communities.
Resolution 10/97 of 7th April (Forestry and Wildlife Policy) [Boletim da República (BR) No. 14- Supp., Series I ­ 7th April 1997]. Maputo 27 Council of Ministers. Resolution 7/95 of 8th August, 1995. National Water Policy. Maputo.
Legislation LAW (ACT ) Land Law.
DESCRIPTION (KEY ASPECTS) T he key aspect of the new law is its recognition of the right to land through occupation on part of rural families, based on oral testimonial. This is particularly important because it opens up opportunities for safeguarding the right to land of many Mozambicans who cultivate it. T hi s law compels for: (i) (ii) recognition of the right to land use and/or utilisation according to customary norms and practices; and compulsory consultation to the communities when demarcating and titling the right to use and/or utilise land.
(Law 19/97 of 1st October) .
Env i ronm e ntal Law 20/97 October 1997) .
rational utilisation and management of environmental components; recognition and valorisation of traditions and community knowledge; participation of the citizens in the environmental management programme; international co-operation in view of finding solutions to environmental problems.
(Law of 1st.
Forestry Wildlife 7th 1999).
and Law July.
integration of local communities' interests, of the private sector and civil society;.
(Law 10/99 of.
(ii) ecologically sustainable use of resources; (iii) establishment of mechanisms for private appropriation; and (iv) recognition of customary rights.
T hi s law emphasises the development of small scale fishing and envisages establishing conservation measures for fishing resources, and this includes determination of resting periods, areas of forbidden or limited access, maximum quantities of exploration, prohibition or regulation of fishing.
(Law 3/1990).
Law 19/97 of 1st October (Land Law) [Boletim da República (BR) No. 40 - 3rd Supp., Series I ­ 7th October 1997]. 29 Law 20/97 of 1st October (Environment Law) [Boletim da República (BR) No. 40- 3rd Supp., Series I ­ 7th October 1997]. 30 Law 10/99 of 7th July (Forestry and Wildlife Law) [Boletim da República (BR) No. 27- 4th Supp., Series I ­ 12th July 1999].
as far as internationally protected species are concerned and protection of rare and endemic species.
T he law postulates that all traditionally established common uses must be recognised and recorded, and that there must not be any private utilisation of water in prejudice of the populations' right to potable water. It also adds that the holders of rights and of private utilisation will have to allow access of the neighbouring population to potable water. T he law also defends the participation of the populations in the main decisions relating to the policy on water management. As one of its objectives, the Law states that the National Policy on Water must be geared towards the continuous and sufficient provision of potable water to the populations so that they meet their domestic and hygienic needs.
(Law 16/91 of 3 August 1991).
Source: Adapted from Nhantumbo et al, 2001 and Chilundo & Cau, 2000.
Law 16/91 of 3 August 1991 (Water Law) [Boletim da República No. 31- 2nd Supp, Series I ­ 3 August 1991]. No implementing regulations were ever issued for this law.
Appendix 5 Map indicating the concentration of institutions in basin during the 2000 floods.
Source: CIG-UCM (2003).
Appendix 6 Institutions and their role during the emergency in Búzi.
O ORGANISATION I NS TI TU TI O N Austrian Cooperation Development Foundation Agai Hu n ge r Health De p a rtmen t Provin ROLE DURING THE EMERGENCY financial donation (US$1 million donation: agricult a ssi st a nce , housing, and GIS research) food distribution, provisory shelter (tents), plastic bags latrines construction, blankets, household asse d i st ri buti on (buckets, material, basin, plates), hygie m a te rial. vaccination against epidemics monitoring the epidemics evolution in the accommodat ce n t re s needs assessment water provision food distribution coordination (facilitating the identificat o f areas of concentration of affected communities identification of households in needs food distribution water treatment definition and coordination of relief activities - definition and coordination of relief activities transport and food distribution; permanent evaluation of the situation in the affected area water pumps and boreholes houses building shelter and medical assistance food distribution food and emergency kits distribution medical assistance and epidemic control elaboration of emergency action plan information gathering on affected communities seeds and agricultural tools distribution infrastructures rehabilitation post disaster needs assessment mobile clinics for medical assi st an ce Epidemiologic profile and control in the affected are d u rin g the emergency situation houses construction food distribution post disaster needs assessment funds for infrastructure urgent reparation generator for the district hospital medical and sanitation assistance food and houses building housing and food distribution housing and food distribution financial assistance.
Provincial Dept. of Pub Wo rks and Housing CCM (Mozambic Ch ri st i an Council) Mozambican Red Cro (S o f al a Branch) INGC (Sofala Branch) L u th e ran Fe d e rat io n UN Agencies Wo.
Medicus Mondi.
Sofala Mus A sso ci ati on German Cooperat (G T Z) KULIMA (Soc E co no mi ca l Integrat De ve lopm en t ) Methodist Church Catholic Chu 32 (E S M AB AM A project USAID.
Source: CIG-UCM (2003) and some interviews with local communities in Boca and Munamícua.
A Catholic charity organization working in four mission of southern Sofala (Estaquinha, Machanga, Barada and Mangunde.
Re fe ren ce s and Se le cte d Bibliography.
Abrahamsson, H. & A. Nilsson.1995. Mozambique, the troubled transition: from Socialist Construction to Free Market Capitalism. London: Zed Books. Blaikie, P., T. Cannon, I. Davis and B. Wisner, 1994. At-risk: Natural Hazards, People's Vulnerability, and Disasters. London: Routledge. Boudreau, et al. 2002. Disaster Risk Reduction in Mozambique: Better Information for Better Outcomes (2004 - 2010) (Prepared for USAID/ Mozambique). Maputo. Chilundo, A. & Cau, B.M. (2000). Literature Review on Policies and Legislation for Promotion of Security of Natural Resources Tenure in Frontier Areas. Maputo. CIG-UCM. Project Interim Report: 2003.The Investigation and the Integration of Research and Extension to Support the Rehabilitation Efforts of the M oz amb i que Government after the Floods. Beira: INTEGER Project. Comfort, L., B. Wisner, S. Cutter, R. Pulw ar ty , K. Hew itt, A. Oliver-Smith, J. Wiener, M. Fordham, W. Peacock and F. Krimgold. 1999. Reframing Disaster Policy: the Global Evolution of Vulnerable Communities. Environmental Hazards, Vol. 1: 39-44. Cramer, C. & N. Pontara. 1998. Rural Poverty and Poverty Alleviation in Mozambique: What's Missing from the Debate? Journal of Modern African Studies, Vol. 36, No. 1: 101-138. Devereux, S. & Palmero, A. 1999. Creating a Framework for Reducing Poverty: Institutional and Process Issues in National Poverty Policy (Mozambican Country Paper). Brighton: Institute of Development Studies, University of Sussex. DiMP ( Dis as ter Mitigation for Sustainable Livelihoods Programme). 2003. Social Risk and Vulnerability Assessment: Western Cape Provincial Social Services and Poverty Alleviation. Cape Tow n: DiMP, University of Cape Tow n. Few , R. 2003. Flooding, Vulnerability and Coping Strategies: Local Responses to a Global Threat. Progress in Development Studies, Vol. 3 No.1: 43-58. Gall, M. 2002. GIS and Multicriteria Decision Making in Disaster Management: The Identification of Flood Emergency Shelters in the Búzi and Save River Basin (Mozambique) (Diplomarbeit zur Erlangung des Magistergrades and der Naturw iss ens c haf tlic hen facultät der Universität Salzburg), Salzburg. GOM: Government of Mozambique. 2000. Floods: Updated International Appeal of the Government of Mozambique for Emergency Relief and Rehabilitation in Collaboration with the United States Agencies. Maputo. GDM: Governo de Moçambique. 2000. Balanço Final: Apelo de Emergência Face às Cheias. Maputo. Heijmans, A and L. P. Victoria. 2001. Citizenry- Based & Development- Oriented Disasters Response: Experiences and Practices in Disaster management of the Citizen's Disaster Response Network in the Philippines. Quezon City: Center for Disaster Preparedness. Watson, E., Black, R. and Harrison, E. 1999. Reconstruction of Natural Resources Management Institutions in Post-Conflict: a Framework for Research. Marena Research Project (Working Paper no.1). School of African and Asian Studies, University of Sussex. INE (Instituto Nacional de Estatística). 1999. II Censo Geral da População e Habitação (Resultados Definitivos). Maputo: INE. INGC (National Institute for Natural Disaster Management). 2000. Mozambique Devastated by Floods (INGC Situational Report). Maputo. Kepe, T. 2002. Grassland Vegetation and Rural Livelihoods: a Case Study of Resource Value and Social Dynamics on the Wild Coast, South Africa. Doctor of Philosophy Thesis, University of the Western Cape.
MAF, MPF, MOH, FEWS, WFP. 1998. Vulnerability Assessment for Mozambique 1997/1998: An Initial Analysis of Current Vulnerability to Food and Nutritional Insecurity (InterSec tor al Vulnerability Assessment and Mapping Group). Maputo. Montz, B. E. and E. Gruntfest. 2002. Flash Food Mitigation: Recommendations for Research and Applications. Environmental Hazards, Vol. 4: 15­22. Nhantumbo, I., Norfolk, S., Matsimbe, Z. and Pereira, J. 2001. Background to Policy and Institutional Changes Affecting Natural Resource Use and Management in Zambézia Province, Mozambique. SLSA - Mapping Phase. Maputo Pitcher, M. 1996. Recreating Colonialis m or Reconstructing the State? Privatization and Politics in Mozambique. Journal of Southern African Studies, Vol 22, No.1: 49-74. Pitcher, M.1998. Disruption Without Transformation: Agrarian Relations and Livelihoods in Nampula Province, Mozambique 1975-1995. Journal of Southern African Studies, Vol. 24, No.1, 115-141. PNUD (United Nations Development Programme). 1998. Project of the Government of Republic of Mozambique. Maputo. UNDP Republic of Mozambique. 2001. Bill of the Law of Disaster management. Maputo. República de Moçambique. 2001. Plano the Contingência: Época Chuvosa e de Ciclones (2001/2002). Maputo. Roque, C & Tengler. 2001. Búzi no Phudji: Perspectivas de Desenvolvimento Distrital Participativo. Beira: Instituto Austríaco Norte Sul (Cooperação Austríaca). SADC (Regional Remote Sensing Unit). 2003. Growing Season Status Rainfall, Vegetation and Crop Monitoring. Harare. Regional Remote Sensing Unit, Issue.
Steinbruch, F., 2003: Hazard and Vulnerability Assessment of Districts of the Búzi River Basin/Mozambique, GTZ- Pr oder . . United Nations Development Programme ( UNDP) . 2002. Human Development Report 2002 (Human Development Indicators 2002). New York.
Chefe da povoação Povoação Regulado Régulo Sagutas chief of the second level at the traditional leadership structure or subcommunity sub-community, below the regulado or community correspond to the largest territory led by traditional leader/chief the traditional leader/chief small groups of about ten households, falling under the povoação or sub-community.
