THE ROLE OF LOCAL INSTITUTIONS IN REDUCING VULNERABILITY TO RECURRENT NATURAL DISASTERS AND IN SUSTAINAB LE LIVELIHOODS DEVELOPMENT.
The role of Qashqai nomadic communities in reducing vulnerability to recurrent drought and sustainable livelihoods development in Iran.
Prepared by CENESTA (Centre for Sustainable Development), Iran for the Rural Institutions and Participation Service, FAO.
February, 2004.
T he designations emp loy ed and the p res ent at ion of material in this p ublicat ion do not imp ly the exp res s ion of any opinion whatsoever on the p art of FAO concernin g the legal status of any country , territory , city or area or of its authorities, or concernin g the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Op inions exp res s ed in this p ublicat ion are those of the authors and do not imp ly any op inion whatsoever on the p art of FAO.
In tro d u ctio n.
M ore than 90% of Iran's surface is arid or semi-arid land and p as t oral communities have alway s p layed an imp ort ant role in food p roduction by developing creative and sustainable systems for the use of scarce natural resources. Although migratin g p ast oralis ts number only about 2% of the entire p opulat ion (1.3 million p ast oralist s ) accordin g to government figures, they satisfy about one quarter of the country 's livestock needs. The p ress ures of drought, debt and p ro-s edent aris at ion p olicies are drivin g p as t oralis t s to abandon their livelihoods sy st ems and settle p ermanent ly in villages and cities. However, there is lack of jobs for settled p ast oralis ts . Furthermore exp erienc es with industrial livestock p roduct ion--t he main alternative to p as t oral livestock p roduct ion--have not been p romis ing. This case study seeks to understand how local p as t oral communities could p lay in the management of drought in Iran. It begins with an examination of the range of organ is at ions that are involv ed in drou ght management in Iran. The next section focuses on the experien ce of the drought of 1999-2001 in the words of Qashqai p as t oralis ts from the south of Iran. Their testimonies mak e a strong case for increasin g the involv ement of local communities in managin g natural disasters that affect them. The tragic earthquake that struck the Iranian city of Bam in December 2003 has made a big imp act on this rep ort . The resp onse to the earthquake served to sp ark a debate in the Iranian media, and interest amon g the public, on the strengths and weaknesses of Iran's disaster management p lan and strategy. The first and most tragic observation was that so-called "natural disasters" do not necessarily need to result in disasters-- they can be avoided and their imp act mitigated. The two earthquakes that hit California and Iran just days ap art in December 2003 both measured at about 6.5 on the Richter Scale, but whereas only 3 people were killed in the California earthquake, rou ghly 43,000 dead according to official numbers have been registered in Iran. The government has been heavily criticised in the weeks followin g the earthquake for its lack of prep arat ion and p oor coordination for such a disaster, even though it is widely known that Iran is one of the most earthquake p rone areas on earth. And while Iranians have been very eager to donate money and goods to the earthquake survivors, many have organised their own deliveries for fear that their donations would not end up in the hands of the victims. Following the earthquake, M s . Jamileh Kadiv ar, M P for Tehran made the link b et w een the Bam disaster and the state of governance in the country. "When the institutions that run this country are constantly arguin g with each other and constantly faced with challen ges and crises and one institution is try ing to eliminate the other, we cannot create a society which benefits from order and security." She went on to say , "If our politicians were really motivated to develop the country for all its p eople then our develop ment p roject s would not lie half-fin ished for y ears on end, our v ill ages wouldn't be emp ty of their p op ulat ions , traffic and p ollut ion would not have reached crisis p oint in our cities and our tourism sector would not be as inactive as it is today ". This p ublic and critical look at the government's record is a very p os it ive step and should be welcomed by the govern ment as it is necessary for develop ing alternatives and for buildin g the p olit ical will to imp lement them. However, one striking feature of all the criticism--.
w het her voiced in parliament, in newsp apers , or in academic journals-- has b een the lack of systematic and in-dep t h analy s is of "what went wrong". As is the norm in Iran, a hu ge p ublic outcry follows a major and tragic national d is as t er and loud calls are mad e for imp rovement s to the sy st em. But there are very few specific reco mmend at ions based on an aly s is of laws, p olicies , budget and on-the-ground exp erien ces . The tragedy is never forgotten, but the call for imp rovement s fades from our consciousness. This case study attempts to p res ent a more in-depth look at the system for managin g natural disasters in Iran and p articularly the new National Comp rehens ive P lan for R elief and Rescue. There are both p os it ive and n e gat ive aspects of the comp rehens ive p lan, but perhap s the most imp ort ant recommendation would be to design a national p lan that put the citizens of the country at its centre. The current p lan is supp osed to be imp lement ed by a maze of overlap p ing committees and workin g group s with no clear p ict ure of how a local commun it y could negotiate its way through such a system to p lay a more active role. Legal obstacles to registering non-governmental and co mmunit y -bas ed organ is ations present another major difficulty in envisionin g a national p lan that could involve local communities since legal registration is a p rerequis it e for any social group to become active. Lastly, the develop ment of a na tional p lan with local commun it y involvement would require local commun it ies to be organised into coalitions or unions at the national level. Since this is currently not the case, the recommend at ion is to start building up exp eriences fro m the most local levels, with the ultimate go al of arrivin g at a full national p lan of coop erat ion.
Context of the case study.
T h e drought.
Iran suffered three consecutive y ears of major drought from 1999 to 2001. Estimates p ut the statistical probability of such a drought at once in 30 y ears . A largely arid and semi-arid country with wide weather fluctuations, Iran is accustomed to drought. However the recent drought was p art icularly hard-hitting. Variation between and within p rovinces was high, but it has been estimated that 25 out of 28 p rovinces were affected in some way and that 37 million p eop le-- half the p op ulat ion-- were affected. Even p art s of the country with high levels of p recip it at ion in normal y ears were severely impacted. Although the drought was less severe each y ear of its duration, the social and economic imp act was greater as it p rogres s ed; an estimated 90% of the p op ulat ion were imp act ed in the last y ear. Rural food p roducers -- farmers and p as t oralis t s -- were the hardest hit. The drought comp ounded stresses already present in the rural economy , p art icularly p oor and inefficient management of water and land. The long-standin g conflict over access to land between farmers and p as t oralis t s also became more acute. Pastoral communities currently comp ris e some 2% (1.3 million p eop le) of the total p op ulat ion of Iran and meet about 25% of the livestock needs of the country. Pastoralists dep end largely on grazin g liv es t ock for their livelihoods but ran ge lands were under sev ere p ress ure due to the drought. During the last drou ght rangeland production fell to half that of a normal y ear in many p rovinces , and less than that in some. The livelihoods of pastoral communities suffered in numerous way s: animal mortality increased, p roduct ion of meat,.
milk and wool fell and sale of animal in creas ed. The UN estimates that the drought affected more than 75 million animals (out of a national total of around 90 million), and immediate small stock losses were about 800,000. The negative imp act of the sale of animals--the source of p as t oralists ' wealth--was compounded by the decline in animal p rices at the same time that the p rice of imp ort ant stap les such as flour increased, thus trapp ing pastoralists in a terms of trade collap s e. The most obvious and severe effect of drou ght on pastoral communities is the ab andonment of their traditional liv elihoods sy s tem and settlement in villages, suburbs and cities.
Background on Confederation.
the Koohi Sub-tribe of the Qashqai Tribal.
The largest group of migratory nomadic p as t oralis ts in Iran is the Qashqai Confederation. The Qashqai live and migrate through p art s of the Zagros M ount ain range of southern Iran (see attached map ), mostly within the p rovince of Fars. Their environ ment is qu it e arid, with an average annual p recip it at ion in Fars of about 300mm. Faced with the aridity and high variability in the amount and distribution of rainfall-- and therefore available forage in their environment-- the Qashqai h ave developed co mplex natural resource management strategies to exp loit the uncertainties by recognisin g and workin g with the p at t erns that emerge in nature. This has led them to a livestock-based livelihood sy st em based on migration in order to make the best use of p recip it ation p atterns . The Qashqai have traditionally migrated with their herds from summer to winter p ast ures twice p er year and gained their livelihood from meat, dairy, wool, and other animal p roduct s . The Koohi Sub-tribe is one of dozens of sub-tribes of the Confed erat ion. Their summer p astures are located to the north of Shiraz, the cap it al of Fars p rovince, near the town of Eqlid and their winter p as tures are located to its south near the town of Farashband. The total distance travelled by the Koohi sub-tribe is about 860 kilometres. In general the b es t grazin g areas are in the summering grounds, p articularly those near the Kooshk-e Zar wetlands, but there are also some good grazin g areas in the winterin g grounds ­ p art icularly at the foothills of the mountains. According to the Koohi, in general, all areas which have little or no hu man imp act are good for grazing but unfortunately there are few such p laces left. Level of p recip it at ion is also a very imp ort ant indicator of quality of grazing land. The Koohi Sub-tribe includes 573 tentholds with a total p op ulat ion of about 3,500 p eop le accordin g to current calculations by the members of the sub-tribe. It should be noted that these figures include the migratory p op ulat ion only ; if the settled p op ulat ion were added the figure would rise to about 1,000 tentholds or families. The official estimates are slightly lower: accordin g to the 1377 (1998) n at ional census of no madi c p as t oralis t p opulat ions there are 536 tentholds with a total p op ulat ion of 3,264 (49.2% female). According to the same census, 52.76% of the Koohi are literate and of this 41.7% are female. In total, the province of Fars has about 145,000 migratory p ast oralis ts in the various summering grounds of the province (the highest number of any of the p rovinces ) and about 170,000 in the winterin g grounds (the second highest figure). The livelihoods p att erns of the Koohi (and all Qashqai in gen eral) have chan ged greatly over the past several decad es , particularly since land reform. Today their production is no longer.
p rimarily for self-subsistence. They sell their various animal p roduct s and buy a wide range of consumer items (mainly food and fuel) from the market. Raisin g liv es t ock is still the cornerstone of their economy , but there are clear signs that the situation has been changing. Accord in g to estimates from the Koohi, before the land reform of the early 1960s they had 40,000 to 50,000 heads of liv es t ock. They kept a wide v ariet y of animals, includin g sheep , goats, camels, donkey s, horses and to a more limited degree, cows, to satisfy a variety of needs, from food to transp ort at ion to clothing and shelter. The livestock were owned by the leaders of the clans and tribes while the other members of the tribe worked as shep herds and herders. Today the role of the traditional leaders has been greatly undermined : they have been stripp ed of their p ow er and this has contributed to changes in their livelihoods sy st ems . For instance, agricu lt ure is p laying an in creas in gly imp ort ant role as an income earner. In the p as t although they p lant ed some crops this was usually for p ers onal use only . Today growing crops (near their summer and winter grazing areas) is p lay ing an increasin gly imp ort ant role, although it tends to be the more financially p rivileged families that can afford to do this, the main constraint bein g access to land. Accordin g to estimates by the Koohi, about one fifth or one sixth of them hav e access to agricu lt ural land (on average about 5-6 What happened in the Iranian land reform? hectares of land p er Land reform refers to a series of laws in 1963 that the Shah was fond tenthold) both in the of calling the "White Revolution." In order to understand the nature summerin g and winterin g and impact of land reform it is important to keep in mind that: grounds. The main crop s.
Th e European concept of "feudalism" never existed in Iran. Unlike the European serfs--who went with the land and had no grown are wheat (for rights at all-- Iranian agricultural systems were based on a p ersonal use) and barley concept more akin to collaborative management. Different and corn (for sale).
elements of production (land, water, labour, animal traction and seeds) each had an agreed share (usually one-fifth each) in the product, and whoever put in each factor got the corres on din g p share of the crop once common expenditures (such as field guards, craftspeople, etc.) were taken off the top. Th e land reform included, more important than the land distribution, the nationalisation of all natural resources, including rangelands, fores s and water. t In the case of pastoral nomads, this meant that land that was ancestrally theirs, and which they managed sustainably and held as common property, was alienated from them and taken over by the State. Sin ce then the nomads have had to obtain individual grazing permits based on a state expert assessment of the carrying capacity of the range. The notions of carrying capacity are based on old approaches to range ecology and management that were mentored by Utah State University, now considered fundamentally in error. Th e present system of individual short-term permits means that the nomads are unable to work together to apply the principles of sustainable use. It also means that the government, unable to manage the rangelands (about 90% of the usable land in the country), has now decided to give it to the private sector--but usually not to the traditional holders of rights to the range. It is usually given to those with power and influence, who use it, more often than not, for speculation.
Both the size and the diversity of their herds are on the decline. The Koohi estimate that they currently have about 30,000 to 40,000 livestock, but also p oint out that their own p op ulat ion has increased from about 300 tentholds to about 600. Today sheep and goats dominate the herds while camels, donkey s , horses and cows are all fast dwindling in number. Accordin g to the national census of nomadic pastoralists of 1377 (1998) the.
comp os it ion of nomadic herds in the v arious summerin g grounds of Fars province is as follows: 51% goats, 47% sheep , 1% donkey s and the rest camels, donkey s , horses and cows. The main reasons for this are rep lace ment of animals by motorised vehicles for transp ort at ion and market orientated herdin g which favours sheep and goats. In fact, meat is by far the most imp ort ant pastoral livestock p roduct because it brings the best p rice. By contrast there is much less dairy p roduct ion because the women are less willin g to do the h ard work invo lved for relatively little cash benefit. Other sources of inco me includ e emp loy ment in the service sector and hand icraft p roduct ion (women only ). In the summerin g grounds some of the Koohi offer their labour to local farmers, either for a wage or for one fifth of the p roduct . In the wintering grounds they rent agricultural land to grow crops or they offer labour to local farmers. In general, the older members of the tribes continue herdin g while the y ounger generation look for new kinds of 1 work. Accordin g to the census about 40% of the Koohi are employ ed . Of this, roughly 59% raise livestock, 10% work in the agricultural sector and 31% work in the handicrafts sector. Throughout the p rovince on average 51% of nomad ic p as t oralis ts only raise livestock as their main source of in come, 32% raise livestock and grow crop s , 15% raise livestock, grow crop s and keep orchards and 2% raise livestock and keep orchards. The main expenses of a Koohi tenthold are for food, fuel, health, education, clothing, housing in wintering grounds, tents in summering grounds, fodder, and transportation of 2 animals. M any of these are relatively new exp enses , such as fodder and rental to farmers for grazin g on the stubble of their crop s , or are much greater than they were in the p ast , such as for clothin g, food, etc. In fact the Koohi say that although their cash in come has in creas ed in the p ast several decades their exp ens es have also increased a great deal. In recent y ears consump t ion p att erns have changed greatly , under the direct influence of the chan gin g consump t ion p att erns of Iran's villages and cities, facilitated by enhanced communications and transp ort . The result has been a desire for greater consump t ion and therefore greater costs of living. For example, rice h as become a stap le whereas in the p as t it was seen a luxury . Owning audio visual equ ip ment , comp ut ers and mobile telep hones are also increasin gly seen as n ecess it ies for mobile commun it ies -- p art icularly amon g the y out h. Accordin g to national census data on average about 26% of migratory pastoralists in Fars use some form of motorised vehicles, 41% have radio /audio equip ment and about 6% have televisions. These cultural factors, as well as the rejection of raising livestock as a form of livelihood by the youth, have led to widesp read migration to villages and cities. Another effect of modern urban life has been the in creas in g use of illegal dru gs by p as t oralis ts , esp ecially among the y outh. The Qashqai have developed a comp lex social structure which is intimately connected with their indigenous sy st ems for natural resource management. Customary regulations for natural resource use and management were develop ed and enforced by traditional tribal leaders at various levels of the structure of the confederation.
1 T he term " em pl oyed" includes all people 6 years of age and older who hav e worked for the 7 days prior to the census, or who don't have full-time work but worked for at least 2 of the 7 days prior to the census, or those who are engaged in seasonal work (as long as they are not looking for other work during their off-season). 2 In the past the animals survived on the natural vegetation of the rangel ands but today there is much less vegetation so they are f rc ed to hand feed their animals. o.
T he Qashqai Confederation comprises six tribes (tay efeh) includin g the "Shish Bay li" tribe. The Koohi Sub-tribe (tireh) is one of about 20 sub-tribes of the "Shish Bay li". The Koohi sub-tribe is divided into 14 clans (bonkooh), and each clan is divided into several households, or more accurately, tentholds (obaa). These organ is at ions will b e referred to in the general term, "p ast oral organisation" in this p ap er. Each tenthold is comp os ed of related families and is the smallest unit of the Qashqai social structure. Generally , families mak ing up tentholds will migrate together, and both in the summering and wintering grounds tend to camp and work near each other as a un it . The head of the confed eration (khan) and the h eads of the tribes were essentially responsible for political and strategic decision-making, coordin at ion of all the tribes and mobilisation. The heads of each of the sub-tribes (kalaantar), clans (kadkhod aa) and tentholds (reesh sefid) were more invo lved with decision-makin g about natural resource management. Socio-p olit ica l and economic chan ges that have envelop ed Iran in the last several decades have fundamentally influen ced and chan ged life for the Koohi sub-tribe and other p astoralis t s. One of the major drivin g forces behind these chan ges has been land reform (see text box, above). The p re-1963 land reform p ast oralis t communities used common prop erty management systems. The land reform p rogramme of the Shah brou ght about the nationalisation of all natural resources, including ran gelands , forests, water and wildlife; individuals were granted use of land b as ed on a sp ecific short-term grazin g licensin g sy st em. Thus p ast oralis t s were alienated from their common p rop erty land and customary rights and their incentives for p roper management and sustainable use of land were weak ened. Nationalisation has further marginalised p as t oral communities by not only fragmentin g and destroy ing their summer and winter p as t ures , but also by imp eding on their migratory routes. Rangelands b eca me state p rop erty and continue to be gov erned by p rincip les of ran ge management which h ave recently been refuted. Nationalised ran ge lands were turned over to agriculture or to a national sy s t em of p rotect ed areas both of which resulted in environmental degradation. While these p olicies have continued and intensified under the Islamic regime, since the reign of Mr. Rafsanjani, the government has adop t ed a dual policy of supp ort (with subsidies and services) and a relentless effort at sedentarisation. This has been arran ged with some encouragement from the World B ank.
Fi gure 1 Because of fragmentation of their migra tory routes, pastoralists, like members of the Koohi Sub-tribe, above, are forced to migrate along roads by truck.
Brief introduction to the host project.
The p res ent case study is embedded within a larger on going p roject entitled Reviving nomadic pastoralism in Iran - Facilitating sustainability of b iodiv er s ity and livelihoods--A learning by doing project. Workin g within the framework of the host p roject allowed the researchers to conduct the case study in a very limited time by building on the relationship s that the authors had already established with one p ast oral community in Iran ­ the Koohi Sub-tribe. Some of the recommendations that conclude this case study are guided by lessons learned so far in the host p roject, therefore a brief p resent at ion of the host project will be useful in situating the case study in context. The p roject to revive nomadic pastoralism seeks to promote sustainable liv elihoods and conservation of biolo gi cal d iversit y among nomadic p as t oralis t s in arid and semi-arid rangelands of Iran and greater Central Asia. Fundamental asp ect s of this p roject are revival and strengthenin g of traditional social organ iz at ions and cu lt ure, as well as collaborative and community management of ecosy st em health and biodiv ers it y . The initial pilot p roject focuses on one sub-tribe of nomadic p as t oralists in central Iran (the Koohi Sub-tribe). The larger goal is to perfect a modular, scalable, self-rep lic at ing, iterative model in which migratory p ast oralis t s themselves are the central d ecis ion- makers , and in.
w hich the processes and projects undertaken are app ropriat e to each group 's unique culture, p resent status, strengths and limitations. The p roject, which was launched in January 2003, began by identify ing the main p roblems , and p os s ible solutions, of the sub-tribe. Following the identification and categorisation of the main p roblem areas members of the sub-tribe tried their hand at writing p roject p rop os als aimed at p roject s which could contribute to solving each of the main problem areas. They also sketched out their overall vision for the p roject . Project funds will be used to implement some of the p roject s that have been devised by the sub-tribe. The results of the problem identification, p roject p ropos al and visionin g exercises are p res ent ed in Annex.
In order to imp lement the projects and to rehabilitate the traditional social structure destroy ed by the recent decades' econo mic and social d evelop ment s , the local community has formed "The Koohi Sub-tribe Nomadic Pastoralist's Sustainable Livelihoods Council". This council consists of rep res ent at ives from all clans comp ris ing the sub-tribe through elections at the lowest social organisational level (tenthold). The council has recently been officially registered as a non-p rofit comp any due to restrictions which make it difficult to register nongovern mental organisations. Subsequently , the sub-tribe created a Community Investment Fund or sanduq, with initial funding don at ed by a non-governmental organ is at ion, designed to fuel small-scale economic d evelop ment initiatives. The Council will act as an advisory and (as needed) d ecis ion mak in g board and will facilitate social mobilisation. Preliminary p roject p lans have also been p urs ued for a number of initiatives. The p rofit s from any investment made with sanduq funds will be returned to the sanduq for further investment. Once the level of investment reaches an adequate level for their needs, the sub-tribe will use any "excess" funds to establish new sanduqs in other sub-tribes and tribes, with a view to sp reading this community investment sy stem throughout the entire Confederation. The sanduqs supp ort two main functions: a) wealth generation for empowerment of the subt ribe; and b) conservation of their landscap e including their rangelands, water sources, and a unique wetland. The wetland and its related landscap e are now b ein g established as the first official Commun it y Conserved Area with the endorsement of the government of Iran. Besides the Koohi Sub-tribe and Cenesta the main partners are various branches of the Iranian Govern ment includin g the M inis t ry of Agriculture and Rural Develop ment , the Organisation for Forests, Rangelands and Watershed Management, and the Organisation for Nomadic Pastoralists Affairs. International p art ners includ e IIED, UNDP/GEF and IUCN/CEESP's Workin g Group on Sustainable Livelihoods. All p artners from outside the Koohi commun it y op erat e through its Council of Eld ers and all major decisions are mad e by them.
Organisations working on drought relief in Iran.
Local institution s.
Organisations working at the local level in Iran are either governmental or nongovern mental. It is imp ortant to note that local-lev el govern ment al organ is at ions are simp ly rep res ent at ives of national organisations, imp lement in g p olici es that are made in Tehran at the local level. All government policies are determin ed in the 5-y ear development plans of.
t he Planning and Management Organisation. Therefore government agencies at the local level will not be treated as "local" institutions in this study . The only governmental organ is at ions which are constituted at the local lev el are the village councils which h ave b een active since 1999. Village coun cils ("Islamic Councils," as they are called under the law) are the rep res ent at ives of the Ministry of Interior at the local level and the memb ers are elected by local residents. "Pastoral councils" are also p lanned but have not yet been established. Levels of exp ect ation and excitement about the councils were high at the outset, but their level of effectiveness seems to be mixed. Elections take p lace every 4 y ears and the turnout for the 2003 elections were much lower throughout the country than the first round in 1999 which saw a massive turnout largely because the councils are seen to be ineffective in addressing peop le's needs. Very few active NGOs exist at the local lev el; most have b een n ew ly established and lack basic cap acit ies and resources. Because of d ifficu lt ies in officially registering NGOs, many NGOs have been registered as non-p rofit comp anies under the law of registering companies. The strongest NGOs tend to be concentrated in the cap it al. Thus the main local, nongovern mental institutions are traditional community based organisations (CBOs) which are informal organ is at ions , not officially reco gnis ed by the government. The p recis e structure, roles and functions vary throughout the country , but it is clear that these organisations have traditionally p lay ed a central role in decision-mak in g about natural resource man a gem ent , includin g drou ght . In recent decades as the role of the central government has increased and modern develop ment app roaches have been adopted, CBOs have been weakened and in many cases have started to dissolve. Remaining elements of CBOs are stronger at the grassroots levels rather than at the higher levels of the structure. For examp le, in p astoral communities the structures are still mean in gful at the level of tentholds, clans and sub-tribes whereas the tribes and confederations have effectively been dissolved. During the p ast few y ears with greater govern ment interest in p ublic p art icip at ion and the greater involvement in international p roces s es related to sustainable development there is increasin g interest in the ro le of ind i genous knowled ge in natural resource man a gem ent . Nevertheless there is still little understanding of the role of CBOs in creatin g, using and p reserving traditional knowled ge. Another major obstacle in rehabilitating CBOs is that they are not officially reco gnis ed by the government.
Non-governmental organisations.
There are no NGOs in Iran that work specifically on drought or any other natural disaster. M any civil society groups get involved in relief efforts at the time of a national emergency , but these efforts are usually organised by the Iranian R ed Crescent So ciet y (IRCS) to deliver relief or raise funds. However IRCS is not a non-govern ment al organ is at ion in Iran (see below for more information about the IRCS). Also, there seems to be greater activity by various civil society groups following a "sudden" disaster such as an earthquake or flood rather than more gradual d is as t ers such as drought.
Gove rnme ntal organisations.
Various government ministries, dep art ment s and organisations are involved with disaster p reparedness and relief at various stages and according to their own mandate. The most wide-sp read criticism of govern ment al resp ons e to natural disasters is that there is no single effective p lan for dealin g with disasters. In fact, the Comp rehens ive National Plan for Relief and Rescue was ratified in 1382 (2003), but it is not yet widely known or debated. It was highlighted in the media durin g the post-Bam earthquake coverage, but mostly for being ineffective. The Plan is run by the Disaster Task Force and is discussed in great detail throughout this report.
Disaster Task Force.
The Disaster Task Force (DTF) is the govern ment al body resp ons ible for the imp lem ent at ion of the Comp rehens ive National Plan for Relief and Rescu e which was ratified in 1382 (2003)--see legislation and p olicy section, below for more information on this p lan. However, the DTF had existed before the introduction of the Plan and was also responsible for coordination of natural disaster p reparat ion and resp ons e. With the introduction of the Plan the resp ons ibilit ies , members and constituent p arts of the DTF have been clarified or changed. DTF is headed by the M inis ter of Interior and its secretariat is hosted at the M inist ry of Interior. The DTF has a largely coordinating and mon it oring role, but it contains a comp le x web of working group s which are also resp ons ible for imp lement in g p roject s . Its coordinating role is reflected in its structure: DTF is made up of rep res ent at ives from relevant government organ is at ions and it has bureaus at the p rovincial and dep art ment levels. The resp ons ibilit ies and p olicies of the DTF are broadly laid out in the Plan and are p resent ed at len gt h in the section, below, on policy and legislation. The cluster of sp ecialis t working group s on p revent ion and risk management of the DTF (introduced through the Plan) p res umably rep lace the National Committee on M it igat ion of Natural Disasters (NCM ND ) which was established in 1993 to discuss and address research and p olicy questions. NCM N D consisted of one coordin ation committee and 9 subcommit t ees that each deal with the following top ics : earthquakes; plant p est s and frost; reconstitution of the rangelands and combatin g drou ght ; floods; air p ollut ion; hurricanes; rescue and relief; comp ens at ion of losses; and health. The top ics have been streamlin ed under the present arrangement to omit the groups on hurricanes, rescue and relief and comp ens at ion of losses. Under the previous sy st em the members of the rangelands and drou ght sub-committee were: the M inis try of Agriculture and Rural Develop ment , the M inistry of Energy, Iran M eteorological Organisation, the M inist ry of Interior, the Dep art ment of Environment, Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting Comp any , and the M inis t ry of Post, Telegraph and Telep hones. The sub-committee was headed by the M inis t ry of Agriculture and Rural Develop ment . Under the present system the drought sp ecialis t working group is still headed by the M inist ry of Agriculture and Rural Dev elopment . The members, terms of reference and internal regulations of each sp ecialis t workin g group are drafted by the head of that specialist working group and must be app roved by the national workin g group on p rep arednes s (another new component of the DTF introduced through the Plan) and the DTF. 13.
Ris k management sp ecia lis t working group s can be established at the p rovincial level if needed. The need is assessed-- and the memb ers of the provincial workin g group s decided-- by the p rovincial prep arednes s working group . The p rovincial prep arednes s working group s are established under the sup ervision of the p rovincial DTF. These are working groups with rep res ent at ives from 17 organ is at ions and are head ed by the p rovincial governor's deputy for develop ment affairs (under the Ministry of Interior). The p rovincial DTFs are established under the sup ervis ion of the national DTF and include rep res ent at ives from 26 organisations and are headed by the p rovincial governor (und er the Ministry of Interior). The head of the DTF at the district level can call for the establishment of any sp ecialis t working group s at that level as n eeded. The district DTFs include 18 members and are headed by the district governor (und er the M inist ry of Interior). All of the activities of the district DTF must take p lace under the supervision of the p rovincial DTF. Before the introduction of the comp rehens ive national plan, the DTF was seen to be doin g little p revent ion or rehabilitation work and to be dealing with natural disasters on a case-by cas e basis, organisin g their activities after the event had taken place. Even in its relief work, there was very little monitoring of its activities or extension our outreach efforts to involve local communities and civil society . The comp rehens ive p lan has not been in action for very long (less than one y ear) so it may too soon to judge the effectiveness of the p lan and the new DTF structure. However, it could be useful to see how the DTF has acted followin g the recent earthquake in Bam which was a great test of its new structure. Unfortunately , the experience of Bam does sp eak well for the government's new and comp rehens ive p lan to deal with natural disasters and the old criticisms of lack of coord ination and p lanning are bein g repeated again. Accordin g to a joint WHO/M inist ry of Health rap id assessment of the area following the earthquake, "Co-ordination and man a gement are not y et effective enough. Sup p ort in terms of supp lies and human resources is ad equat e, but lack of p rop er management and insufficient co-ordination has been counterp roduct ive." The daily newsp aper Kayhan, said that although Iran has a Disaster Task Force at the national level and in each city , the DTF is not structured in such a way as to have the p ow er to take charge of disaster man a gem ent when a disaster strikes. They criticised the DTF for being badly managed and coordinated and suggest that this was the reason why the responsibility for relief was given over to the armed forces 3 days after the earthquake. On the other hand, Dr. Ahmad Ali Noorbala, the Director of the Iranian Red Crescent Society criticised in a p res s conference the intervention of other agencies in the IRC S's relief activities and also the government's decision to delegate the management of the p os t eart hquake op erat ions to the armed forces. He said that this was in contradiction to the Comp rehens ive National Plan for Relief and R es cue sin ce under this p lan the man a gement of relief and recovery in disasters is the resp ons ibilit y of the IRCS. He also criticised the role p layed by the state broadcasting comp any for p ublicis ing and rally ing sup p ort for the Imam Khomeini Relief Fund, rather than for the IRCS, which accordin g to the Plan and article 44 rd of the 3 develop ment p lan, p ut s the responsibility of coordinating disaster relief aid squarely on the shoulders of IRCS. He added that the Imam Khomeini Relief Fund was not distributing the aid fairly among the p eople. He said that IRCS exp ert ise was not used at all, but that they chose to remain silent in order to p revent open conflict.
In the day s following the Bam earthquake and the influ x of international h elp to the country , the coordinator of the group of "Rescue Without Borders" criticised Iranian officials for their lack of coordin at ion in resp onding to the earthquake, add in g that the attention to details in imp lement ing activities and also the sp eed of resp ons e in other countries that he h ad worked in, includ in g Turkey , India and Nigeria h ad been b et t er than Iran. In the daily newsp ap er, Shargh, the M P Mohammad Reza Tabesh was rep ort ed as say ing that a p arliament ary rep ort on the Bam earthquake shows that the fact that there was no organ is at ion or structure in p lace for immed iat e resp onse to the earthquake made the imp act of the earthquake much worse. He added that the 1,600 international relief staff that were p resent in Bam were as effective as the 30,000 strong Iranian team.
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development.
Forest and Rangeland Organisation.
The Forest and Rangeland Organisation (FARO) is the government body responsible for the management of the country 's rangelands (amon g other things) and its p olicies thus have an imp ort ant imp act on the livelihoods of pastoral communities. The drou ght -relat ed activities of FARO focus on p revent ion and mitigation through their central programme of "establishing equilibrium between livestock and ran gel ands ". Over-grazing by p as t oralis ts is up to five times the carry ing cap acit y of the land according to FARO estimates. The p rogramm e is very unp op ular among p as t oralis t s themselves. It is based on the premise that the main cause of d et eriorat ion of ran ge lands , desertification and drought is unsustainable use by p as t oralis ts due to overp opulat ion of livestock. The main thrust of the p rogramme is the sedentarisation of p ast oralis ts and imp os it ion of alternative liv elihoods systems. Pastoralists maintain that their numbers h ave actually decreased in recent y ears and that any unsustainable use is due to the fact that they are forced onto increasingly small p lot s of land. Furthermore, they say that the land that is taken from them is used unsustainably by farmers and industrialists. FARO is also involved in a variety of drought-related p roject s such as p roviding fodder during drought, imp roving water storage and distribution and vegetation in ran gel ands and develop ing an early warning sy st em with the national meteorological organisation. Some of these p roject s are coordinated and funded by the Disaster Taskforce of the Interior Ministry (see below for more information on the taskforce). FARO is also keen to take advantage of the latest modern technology in ran gel and rehabilitation and p revent ion of desertification-- w it h mixed success. For examp le, in the mid 1990s FARO conducted p roject s aimed at incitin g clouds to rain.
Fi gure 2: Water tankers distribute water to pastoral communities.
As with DTF, FARO seems overwhelmed by the scale of their task: they are resp ons ible for the management of some 50 million hectares of ran geland. Because of lack of funds, their p rogrammes tend to be quite limited in their impact. Furthermore, they say that their work is hamp ered by lack of coordination between various gov ernment programmes. Within FARO there is a growin g movement for greater civil society participation ­ p articularly by NGOs ­ and for greater reco gnit ion of the role of indigenous knowledge and customary law. However, this has not yet taken the form of a unified p olicy within the organ is at ion and there remain many contradicting p olic ies . For examp le, FARO has a history of establishing NGOs in order to have a pool of "friendly " NGOs that it can choose to work with. At the level of local co mmunit ies , it is difficult to see how p as toralis ts could want to p articip at e in the activities of an organisation that they p erceive as threatenin g their way of life. Accordin g to the 3 develop ment p lan the short-term goals of FARO in relation to rangeland management are: M anagement of livestock grazin g (issuing grazing p ermit s controllin g when livestock enter grazin g areas and how lon g they are allowed to stay ) Distribution of water Watershed and groundwater management for ran ge v e getat ion Stemmin g urb an migration to sustain rural p roduct ion Grants, insurance and facilities for drou ght -s t ricken p op ulat ions.
T he long-term goals are: Predicting rainfall and sharin g information with executive branches of the govern ment Predicting drou ght s, their extent and p att erns Extension to p as t oralis ts and farmers on drought Calculating the numb er of liv es t ock app rop riat e for non-drought y ears Activities of the Committee on sustainable water use and management in agriculture, industry and for drinking Promoting new crops suitable for dry lands Promoting policies for ch angin g rain-fed crop s to irrigated crop s Increasin g insuran ce for agriculture and pastoral p roducts.
Office of Nomadic Pastoral Affairs.
The Office of Nomad ic Pastoral Affairs (ONPA), also within the M inist ry of Agriculture and Rural Develop ment , has as its main aim the p rovis ion of suitable services to imp rove and develop the social and economic situation of the country 's nomadic p as t oralis ts and to imp rove their p roduct ivity . ONPA's objectives include: p roviding services to nomadic p astoralis t s ; help ing to sedentarise them; introducing industrial models of livestock p roduct ion; help ing p as t oralis t s with marketing of their p roduct s ; and, help ing them to establish co-op eratives . The ONPA sedentarisation p rogramme provides each tenthold with a house, 10 hectares of irrigated crop land and access to pasture, through low interest credit. The p rogramm e has met with hesitation from p ast oralis ts and in any case would only be available to a small p roport ion of p ast oralis t s because of the high costs involved. ONPA also aims to give technical supp ort such as fodder and water p rovis ion (the former through p ast oral coop erat ives ). Pastoral coop erat ives are established through, and under the sup ervis ion of, the ONPA under the laws of the M inis t ry for Coop eratives . The main aim of the pastoral coop erat ives is to p rovide services to p ast oralis t s who are officially reco gnis ed as such (this means they must have a p ast oral identity card), but currently their activities are 3 limited to sellin g rationed food items and fodder to p ast oralis t s. Each pastoral tenthold must p ay 350,000 rials (about $42 USD) to b ecom e a member of a pastoral coop erat ive. The sale of livestock and agricultural p roduce is p redominant ly done p rivat ely , but cooperatives seem to be a more attractive offer for farmers than herders: on average 0.8% of nomad ic p astoralis t s in Fars marketed their livestock through coop erat ives while 2.8% marketed their agricultural crop s in this way . In general the ONPA has few funds to sp end on natural disasters and therefore must rely mostly on their regular budget for any drought-related activities. They could app ly for extra.
A national universal system of rationing was established during the Iran-Iraq war for essential food items and is still in place.
funds but this would require a strong justification on a p rovince-by -province basis on the effects of drought.
Department of Environment.
The Dep artment of Environment (DoE) h as a strategy of emergency resp ons e mainly to p rotect wildlife, p lant sp ecies and biodiversity in the hardest hit areas. Although their main focus is not mitigation, prevention, or development of early warning sy stems , DoE has receiv ed assistance fro m UNDP in cap acit y buildin g for drou ght mitigation and man agem ent in areas where biodiv ers ity is most threatened, such as wetlands and the hab it at s of the Asiatic Cheetah, an endan gered species.
Iranian Red Crescent Society.
The Iranian R ed Crescent Society (IRCS) is a memb er of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. It focuses mainly on relief aid durin g emergencies such as p roviding tents, blankets, rations, etc. IRCS has a large n et w ork of volunteers and presents itself as a non-gov ernmental organisation but its fundin g co mes directly from the M inis t ry of Health, therefore it is widely seen in Iran as a governmental organisation. Furthermore, it is rep res ent ed in governmental bodies like the DTF-- an opp ort unity denied to NGOs that are indep endent of the government. In one sense the IRCS creates the government's closest link to local commun it ies in times of disaster by mobilisin g the p ublic and lo cal NGOs to help in relief op erations , however, its volunteers contribute by p roviding free labour to deliver aid, not by p articip at ing in p olicy and decision-makin g. But on the other hand IRC S is very selective with the NGOs that it works with. For instance, they have invited the coop erat ion of non-governmental organ isat ions that are recognised by the cabinet--an almost impossible condition to fulfil for NGOs that are truly indep endent of the government. The Comp rehens ive National Plan for Relief and R es cue was drafted by IRCS accordin g to article 44 of the law of the Third Plan for Economic, Social and Cultural Dev elopment . Accordin g to the plan the IRCS is resp ons ible for coordinating relief and non-governmental aid and assistance (see legislation and p olicy section, below, for more information).
Islamic Republic of Iran Meteorological Organisation.
The IRIM O p lays a key role in providing the govern ment with data that helps to determine the arrival and extent of a drought. IRIMO has a drought sp ecialis t research group which responds to the research needs of various government dep art ments as needed. Following the last drought the drou ght research group created a draft p lan of action for drou ght research which would take a more lon g-t erm view. The aim of the p roject is to better understand the negative consequences (losses) of drought and to p lan better for minimisin g risk. One of the main asp ects of the p rop os ed research project is to define indicators of drought for each p rovince based on its geo grap hica l, climatic and econo mic conditions.
Unite d Nations.
The FAO in Iran aims to sup p ort the government in develop ing ap p ropriat e p olicies for food and agriculture. In the case of drou ght , if the drou ght is severe enou gh to be declared as a national emergency the FAO p art icip at es in a UN assessment mission. Such missions are usually followed by assistance to mitigate the effects of the drou ght , usually "band-aid" solutions such as providing drinkin g water or seeds for farmers. The main recip ient s of such relief are the general p ublic (through the p rovis ion of drinkin g water) while food p roducers take second stage desp it e bein g the h ardes t hit, sustaining up to 90% of the d ama ge inflicted by droughts. Among food p roducers farmers tend to receive mu ch more attention than p astoralis t s . The FAO, with the supp ort of the government, is attempting to steer its ap p roach away from these "band-aid" solutions and relief efforts towards develop ing long-term p olici es aimed at p reparedness and mitigation. Although there have been no major initiatives on drou ght in the p ast 3-4 y ears (since the end of the last drought), a TCP p roject sp ecifically addressin g drought has been prep ared and is awaiting ap p roval. The TCP project aims at the formulation of a national strategy and action p lan on drought management and mitigation for the agricultural sector through cap acit y -building for the government, and enhan cin g inters ect oral coop erat ion. The FAO is in a good p os it ion to assist the government in enhancin g inter-sectoral cooperation which is clearly one of the weak p oint s of the govern ment : key p olicies are in conflict with each other-- even within the same ministry . Another challen ge is to supp ort institutional chan ge sin ce new ideas tend to be introduced by individuals and support for them tends to fade away once key indiv iduals leave. Althou gh there is hop e that the govern ment is fin ally seekin g a more lon g-t erm ap p roach to drought, the fear is that any new changes in the gov ernment tend to be quite fragile as they rely on the political supp ort of key individuals.
UNDP initiatives related to drought are usually short-term. For examp le, as mentioned above, UNDP leads the UN assessment mission during a severe drought. During the most recent drought, UNDP conducted field research to assess the ecological damage of the drought and has subsequently p rep ared a p lan of action. The rep ort was distributed to international donors and media, putting the sp ot light on Iran's severe situation. Currently however, UNDP has no field-based p roject s related to drought, nor an exp licit p olicy focusing on drou ght and local commun it ies . In 2001 UNDP Iran was involved in organizing the first Regional Semin ar on Drought M it igat ion. UNDP has also been assisting the govern ment of Iran to p rep are a short-term p rogramme to exp and watershed management and rainwater harvesting in areas h ardes t hit by drought.
U N DP relates Iran's unsustainable use of its natural resources to p op ulat ion exp ans ion, loss of indigenous knowled ge lead ing to the inefficient man a gem ent of water resources, overgrazing, weak enin g of rural communities and traditional sustainable liv elihood systems. Empowerment of local communities, sustainable management of water resources, and bottom-up policies and ap proaches are p art of UNDP's solutions, but with an absence of field p roject s on drought it is difficult to see how UNDP will imp lement their ideas.
The World Bank has p ropos ed a p lan for a disasters insurance fund to the government. The p ropos al has been discussed by the ministries of housing, interior, and economics and finan ce over the last 2 y ears . If the ministries come to agreement then the World Bank would give Iran a loan of about $100 million (USD). The government would hav e to insure ev ery house in the country and it would have to have a p lan to support families that could not afford the insurance. The Comp rehens ive National Plan for Relief and Rescue calls for greater coverage of insurance schemes in case of natural disasters but it is not clear whether this will o ccur with World Bank assistance.
Current legislation and policy relevant to drought.
The 5-y ear Plans for Economic, Social and Cu lt ural Develop ment rep res ent the government's main p olicy document on all matters and each p lan is recognised as law throughout its duration. They define the main p olicy lines for all min ist ries and dep artment s and the annu al work p lans and budgets of each government ministry and organisation are based on the 5y ear develop ment plan. The first plan was effectively launched after the end of the Iran-Iraq th war in 1989. The 4 development plan will begin in 1384 (2005) if it is ratified on schedule (if not then it could be delay ed by a y ear or two). The current (and third) develop ment p lan refers directly to natural disasters in one article: Article 44: In order to prevent and mitigate the impact of na tur al disasters, to prepare the public and to specify the roles of all [governmental] executive organisations in responding to natural disasters, the Iranian Red Crescent Society (with th e coop er ation o f the Min is tr y of Interior and the national voluntary militia, (basij)), is responsible for producing a comprehensive plan w ith the cooperation of all relevant [governmental] organisations and for having it approved by the cabin et within the first year o f th e Third Plan for Economic, So cial and Cu ltur al Development. The plan should include provisions for disaster management, raising public awareness and preparedness and mechan is ms for the participation of [governmental] executive organisations, the state broadcasting company and mass media, executive initia tiv es, funding sources and administration, etc. Note: The na tional voluntary militia (basij) will b ecome a member of the country's disaster taskforces. As a follow-up to this law, the IRCS p rep ared the Comp rehens ive National Plan for Relief and Recovery , which was ratified by the cabinet in 1382 (2003). This is the first comp rehensive national p lan to address natural disasters. Some elements of the p lan are: General 20.
A definition of "disaster", and also "national d isas t er" as a d isas t er which is too severe for one p rovince to address on its own; the level of a d is ast er (local, p rovinci al, or n at ional) is decided by the head of the DTF on the recommend at ion of the provincial governorate; The p lan recognises 4 stages of the disaster management cy cle: p revent ion, p rep arednes s , relief and reconstruction; One of the main objectives of the plan is to channel p ublic voluntary aid and also the inp ut of non-governmental organ is at ions ; The main strategies are: research, imp lement in g projects, investment, coordination, attracting p op ular p articip at ion, more efficient use of existing resources, enlisting the n eces s ary supp ort from all p art s of government, the armed forces and p art icular ly the voluntary militia;.
Disaster Task Force The establishment of the DTF with the objectives of overall p olicy -makin g, n ational p lannin g and the highest level of mon it oring of d is as t er related p lans and p rogramm es ; The comp os it ion and responsibilities of the DTF; when a disaster takes p lace all ministries, govern mental organisations and the p olice and armed forces are supp os ed to coop erate fully with the directives of the head of the DTF; The establishment of p rovincial offices of the DTF under the sup ervis ion of the national DTF; the comp os it ion and resp ons ibilities of the p rovincial office of the DTF; when a disaster takes p lace all the gov ernmental organisations, p olice and armed forces at the p rovincial lev el are sup pos ed to coop erat e fully with the directives of the head of the p rovincial office of the DTF (the governor of the p rovince); The comp os it ion and responsibilities of the district level offices of the DTF; all of the activities of the district offices of the DTF must be under the sup ervis ion of the p rovincial office of the DTF; when a disaster takes p lace all govern ment al and non-governmental organ is at ions , p olice and armed forces are supp os ed to coop erat e fully with the directives of the head of the district office of the DTF; Preparedness working groups and their specialist working groups National and p rovincial prep arednes s working group s: formed and op erating under the sup ervis ion of the DTF to manage and follow up on all p rep arednes s activities stip ulat ed in this law; the resp ons ibilit ies of the national and p rovincial p reparednes s group s are broadly stated; the main resp ons ibilit ies are the man a gement and follow-up of all activities related to the prep arednes s stage of the disaster management cy cle; The national p rep arednes s working group will be assisted by 3 clusters of sp ecial is t working groups: the operations specialist working groups, the prevention and risk management sp ecialis t working group s , and the education sp ecialis t working group s ; the responsibilities of the 3 clusters of specialist working group s are broadly defined;.
Certain ministries and organisations have the added resp ons ibility of coop erat ing with the DTF to improve awareness of disasters and to p rep are for them through education; the role of each ministry in terms of educational activities for disasters is stip ulat ed; The op erations specialist working group s are comp os ed of the following 12 specialist working group s on rescue and relief; h ealt h, transp ort at ion, communications, fuel supp lies , security and p olice, man a gem ent of water, sewage and electricity , housing, agricu lt ural and animal husbandry and industry and mines. Each of the 12 sp ecial is t group s is headed by a ministry or other relevant gov ernment al organisation; The p revent ion and risk management sp ecialis t working group s are comp os ed of the followin g 6 sp ecialis t working group s on earthquakes and tremors, p est s , p lant diseases and frost, drought and rangeland rehabilitation, floods, air p ollut ion, and climatic/atmosp heric disasters (such as hail). Each of the 6 sp ecialist groups is headed by a ministry or other relevant governmental organisation; The education sp ecialis t working group s are comp os ed of the following 5 sp ecialis t working group s on public education, sp ecia lis t education, edu cat ion in schools, education through mass media, and edu cat ion in the state broadcasting comp any . Each of the 5 specialist group s is headed by a ministry or other relevant governmental organisation; The resp ons ibilit ies of these 23 sp ecialist working group s must be defined by the head of each working group and ratified by the DTF and the national p rep arednes s working group ; The sp ecialis t s working group s memb ers are nominated by the leader of the n at ional workin g group and ap p roved by the DTF and they must each meet once every 2 months; The op erat ions sp ecialis t working groups will also be established at the provincial level under the overall sup ervis ion of the national workin g group ; Risk management working group s will be established in each province if needed. The need and the members of the group s will b e d ecid ed by the p rovincial prep arednes s working group ; The head of the DTF at the dep artment al level can call for the establishment of any specialist working group s at that level as need ed; The relief and rescue sp ecial is t working group s will be headed by IRCS; Budget and donations All help and assistance from non-governmental sectors (both national and international) shall be received and d is t ribut ed by IRCS. All help and assistance from gov ernment al sectors (both national and international) shall be receiv ed and distributed by DTF. The receip t and distribution of assistance by any other organisations is banned; The M PO is resp ons ible for including in the national annual bud get a budget line for the various stages of disaster management in the country . This budget will be handed over to DTF which will distribute it based on its own p olicies , strategies and p erceiv ed needs;.
T he p rovincial coun cils for p lannin g and develop ment must dedicate a p art of their annu al budget to the various activities related to the 4 stages of the disaster management cy cle and this will be sp ent on the advice of the p rovincial DTF; All provincial d ep art ment s and organ is at ions must p ut all of their resources at the disposal of the provincial DTF as needed when a natural disaster occurs; Insurance The secretariat of the DTF, along with the national insurance comp any of Iran, is responsible for extending the cov era ge of insurance against natural disasters throughout the country; The M inis try of Economic and Financial Affairs is resp onsible for extendin g insuran ce coverage to at least 50% of all residential and commercial enterp ris es by the end of 1383 (M arch 2005) and for creatin g the p os s ibilit y of making insuran ce coverage against natural disasters mandatory throughout the country by the end of 1388 (M arch 2010); The resp ons ibilit y of extending insuran ce to all agriculture and liv es t ock herding will be the responsibility of the M inist ry of Agriculture and Rural Development according to the law of insurance fund for agricultural p roduct s of 1362 (1983). The draft of the fourth development plan has been p rep ared and is currently awaiting discussion and app roval by the new parliament, which was elected in February 2004. Presumably the Comp rehens ive National Plan for Relief and Rescue which is now in p lace contains all govern ment p olicy on disaster management; therefore the draft does not have any articles or sections dealing sp ecifica lly with natural disasters. However, there are some relevant p aragrap hs, which indicate that in sp it e of having the national p lan, the government wants to highlight some issues, p art icularly earthquakes. For instance, the draft p lan calls for: Improvement of buildin gs throughout the country to make them resistant to earthquakes; Improved organ is ational structure and management of weather data co lle ct ions networks and imp roved national and international networking; Several articles are dedicated to the issue of reformin g the governan ce sy st em in the country and facilitatin g the p art icip at ion of civil society ; these are p res ented in the section on recommendations for the 4th develop ment p lan regard in g civ il society ; A foreign curren cy account is to be created for the excess earnings from oil and gas revenues relative to annual exp ect ed revenues and is to be sp ent on strengthening certain areas of the economy; at least 10% of these funds dedicated for the non-governmental sector will be giv en to the Agricultural Bank for distribution to the agricultural non-gov ernment al sector; One of the objectives for rural develop ment is the sedentarisation of at least 50% of the country 's nomadic p as t oralis t p opulat ion; and, Calls for the continuation of the livestock and range equilibrium p lan. Besides the content of the dev elop ment p lans , it is also important to examine their p as t p erformance. In general, many of the p rogrammes in each of the p lans have not been imp lement ed. Accord in g to the 1999 UNDP Human Develop ment Rep ort for Iran, Iran lacks.
t he executive, technical and information cap acit y required for the full successful imp lement at ion of the p lans . A recent civil society assessment of the reasons for lack of imp lem ent at ion of environmental laws (includin g the p olicies of the 5-year develop ment p lans ) p oint ed to the following factors: ! ! ! ! Weak nes s of civil society institutions; Lack of responsiveness of many government agencies; The tradition of vertical, non-participatory and paternalistic style of governance in the coun tr y; The prolonged war with Iraq, which further weakened participatory government in the country, due to the requiremen t o f a reg im ented and con tr olled society that happens in most countries at war; Weak ening of capa cit ies in the pub lic sector du e to a brain drain as a result of poor pay, and th e la ck of ability to take advantage of trained and competent personnel. The struggle o f the years since the revolution for id eologi cal purity often also pushes many competent technocrats out o f the public sector; The creeping corruption that has been ta lk ed about by bo th civil society and very high level au thor ities , wh ich is due to th e inordinate role o f the sta te in policy and operational spheres, to th e la ck of transparency and accoun tabil ity of the government, and to the tremendous economic poverty that has beset the country.
The Koohi Sub-tribe and the drought of 1999-2001.
Accordin g to the Fars M etrologic al Dep art ment , in 1999 the northern parts of the p rovince of Fars receiv ed about h alf of the long-term average annual p recipit at ion. In the central parts of the province there was 80-90% less p recipit at ion than normal and in the southern p arts 100% less than normal. The average annual rainfall for the entire p rovince is 300 mm. Durin g the drought, the average temp erat ure was 1-2 degrees centigrade greater than the long-term average durin g the sp ring and summer, and durin g autumn and winter about 0-1 degrees centigrade greater. In 2000 most areas of the province received more p recipit at ion than the y ear before, but still only about 50-70% of their long-term annual average. In 1380 (2001) the average annu al rainfall for Eqlid (located in the summerin g grounds of the Koohi) was 444.3 mm and for Firoozabad (located near their winterin g grounds) it was 104.5 mm. The total annual p recip it ation for 5 rainfall stations in the p rovince of Fars for 1961-2000 is p resent ed in Annex.
The following tables from the Iran M et eorologica l Organisation show various p recip it at ion p att erns for the p rovince.
Fi gure 3 Average annual normal precipitation levels (mm).
Fi gure 5 Severity of drought in Fars, 1999-2000 (pink area: v ery severe drought; o ran ge :s eve re drought).
M ost of the information in this section is drawn from a workshop held with the Koohi Subt ribe in their summerin g grounds near Eqlid in the summer of 2003. The workshop was held in Turkish, the language of the Qashqai. About 50 members of the Sub-tribe p art icipat ed in the discussion, including all members of the Council of the Sub-tribe of Koohi M igrat ory Nomads for Sustainable Livelihoods. Sup p lement ary information was gathered through smaller group interviews with members of the Council and some written sources. The Koohi rep ort ed that they had lived through drou ght s of varying d e grees of sev erit y every 4 to 11 y ears for the p ast 40 y ears . However although they were clearly no strangers to drought, they emp has is ed that the frequency , severity and p art icularly the impact of drought on their livelihoods had been increasin g over this p eriod.
Impact of the drought on livelihoods.
Drought is one of the most imp ortant determinants of the quality of life for nomads. As with all drou ght s the drought of 1999-2001 essentially served to intensify the p res s ures that p astoralis t s face even in non-drou ght y ears . Currently , the most imp ort ant p res sures they face are: cop ing with less land and livin g with greater costs. It is clear that their main p roblem is access to grazin g land and this is not exclusive to drought y ears .
T he entire Sub-tribe now has only 35,000 h eads of livestock and we are under continuing pressure to sell th em. My father had 1,500 sheep and I only have 300 left. The land that we have is no t even enough to sustain this redu ced number because farmers are continuously taking our land. We don't have enough land and so are forced to sell our animals. Drought leads to a downward spiral of debt and p overty culminating in the most extreme cases in the sale of a family's entire herd (the source of pastoralists' wealth) at low p rices and their p ermanent settlement in villages and towns. Accordin g to their own rou gh estimates, on average about 10% of the Koohi settle in villages, towns and cities each y ear, however they stress that in some years there is no sedentarisation. In drought years the supply of an im als goes up and demand goes down so we are forced to sell a sheep for a fifth or sixth of th e price that we know it is worth. A not her cost burden is the cost of fodder. As their access to rangelands becomes more limited, and the available land is in creas ingly degraded, p as t oralis t s are forced to buy fodder for their animals. During the drought, in some cases the Koohi bought fodder in the summerin g grounds and transp orted them to the wintering grounds by truck, otherwise they would have been forced to buy fodder from merchants in Farashband (a town near the wintering grounds) at high p rices . The most imp ort ant fodder that they p urchase is barley but alfalfa, corn, by -p roduct of turnip sugar factories, hay (from beans, ch ick p eas and lentils) are also imp ortant . Lastly there is some use of a concentrated feed which is made from a mix of corn and chemical fertiliser. Buying fodder and renting land are our two greatest costs. We have to borrow money to buy the fodd er and then wh en it's time to repa y we have to pay in ter es t and we get stuck in a loop of debt. We are then forced to take our children ou t of school. The situation is not the same for all Sub-tribe members because grazing p ermit s are granted on an individu al basis and individual circumstances differ. The situation seems to be worse in the wintering grounds than the summering grounds. On average, about 50% of the Qashqai do not have grazin g p ermits for wintering grounds. The most vulnerable people are those who do no t have grazing permits for the wintering grounds because th ey have to pay rent for land and buy fodder. Therefore drou ght leads to increased cost (esp ecial ly fodder) and decreased revenues (because of fallin g liv es tock p rices ) so it p ushes p ast oralis ts further towards debt. The drought-- or any other external p res s ure-- simp ly intensifies existing burdens. The most extreme imp act on livelihoods is sedentarisation: p ermanent ly abandoning pastoral livelihoods for other livelihood systems such as farming or tradin g. Sedentarisation is a much more common result of drought than it used to be (see section on the historical co mp aris on of the drought management cy cle, below, for more details). In some cases families beco me sedentary temp orarily during the drou ght when there is not enough water and vegetation and then they begin migratin g again when the drought is over. When asked how some members managed to continue migratin g desp it e the droughts and other p res s ures they resp onded, "We are takin g our last breaths". Some say that they have stayed because they don't know how to live any other way , but making ends meet is difficult. 27.
T hos e that have continued migrating are mostly in debt. Even if th ey wanted to, th ey could not repay their loans to the bank. A few p ast oralis t s (mostly the y out h) are even forced into illegal but more lucrative lin es of work such as traffickin g. In some cases pastoralists cut back on their own food to buy fodder for their animals. Social and cu lt ural reasons are also imp act ing to decrease the numb ers of p as t oralist s who continue to migrate and mak e their liv in g from herd in g liv es t ock. The younger generation have gone to school and are literate. They are no longer willing to make th eir livelihood as pastoralists. It's clear that the number of migrating pastoralists will continu e to decrease. Finally , the drought acts to increase conflict in the community : p eop le are forced to comp et e even more than usual for scarce resources and this leads to conflict. There are no incentives for coop eration because rewards and p unis hment s are handed down to individuals and not the community as a whole.
Action taken by relevant organisations to support the Sub-tribe.
The organisations that pastoralists have turned to for supp ort in recent y ears are govern mental or para-governmental organisations. M ost imp ort ant among these are FARO and ONPA. Other organisations such as the Disaster Task Force and IRCS were basically unknown to them. None of these organisations is seen to be giving ev en the minimum of support they need. Their two main comp laint s against the gov ernment were their p ros edent ary policies and allegations of corrup t ion. One of the main forms of sup p ort for rural communities after a natural disaster is government loans but pastoralists themselves say that the loan schemes are riddled with corrup t ion and are also very bureaucratic. It is clear that with the current limitations pastoralists do not see these loans as a viable solution. After the recent drought, the M ajlis [parliament] approved banks loans for farmers and pastoralists, but the loans were only received by peop le with connections and influen ce. If there are any loans to be had, the head of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development announces it to the rural communities and farmers. If the loans are specifically for pastoralists then the rural fo lk bribe someone in the loan office, then they find someone with a grazing permit to use his license to get the loan. They pay both parties off to get the loan. In fa ct, unless civil servants receive a bribe th ey don't do anything! No one has ever received a loan without handing ou t a bribe. We know that the government gives grants to each province for pastoralists. But instead of pastoralists receiving the funds directly, it's the ONPA that receives those grants. I don't know how they spend them. The government doesn't really help and even if they offer a small loan this usually involves a very bureaucratic process.
Corrupt ion was also mentioned in relation to state p rovisions of fodder. Pastoralists questioned why fodder p rovided by the government was bein g sold to them at market p rices : if fodder merch ants were makin g a p rofit at market prices then why was the government selling fodder at for-p rofit market p rices and furthermore, what was it doing with that profit? The government was offering us fodder at the same price as the fodd er merchants ­ so there is no difference betw een the government and a business! We prefer to buy from the merchants because it is a much simpler process. Even if we have to pay back in instalments with an in ter es t rate we prefer to do business with the merchants. The p ast oralis t s ' coop eratives are another organisation that could help during disasters, but they were also accused of corruption. There is a clear lack of trust in the coop erat ives -- whether in drou ght or non-drou ght y ears. They say that the coop eratives essentially act as p rofit -making businesses. The cooperatives don't do anything special during a drought. The only thing th ey usually do for us is to sell the subsidised supplies tha t we are all entitled to according to the government's ration system. On the one hand we're happy to receive subsidised sugar and flour, but on the o ther we don't know what they are doing with the profits of the cooperative. The cooperatives are just like any other business ­ they make a profit for themselves ­ th e only d iff er ence is that their goods are more expensive than th e regular shops. The cooperative sells a ten t for 2.8 million rials that you can buy in a regular shop for 800,000 rials. They sell barley that is normally 1,000 rials per kilo for 1,800 ria ls . We're forced to buy from the cooperative because it allows us to pay in instalments and we don't have enough money to pay in on e instalmen t. With resp ect to specific emergency -relat ed govern ment interventions, the pastoralists had less direct exp erience of government p rogrammes. They had never heard of the Disaster Task Force and when asked about non-finan cia l support they mentioned the activities of the Red Crescent, but also sp oke of corruption. I remember there was a storm a few years ago and the Red Crescent Society brought some tents-- supposedly for us. W ell, the trucks never reached us-- th ey stopped in Farashband and the tents were sold th er e for 2 million rials each. To understand the action taken by government organisations durin g a drou ght it is important to understand how they supp ort p ast oralis t s in general durin g non-drought y ears . The members of the Sub-tribe see the government as essentially working against them, favourin g settled communities-- especially farmers-- and adop t ing p olicies that directly or indirectly lead them to sedentarisation themselves. They see FARO as their main antagonist and the ONPA as being too weak to supp ort them. FARO wants to destroy us. They don't even try to cover it up. They wan t to take a ll our lands from us. Pastoralists have no supporters.
Cooperatives in Iran are established in rural and pastoral areas by the government. The cooperatives are governed by the law of coop erati ves and the Ministry of Cooperatives and are based on an imported Danish model. Members of the boards of coop erat i ves are appointed by government.
No one g iv es us any answers­ no t th e po lic e, not th e jud iciar y, not our members of parliament. The p eople who we rely on for help are usually on the side of the villagers or come from the villages themselves so we are always losing. Who is responsible? No one a ccep ts responsibility for pastoralists. So far, no one has been concerned about them. The organisation tha t is supposed to be responsible for pastoralists is the ONPA bu t it do es n't have enough pow er . It has to do whatever the Ministry of Agriculture orders it to do. There is not one sing le independen t supporter of the entire pastoralist populations of Iran. The government is widely criticized by p as t oralists as taking every opp ort unity to app rop riat e their last remainin g lands for agriculture by settled rural communities. To sum it up: there is no such thing as help or support for pastoralists because of drought or other natural disasters. I don't know--maybe they help other tribes and not ours--but I would warrant that other tribes are worse off than we are. I th ink all the relief must be geared towards the farmers. This is a fact. They also say the government supp orts farmers in other way s without extendin g the same support to them. Farmers have a guaranteed price for their crops [the government guarantees prices on certain key crops for farmers] but we don't have guaranteed prices for our livestock-- even though we are important livestock producers in this coun tr y.
Tribal expertise/knowledge and the disaster management cycle.
Traditional knowledge related to drought management is p art of the vast body of traditional knowledge related to natural resource management. The dev elopment and ap plicat ion of this knowledge relied heavily on the social organisation of the tribes with each member p lay ing a role accordin g to their p os it ion in the p astoral organ is at ion. Pastoralists divide their traditional drought-related activities into two main group s : activities before the disaster and activities after the disaster (roughly comp arable to p rep arednes s and relief and rehabilitation). Prep arednes s activities were led by a variety of mechanisms for drought p redict ion. Drought was p redicted in a number of ways. The most common early warning sy st em was based on observation of weather p att erns . Usually around the first o f Esfand [21 February] you can tell wh ether the year will bring a drought. It's just like the saying, "saali ke nekoost az bahaarash peydast" [a good year is herald ed by a good spring]. In addition to this simp le p rediction, the sub-tribes would send scouts (peeshgharaavol) to the ranges about 20 d ay s before the p lanned day of the migration. These scouts were exp ert s at assessing the condition of the grazin g lands and would brin g back news that allowed the tribe to adjust the date or duration of the migration if necessary to avoid the harshest imp act of the drought-- by delaying the date of migration or extendin g the time sp ent on the migratory routes pastoralists could decrease the amount of time they would stay in the wintering grounds and therefore ease their imp act on the drought-stricken wintering grounds (droughts were more common in wintering than in summerin g grounds). Furthermore, even in non-drought y ears an early arrival at the winterin g grounds would risk consump t ion of the 30.
veget at ion before it had begun to seed. The scouts would also clearly stake out the grazing area of each tenthold in advan ce of their arriv al in order to avo id conflicts later when they all arrived to get her. Scoutin g was therefore imp ort ant in both drought and non-drou ght years by enablin g p ast oralis ts to estimate the best time to arrive at the grazin g lands. One sub-tribe of the Qashqai Tribal Confederation, the Hoolegooh, who were known as monnajem (astronomers), were specialists in p redict ing the chances and duration of drought. They used their knowledge of vegetation p att erns, wind p at t erns and cloud p atterns to p redict rainfall and drou ght . This allowed them to p rep are themselves well in advan ce for any drought. Some of them are so expert that in the au tumn they can predict a drought in the following year. They can even predict th e time of rain during the day. They figure this out from the direction and patterns of th e wind. For instance, based on the way the wind is blowing now they will tell you whether there will be rain in 5 months time. Emadi h as detailed ind i genous knowled ge of rainfall patterns and p rep arat ion for drought amon g another branch of the Qashqai Tribal Confederation, the Ghareghani clan of the Gharegh anli sub-tribe which is a part of the Dare-Shori tribe. The knowledge and ab ility o f nomads to predict drought and rain is reflected in the time spent observing and categorising the climate (winds, cloud, temperature and moisture), nature (flora and fauna), animal behaviour (seasonal bird migration, domestic animal behaviour) and also astrological coincidence. For instance, rain is classified in different wa ys according to its style, season and intensity. The Ghareghani nomads are aware of the main characteristics of rainfall, and classify rainfa ll in different ways according to style, d ens ity, season, and associa ted events (thunder, lightning and storms etc.). The second important aspect of their awareness is their sophisticated definition for an optimum rainfa ll of pasture and farming in each particular situation. The th ir d important aspect is that th ey change grazing routes and patterns according to rainfall. In terms of the impact of the rainfall, Ghareghani say that rainfall has positive as well as negative impacts on both pasture and an imal husbandry, but the best pattern is for rainfa ll to continue from middle autumn to late spring in the w inter quarter, with enough snow in th e summer quarter for the enrichment o f natural springs. If a drought was predicted then pastoralists would try to avoid a heavy imp act on their own livelihoods and on the environment by making adjustments in the timing and duration of their migration as ind icat ed above. First, they would adjust the timing of the migration (in most cases it was the migration from the summering to wintering grounds that was affected because drou ght has been more common in the wintering grounds). In order to avoid facin g drought p ast oralis ts would start their migration later and thus sp end less time than usual in the wintering grounds. Second, they would extend the duration of migration, also to arrive at the wintering grounds later. This enabled them to take advantage of the relatively good vegetation in the high mountains of the migration route and also arriv e later at the droughts t ricken wintering grounds. In some cases they would extend the migration p eriod to as much.
as two months. If the migration route itself was also imp act ed by drought then they would move to high er p ast ures where there was better chance of rainfall and vegetation. In addition to changes in migration p att ers , p ast oralis t s also sold off some of their livestock in years when drought was p redict ed. Based on y ears of exp erience, p as t oralist s had develop ed exp ert is e on assessing the nu mber of liv es t ock that a certain area could feed given the vegetation cover of that area. Therefore if they p redict ed that they had too many livestock giv en the vegetation cover they would sell some of their animals before setting off on migration. Despite these efforts to p rep are for a drought it was inevitable that some families were h it hard by drought. Rehabilitation efforts were driven by a sense of community identity and solidarity . To understand these efforts it is imp ort ant to realise that traditionally the livestock of a sub-tribe was owned by a small p rop ort ion of tentholds while the remain in g tentholds did not own livestock but worked as shepherds. The livestock owners were the leaders of the various levels of the p as t oral organisation: the heads of the confederation, tribes, sub-tribes and clans. In some cases other families also owned sheep . In exch an ge for their labour the shepherding tentholds were p rovided a guaranteed liv elihood and p rot ect ion. The most hard-hit tentholds would face bankruptcy (losing all their livestock) and would be forced to leave the tribe and settle in villages and cities. However, the collective sense of identity and honour made it unthinkable for the rest of the sub-tribe to consider losin g on e of their own due to bankrup t cy . Therefore if any livestock-ownin g tenthold's livelihood was h it hard by the drought those who were still relatively well off would sup p ort them. This supp ort was given in the followin g way s : Gifts/grants: The head of the p as t oral organisation would take the in it iat ive to collect gifts in the form of livestock, fodder or funds from members of the tribe dep endin g on their ability to make a contribution for the affected tenthold(s). Loans: Loans were giv en in the form of livestock and were b as ed on a negotiated agreement. A certain numb er of livestock were loaned to the bankrup t tenthold for a certain p eriod of time (usually 5 y ears ). The family receivin g the loan would take care of the new herd and p ropagat e them. After the p eriod was over the family who had given the loan would take back the original number of liv es tock that they had loaned in addition to half of the new herd. This sy st em was known as nim soudi. For examp le, a family who had lost every t hing in a drought would receive a loan of 20 sheep on a 5-y ear term. After the five y ears the family has 100 sheep . They would return the 20 loaned sheep and also half of the remainin g number, i.e. 40. In some cases the new herd would simply be divided half-half. This mech anis m no longer exists on the same scale as in the p as t; in some cases it operates only when the families are v ery closely related to each other. Some tribes have developed breeds of livestock that are p art icularly well suited to arid conditions and have a good chance of survivin g drou ght . A recent article by CENESTA in Seedling magazine d et ails the experiences of some of these p as t oralis t s in their own words. The traditiona l breeds make do w ith wha tev er plants and shrubs are available, whereas the new breeds only graze on the best shrubs. When those are finished we have to buy feed for them. The new breeds are no t well-suited to their environments.
­ we all know that they are not as resistant to co ld and drought as the traditional ones.
The Qashqai and other p ast oralis t s have also d evelop ed sy s t ems for rehabilitatin g ran gelands and imp roving vegetation. For instance, they have develop ed a sy st em of p lant ing seeds of wild p lant s along the migration route (small bags filled with seeds were carried around the necks of sheep and goats and the seeds would spill out of small holes in the bag as the herds migrated across the mountains), assessing the number of liv es t ock that a rangeland could carry in any given season and adjusting their numbers of livestock accordin gly , discussion and agreement on the p rice to sell livestock, and finally leavin g fallow certain areas of grazin g lands that were being exhausted.
Historical comparison of the drought management cycle.
Drought is a regular occurrence for p ast oralis t s in the p rovince of Fars. Over the past 40 y ears they have become accustomed to seein g less rain in 5-6 y ear cy cles . However, the imp act , p atterns and frequency of drou ght, as well as social responses to it, have all chan ged.
gre at ly over the past decades. Perhap s the most significant chan ge is that before the weakenin g of p ast oral organisations there was less p ost -drought sedentarisation whereas this has become a very regular and predictable occurrence now. Interestingly , one of the main indicators used informally by p astoralis t s to exp res s the severity of a drought is the numbers of pastoralists that are forced to sedentarise as a result. There is a sp ecial term for sedentarisation amon g the Qashqai, eldan dushmak, which means "separating from the tribe" in Turkish. The last severe drought that the Koohi Sub-tribe rememb er was rou ghly 50 y ears ago (roughly 1960-1962) when 50-60% of Qashqais were forced to settle in villages and towns. They refer to this drought as qara yil, "black y ear" in Turkish. Subsequent severe drou ght s followed by mass sedentarisation have also been referred to as qara yil. We all waited for rain but it didn't come. Many livestock and camels died and livelihoods were destroyed. Some people had to carry their own possessions and became known as p os ht-e beh kool [those who carry th eir possessions on their backs]. Most of these people settled in Farashband, Firoozabad and Shiraz. Besides the chan ging imp act of drought, p att erns of drought also started changin g from the mid 1980's. The drought of 1363 [March 1984 to March 1985] was the first drought where the wintering and summering grounds were both badly affected. Until th en it was usually only one or the other. W e were forced to sell the weakest and thinnest animals or send th em to the cities by truck. This was the second very large wave of sedentarisation. The duration of drought also seems to be in creas in g. The Sub-tribe say that the drought of 2000 is not really over since there is less water and vegetation than normal in the wintering grounds this y ear. They call this year--2003--a "semi-drought" y ear.
Fi gure 7 The winter pastures of the Koohi Sub-tribe during the "semi-drought" winter of 2002/3.
In terms of government supp ort during a drou ght, the p as t oralist s rep ort ed little chan ge sin ce the first drought they mentioned, the "black year" of 1962: there h as never been any significant supp ort from the government. Their own resp onses to drought, however, have changed drastically . Their use of traditional knowledge and natural resource management sy st ems have decreased tremendously although they are still not insignificant. There is interest in reviv ing traditional systems of drought and range management but they feel that this would be imp os s ible under current p olicies that severely limit their access to land. In the past w e used to leave some lands fallow to g iv e them time to recover and this techniqu e worked very well. But now it's unth ink able because there is so little land left for us that we can't afford to leave part of it unused. In the past we spent about 2 months on the migration route twice ea ch year. During this time when we w er e en route the summering and win ter ing grounds both had time to recover. We would arrive at the summering grounds just in time-- when the vegetation was full and lush. Now we are forced to migrate by truck because the migration routes have been taken over [for agriculture, industrial d ev elopm ent, urban sprawl and roads]. The migration now only takes one da y so we arrive at the summering grounds very early. We're not allowed to stay at the wintering grounds any longer according to our grazing permits and in any case there wou ld be nothing for our animals to graze on if we did stay. Of course the rangelands become deteriorated bu t what can w e do? The on ly families that continu e to endure the hardships of migration on foot are those that are too poor to rent trucks.
Fi gure 8 While cars and trucks speed by, a Koohi pastoralist and his herd migrate to their summering grounds. Many animals are lost each year in car accidents.
Furthermore, now that there are modern commun icat ions and there is no chance of makin g adjustments to the date and duration of the migration route, the scouts have become redundant. As a result there is a new in cent ive for p as t oralis t s to migrate as soon as p os s ible: to lay claim to their p iece of land in the grazin g grounds. Another major chan ge has been increased dep endence on bou ght fodder. This allows p astoralis t s more flexibility, but it also rep res ents a new cost. In the past-- even as recently as the drought of 50 y ears ago-- it was not common to buy fodder for the herds, nor was fodder as easily availab le as it is now. In the late 1960's the more wealthy and educated members of the tribe were ab le to establish conn ect ions with sources of fodder for their livestock, such as waste by -p roducts from a sugar factory . Furthermore, new breeds, which started to be introduced at about the same time tend to be less hardy and therefore more reliant on fodder. Usin g fodder may help p ast oralis t s survive harsh conditions and drou ght , but as it becomes more co mmon it rep res ent s an important additional cost (excerpt from above-mentioned article in Seed ling magazine): Our traditional breeds managed with whatever was available ­ and because the rangelands were h ealth ier th er e was much more available. For example, our sheep used to go into the desert in the winter and there was plenty for them to graze on. Now we have to buy feed for them. We did that very rarely in the past ­ for instance, because of drought. And there are many oth er increased costs. Now we have to hand-feed our herds for about 8 months of th e year. They only have enough to eat from the rangelands for about 4 months per year.
T hese increased costs rep res ent one of the main sources of p res sure on p as t oralis ts and factor into the greater tendency to abandon p as toralis m and sedentarise following a drought. When asked why the traditional breeds had been increasin gly rep laced by new breeds even though they were better suited to the environment, p as t oralists p oint ed to economic and sociocult ural factors, and sometimes to a co mbinat ion of the two, includin g the p res s ures of the recent drought. These reasons show a greater dep endence of p as t oralist s on the market than existed in the p ast . Of course there are various reasons in each region for the decline of traditional breeds, but I th ink it basically comes down to a matter of cost. Our costs kept increasing till abou t 10 or 15 years ago when keeping th e traditional Sang es ar breed just wasn't cost effective anymore. The new breeds are better suited to consumer demand. The Sangesar sheep are small so there's not that much meat and they have large fat tails, but peop le avoid an im al fat these days because they say it's bad for you. The new breeds we have adopted are larger, w ith less fatty tails. The drought over the past years has made our work very unprofitable. It [Land Reform] brought about a big change in our lives. Cooperative work within the family do es n't exist an ym or e. In the past the extended family would go to y ey laagh (summer pastures) and work together. We used th e milk and wool ­ not just the meat ­ because th er e were enough p eople to do tha t labour-intensive work. But now that we don't have that labour force anymore our livestock are more geared towards meat production. Nevertheless, coordination still takes p lace on a number of imp ort ant issues relevant to drought within the sub-tribe at the level of the clan and the tenthold. For instance, members of the same clan agree on the time of their migration (although they have to work within the restrictions on timing of migration set by the government). They also collaborate on the p urchas e and mark et ing of livestock p roduct s and other goods. Durin g the recent drought the Koohi used these traditional mechan is ms : The leaders of the clans met to discuss and agree on the b es t way s for using the resources of the rangelands during the drought; their main strategy was to try to leave the winter grazing area (where the drou ght was more severe) as soon as p oss ible; joint decisions were taken about buy ing fodder and transp ort ing water to wintering grounds; fodder was bought in the summer pastures to p repare for drought in the winter pastures; they tried to p rolong the migration route in order to arrive at the p ast ures later in the dry season (only among clans that continue to migrate by foot); there was a limited use of the nim soudi sy st em of loans (p art icularly for very vulnerable families and amon g v ery close family memb ers ), but trust is an imp ort ant p rerequis it e for the success of this sy stem; some members of the sub-tribe who were better off shared their fodder with those who were less well off (mostly limited to close family relatives); and, they made some rough p redict ions about the weather and drought by observing the behaviour of the monajem: "If the monajem stay longer in the summer p as t ures then we take this as a red alert".
D elay ing and /or p rolonging the time of migration and the p eriod of use of the p as t ures has p roved to be the least effective app licat ion of the traditional mechanisms. This is because these activities are very highly regulated by the government and there is very little flexibility for pastoralists regardin g the timing of p as t ure use. Furthermore, since many of the migration routes have been destroy ed and pastoralists increasingly rely on road transp ort at ion they are not able to p rolong their migration p eriod as in the p as t. The Koohi rep ort ed that in drought y ears they even have to resort to hand-feedin g their animals on the migration routes.
Lessons learned and recommendations.
Drought in Iran is a regular occurrence and although the timing and duration of a drought is not p recis ely p redict able, we can certainly p redict that droughts will continue to hap p en. Tragically , although droughts have alway s occurred, their environmental and liv elihoods imp act s have become more severe ov er the p ast several decades accord in g to p astoralis t s themselves. This has happ ened over the same p eriod that natural resource man a gem ent systems have changed radically and traditional pastoral organ isat ions have been weak ened. The factors that affect the livelihoods of local commun it ies durin g drou ght are similar to those that affect them during non-drou ght y ears; drought simply serves to increase existing p ress ures . These observations suggest that droughts would not necessarily turn into disasters if we cou ld p lan and manage our natural resources better, to live with the regular up s and downs of nature. Drought must be examined, on the on e hand, in the context of current and on goin g p roblems related to natural resource management and p as toral livelihoods, and on the other within the context of the national sy st em for natural disaster p lanning and management, the Comp rehens ive National Plan for Relief and Rescue. It is important to understand how the p lan works, the resp ons ibilit ies of each organisation invo lved in it, the role of civil society includin g local co mmunit ies , and how the p lan can be imp roved through critical monitorin g and evalu at ion. However, we should not assume that p olicies and practice related to natural resource management are simp ly determined by technical knowled ge and jud gement ; p ow er is also an imp ort ant factor. As was seen above, one of the most repeated criticisms of the Koohi against the government was the extent of corruption and the lack of accountability . They repeatedly exp res s ed their frustration at not having any supp ort ers in the government and they imp lied that they did not have any mechanisms for lodgin g their complaints or taking government staff to task for their decisions and actions. Power imbalan ces cannot be addressed within the context of any single p roject or p lan, but the following recommendations attempt to contribute to a national sy stem which is transp arent and op en to accountability .
Empowering pastoral communities.
Pastoralists have substantial interest in drou ght mitigation: as a commun it y that dep ends directly on natural resources for their liv elihood they are amon g the first to feel the imp act of drought, and the imp act on their liv elihoods is more acute than on those of urban communities. Pastoralists are also the keep ers of valuable traditional knowled ge which 38.
recognis es the inter-connectedness of drought, liv elihoods and co mmunit y . Tribal leaders, traditional pastoral organisations and institutions are key in ensuring the sharin g of relev ant information, joint decision-making, conflict resolution, and mobilisation of support for drought-stricken families. The p rincipal of collective action for collective benefit is one of the most imp ort ant comp arat ive advantages of traditional p as t oral organisations. Under collective sy stems of natural resource man a gement , there are strong incentives for acting for the co lle ct ive good rather than for indiv idual gain. By contrast, under modern sy st ems management incentives serve to p romot e individual benefit rather than the benefit of the group. For examp le, access to government-owned land on the basis of temporary grazin g permits issued to individuals has led to a situation of the "tragedy of the commons" where each individual p ermit holder, not being assured of their long-term access to a grazing lands, have beco me disenfranchised from the land and are now en ga ged in a race to take the maximum benefit from the land in the short-term. Another examp le can be given of p olic e records that show that during the last drought conflicts within commun it ies increased substantially , while under traditional collective systems mutual supp ort has increased in times of stress. Collective action is not just required at the level of each local co mmunit y , but also what is needed is group s of like-minded communities formin g alliances (in the form of confederations, unions, coalitions or movements) to influence the gov ernment at higher levels. Wh ile local communities in Iran have b ecom e fragmented and operate effectively on a very micro level, the government is p res ent at all levels from the village to the nation. Therefore, to have an effective national strategy for natural disaster management with local community involvement would requ ire local commun it ies to be organised into coalitions at all levels and ultimately at the national level. This is far fro m bein g the case, but it is difficu lt to see how the government could even op en a dialogue with local communities at the national or even p rovinci al level because local communities in Iran do not have an organised p resence at these levels. In the p as t p as toral communities have clearly understood the need for forming alliances with each other and this is the basis for the formation of tribes and confederations. It is true that the role of traditional p as t oral organisations has been in creas in gly weakened, as has social solidarity , but they are still imp ort ant factors in determinin g the behaviour of p astoralis t s , esp ecially at the level of the clan and tenthold. The comparative advantages of traditional pastoral organ isat ions in dealin g with drought, mentioned briefly above, merit a closer look at the possibility of creating hy brid organisations which could address modern needs but also benefit from p as t exp eriences and wisdom. The immense social, economic and p olit ical changes of the p ast decades make it impossible to consider reviv ing p as t oral organisations exactly as they were before land reform. The challen ge is to create organisations that would address modern needs and concerns while keeping certain usefu l elements of the traditional organisations. For instance, traditional p astoral organisations were often qu it e top -down, with individual leaders who were in a p os it ion of p ow er sometimes abusing their p ow er with little accountability for their actions. Hy brid organisations offer the p oss ibilit y of rebuildin g organisations with more emp has is on p rincip les of p art icip at ory decision-making, accountability and equity . At the same time their p os it ive traditional elements would encourage the community to accept and trust the organ is at ion, would cause minimal d is rupt ion to their culture and sense of identity and would 39.
fos t er a sense of ownership . As mentioned above, one of the main outputs of the Sustaining Pastoral Livelihoods Project has been the establishment of a council for the sub-tribe. This council h as a constitution and clear rules and accountability reflecting mod ern needs, but is also comp ris ed of one member representing each clan of the sub-tribe, reflectin g the need to respect the traditional structure of the sub-tribe. The strongest incentive for p ast oral communities in coop erat ing together for drou ght management would be to see an imp rovement in their livelihood. This would lead to a curtailment on the relative indep endenc e that they have become accustomed to. For the more p owerful members of the sub-tribe it would mean sharin g p ow er with an elected coun cil, and for council members it would mean op ening themselves to being held accountable. Some of these outcomes may not seem attractive at first, but for those who are keen to continue a migratory lifesty le, these solutions offer a chan ce at survival. On the side of government, the greatest incentive would be to hav e more success in their own p roject s and p olicies and greater p ublic support because they could count on the coop erat ion of their constituents. But this would also mean givin g up some of their power as well as being op en to being held accountable. The Koohi council believes that they could p lay an important role in the drought management cy cle on the condition that the sanduq has adequate funds. They said that it would p robably be best to app roach this objective in several p has es , the first phase of which would involve activities that would bring some d irect and tangible imp rovement to the livelihoods of all members of the sub-tribe. They said they could achieve this by using sanduq funds to buy and store fodder for the entire community when prices are low and sell the fodder when n eeded at cost. Fodder is an essential item for all tentholds and its p urchas e and storage are important and costly activities. Once they had seen the tan gible and shortt erm benefit of cooperating with the council on drou ght man a gement the members of the subt ribe would be much more op en and serious about coop erat in g on lon ger term activities with less tangible or direct benefits such as: achiev ing a wider consensus than currently possible on the timing and duration of migration, achievin g consensus within the commun it y about how to confront drought, how to manage the ran ge lands and help in g to revive traditional systems of managing drou ght . Lastly , the accountability that the Koohi say is lackin g in the administration of cred it schemes, coop erat ive activities and the administration of grazing p ermit s could be curbed if these schemes were administered through the community as they have been in the p ast . Selfadminis t rat ion of these imp ort ant resources would lead to a built-in system of self-policin g since any abuse of resources would result in severe consequences for the abusers' membership and standing in the community . Furthermore, community members have much better knowledge than gov ernment officials outside of the community of the resources available to each community member and of their needs. Recommendations Pastoral organisations should be sup p ort ed by a favourable policy and legislative climate which allows them to organ is e, rep res ent and take action on behalf of their community . This climate would includ e: Political and legal supp ort.
Int roduce policy and legislative instruments to supp ort collective action by self-organised communities of pastoralists or any other local communities. So me specific p olicy recommendations are p res ent ed in the followin g sections; Introduce a single law for the official registration of local community -bas ed civil society organ is at ions (such as p ast oral organisations), with clear p roces s es for registration and the 5 absolute minimum of restrictions on the structure, objectives and membership of the organ is at ion p laced by the government or the law; Official reco gnit ion of community investment funds (sanduqs) as legitimate commun it y bas ed organisations with legal rights; Laws related to loans, insurance and grants should be changed to allow agreements on these with p as t oral organisations and not just individuals; and Laws and regulations related to govern ment contracts with outside entities should be chan ged to simp lify and facilitate gov ernment contracts with pastoral organ is at ions and other civil society organisations. Technical and financial supp ort Empowerment of local commun it ies should begin with traditional organisations that are most intact; in the case of p ast oral communities in Iran this means those organisations which op erat e at the level of close family members (such as the Koohi clans); A more long-term goal should be to encourage the formation of alliances of like-minded local commun it ies at p rovincial and national lev el throu gh technical and finan cia l support for coalition activities; Projects to offer technical or financial supp ort should be designed in stages with the p articip at ion of the community , givin g priority to activities that bring direct and tangib le imp rovement for liv elihoods ; followin g success in this stage coop erat ion cou ld begin on longer term activities or those with less tangible or d irect benefits; In the case of the Koohi technical and/or financial assistance could p riorit is e fodder p rovis ion, building p ools to collect rainwater, and tankers to p rovide water. The longer term objectives cou ld be achievin g a consensus on the timin g and duration of migration, a drou ght cy cle management strategy and action p lan and management of ran ge lands . Financial and technical supp ort should be given to p ast oral organisations such as sanduqs rather than to individuals in order to reward collective action; and, Long-term loans, grants or comp ens at ion for the sanduq through the Agricultural Bank which currently only offers these services to individual pastoralists. Research International case studies on the role of local community action in managin g disasters (such as the p res ent p roject ) should be made availab le to and discussed and debated within key.
Besides restricitons on membership of individuals with a background o f certain types o f political activity, or lack of demonstration of Islamic revolutionary principles, another restriciton currently in place is that membership of NGOs and coop erat i ves is restricted to individuals, whereas the Koohi, for example, want an organisation based on clan-based membership.
decision-m akin g organisations, most imp ort ant ly the Interior M inis try , the Disaster Task Force, the Management and Plannin g Organ is at ion and the M inis t ry of Agriculture and Rural Develop ment . A network of learnin g sites could be established at the national level to gain a better understanding of the role of local communities in the disaster management cy cle in Iran. The lessons from these exp eriences should b e debated with the relevant gov ernment al and nongovern mental organisations and should contribute to new p olicy and law. Particip at ory research is needed on the role of traditional knowled ge in drou ght man a gem ent and contingen cy planning, and esp ecially the links between traditional knowledge and p astoral institutions. Particular attention should be p aid to the role and mechanisms of social solidarity in the develop ment and use of traditional knowledge. This research should lead to recommendations on how traditional knowled ge can be ad ap t ed to meet modern needs. Capacity Facilitatin g the council's co mmuni cat ion and collaboration with national, regional and international organisations; and, Facilitatin g their commun icat ion with similar community-based organ isat ions throughout the world and increasing their p art icipat ion in international decision-makin g fora.
NGOs could p lay an imp ort ant role in emp ow ering p ast oral commun it ies and in mediatin g between local commun it ies and the government on disaster related issues. However, currently very few NGOs are involv ed in n at ural resource management issues, includin g natural disasters. Those NGOs or charities that do get involved usually focus on relief work by coop erating in the p roject s of the Iranian Red Crescent Society . Furthermore, despite the up s urge in civ il society activity over the past 10 or more y ears , there are still very few NGOs doing p olicy-leve l research, monitorin g and advocacy and also very few that work in the field with local communities. NGOs have a very key role in imp roving natural disaster man a gem ent in the country by regularly monitoring the work of the government in this field. Little is known about the work of the Disaster Taskforce, for examp le. Regu lar monitorin g would be help ful in bringin g the work of this and other relevant organisations to light and ensurin g that emp has is is focused on the most imp ortant issues, and that funds are sp ent efficiently and resp ons ibly . Recommendations Law Regulations are n eeded to clarify and make easier the p roces s of registerin g an NGO (see the section of recommendations for local communities, above). Capacity Gear international fundin g for, and co llabor at ion with, Iranian NGOs towards strengthening Iranian NGOs in areas where they have been traditionally inactive or weak: p olicy lev el.
w ork, regional and international networking, lobbying and field work with local communities; Provide regional and international exp ert is e and collaboration for cap acit y building of Iran ian NGOs on long-term monitoring and analysis of policies and activities of gov ernment ; Encourage and build the cap acit y of Iranian NGOs to monitor the natural disaster p lanning and follow-up activities of the government, p art icularly the Comp rehens ive National Plan for Relief and Rescue. Collaboration with gov ernment Introduce laws and regu lat ions that would facilitate the coop erat ion of government and NGOs. Currently , one of the main p roblems is that no govern ment organ is at ion has a simp le mechan is m of p roviding fundin g or sub-contracting to NGOs and they must improvise with existing regulations which usually results in a very complicated and bureau crat ic p roces s . Collaboration with local communities NGOs could help local communities understand the structure of the DTF and other relevant organ is at ions , the laws, access to information and so on. They could also help advocate for local communities at the national and p rovincial levels by airin g their concerns, sharing their exp erien ces, and also facilitating the p art icip at ion of local co mmunit ies .
Governmental organisations and policy.
The 5-y ear economic, social and cultural develop ment p lans rep res ent the main p olicy document of the government. Although each p lan is supp os ed to be based on a long and meticulous p rep arat ion p roces s , in reality it tends to based on a simp le revision of the p revious p lan. This p robably reflects the fact that monitoring and ev aluat ion of the plans is quite weak. Innovations are needed in government to ensure that new p olicies remain in place even after changes in staff. Government p olicies are essentially formulated and imp lement ed with the support of influential figures. When key p eop le change positions p olicies are often abandoned or rep laced. Recommendations In general, the develop ment p lans would be greatly strengthened with a robust system for monitoring and evaluation. Transp arency and access to information throughout the entire govern ment (as well as p ara- governm ental organisations) would facilitate the work of both govern mental and non-gov ernment al actors in monitorin g p rogr es s on the dev elop ment p lans . This monitoring could lead to n ew p olicy recommendations which could b e worked out with the p art icipat ion of all relevant stakeholders. Introduce mech anis ms in all relevant govern ment departments for adjusting p olicy and p ract ice based on the outcome of monitorin g and ev aluation activities. Continuity of p olicies could be imp roved with the creation of lobby ing, advo cacy and monitoring group s at the highest possible levels, includ in g gov ernment and p arliament arians.
w it h the involvement of NGOs and the media to maintain p res s ure on the government to deliver on its p olicies .
The Disaster Task Force and The Comprehensive National Plan for Relief and Rescue.
The Comp rehens ive National Plan for Relief and Rescu e rep res ent s the first national plan for p revent ion, p rep arednes s , relief and reconstruction in relation to natural disasters. The p lan dep ends largely on inter-ministerial and inter-departmental cooperation and coordination, and y et these are the most widely criticised weaknesses of the government even accordin g to many of its own staff and p arliament ari ans . The p lan, which was supposed to be drafted and app roved within one y ear, actually took 3 to 4 years to get off the ground and accordin g to some observers, this delay in development of the p lan does not bode well for its imp lement at ion. Despite finally havin g a comp rehens ive national p lan, the DTF, and p art icularly the Ministry of Interior which heads and hosts the DTF, are still criticised for resp onding to each situation on a case-by -cas e basis. The media outcry to the government's lack of p lanning and p reparedness for the Bam earthquake shows that the old criticisms are still b eing held against the government. Accordin g to the Iran daily newsp ap er the p lan had no p os it ive imp act on the p rep arednes s or relief for the Bam earthquake. Dr. M ohammad Taher Kanan i, head of the Secratariat of the National Committee of Human Rights said that one of the p roblems with the plan is that the responsibilities that have been given to the members of the DTF is not comp atible with their cap acit ies . For examp le, accordin g to the p lan the IRC S is resp ons ible for coordin at ion of all rescue and relief operations, but he said, they do not currently have the cap acity to carry out all their responsibilities. Several journalists and researchers have recently called for the transfer of coordination of disaster relief and prep arednes s from the M inistry of Interior (through the DTF) directly to the President. They argue that with a government as hierarchically structured as Iran's, the chances of successful implementation of any p lan are increased the high er the level of the responsible p ers on. These criticisms may suggest that the p lan needs more time to iron out some p roblems , but they also call for a closer look at the plan to see understand whether any of its elements contribute to the p oor p erformance and if so, in what way. A closer look at the p lan shows that it is not really a p lan, but more of a terms of reference and organ isat ional structure for the DTF. It p resent s a framework for a p lan, but it does not have any of the important elements of a plan, such as detailed aims and ob ject ives , a timeline of activities, or a strong sy st em of monitoring and evaluation. The plan does not sp ecify sufficiently how the various p arts of the DTF communicate, collaborate and make decisions. The p lan and the DTF would p robably have been radically different if they had p ut communities and constituent group s at the centre of their p lanning. For instance, instead of creatin g sp ecialis t group based on the type of disaster, it may have been more usefu l to create sp ecialis t group s for p as t oralis ts , farmers, fisher folk, urban dwellers, etc.
It is good to see that the DTF and the comp rehens ive plan attempt to prioritise p rep arednes s through the national and provincial p reparedness working group s since lack of p reparat ion has been a very common criticism of d is ast er management in Iran. The p lan creates a very hierarch ical structure of accountability within the DTF where district and p rovincial level offices of the DTF and all levels of all of the sp ecialis t working group s are ultimately responsible and accountable to the national DTF. But it is not at all clear who the national DTF is accountable to and who monitors its work. The DTF is lay ered with various committees and working groups, each made up of anywhere from about 6 to about 30 organisations, and each actin g at the national, provincial and dep art ment al levels and there is a great deal of overlap in the membership of the groups. This creates a very comp lex structure where each group is related to a number of other group s in vertical or horizontal relation. Furthermore, each member is not simp ly an individual, but a ministry or other organisation with its own internal structure, rules, objectives and p roces s es which add yet another lay er to this comp lex p uzzle. The current structure of the DTF (as introduced under the comprehensive p lan) is extremely hierarch ica l. For instance, the TOR, members and internal guidelines of the drou ght and rangeland rehab ilit at ion workin g group must be drafted by the M inis try of Agriculture and Rural Develop ment (it is not clear who has this responsibility within the ministry ) and app roved by the DTF and the national working group on p rep arednes s. This structure p ut s a lot of p ow er ultimately in the hands of the M inistry of Interior (as the head of the DTF). Accordin g to article 44 of the 3rd develop ment p lan, the comp rehensive p lan was drafted p rimarily by IRCS, but the p lan, which p rovides a structure and resp ons ibilit ies for the DTF, is dominated more by the M inis t ry of Interior than any other organisation and this begs the question why one organisation is writin g plans for another? On the other hand, if IRC S is the most comp et ent disaster management organ is at ion in the country then it should be charged with heading the DTF. The p lan obviously envisions the role of civil society mostly in the context of help ing voluntarily in disaster relief and giv in g donations, but not in terms of decision-makin g, p lanning, management or monitorin g. Furthermore, it does not differentiate between different typ es of civil society : local commun it ies are not mentioned exp licit ly at all, but they are different from, and must be treated differently than, NGOs or businesses. Recommendations Either the 4th develop ment p lan or p arliament should call for the followin g clarifications and changes regard in g the p lan: Provide detailed aims and ob ject ives , a timeline of activities, and a sy s tem of monitoring and evaluation; Provide details on the mechanisms for commun icat ion, collaboration and decision-makin g of the various comp onent p art s of the DTF; A restructuring of the p lan to p ut communities and constituent groups at the centre of the p lanning;.
Clarify who the DTF is accountable to and how its work is monitored; Discuss and adopt a less comp lex and more streamlined structure for the DTF; Clarification on of the DTF communication and decision-making mechan is ms ; A chan ge in the text of the p lan to allow for greater autonomy for non-governmental activities at the district level (currently the p lan calls for the DTF to sup ervis e all nongovern mental activities at the local level); The p lan seems to be quite ambitious and p erhaps too demanding of the limited cap acit ies of the members of the DTF, therefore it would be help ful to introduce a mechanism or process for determinin g p riorit ies within the p lan's objectives and activities. An indep endent evaluation of the cap acit ies needed to implement the p lan, and those currently availab le within the DTF, would also b e helpful in identifying p otent ial problem areas and opp ort unit ies for cap acity building. The p lan should include a call for a strategy and action plan for increasing the invo lvement of local communities in the d is as t er management cy cle. The action p lan should begin with achiev able ev en if modest targets at the local level and build up to participation in p olicy makin g, etc. Key areas for local commun it y p art icip ation would be developing indicators, monitoring, admin is t rat ion of funds for loans and insurance schemes. At the same time, the NGOs, journalists, academics and researchers who are active at p rovincial and national levels could begin to en gage with the government on those levels. In the short and medium term, a strategy for real cooperation should begin at the level of local commun it ies : the lev el of the sub-tribe in p as t oral language and the lev el of the dep art ment and district in government lan gua ge. This calls for a closer look at the national p lan at the dep artment and district levels and the identification of entry points into the existing sy st em, and also the identification of chan ges that would be needed to the p lan and how those changes could be mad e. The table, b elow , summarises some of the concerns about working with DTF at the local lev el:.
Aim Relevant DT F mechanism Action needed.
Particip at ion of pastoral communities in d es i gnin g and imp lement in g a local drou ght action p lan includin g prevention, p rep arednes s , relief and reconstruction; (including technical and financial assistance).
Cooperation with district and p rovincial The plan needs to clarify what is level DTF on the 4 stages of the meant by the "non-governmental" sector: does this include pastoral management cy cle; Cooperation with national and p rovincial The level of autonomy of the p rep arednes s working group s for DT F offices at provincial and p rep arednes s related activities; One of the main ob ject ives of the p lan is to channel public voluntary aid and also the inp ut of non-governmental organisations;.
district levels needs to be clarified, currently it says that they must work "under the supervision" of the national DT F: to what extent can they take action independently of the national DT F? organisations;.
The resp ons ibilit y of extendin g insuran ce to all agriculture and livestock herdin g The plan needs to clarify what are will be the resp ons ibilit y of the Ministry 46.
of Agriculture and Rural Develop ment the mechanisms, if any, for nonaccordin g to the law of insurance fund for go v ernm en tal sector participation in the work of the DT F at agricultural products of 1362 (1983).
provincial and district levels. Clarification on which element of the DTF has the responsibility for planning: DT F or the preparedness working groups? All DT F and working group meetings should be open to local communities; Given the importance of FARO and ONPA for pastoralists, the role of these two organisations in the DTF should be clarified. Cooperation to monitor and District or provincial offices of DTF evaluate the impact of local disaster management plans Clarification on whether there are any mechanisms for local community participation in monitoring and evaluation of the work of DT F. The plan needs to clarify what are the mechanisms, if any, for local community participation in the work of the specialist working groups;.
Research indicators.
developing The 3 clusters of sp ecialis t.
working groups of the national p rep arednes s working group : the op erations specialist working group s , the p revent ion and risk management sp ecialis t workin g group s , and the education sp ecial is t working groups;.
Each of the clusters is made up a number of specialist working groups so local communities who The op erat ions sp ecialis t working group s want to collaborate on research will also be established at the p rovincial related issues would have to level under the overall sup ervis ion of the collaborate with 23 working national workin g group ; groups! Can the system be made to be a more streamlined?.
Risk management working group s will be established in each p rovince if needed. The need and the members of the group s will be decided by the p rovincial p rep arednes s working group;.
It would be good to have mechanisms for the establishment of specialist working groups at the provincial and district levels based on the need expressed by The head of the DTF at the dep artment al local communities, and not just the working groups level can call for the establishment of any by themselves. sp ecialis t working group s at that level as.
Educat io n and awareness raising.
The cluster of the education specialist There seems to be a lot of overlap working group s of the national in the responsibilities of the various constituent parts of the p rep arednes s working group;.
Certain min ist ries and organisations have the added resp ons ibilit y of cooperating with the DTF to imp rove awareness of disasters and to p repare for them through education; DTF.
Distributing relief and aid.
DT F on the issue of education and awareness raising therefore clarification is needed for a clear division of labour and mechanisms for cooperation between the various constituents.
All help and assistance fro m nongovern ment al sectors (both national and international) shall be receiv ed and distributed by IRCS. All help and assistance from governmental sectors (both national and international) shall be received and distributed by DTF. The receipt and distribution of assistance by any other organisations is banned.
At the most local level aid should be distributed by local community-based organisations, not the IRCS or DT F.
Lastly , a website for the National Comp rehens ive Plan for Relief and Rescue would b e a key tool for improving civil society involvement in the p lan and would assist monitoring and evaluation. The website should p rovide information about laws, p olici es , activities, and budget.
The 4th development plan and natural resource management.
Prevention and p rep arat ion related activities for drought tie in closely with p olicies for natural resource management and in the case of p as t oralis t s this mainly includes rangeland th management. The draft 4 development plan offers little in the way of new p olicies related to range man agem ent. The overall aim of sedentarisation is p urs ued through 2 objectives: sedentarisation of at least 50% of the country's nomadic p as t oralist p op ulat ion and the continuation of the livestock and ran ge equ ilibr ium p lan. Under the current sy s t em, the government has dev elop ed sep arat e institutions and p olicies to address range management, p as t oral livelihoods and drou ght (Forest and Rangeland Organisation, Organ is at ion for Nomadic Pastoral Affairs and the Disaster Task Force) and their p olicies are uncoord inat ed and sometimes in direct conflict with each other. Accordin g to p ast oralis t s , drought simp ly acts as a cataly st to accelerate the government's existing p olici es of sedentarisation and eventual elimination of mobile pastoralism. Therefore their first demand is that the govern ment should treat them as equ als -- esp ecially in relation to farmers and other sedentary pop ulat ions , givin g them the same ben efit s and access to resources.
In relation to drought the government tends to look for technical solutions without an indep th assessment of the root causes of the increasin gly severe imp act of drought. Wh ereas some of the root causes lie in p as t and existing gov ernment p olici es themselves, p olic ies that have restricted p as toralis t s' access to natural resources through grazin g p ermit s and created a centralised and inflexible decision-makin g sy s t em. Once p ast oralis t s have organised themselv es in order to defend their collective rights and interests they should be ready to negotiate new rights and responsibilities with the govern ment. Lack of transp arency and accountability and extreme centralisation of p ow er and resources in the hands of the gov ernment and other related p ow erful actors have led to p astoral communities findin g themselv es cau ght between dep endency on the gov ernment and lack of trust. Recommendations The following recommendations should either be recognised in the final 4 dev elop ment p lan or within the internal regulations of the relevant organisations. M aking the links What is needed is for the right of p ast oralis t s to migrate and to continue their sy st em of p roduct ion should be reco gnis ed as a right in the 5-y ear development plans; the develop ment p lans should view pastoralists as an imp ort ant food p roducer rather than as destroy ers of the environment; each p as t oral family or tenthold should be viewed as a unit of p roduct ion in the p olicy and legislation of the country ; Recognise and mak e explicit the links between drought management, natural resource management and liv elihoods p olicies in the country by establishing a jo int commission between FARO, ONPA, the Disaster Task Force and the M anage ment and Plannin g Organisation, as well as civil society group s , to examine how p olici es could b e better coordinated amon g various branches of the government to have better coordin at ed policies on natural resource management, pastoral livelihoods and disaster man agem ent; Further explore the best division of responsibilities between the govern ment and pastoral organ is at ions for natural resource management; closer collaboration between the government and p as t oral organisations would require an in creas e in the capacity of government to work with p as t oral organisations for drought contin gency p lanning; FARO, ONPA and DTF to introduce regulations and mechan isms that facilitate cooperation with community based organisations; objectives would includ ed reco gn it ion, access to information, and enterin g into agreements and contracts with community organisations; Land and grazin g rights The sy st em of land tenure has to be re-thought to giv e sufficient control of sufficient amounts of land to pastoralists to ensure their livelihoods and sustainable management of resources, for instance by negotiating lon g-t erm and flexible leases between FARO and pastoral organ is at ions ; Give more flexible grazing p ermit s that would allow pastoralists to react to early warning information; Ensure that grazing rights are respected;.
M onit oring and ev aluat ion FARO, ONPA and DTF to adopt regulations to allow civil society group s to monitor and evaluate their work; These organisations to adopt regulations and mechanisms to imp rove their accountability , p articularly where distribution of funds or goods is concerned; Improve transp arency in p ast oral coop erat ives , both in terms of their finances and also decision-makin g and gov ernanc e; Ecosy st em research as a b as is for sound policy The latest theories of ran ge man agem ent in arid eco-systems and lessons about the role of traditional management systems should be introduced to Iranian decision-makers and their p olicy imp act exp lored; Introduce and assess the app licabilit y of recent work on dy namic ecosy s t em theory or nonequilibr ium sy s t ems to Iran and use that as a basis for p olicy -making. Economy Intervene in the p as t oral economy in case of crisis (terms of trade collap s e) while ensurin g transp arency and accountability and provide emp loy ment and livelihoods for those p astoralis t s who are driven out of pastoralism due to drought and other natural disasters; Provide guaranteed p rices for pastoral p roducts and p revent terms of trade collap s e in drought y ears by p roviding guaranteed p rices for liv es t ock through co mmunit y-bas ed funding mech anis ms ; Sup ply fodder at reasonable p rices and with affordable interest rates through commun it y bas ed mechanisms; Ensure fair loan schemes with reasonab le and equitable pay -back schedules and interest rates and consider waving loans of p as toralis t s in heavy debt. Extension Strengthen govern ment extension activities in ONPA and FARO and ensure a greater lev el of p articip at ion by civil society --including local communities--in p lannin g and decisionmakin g.
The 4th development plan and civil society.
It is useful to look at the opp ort unit ies that exist for the participation of local communities in national affairs in general and not just in the context of disasters and natural resource management. This wider context will influence how local commun it y p art icip at e in natural disaster p lanning. There has been a growing realisation that the govern ment on its own does not have the resources to fulfil the needs of every single citizen. This has strengthened the movement for greater p ublic p art icip at ion in government programmes, but generally particip at ion is endorsed only as lon g as it simply entails the involvement of the public in p rogrammes devised and imp lement ed by the govern ment . This amounts to the mobilisation of free labour.
for government p roject s . The organisation of communities to define their own p riorities and devise and imp lement their own plans is still not p rominent on the agenda. The draft 4 develop ment p lan addresses issues of civil society and governan ce in an unprecedented way (though many of the details still need to be worked out), includin g: New mechanisms to be introduced to facilitate the coop erat ion of governmental organ is at ions and the non-governmental sector; based on a draft executive bylaw which is to be prep ared by the M anagement and Planning Organisation and which must gain the app roval of the cabinet; Reform of the management and p lanning organisation to make it more streamlined and efficient, imp rove national budget allocation, facilitate coop erat ion with the nongovern mental sector; the reform is to be based on a draft executive bylaw from the M anagement and Plann in g Organisation which must be ap p roved by the cabinet; The councils of p lanning and develop ment of the p rovinces are resp ons ible for creating opp ort unit ies for civil society organisations (includin g the Islamic Coun cils) in decisionmakin g, mon it oring and co-op erat ion of dev elop ment p rojects at the p rovincial level; the M anagement and Planning Organisation and the M inist ry of Interior are resp ons ible for findin g the mech anis ms for op erationalis ing this; M anagement of national affairs should move fro m an institutionally-driven system to a system driven by plans and goals and by adop t ing less hierarchical p rocedures ; In order to supp ort social cap it al and expand civil society , the government, within the first y ear of the 4th develop ment p lan, has to: assess the level of social cap ital; giv e annual rep ort s and analy s is on the state of social cap it al; adop t p rojects and programmes to increase social cap it al; conduct annual opinion p olls on the level of p ublic satisfaction with the government and p ublis h the results in the government's annual rep ort s; outline and imp lement a comp rehensive national plan for cap acit y -buildin g, gender equity and women's rights; outline a comp rehens ive national p lan for p art icip at ion and monitoring by the p ublic, NGOs and the Islamic Councils regard in g sustainable d evelop ment ; and, adopt p olicies to encourage qu ant it ative and qualitative improvement of civil society organisations Calls exp licit ly for the p articip at ion of civil society in some areas, such as caring for orp hans , but disaster management is not one of these. NGOs have been quite active and vo cal in the area of ch ildren's rights recently so may be they have won the recognition from the govern ment, but not y et in the field of disaster management. Recommendations The p lan should call for exp lic it mechan is ms for the p art icipat ion of civil society in the drafting and monitorin g of the 5 year develop ment p lans; The drafting of executive by law s on the following issues by the M anagem ent and Plannin g Organisation should be done through consultation with civil society group s : new mechanisms for the cooperation of governmental organisations and the non-gov ernment al sector; reform of the M anagement and Plannin g Organisation; and mechan is ms for civ il society involvement in the councils of p lannin g and d evelop ment of the p rovinces ;.
T he p lans for op erat ionalising the shift from institutionally -driven management systems to a system driven by plans and goals should be mad e explicit (who is resp onsible for what? What is the timeline? etc.); The p lans to support social cap it al and exp and civil society should be detailed (who is responsible for what? What is the timeline? etc.); An indep endent assessment should be conducted of the government's cap acity to fulfil these obligations in order to identify capacity -building needs; The p lan seems extremely ambitious and should therefore include a sy st em for p riorit is ing its activities to ensure that the most imp ort ant ones are achieved; The p lan should include an exp licit definition of the "non-governmental sector" and "civ il society "; and, An indep endent assessment should be conducted to see whether these p lans are in contradiction with any other government laws or p olicies.
Other plans and programmes related to drought.
A p roject prop os al has been submitted to FAO (for TCP funds) to p repare a national strategy and action plan on drought management and mitigation for the agricu ltural sector. Since this p ropos al was develop ed before the adoption of the Comp rehens ive National Plan for Relief and Rescue it is imp ort ant to revisit the prop os al before its implementation to ensure that it works with and not against the new p lan. The p rop os al should also ensure that all stakeholders, includ in g NGOs and co mmunit y-bas ed organisations, are in cluded in any cap acit y building and p lannin g activities foreseen in the project.
Ann ex 1: List of people interviewed.
Members of the Koohi sub-tribe who participated in the workshop on drought: Hamzeh Davar, Say y ad Soltani, Reza Abdolahi, Khodamorad M ehrabi, Bah man Kolahdoozloo, Khalil Seydaiee, Bahram Latifp our, Amrollah Khodabakhshloo, Ali Asghar Esfandiari, Sh ems had Zolfaghari, Zolfaghar Naderp oor, Hooshang Naderp oor, Cheragh Ali Aghaiee, Meraj Bay rami, Bahram Lajevard i Asl, Ali Hassan Esfand iari, Ahmad Soltani. In addition a large number of other peop le particip at ed in the workshop whose names have not been written here. The workshop was held in a tent in the summer p ast ures of the Koohi so many p eop le dropped into the workshop uninvited. Office of Nomadic Pastoral Affairs M r. Baghaaiee, Expert of planning dep artment Forest and Rangeland Organisation M r. Moghadassi, Focal p oint for UNCCD relations Hossein Badrip our, Rangeland expert Department of Environment M asoud Bagherzadeh Karimi, Senior Expert of Wetlands Food and Agriculture Organisation of the UN Ali Y. Hakimi, Programme Officer, FAO Iran United Nations Development Progra mme Hossein Jafari Giv, Programme Officer, Natural Resource M anage ment &Disaster Resp ons e Natural disasters consultant Abolghaasem M oghadas Khoraasan i.
Ann ex 2: Summary findings of the project, Facilitating Sustainability of Livelihoods of Mobile Pastoralist Communities, A learning-by-doing project.
Prioritization of Problems.
Through several participatory workshop s the Koohi communities have identified and p riorit iz ed the p roblems they face. These are:.
A. Livestock, Migration and Pasture.
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! Taking of p as t ures of the Koohi sub-tribe by governmental bodies and refin eries in p art icular; Obs t ruct ion of tribal migratory routes by government and governmental organ iz at ions ; Des t ruct ion of pastures and lands of nomadic p as t oralis t s by rural p eop le; Failure in p ros ecut ing tresp as sers on pastoralists' lands; Lack of sufficient land for some nomad households in wintering or summerin g grounds; Inequit able distribution of lands (natural resources) amon g nomadic p as t oralis t s ; Failure to p ay enough attention to nomadic p as t oralis t s by the Dep art ment of Environment; Seiz ure of the lands of the nomad ic p as t oralis t s ' summerin g grounds by rural peop le; Lack of coop erat ion of the Forests and Ran gelands Organisation in p rot ecting the pastures against degradation caused by rural livestock; High transp ort at ion costs during migration; Lack of insurance for livestock; Inadequat e use of p art of the land and wells of p as t oralis ts ; Underground waters used by pastoralists are gen eral ly salty ; Obs t ruct ion of migration routes; Lack of toilet facilities for women while migratin g.
B. Economy ! Lack of reco gnit ion of nomad ic p as t oralis t households as p roduct ive units ! ! ! ! ! !.
and failure to p rovide banking facilities to supp ort them; U nemp loy ment among y out h; D eclinin g market for carp et s and livestock; F ailure to provide pastoralists with aid and grants; Lack of sufficient facilities for the nomadic p as t oralis ts who own land and water for farmin g; Ins ufficient income relative to high cost of livin g; Lack of govern ment sup ervis ion for livestock p rices ;.
D ecline of livestock due to recurrent drought; D ifficult guarantor conditions for loans; P as toralis t coop eratives buy p roduct s below real market prices; Inadequat e land given to those who choose to settle; N eglect of the nomadic h andicr afts by relevant organizations; T he nomads are not leadin g a hap py life.
C. Services ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !.
Inadequacy in drinkin g water and cisterns; Inadequacy of roads in winterin g grounds; Low level of san it at ion and lack of mobile p hys icians amon g nomads; Lit t le attention to nomad children's welfare; Lack of sufficient veterinarians and med icin e amon g no mads ; Inadequat e attention to sanitation and welfare by the government; Lack of security for nomads; Lack of water p umps in wintering grounds; N o right of access to the gas and oil resources near which the nomads live; N omadic children h ave d ifficu lt y p urs uing their education after co mp let ing p rimary school.
D. Culture ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !.
Lack of nomadic rep res entat ives in the p arliament ; Lack of coun cil for no madic p as t oralis t s ; Lack of mosques in the area; Lack of clergies amon g nomads; Bribery in govern ment al bodies; Inadequat e attention of IRIB (Iranian state-run TV) to nomadic p eople and their culture; Lack of a quota sy st em for accep t ance in universities; Lack of adequate number of facilities to p romot e nomadic culture, customs and lifesty le; Lack of libraries for children in winterin g/ summerin g grounds.
E. The Nomadic Youth.
! ! ! ! ! ! U nemp loy ment ; Yout h not able to afford the costs of getting married ; Lack of sp ort s facilities for nomadic y out h; F ailure to pay enough attention to outstanding nomad p upils ; Lack of sufficient educational facilities for nomadic children; D rug addiction amon g the y out h;.
Inadequat e schools for nomad girls resultin g in lower education levels; F ailure to pay enough attention by p arliament memb ers to the p roblems of nomadic p ast oralis ts and migration.
P roj e ct writing workshop and project proposals.
M embers of the sub-tribe were divided into 5 group s to practice p roject p rop os als to solve each of the 5 main problem group s. They came up with the following p roject p rop os als: - P roject to buy and distribute livestock feed in a timely manner to the sub-tribe - P roject to p romot e handicrafts through establishing workshop s for dy ing wool and weavin g carpets, kelims and gabb ehs - P roject to buy trucks to facilitate migration - P roject to create employ ment for unemp loyed y out h in the sub-tribe - P roject to establish a mobile library for the sub-tribe.
The overall p roject go als to be achieved in the next 5-10 y ears were identified by local communities after a p art icip at ory workshop . These include: ! Sus tainable livelihoods p roject to be officially recogn is ed and launched ; ! A tt ract ing other tribes to the Sustainable Livelihoods Project; ! Int ernat ional aid to be allocated to the p roject with the resp ect ive rep resent at ives already in the region; ! A vailabi lit y of sanitation facilities, hosp itals and water supp ly system; ! Reduct ion in y out h unemploy ment while y oung nomads to work as herders and farmers; ! Irrigat ion of farm lands by water pump s ; ! A vailabi lit y of mobile hospitals in wintering grounds as well as summerin g grounds; ! Some of the nomads will also p ursue farming; ! A vailabi lit y of water cisterns in the clans; ! Res torat ion of sp rings and watering p oint s; ! A vailabi lit y of local clinics and app reciat ion of better hygienic conditions; ! A n increase in the numb er of nomad ic households and their livestock; ! Recap t ure of the nomadic migratory routes; ! P eace, safety and security and the elimination of bandits and thieves; ! A n increase in the scientific knowled ge of the nomads; ! G ifted nomad children to be enjoying h i gher levels of education and p rogres s ; ! G reat er availability of fuel; ! A higher quality of life; ! D evelop ment of industrial animal husbandry in some areas without affecting traditional production. ! Emer gen ce of other p rofit able and suitable industries; ! A vailabi lit y of electricity and water supp ly sy st ems ; ! T radit ional structure of the tribe intact and active, while the nomads lead their authentic lifesty le; 56.
A n easier and more comfortable livelihood for all; A vailabi lit y of government aid to meet the needs of the nomads; F urther solidarity among nomadic p as t oralis t tribes and sub-tribes; Increas e in literacy ; Sus tainable Livelihoods Committee to be more active; Landles s nomads to obtain access to land and no lon ger hav e to p ay rent; Bet ter communication amon g p eople in the region; T he return of nomad y out h to the tribe after completion of their studies; A ll memb ers to be serving the tribe; T he number of Sustainable Liv elihoods Committees to reach 14 and to cover the whole Shish Bay li tribe.
Ann ex 3: Annual precipitation in Fars province.
Table1: Total annual precipitation for 5 rainfall stations in the province of Fars, 1961-2000.
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 M EAN.
