<title>Report of the Conference of FAO Sixteenth Session Rome, 6-25 November 1971</title>
<section>1</section>
I. Council committees
November 1871-November 1973
Programme committee
Members
First Alternante
G. Bula Hoyo (Colombia)
K. Ando (Japan)
M.A. Bajwa (Pakistan)
First Alternate
E. Bucluman (Roumania)
H.J. Kristensen (Danemark)
R.W. Phillips ( United States of America)
Second Alternate
K.. Prased (India)
B. Shaib (Nigeria)
A.S. Tuinman (Netherlands)
Third Alternate
S. Haidar (Lebanon)
FINANCE COMMITTEE
Chairman
Members
First Alternate
F. Shefrin (Canada)
Miss Marina de Barros e Vasconcelios (Brazil)
First Alternate
A. Lochen (Norway)
P. Byrnes ( United States of America)
Second Alternate
Ju In Song (Korea, Rep. of )
E. Luhe (Germany Fad. Rap. of)
G. WEILL (France)
Third Alternate
J. Murenga (Kenya)
COMMITTEE ON CONSTITUTIONAL AND LEGAL MATTERS
Australia
Italy
Morocco
United Kingdom
Ecuador
Japan
Pakistan
OTHER COMMITTEES
AD HOC COMMITTEE ON THE METHODS OF WORK OF THE COUNCIL
Argentina
Indonesia
Nigeria
United States of America
Egypt
New Zealand
Norway
AD HOC COMMITTEE ON INCREASING THE PRODUCTION AND USE OF EDISLE PROTEINS
Brazil
France
Iran
Sierra Leone
Canada
India
New Zealand
UN/FAO INTERGOVERNMENTAL COMMITTEE FOR THE WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME
Australia
*Ghana
*Mexico
Togo
*Canada
Hungary
*Netherlands
*Trinidad and Tobago
Danmark
*India
*New Zealand
Turkey
Egypt
*Indonesia
Pakistan
*United Kingdom
*France
Irland
Peru
*United State of America
*Germany, Fed Rep of
Kenya
Sweden
Uruguay
*Elected by FAO Council
<section>2</section>
II. Report of the conference of FAO - Corrigendum
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Please insert "(Res. 2/73)" immediately after "International Agricultural Adjustment".
PARAGRAPH 132, RESOLUTION 3/73
Please alter the second part of operative paragraph 2 to read:
''...authorizes the Director-General to invite interested non-member States which are members of the United Nations, any of its...''
APPENDIX B. JAPAN
Please replace the present entry by the following:
JAPAN
Delegate
Makoto SAITO
Adviser to the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry President of the Japan FAO Association
Tokyo
Alternate
Chohei NAGATA
Counsellor
Embassy of Japan
Permanent Representative of Japan to FAO
Rome
Alternate
Katsuhiro ICHIOKA
Director
Specialized Agencies Division
United Nations Bureau
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Tokyo
Alternate
Yasuo GOTO
Director, International Economic Affairs Division
International Affairs Department
Economic Affairs Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Tokyo
Associate
Tatsuo SAITO
First Secretary
Embassy of Japan
Alternate Permanent Representative of Japan to FAO
Rome
Associate
Yoichi YAMAGUCHI
First Secretary
Embassy of Japan
Rome
Associate
Seiji SHINDO
Deputy Director
International Cooperation Division
International Affairs Department
Economic Affairs Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Tokyo
Associate
Shoji SUNAGA
Senior Officer
International Cooperation Division
International Affairs Department
Economic Affairs Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Tokyo
Associate
K. NANAO
Officer, Economic Division
United Nations Bureau
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Tokyo
Adviser
M. EDAHIRO
Executive Director of the
Japan FAO Association
Tokyo
APPENDIX E
Please alter the second part of the title to read:
"... AND TO RULE XXVII GRO".
<section>3</section>
III. Introductory
A. The late Lord Boyd Orr
B. The late Maurice Gemayel
C. In memoriam
D. Seventh McDougall memorial lecture
E. Presentation of the B.R. Sen awards for 1970 and 1971
A. The late Lord Boyd Orr
1. The Conference paid tribute to the memory of the late Lord Boyd Orr, first Director-General 2 of FAO (1945-1948), who had tied in June 1971, and unanimously adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 1/71
Tribute to Lord Boyd Orr
THE CONFERENCE,
Having learned with deep sorrow of the death of Lord Boyd Orr, the Organization's first Director-General,
Recalling the dynamic role he played in alerting the world to the urgency on the international scene for actions to provide adequate food and purchasing power for people with inadequate resources wherever they were,
Recognizing the outstanding service which he rendered to the Organization during his tenure of office not only by his leadership in developing programmes to combat hunger and poverty, but also by inspiring the Organization with a vision of service that has never dimmed,
Appreciating his dedication to efforts to ensure and secure peace by removing the injustices of hunger and poverty wherever they existed, for which he received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1949, ant thus 0a contribution to humanity at large,
1. Wishes to have a copy of this resolution sent to Lord Boyd Orr's widow, Lady Boyd Orr;
2. Expresses the deep sense of loss of the Organization at the passing of a worldwide figure who made such a significant contribution to human welfare;
3. Decides to create a new and permanent FAO activity dedicated to the memory of Lord Boyd Orr;
4. Requests the Council at its Fifty-Ninth Session to take action as appropriate to implement such a permanent and continuing memorial to Lord Boyd Orr.
(Adopted, 25 November 1971)
B. The late Maurice Gemayel
2. She Conference paid tribute to the memory of the late Maurice Gemayel of Lebanon, Independent Chairman of the Council from 1965 to 1969, who had died in October 1970.
C. In memoriam
3. The Conference paid tribute to the staff members named below, who had died in the service of the Organization since its Fifteenth Session in November 1969:
Name
Title
Duty Station
ACOCK, A.
(Australia) Economist (World Food Programme),
Economic Analysis Division Rome, Italy
EL DEEB, Z.
(Egypt) Documents Clerk, Regional Office
for the Near East Cairo, Egypt
BELLI, L.B.
(Canada) Animal Health Officer, Animal
Production and Health Division Bogota, Colombia
GEMMA, Miss A.
(Italy) Secretary, Economic Analysis
Division Rome, Italy
GERBER, R.
(Germany, P.R. of) Rural Institutions Officer,
Rural Institutions Division Santiago, Chile
IRIARTE, J.
(Spain) Translator/Reviser, Publications
Division Rome, Italy
JANSSEN, A.C.
(Netherlands) Director, Conference, Council
and Protocol Affairs Division Rome, Italy
MCCUBIN, H.
(United Kingdom) Project Officer, World Food
Programme Taipei (Taiwan)
MCLEAN, C.W.
(Canada) Regional Economist, Economic
Analysis Division Washington D.C.,
U.S.A.
PADMINDRA, U.
(Thailand) Stock/Customs Clerk, Regional
Office for Asia and the Far East Bangkok, Thailand'
PALADINI, A.
(Italy) Guard, Administrative Services
Division Rome, Italy
PRICE, W.
(United Kingdom) Technical Officer, Agricultural
Services Division Zaria, Nigeria
REYNOLDS, Miss E.
(United Kingdom) Publications Officer,
Publications Division Rome, Italy
ROCHE, D.
(France) Forestry Officer Fez, Morocco
BARON, P.
(France) Drilling Mechanic, Land and Water Development Division Zinder, Niger
CHEN, I-gok
(China) Agricultural Statistician,
Statistics Division Maseru, Lesotho
COCHEME, J.A.M.
(United Kingdom) Agricultural Officer, Plant Production and Protection Division Rome, Italy
DAVEY, P.L.H.
(United Kingdom) Chief, Applied Nutrition Branch,
Nutrition Division Rome, Italy
DELLA VIDA, Miss M.L.
(Italy) Operations Clerk, Rural
Institutions Division Rome, Italy
FONS, A.
(France) Agricultural Officer, Plant Production and Protection Division Oran, Algeria
GERARD, P.
(Belgium) Agricultural Officer, Plant Production
and Protection Division San'aa, Yemen Arab Rep.
GODDARD, J.
(Canada) Forestry Officer, Forestry
Department Chisombo, Zambia
HUSSEIN, H.
(Egypt) Regional Statistical Adviser
Statistics Division Cairo, Egypt
LEBLOIS, A.
(France) Agricultural Officer, Plant Production and Protection Division Algiers, Algeria
MENNESSON, P.L.
(France) Animal Production Officer, Animal
Production and Health Division Phnom Fenh, Khmer
Republic
NIELSEN, Miss A.H.
(Denmark) Associate Expert (Food Consumption
Surveys), Nutrition Division Lusaka, Zambia
PEISSEL, G.
(France) Director, Division of External
Relations and General Services,
World Food Programme Rome, Italy
RABSON, Mrs M.
(United Kingdom) Secretary, Forest Industries and
Trade Division Rome, Italy
SIGURDSSON, G.
Rep.(Iceland) Master Fisherman, Fisheries Department Hodeida, Yemen Arab
TENTONI, R.
(Italy) Dairy Officer, Animal Production
and Health Division Rome, Italy
WILLIAMSON, J.Q.
(United Kingdom) Project Manager, Forestry
Department Santiago, Chile
ZWANKHUISSFN, Miss T.
(Netherlands) Agricultural Services Officer,
Regional Office for Africa Accra, Ghana
D. Seventh McDougall memorial lecture
4. The seventh in the series of lectures at regular Conference sessions in memory of Frank Lidgett McDougall, a founding father of the Organization, wee delivered by Norman E. Borlaug (U.S.A.), 1970 Nobel Peace Prize winner. 1
E. Presentation of the B.R. Sen awards for 1970 and 1971
5. The Chairman of the Conference presented the B.R. Sen Awards for 1970 to Pierre Alfred Lusyne (Belgium) and for 1971 to Solon Lovett Barraclough (U.S.A.). These annual awards, created under Conference Resolution 33/67, go to the FAO field officers who have contributed most to the progress of the country or countries to which they have been assigned. Mr. Lusyne had served as a fisheries training expert in India, Pakistan, Korea (as Project Manager), Peru, Indonesia and Mexico. Mr. Barraclough had served as Project Manager and Rural Institutions Officer in Chile.
<section>4</section>
IV. Procedure of the session
A. Election of the chairman and vice-chairmen of the conference
B. Appointment of the general committee and credentials committee
C. Adoption of the agenda
D. Arrangements for the session and allocation of agenda items
E. Admission of observers
A. Election of the chairman and vice-chairmen of the conference
6. The Council nominated, and the Conference elected I.M. Sinclair (Australia) as Chairman of the Sixteenth Session of the Conference.
7. The Nominations Committee recommended, and the Conference approved the following appointments:
Vice-Chairmen of the Conference
T.P. Singh (India)
A.J. Mair (United States of America)
R. Gobe (Cameroon)
B. Appointment of the general committee and credentials committee
8. The Nominations Committee recommended, and the Conference approved the following appointments:
Members of the General Committee
Colombia Japan
Egypt Nigeria
France Venezuela
Hungary 
Members of the Credentials Committee
Bulgaria Malta
Ecuador Nicaragua
Ethiopia Tunisia
Jordan Vietnam, Rep. of
Malaysia
C. Adoption of the agenda
9. The Conference adopted the Agenda set out in Appendix A to this Report.
D. Arrangements for the session and allocation of agenda items
Establishment of Commissions and Appointment of their Chairmen and Vice-Chairmen
Resolutions Committee of the Conference
Right of Reply
Verbatim Records
Verification of Credential
Voting Rights
Informal Meeting of Non-Governmental Organizations
10. The Conference adopted the arrangements and timetable proposed by the Fifty-Sixth Session of the Council, as amended by the Fifty-Seventh Session of the Council and by the General Committee.
Establishment of Commissions and Appointment of their Chairmen and Vice-Chairmen
11. The Conference concurred with the Council's recommendation to establish three Commissions to consider and report upon Parts I, II ant III of the Agenda.
12. In accordance with Rules VII-1 and XXIV-5(b) of the General Rules of the Organization, the Fifty-Seventh Session of the Council had nominated the following chairmen of the Commissions:
Comission I: Thiam (Senegal)
Comission II: H.J. Kristensen (Denmark)
Comission III: F. Hedina Ascensio (Mexico)
13. The Conference appointed the foregoing officers and, taking into consideration the proposals of the General Committee, in accordance with Rule XIII-2 of the General Rules of the Organization, also appointed:
Vice-Chairmen of Commission I:
J.C. Vignaud (Argentina)
S. Haidar (Lebanon)
Vice-Chairmen of Commission II:
H.O. Semega-Janneh (The Gambia)
S. Sarmiento (Philippines)
Vice-Chairmen of Commission III:
Soageng Amat (Indonesia)
M. Häkkänen (Finland)
14. The Conference agreed with the recommendation of the Fifty-Sixth Session of the Council that it appoint a Rapporteur from Plenary to Commission I, to inform the Commission of the salient points made by ministers and heads of delegation in their general statements. On the proposal of the General Committee, it appointed E.R. Woods (New Zealand) as Rapporteur from Plenary to Commission.
Resolutions Committee of the Conference
15. The Fifty-Sixth Session of the Council had recommended the establishment of a Resolutions Committee similar to that which hat functioned during the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Sessions of the Conference. The Conference concurred with this recommendation, and agreed that this Committee should comprise the Chairman of the Programme Committee, Finance Committee and CCLM, together with four members of the General Committee. The following four members were selected by that Committee:
Egypt Nigeria
Japan Venezuela
16. The Conference agreed to the proposal of the General Committee that the Resolutions Committee should elect a chairman from among its own members.
17. The Conference approved the functions and method of operation of the Resolutions Committee, as well as the criteria for the formulation of resolutions, as set out in document C 71/17-Sup.1.
18. The Conference, however, concurred with the recommendation of the General Committee that the functions to the Resolutions Committee as specified in paragraph 3 of document C 71/17-Sup.1 be amended to read as follows:
"The functions of the Resolutions Committee are to examine all draft resolutions, whatever their origin, before they are submitted to the Commissions or the plenary of the Conference for approval, unless the General Committee decides otherwise, and where desirable to revise or consolidate them, or recommend that the substance be incorporated in the text of the report.''
19. The Conference also decided that the criteria for the formulation of resolutions, as set out in paragraph 4 of the same document, be reviewed by the Council at a future session.
Right of Reply
20. The Conference confirmed the decision taken at its three previous sessions to the effect that, when a delegate wished to reply to criticism of his Government's policy he should preferably do so on the afternoon of the day on which such criticism had been voiced, after all those wishing to participate in the discussion had had an opportunity to do so.
Verbatim Records
21. Under FAO rules, verbatim records were kept of the Conference Plenary and Commission meetings, and the right of delegates to suggest corrections to the records was specifically mentioned (Rule XVIII-2 GRO).
22. The definition of ''corrections", and the procedure for having them inserted in the verbatim records, were the same as those adopted by the Fourteenth Session of the Conference.
Verification of Credential
23. The credentials of delegations of 119 Member Nations, including those of five newly admitted Member Nations, were found in order. The credentials of one delegation were found invalid. Five Member Nations did not send a delegation to the Conference.
24. The credentials of the Permanent Observers to FAO of the Holy See were found satisfactory,
25. The names of the representatives of the international organizations attending the Conference, including the United Nations and Specialized Agencies, were duly deposited as prescribed by Rule III.2 of the General Rules of the Organization.
Voting Rights
26. The Conference recalled that under the terms of Article III-4 of the Constitution, a Member Nation which was in arrears in the payment of its financial contributions to the Organization had no vote in the Conference if the amount of its arrears equalled or exceeded the amount of the contributions due from it for the two preceding calendar years. The Conference might, nevertheless, permit such Member Nations to vote if it was satisfied that the failure to pay was due to conditions beyond the control of such Member Nations.
27. The Conference noted that one Member Nation was in arrears in the amounts referred to above, and had therefore forfeited its right to vote.
Informal Meeting of Non-Governmental Organizations
28. An informal meeting of representatives of international non-governmental organizations admitted as observers to the Sixteenth Session of the Conference was convened on Monday 8 November 1971 under the chairmanship of Tom S. Bavin (International Federation of Plantation, Agricultural and Allied Workers), who had been nominated by the Fifty-Seventh Session of the Council.
E. Admission of observers
Applicants for Membership
Intergovernmental and International Non-Governmental Organizations
Applicants for Membership
29. As was customary, the Director-General had provisionally invited the applicants for membership to be represented by observers until their admission to the Organization hat been decided upon. These applicants were Bahrain, Fiji, Maldives, Oman, Qatar and Swaziland. The Conference confirmed the Director-General's action.
Intergovernmental and International Non-Governmental Organizations
30. The Conference approved the list of international organizations to which the Director General had extended a provisional invitation to the Conference session, ant invited the representatives of these organizations to participate in the activities of the Conference in an observer capacity.
31. The Conference concurred with the recommendation of the General Committee that, in accordance with Rule XVII.3 of the General Rules of the Organization, the International Federation of Agricultural Producers (IFAP) address the Plenary of the Conference, and that statements by the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) and the World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU) be inserted in the verbatim records of the general discussion.
<section>5</section>
V. PART I. Major trends and policy questions in food and agriculture
A. World situation and outlook
B. Perspective study of world agricultural development (PSWAD) and international strategy for the second development decade
C. World food programme
D. Second world food congress
E. Report of the FAO special committee on agrarian reform
A. World situation and outlook
Salient Features of the World Food and Agricultural Situation
Commodity Problems
Fishery Problems
Salient Features of the World Food and Agricultural Situation
a) Salient Features
b) Conference Discussion
c) Contents and Structure of "The State of Food and Agriculture"
a) Salient Features
32. The Conference noted the salient features of the world food and agricultural situation in 1970 and 1971, as reported in The State of Food and Agriculture 1971, and the up-dating information supplied by the Secretariat:
(a) World agricultural production, which in 1970 had risen by 2 percent, was likely to have increased in 1971 by between 4 and 5 percent.
(b) Production in the developing countries had continued to increase throughout the period, though unevenly as between regions and countries. It had, moreover, slowed down somewhat in 1971 compared with 1970, when it had risen by 3 percent. This reflected a smaller increase in Latin America and even certain setbacks in some countries in the Far East. The Near East and Africa, on the other hand, fared better than in 1970, though drought in some parts of both regions had caused serious food shortages.
(c) The progress in food and agricultural production in recent years had been faster in the Far East than in other developing regions, owing largely to the introduction of more advanced cereal production techniques in a number of countries. The Far East, in fact, was the only developing region which had shown a substantial increase in per caput production levels since 1967; in all other developing regions, the per caput production had either remained unchanged or fallen.
(d) The acceleration of cereal production in several countries of the Far East, and in a few developing countries elsewhere, had brought them undoubted benefits. But the basis of this improvement remained narrow, both geographically and in terms of commodities.
(e) In the developed countries, production had on the whole remained stable between 1968 and 1970, largely because of efforts in a number of countries to restrict output in response to the renewed accumulation of surplus stocks. These efforts had subsequently been relaxed, in some countries, following the easing of the stock situation in 1970. This, together with generally favourable weather, had led to a steep increase, by some 7-8 percent, in the agricultural production of the developed market economy countries in 1971. These developments showed the ability of the developed countries to make fairly flexible adjustments in their production in response to changes in the demand/supply situation, but were also evidence of the strength of the various factors in the developed countries, such as advanced technology, legislative actions and policy, supply management, and affluence, which in combination tended to push production up. While the continued rapid technological
progress in their agriculture was a positive feature from the global point of view, it tended to restrict the opportunities for other countries particularly in developing regions, to expand their production of certain commodities for export.
(f) The value of agriculturalexports had risen unusually steeply in 1970, and, although those from developed countries had risen most, a number of developing countries too, especially in Latin America and Africa, had made substantial gains. The increase had, however, been due mainly to short term factors which by 1971 had largely spent themselves. A return to a slower rate of growth was therefore likely to have taken place in the current year. Even in 1970, moreover, the international prices of manufactured goods had risen faster than those of primary agricultural products exported by developing countries.
(g) The interacting changes in production and trade in 1970 and 1971 further stressed the importance of agricultural adjustments being made within an agreed international framework with a view to better ascertaining the direction in which adjustments were likely to be needed, increasing stability of agricultural prices and production, and providing opportunities for development of production patterns reflecting comparative advantages. The short and medium-term prospects for dynamic adjustments were, however, reduced by the unpromising outlook for concessional development aid, despite the increased commitments of a number of smaller donor countries; by the recent convulsions in the international monetary economy, and the related United States temporary import surcharge; by the possible deflationary effect on other industrial countries of the trade adjustments the United States was seeking; and by the prospective enlargement of the European Economic Community.
b) Conference Discussion
33. The Conference was in broad agreement with the assessment of the situation. In particular, many delegates drew attention to the fact that, while some progress had been made in a number of countries with the introduction of a more advanced cereal production technology, the per caput level of output in developing regions had generally risen too slowly, if at all. Much greater efforts than hitherto were therefore necessary, by both the developing countries themselves, and the developed countries, as well as the international community, if agricultural production growth was to be accelerated to the growth rate of a minimum of 4 percent a year envisaged under the Second UN Development Decade. Priority areas singled out included provision of inputs, investment in irrigation and other land improvement, increased credit to farmers, improved and expanded education, and research. With regard to research the Conference noted the recent initiatives by FAO together with UNDP and
IBRD, to sponsor international research efforts, and the bilateral support to research by some countries. Attention was also drawn to the important role of population policies in efforts to solve the food problem of developing countries.
34. Several delegates stressed that the basic development goal was not merely to increase production, but also to advance the social welfare of the population, and better guarantee social justice and human dignity. Some delegates pointed out that, unless carefully implemented, plans for technological improvement in agriculture could (for instance through inappropriate mechanization of operations) result in increased unemployment and further maldistribution of incomes and wealth.
35. Many delegates thought it unlikely that the developing countries would be able to make the required effort in this area, and more generally to reach the objectives spelled out in the strategy for the Second Development Decade, unless more development assistance were provided for the purpose by the developed nations. In this connexion, attention was drawn to the loan conditions of some international financing institutions, which made their lending activities less suitable for agricultural development. A few delegates stressed in particular the need to provide aid in the form of agricultural requisites.
36. Attention was drawn by some delegates to the fact that natural calamities remained an ever present threat and an obstacle to economic growth. One delegate proposed that FAO should examine the possibility of establishing an emergency fund, or a system of agricultural insurance on an international basis.
37. In taking note of the reduction and even disappearance of surplus stocks of some agricultural products-though not rice-in the developed countries, a number of delegations pointed out the paradox whereby many developed countries had to cut down their output, while the majority of developing nations had difficulty in sufficiently accelerating their agricultural production. While stressing the importance of food aid, some delegates also mentioned the importance of using it in a way that did not hurt the growth of agricultural production in the recipient countries. One delegate drew attention to the positive step represented by the Council resolution on usual marketing requirements and hoped it would find support among Member Nations. Delegations from some developed countries said that, partly as a result of spontaneous economic and social changes, partly in response to policy measures taken by their governments, the volume of their agricultural production had ceased or was
about to cease growing. Some delegations also stressed the problems their governments faced in trying to stabilize production, because of the heavy costs involved and the complicated social and economic considerations which had to be taken into account. One delegation referred to the readjustment measures introduced recently by his country, in consequence of the marked deterioration of the market situation of some of the country's principal export commodities.
38. As regards developments in trade, a number of delegations stated that the recent developments made clear that the basic trends and tendencies in world agricultural trade had not changed. This was particularly true as regards the tendency for the prices of agricultural products to deteriorate relative to those of manufactured goods, including agricultural machinery, fertilizers, pesticides and other manufactured inputs. Intensified efforts to solve the trade problems were therefore necessary. In this connexion, some delegates expressed a view that the commodity-by-co city approach to trade problems was likely to remain the most effective. Other delegates drew attention to the potential benefits which developing countries would derive from intensified trade among themselves, particularly within regional integration schemes. Some delegates pointed out that meat production was a promising potential export industry in many developing countries, but its progress was hampered
by slow progress in the eradication of animal diseases, by import restrictions on grounds of meat hygiene, and by lack of international action to promote meat-production and exports from developing countries. The potential contribution of forest products exports was also stressed. Delegations from some land-locked countries drew attention to the special problems created by their geographical position, as regards both exports and imports, including those of agricultural requisites.
39. There was a general feeling that the closely linked problems of production and trade could be best solved in an international framework under which countries were better able to take account of the repercussions of their production decisions on each other, to plan their production and trade policies within a longer time perspective, and share the burden of adjustment more equitably. Support was expressed for the Director-General's proposal to make International Agricultural Adjustment a major theme of the Seventeenth Session of the Conference, to be held in 1973. Some delegations drew attention to the forthcoming Third UNCTAD Conference in 1972, and to the need for FAO to prepare carefully for it so as to he able to contribute to its success.
40. In a reference to the recent new elements of uncertainty in international trade, the view was expressed that developing countries should be more closely involved in the negotiations which were being carried out with a view to overhauling the international monetary system. Some delegated from both developed and developing countries voiced their concern about the potentially harmful impact on their trade of the enlargement of the European Economic Community (EEC). Delegates from present and prospective member countries of the EEC demonstrated that EEC was a dynamic trading area whose agricultural imports from outside countries had increased rapidly and expressed their conviction that this increase would continue. Other delegates claimed, however, that EEC imports from developing countries had not increased as much as those from developed countries and therefore there was need to facilitate larger imports from these countries. Attention was drawn to the negotiations now in
course with the Latin American governments on relations with EEC.
c) Contents and Structure of "The State of Food and Agriculture"
41. The Conference noted that since 1969 The State of Food and Agriculture had been prepared in two versions, a preliminary one which reached governments relatively early in the year, and a final one which was more up-to-date on developments in the current year and contained more definite information on the preceding year for reference purposes. It was agreed that these arrantements functioned well and should be continued. The Conference also noted with satisfaction the improvements in the quality of the report in recent years, as regards the timeliness and width of its coverage, and the analytical contents. In particular, the Conference welcomed the inclusion for the first time in the final version of the The State of Food and Agriculture 1971 of preliminary indicators of the level of agricultural production in the current year in each of the regions and the world as a whole.
42. Suggestions were made for increased emphasis on a number of aspects, including domestic agricultural policies, in particular structural policies; levels of consumption in individual countries; levels of and changes in farm incomes; rural employment and unemployment; relations between product and input prices, and national and international prices; terms of trade, both internationally and between the agricultural and other sectors; share of agriculture in GDP and population; and agricultural production inputs, including sail improvement. It was also suggested that, in order to throw light on the sources of supply, analyses should be prepared showing levels of per caput consumption in different countries and regions, together with information on production and trade, including trade within regions and bating areas. It was felt that the coverage of China should be expanded and improved in the future. As regards the structure of the report, some delegates suggested that it
might be useful to start the report with a section dealing with the various factors which condition the progress of production, rather than with a report on changes in production itself. Some delegates also suggested that more emphasis should be given to international trade, including data on its volume, and to the relationships between changes in production and trade.
43. It was recognized that, in order to improve the report without making it too long, the various suggestions would have to be scrutinized carefully so as not to overburden the secretariat and in order to keep the report from growing too long. The secretariat note that, while it was anxious to improve and expand the report further, it would be able to introduce new material only gradually. At the same time, it also informed the Conference that several measures were already being taken in such a direction, particularly in view of the need to prepare for the review and appraisal of progress during the Second Development Decade.
Commodity Problems
a) Salient Features in International Commodity Situation
b) FAA's Role in International Commodity Problems
a) Salient Features in International Commodity Situation
44. The Conference noted the salient features of the international commodity situation during the biennium 1970-71, in the light of the Report of the Forty-Sixth Session of the Committee on Commodity Problems. In 1970, world agricultural trade had increased by $4 000 million in value in respect to the previous year, i.e. by about 13 percent. This growth compared with an increase of 3 percent per annum in the previous decade. The increase was attributable to a very unusual combination of factors and was largely concentrated in temperate zone commodities. The data available for the year 1971 indicated that the rate of progress witnessed in 1970 would not be maintained in 1971. Moreover, the expansion of agricultural trade in 1970 had benefited the developed more than the developing countries, and the latter saw their share in total trade continue to diminish. The outlook for 1972 was also clouded by further uncertainties deriving from the current monetary crisis and the
instability of the major world currencies, while, in the longer term agricultural trade could, in the view of many delegates, be affected adversely by the continuation or accentuation of existing difficulties and by the enlargement of regional integration arrangements in developed countries.
45. The Conference also noted the main findings of recently published commodity projections over the period 1970-1980. These projections suggested that world agricultural trade was not likely to grow very rapidly if the difficulties facing agriculture continued to be aggravated by current protectionist policies and if no action was taken to reverse current trends. In the absence of these measures, the increase in foreign exchange earnings accruing to the developing countries from agricultural exports would at best be modest. This, in turn, could adversely affect their plans for accelerated growth. For most commodities, the longer term outlook pointed to excess productive capacity in relation to market demand, However, the food situation in developing countries should improve by 1980, but the rate of improvement would be low, and in many developing countries the average levels of calorie intake would still remain below recommended nutritional standards.
46. The Conference noted that, the annual increase in agricultural production in the developing countries that can be derived from these commodity projections fell short of the objective of a minimum 4 percent growth envisaged in the strategy for the decade. Even with this lower rate of growth, there was a possibility that surpluses would develop and agricultural trade would fail to reach the objectives of the decade with respect to the growth of export earnings. This finding of the projection study in the view of many delegates underlined the need for agricultural adjustment measures in order to attain the objectives of the Second Development Decade. Some delegates also drew attention to the additional problems of growing debt burden, high interest rates and a possible contraction in the flow of aid to developing countries.
47. The Conference agreed that agricultural commodity trade was of crucial importance for the economic development of the developing countries, since many of them would continue to be dependent on these exports for the greater part of their export earnings. Growth in exports continued to be limited by existing policies and by tariff and non-tariff barriers, subsidization of competing exports from developed countries and competition from synthetics and substitutes. These factors contributed also to fluctuating and, for some commodities, declining prices, while the terms of trade for exports of agricultural commodities deteriorated because of rising prices of imported manufactured products.
b) FAA's Role in International Commodity Problems
48. The Conference agreed that FAO had an important role to play in the identification of international commodity trade problems and in the consideration of possible measures for dealing with these problems. It also generally agreed that, while more general measures should be explored, the main approach to commodity problems in FAO should continue to be on a commodity by commodity basis. Some delegates pointed out that the future work by FAO on world agricultural adjustment would supply an adequate framework for this action commodity by commodity because of the relations between production and consumption and trade. Other delegates pointed out that regional and sub-regional frames were also desirable in some cases.
49. The Conference agreed that for several commodities problems remained serious and that it was necessary for FAO to intensify its efforts in assisting to solve them and to contribute to the success of the strategy for the Second Development Decade. The main machinery available to the Organization for performing this role was the Committee on Commodity Problems (CCP). The Conference agreed that this Committee was a valuable forum for the consideration of commodity problems. The Conference felt, however, that the Committee should become more action oriented and should within its competence examine the possibilities of suggesting concrete measures and solutions that should emerge from the reviews and studies, while making the best use of FAO resources by concentrating on products presenting severe problems for the countries affected.
50. The Conference decided that the CCP should carry out a study-in-depth of its subsidiary bodies in order to abolish those bodies whose existence was no longer justifies and, if requested by governments, to create new organs which should be more effective in terms of policy recommendations, or to organize ad hoc consultations where the need for standing machinery was considered unnecessary. This analysis should take place in the light of the criteria which the CCP had adopted for the establishment, supervision and duration of its subsidiary bodies. The frequency of the session of the groups should depend on the problems involved and the possibilities of obtaining practical solutions.
51. The Committee on Commodity Problems should give priority to activities that would assist in the development of commodity arrangements or the improvement of existing ones. The Conference stressed that in this task the Committee should also seek more systematic coordination and cooperation with other bodies such as those of UNCTAD and GATT.
52. The Conference noted the satisfactory development of cooperation between the FAO secretariat and those of other bodies interested in commodity questions. It considered that this cooperation should be developed further. Some delegates, however, pointed out that there was also a need for coordination within national delegations attending meetings of different bodies dealing with commodity questions, with a view to ensuring the best utilization of existing machinery and avoiding overlapping and duplication of work. The Conference noted that there was a complementarily between the competence of FAO in international commodity matters and that of other bodies and that progress towards the achievement of practical results would be facilitated if the specialized competence of each organization could be brought to bear in the search for specific solutions.
53. The Conference noted the progress made within UNCTAD towards the adoption of a Generalized System of Preferences in favour of imports from the developing countries. However, some major developed countries had not yet implemented this arrangement and the Scheme was generally directed towards the granting of preferences on manufactured products while most processed and unprocessed agricultural commodities were not included in preferential schemes so far announced by governments.
54. The Conference recognized the importance of trade in agricultural products for the success of the social and economic objectives of the Second Development Decade. It recorded its appreciation of the efforts made by the CCP and its subsidiary bodies in tackling some of the commodity problems facing developing countries. It recognized the importance of the production and trade problems faced by developing countries in the field of agriculture. At the same time, the Conference reaffirmed its support for General Assembly Resolution 2626 (XXV), setting out the strategy for the Second Development Decade and circulated as document C 71/16, and the policy measures therein relating to these matters. The Conference, having in mind the general objectives and the programme of work of FAO, expressed its confidence that the Third UNCTAD to be held in Santiago early in 1972 would address itself to these subjects, especially those mentioned in paragraphs 21 to 38 of the Strategy
attached to the above Resolution affecting the exports of developing countries, including the consideration of expanding the Generalized System of Preferences.
Fishery Problems
55. The Conference discussed the world situation and outlook of world fisheries, including their present status and the main problems and prospects affecting their future.
56. While expressing appreciation of the content and presentation of the document before it, the Conference felt that the policy discussion on the subject would have gained if it had had before it the relevant sections of the reports of the sessions of the Committee on Fisheries (COFI) held in the inter-Conference period.
57. The Conference noted with satisfaction that FAO was directing its efforts at the development of world fisheries, with particular attention to the needs of developing countries. It also expressed satisfaction at the way in which COFI was playing an important role in ensuring that FAO was the leading intergovernmental body in encouraging the rational harvesting of food from the oceans and inland waters, in accordance with the views set forth by the Conference at its Thirteenth Session (November December 1965). It noted in particular that the Committee had made it possible to formulate policies and programmes that met the requirements of both developing and developed countries, had provided a global forum for the review of world fishery problems and had recommended appropriate action, which in many cases had been followed up by governments and intergovernmental bodies.
58. Noting that the world fish catch had reached a new peak of 69.3 million metric tons in 1970, the Conference recognized that certain disturbing features of fishery exploitation and utilization had nevertheless remained in evidence. These related to the comparatively small share of many developing countries in world fisheries, the effect of long-range fishing operations of certain countries with developed fisheries, and the generally increasing need for resource management, particularly of stocks exploited by a number of nations.
59. The Conference emphasized that, with its integrated Department of Fisheries, FAO was the appropriate and leading agency executing an extensive field programme in the fisheries sector, reflecting the varying needs of Member Nations and mobilizing technical assistance funds from a number of sources. The importance of UNDP funds was noted, but it was recognized that bilateral assistance programmes had a vital complementary role and could in many cases effectively be channelled through FAO or be applied within the framework of regional programmes so as to increase the impact of external assistance. It was noted that a number of governments were already channelling bilateral assistance in fisheries through FAO and that this trend deserved to be encouraged.
60. The Conference agreed that the particular needs of fishery development on an international level, stemming from the international nature of the resources, interests of developing and developed countries and the requirements for resources management, were aptly served by programmes such as the International Indian Ocean Fishery Survey and Development Programme adopted by the Indian Ocean Fishery Commission (IOFC) and being implemented with the support of the UNDP. The Conference noted that programmes based on the same principles were being developed for the Eastern Central Atlantic and for the South China Sea, that developing countries in these regions were being kept fully informed and are participating in their formulation; it urged that timely and adequate support be made available by multilateral agencies and by governments of developed countries directly. The Conference was of the opinion that these programmes should clearly identify the problems and prospects
applicable to individual countries concerned and should follow an integrated approach covering all aspects of fishery development. It considered, moreover, that, if developing countries in the areas concerned were to benefit fully from these programmes, there should be a corresponding development of their technological capabilities. The programmes should, therefore, give adequate emphasis to training and dissemination of expertise..
61. The establishment of the Committee for Inland Fisheries of Africa by the FAO Council at its Fifty-Sixth Session was noted with satisfaction. The Conference urged all African Member Nations to join the Committee so that its activities could effectively commence in 1972 to meet their needs. The Conference agreed on the desirability of the Committee playing a central and coordinating role with regard to the development and management of the fisheries of each international inland water body.
62. The Conference emphasized that problems of development and management could not be separated in promoting the rational growth of international fisheries. It endorsed the views expressed by COFI at its Sixth Session, regarding the role that FAO could appropriately and competently assume in the statistical and scientific assessment of the state of the stocks, and the technical assistance it could provide at the national and regional level in assessing the need for regulatory measures and the forms these might take. It agreed that regional arrangements, both within and without the framework of FAO, represented the most viable solution for the rational utilization of fishery resources at the present time and expressed the opinion that their strengthening for greater effectiveness should, therefore, be of high priority.
63. The Conference further endorsed the views of COFI that that body could play a valuable role in keeping under review the status of utilization of fishery resources throughout the world, identifying areas where management action was needed, assessing the effectiveness of regulatory bodies and promoting action where required. With this in mind, the Conference recommended that the Committee review its ability to discharge all the responsibilities it was likely to be called upon to discharge, including those that might arise from the forthcoming or proposed United Nations Conferences on the Human Environment and on the Law of the Sea.
64. The Conference noted with satisfaction the coming into effect of the International Convention for the South East Atlantic Fisheries, urged signatories of the Convention who had not ratified or accepted it to do so as soon as possible and recommended the activation of the Commission at an early date.
65. Noting the work initiated by a number of FAO regional fishery bodies for the furtherance of resource management, the Conference expressed its appreciation of the work of the Indian Ocean Fishery Commission and the Indo-Pacific Fisheries Council to promote the management of tuna stocks in their respective areas, urged that it be continued and expressed the hope that non-member nations would have an opportunity to contribute to this work on the basis of their fishing experience in the area.
66. The Conference expressed satisfaction at the prompt and comprehensive response of FAO to the concern of African nations at the intensive exploitation of fishery resources in waters off their continent. These nations felt that they did not benefit sufficiently either as fishermen or as consumers of fish. The Consultation with the African States on the Conservation of Fishery Resources and on the Control of Fishing in Africa had assisted these countries substantially, not only in determining the present state of the fisheries and its characteristics but also in shaping their own policies with regard to it. The Conference noted with interest the views of CECAF and the Consultation that the developed countries, particularly those fishing in the area, had a responsibility to assist and cooperate in the development of all sectors of the African fishing economy.
67. The Conference noted that exploitation into offshore waters sometimes resulted in depleting fish stocks in coastal waters which were the mainstay of artisanal fisheries. It recognized that the large number of artisanal fishermen in most parts of the world deserved special help and their needs for a sustainable fishery should be given particular attention.
68. The Conference noted that some 40 percent of the world fish catch was presently used for the manufacture of fishmeal for animal feeding and that in some cases the proportion so utilized was as high as 95 percent. While recognizing that certain species could, at the present time, not be utilized for direct human consumption, and that use for fishmeal led to protein consumption by hymens at a later stage in the food chain, the Conference agreed that two aspects deserved attention; firstly, preference should be given as far as practicable, to utilization of fish for direct consumption by man, and fisheries for fishmeal should not be carried on at the cost of human consumption; secondly research should be pressed forward to develop processing techniques in order to upgrade the use of catches now used for fishmeal. The Conference stressed that such research was costly and therefore most appropriately undertaken by national governments as well as by research institutions and
commercial interests mainly in developed countries. In this regard, it noted with satisfaction FAA's collaboration in this field with the International Association of Fish Meal Manufacturers.
69. The Conference emphasized the importance of aquaculture as a potential source of an increased fish supply for human food. It noted that techniques for the cultivation of a number of species, particularly in estuarine and inland waters, had been developed and could be applied to produce food fish of high market value.
70. The Conference also noted the existence of certain fish stocks which were so far underutilized, 85 well as certain species not utilized for reasons of technological deficiencies in harvesting and processing such as the Antartic krill. It urged FAO to take the lead in promoting resource surveys and research to assist member nations in exploiting them.
71. The Conference expressed its deep concern regarding the dangers of marine pollution and its effects on living resources and on fishing. It valued the activities of FAO in this field, such as the Technical Conference on Marine Pollution and its Effects on Living Resources and on Fishing, (December 1970); its collaboration with WHO in the joint Codex Alimentarius Committee on Fish and Fish Products, to consider Marine Contaminants; its sponsorship, with other United Nations agencies, of the Joint Group of Experts on the Scientific Aspects of Marine Pollution (GESAMP); its collaboration with other agencies in the preparations for the forthcoming United Nations Conference on the Human Environment; and its collaboration with and support to the Inter-governmental Oceanographic Commission which provided useful joint machinery for considering the scientific aspects of marine pollution and of other subjects of relevance to fisheries. The Conference recommended that FAO continue
to play a leading role in all international discussions and action concerned with marine pollution and its control for the protection of living resources of the oceans and inland waters. It urged that FAO collaborate closely with the Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization (IMCO) but stressed that, whereas IMCO was more concerned with the means of pollution, particularly by sea-going vessels, and with ways to control it, FAO was clearly responsible for work on its effects on the living resources of the seas and inland waters.
72. The Conference welcomed the mandate of FAO and its Committee on Fisheries to assist in the preparations for the UN Conference on the Law of the Sea, tentatively scheduled to be held in 1973, in accordance with the Resolution 2570 C of the United Nations General Assembly. It urged that every effort be made to provide the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor beyond the Limits of National Jurisdiction, with information of a scientific and technical nature relating to fisheries in response to requests by that Committee. It noted the appreciation of the Sea-Bed Committee at the prompt preparation by FAO of information submitted at its Second Session in July-August 1971. The Conference noted that further material was being prepared as time and resources permitted, with the assistance of national experts and institutions and would be submitted as appropriate to governments before being finalized and to the Committee on Fisheries. It requested the
Secretariat to circulate this documentation to Member Nations so as to assist them in briefing their delegations to future sessions of the Sea-Bed Committee and urged Member Nations to ensure that fishery experts were included in these delegations.
73. The Conference emphasized the paramount importance of fishery education and training in all sectors and at all levels. It noted with concern the alarming waste of fishery products caused by the lack of facilities for, or inadequate methods of preservation, storage, transport or distribution. It emphasized the useful functions that FAO could fulfil in all fields of research by acting as a clearing house for technical information, promoting specialized training and the application of science and technology to all aspects of fish stock evaluation, improvement and protection of the aquatic environment, production, processing and marketing and by providing assistance to introduce appropriate methods and equipment.
B. Perspective study of world agricultural development (PSWAD) and international strategy for the second development decade
Perspective Study of World Agricultural Development (PSWAD)
Agricultural Adjustment
74. The Conference discussed the above item in the light of the aspirations of the Second Development Decade, of Resolution 1/69 of the Fifteenth Session of the Conference and of the Director-General's proposal that agricultural adjustment should be a major theme of the 1973 session.
75. The Conference accepted that the objectives and strategy of the Second Development Decade, as adopted by the General Assembly in UN Resolution 2626 (XXV), provided the common and appropriate broad framework for national policies and for relevant FAO activities. The specific Second Development Decade targets for agriculture were an average growth rate of not less than four percent a year in the agricultural production of developing countries as well as improvements in such areas as international trade, employment and nutrition. The Conference agreed that there were reasonable prospects of achieving these goals, provided at least three prerequisites were met, namely (a) acceptance by the developing countries that the prime responsibility lay with them; (b) provision of adequate aid from developed countries, and (c) creation of conditions which allowed developing countries to increase their exports dynamically. The Conference also stressed the great importance of the
application of science and technology to agriculture in developing countries.
<section>6</section>
Perspective Study of World Agricultural Development (PSWAD)
76. The Conference agreed that FAO had an important role in the implementation and evaluation of the progress towards the Second Development Decade targets and goals relating to or arising from the agricultural sector. Recalling its Resolution 1/69, the Conference re-emphasized that the Perspective Study of World Agricultural Development should continue to provide a useful instrument and a reference framework for FAA's contribution to the objectives and targets of the Second Development Decade.
77. The Conference endorsed the interpretation given to PSWAD by the Council at its Fifty Sixth Session, as a continuing process, drawing basically upon the headquarters and field work of the Organization, to facilitate examination of policy alternatives relevant for perspective planning by governments, the main policy implications being brought together periodically to provide integrated, global perspectives. The fundamental aims of such a continuing Perspective Study would be:
(a) To provide a continuing analysis of economic, social and technological changes so as to enable governments to take into account in their plans or strategies the implication of these changes;
(b) To facilitate FAA's contribution to Second Development Decade goals by assisting countries in the attainment of these targets and to assist governments in the periodical appraisal of progress; and
(c) To facilitate-in cooperation with other agencies-the solution of longer-term problems of agriculture through greater harmonization of national policies in a global perspective.
78. The Conference expressed general appreciation of the Director-General's efforts in adapting the work along the lines laid down in Resolution 1/69.
79. The Conference took note of the Director-General's proposals for the work to be done for 1973 and 1975. While provisionally approving in principle these proposals, delegates considered that more information would be needed to appraise them adequately. The methodology of the work would also have to be spelled out more clearly. The Perspective Study would be oriented towards providing the material needed by the 1973 Conference for its discussion in 1973 of agricultural adjustment. The 1975 report would go further in providing a global perspective as requested in Resolution 1/69 and would be preceded by a mid-term Second Development Decade review and appraisal of the agricultural sector by FAO in 1974, it being understood that in considering the selection of specific studies for the 1975 output, the Director-General would give high priority to the cereals-feeds-livestock complex.
80. Some delegates from the Latin American Region expressed appreciation of the work done under the Perspective Study in certain countries of the region and suggested that similar work be undertaken in as many Central American and Caribbean countries as possible. The Conference, noting that resources would be available, agreed that this should be done.
81. Some delegates expressed misgivings about the adequacy of resources for the large volume of work involved in preparing the studies proposed for 1973 and 1975. The Conference was assured, however, that it was intended to accomplish these tasks on a selective basis within the budgeted resources. Delegates from developing countries drew attention to the importance of timeliness. If the studies were to help countries to reach the objectives of the Second Development Decade, these studies must be available early in that decade. The perspective studies should be as practical as possible, and should relate long-term perspectives to country planning and programming with the aim of adjusting the projections of the specific development characteristics of each country. While fuller use should be made of advanced methods of analysis, such as econometric projections, models and relevant work already done in FAO and other agencies, it should be borne in mind that agricultural
development included human and social aspects as well as economic and technological ones.
Agricultural Adjustment
82. The Conference endorsed the Director-General's proposal that international agricultural adjustment should be one of the major themes of the Seventeenth Session of the Conference in 1973. The Conference emphasized that adjustments in national policies, keeping in view the international implications of such policies, were necessary and desirable; but the success of such adjustments would depend on international cooperation and on the exercise of political will on the part of the countries concerned.
83. Varying views were expressed about the scope and purpose of international agricultural adjustments and the role of FAO in this context. It was agreed that there was a need to spell out more clearly the objectives to be reached in this process. It was recognized that agricultural adjustment entailed a wide range of economic and social problems which could not be ignored. The Conference also agreed that the concept of agricultural adjustments was broader than trade, although trade issues would occupy an important part of the work on adjustments. The Conference agreed that international agricultural adjustments should have as their primary objective the adoption of measures which would meet the special requirements of the developing countries and that these should be viewed in the context of the international strategy for the Second Development Decade.
84. The Conference welcomed the statement by the Director-General in his opening address to Plenary to the effect that he did not "envisage FAO acting as some kind of arbiter prescribing specific adjustment policies for individual member countries", and that it should not "turn itself into a general forum for economic and trade negotiations after the manner of UNCTAD or GATT''. The Conference recognized that, in view of the complex interrelationship of the production, consumption and trade aspects of the adjustment process and of FAA's competence in all aspects of agriculture, FAO had an important role to play in the process of international agricultural adjustment.
85. There was general agreement that the moat fruitful approach for the adjustment problems at the international level would be on a commodity-by-commodity basis. However, it was becoming more apparent that attention would also have to be given to problems of interrelated commodities and to the effects of technological developments. Attention was repeatedly drawn to the need to give developing countries greater market access, even though this alone would not solve all trade problems. Improved access implied a gradual reduction in the high levels of agricultural protection. Several delegations pointed out the long term nature of adjustment problems and stressed that any adaptation of the agricultural sectors of high-income countries which might be needed to permit a substantial increase in their agricultural imports from developing countries encountered difficult social, political, technical and economic constraints.
86. Most delegates felt it would be premature, and perhaps unnecessary, to establish an advisory panel of experts as suggested in document C 71/41. The Director-General could engage consultants if required, and retain responsibility for their work, but an advisory panel, if one were to be established, should be intergovernmental in nature. The role of existing FAO bodies in their respective sphere was stressed by several delegations.
87. The Conference emphasized the importance of very close cooperation between the FAO secretariat and member countries and other international bodies, and appreciated the contribution made by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA) in their response to the Director-General's invitation to comment on the implications of the Indicative World Plan for their member countries. In addition to throwing further light on the scope for and problems of agricultural adjustment, these reports were an instance of the kind of fruitful cooperation which should be continuously sought by the FAO secretariat with international bodies as well as with governments.
C. World food programme
88. The Conference had before it a proposed resolution submitted by the FAO Council at its Fifty-Seventh Session concerning the establishment of a pledging target of $340 million for the World Food Programme (WFP) during the period 1973-74, The Conference wee aware that a similar resolution had been approved by the ECOSOC and submitted to the United Nations General Assembly.
89. The Conference heard a statement from the Executive Director setting forth the reasons why the pledging target had been established at that minimal level. There had been a sharp change in the economic and social climate. The pace of economic affairs had slackened, international trade was threatened with protectionist tendencies and, while some major donor countries had stepped up their aid, others have cut it back, amid questioning of the effectiveness of aid. The crisis in balances of payments and in international monetary affairs had led to calls for a fairer sharing of burdens, including that of providing aid. Support for multilateral aid had become very uneven amongst donor countries. Some donors who had formerly supported the Programme had not yet made pledges for the current biennium. Hence the Programme had been unable to expand as recommended by the General Assembly. WFP commitments had fallen from $328 million in 1969 to $196 million in 1970 and $85 million in
1971 Given the present levels of pledges and targets, commitments could hardly be expected to rise substantially in 1972.
90. The Executive Director said that a realistic appraisal of the current situation had led WFP to the belief that it might have to resign itself to a commitment level of about $150 million yearly, a pathetically inadequate multilateral response to the growing needs of human under-nourishment and unemployment. Another main problem underlying the food aid situation was that in some cases major food surpluses were not being used for human feeding. Despite General Assembly recommendations for increased food aid, in Asia rice surpluses were often being held until they deteriorated, and in Europe very large quantities of dried skim milk were being fed to livestock. With little increased expenditure by the governments concerned, these surpluses could be used to meet aid target. of the Second Development Decade.
91. The Executive Director did not expect policies to change overnight, but emphasized that, if a fraction of such surpluses could be transferred to WFP, benefits to development and human welfare would be very considerable. He urged the Conference to adopt the resolution as a minimal pledging target for the 1973-74 biennium and hoped member governments would make timely preparations for the next pledging conference, which was expected to be held in New York at the end of January 1972.
92. A large number of delegates expressed strong support for the World Food Programme and noted its growth and progress. The Conference approved the acceptance of the $340 million target, although many delegates would have preferred a target of $400 million AS originally proposed to the IGC by the Executive Director. Most delegates noted that pledges so far for the current biennium amounted to only about two thirds of the $300 million target and urged those donors who had not already made pledges to do so and those who had done so to increase them whenever possible. Many delegates mentioned that the Programme had to fulfil important tasks in the field of development ant some delegates suggested ways in which the Programme might be made less dependent upon surpluses of a temporary nature, It was pointed out that fluctuations in the amounts of resources available to WFP prevented projects from being carried out as planned. In this connexion, the Conference noted the importance
for the Programme of planning the use of its resources on a medium-term basis. It was, therefore, suggested that Member Nations consider indicating at the next Pledging Conference the probable size of their contribution for the biennium 1975-76. Many delegates noted the shortage of proteins in commodities available to WFP and made a strong appeal to donor countries to consider increasing the protein content of their commodity pledges. Some delegates suggested that WFP should not be treated as a means of disposal of surpluses but as a part of multilateral development aid.
93. Delegates offered various suggestions for solving these problems. It was suggested that WFP, in view of its experience and success in the handling of food and in view of the existence of surpluses in many countries, could cooperate in the collecting of information about surpluses and shortages among nations and take action to facilitate the exchange of such surpluses as needed. This activity could produce for WFP a certain percentage of these surpluses to be added to its development resources. The Conference requested the Intergovernmental Committee (IGC) to examine this suggestion along with related proposals that were already under consideration by the IGC.
94. Many delegates promised that their countries' pledges would continue, and in many cases increase, in the coming pledging period. Several delegates said that their countries would make further contributions to WFP through the Food Aid Convention. Some delegates also drew attention to the bright side of the picture and noted a substantial growth in the Programme since its early years.
95. It was suggested to recommend the use of computer system where possible for better handling of the distribution of WFP commodities. Some countries offered to contribute by their experience in this field for the benefit of other countries.
96. In summing up the discussion, the Executive Director said, on the question of cooperation with other United Nations organizations, that the Programme and the IGC had made major efforts in this direction since the Programme was established. Thus, the Programme was primarily represented in developing countries not by its own officials but by the UNDP Resident Representatives. WFP also had not set up its own group to give technical advice on labour, health and other technical aspects of protects, but had relied on the competence of the appropriate UN technical agencies, thus maintaining a low level of overhead costs for WFP operations. As to his appraisal of the resources situation, he had referred to the fact that, while the Programme had shown its ability to handle far larger resources, these resources had not continued to grow lately as they had done over the first eight years of WFP's operation.
97. The Conference then adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 2/71
Target for WFP Pledges for the Period 1973
THE CONFERENCE,
Recalling the provisions of Resolution 4/65 that the World Food Programme is to be reviewed before each pledging conference,
Recalling the provisions of operative paragraph 4 of Resolution 3/69 that, subject to the reviewed mentioned above, the next pledging conference should be convened at the latest early in 1972, at which time governments should be invited to pledge contributions for 1973 and 1974 with a view to reaching such a target as may be then recommended by the General Assembly and the Conference of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
Noting that the review of the Programme was undertaken by the Intergovernmental Committee of the World Food Programme at its Nineteenth Session and by the FAD Council at its Fifty-Sixth Session,
Having considered Resolution 1/57 of the FAO Council as well as the recommendations of the Intergovernmental Committee,
Recognizing the value of multilateral food aid as implemented by WFP since its inception and the necessity for continuing its action both as a form of capital investment and for meeting emergency food needs,
1. Establishes for the two years 1973 and 1974 a target for voluntary contributions of $ 340 million, of which not lees than one third should be in cash and/or services, and expresses the hope that such resources will be augmented by substantial additional contributions from other sources in recognition of the prospective volume of sound project requests and the capacity of the Programme to operate at a higher level;
2. Urges States Members of the United Nations and Member Nations and Associate Members of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, to make every effort to ensure the full attainment of the target;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the Director-General of FAO to convence a pledging conference for this purpose at United Nations Headquarters early in 1972;
4. Decides that, subject to the review provided for in Resolution 4/65, the following pledging conference at which governments should be invited to pledge contributions for 1975 and 1976 with a view to reaching such a target as may be then recommended by the General Assembly and the Conference of the Food and Agriculture Organization, should be convened at the laterst early in 1974.
(Adopted, 24 November 1971)
D. Second world food congress
98. The Conference considered a progress report on action arising out of the Second World Food Congress, held in the Hague from 16 to 30 June 1970.
99. The Conference expressed its appreciation of the opportunity the Congress had provided for bringing together a large number of people from all over the world to discuss, in their individual capacities, the problems of underdevelopment.
100. The Conference recognized that the mayor significance of the Congress was the emphasis which had been placed on the humanization of the development process, and which had given a new dimension to the development debate and established a constructive strategy for the seventies. The Conference requested the Director-General to continue to give due attention to this emphasis, as well as to the other Congress recommendations, in the programme of the Organization.
101. The Conference stressed the importance of the participation of women in the Congress and the valuable contribution made by young people to its deliberations, and urged the Director General to take the necessary steps whereby the participation of women and youth in the development process could be maintained and enlarged.
102. The Conference noted the positive cooperation the Organization had achieved with nongovernmental and professional organizations, largely through the Freedom from Hunger Campaign/Action for Development, and requested the Director-General to consider the methods by which the dialogue initiated with these organizations at the Congress could be increased.
103. The Director-General was requested to study the feasibility of designating, as part of the follow-up to the Congress, a special week to promote the fundamental concerns of development among the wider public at either the regional or international level.
104. The Conference expressed its gratitude to the Government and the people of the Netherlands for acting as host to the Congress, and its thanks to the Director-General and the Congress secretariat for the efficient manner in which the organizational arrangements had been effected. A special tribute was paid to the work of Adrian Janssen, who was Secretary General of the Congress prior to his untimely death.
E. Report of the FAO special committee on agrarian reform
105. At the invitation of the Director-General, Carlos Lleras-Restrepo, Chairman of the Special Committee on Agrarian Reform, presented to the Conference the Committee's Report which had been prepared in compliance with Resolution 5/69 of the Fifteenth Session of the Conference.
106. Dr. Lleras-Restrepo stressed the increasing importance now attached to agrarian reform as a factor in agricultural development. It was essential for FAO to match the general growing willingness to take action on agrarian reform. FAO should exercise leadership in the elaboration of policy and in the implementation of appropriate and effective measures. In this task, FAO should seek the collaboration of other UN, regional and bilateral agencies active in this field. In particular, it was important, in the formulation of technical assistance programmes and projects, for FAO to attach due emphasis, where appropriate, to the issue of agrarian reform and related institutional and social considerations.
107. The Chairman of the Special Committee then proceeded to present the conceptual framework and strategy for agrarian reform contained in the Committee's Report. Such reform was a vital factor in economic and social development which aimed at bringing about changes in the structures of land tenure, agricultural production and agricultural supporting services, as well as an equitable income distribution. Particular emphasis should be laid, in this process, on the need to ensure popular participation, especially in the process of implanting and administering the reform by the recognition, encouragement and promotion of organizations such as trade unions and cooperatives, and their training and effective participation at all levels in order to enable them to make a creative contribution to the technological innovations required by social development. It was also important to set up farm units or producers' associations, which would facilitate the adoption of modern
techniques, stimulate investment, raise income levels and generate more and better employment opportunities.
108. Dr. Lleras-Restrepo emphasized that the Special Committee's Report drew much of its inspiration from the discussions and decisions of the United Nations and the UN specialized agencies, and in particular from UN General Assembly Resolution 2542 (XXIV) on Economic and Social Progress. However, such resolutions and policy recommendations would remain largely inoperative unless the countries with inadequate or out-of-date agrarian structures themselves took vigorous steps to develop and implement a sound policy of agrarian reform. It had been clearly realized by the Special Committee that the national decisions involved were of a highly political nature, but this was all the more reason why greater emphasis should be laid on the need for such decisions by individual governments and in particular on the need to change the existing economic and social structures to the extent that they impeded the successful implementation of agrarian reform. The Committee also stressed the
fact that development was indivisible, and hence, that agrarian reforms, however carefully planned, would be seriously prejudiced unless popular participation in planning, implementation and benefits was ensured. Similarly, defective agrarian structures hampered not only agricultural progress, but also development as a whole.
109. The Director-General congratulated the Committee and especially Dr. Llerea-Restrepo on the Report as well as on his presentation thereof and on his admirable work as Chairman of the Special Committee. Agrarian reform, with its economic, social and political components, was a very difficult subject involving many controversial aspects. He was pleased to note that the Committee had been able to agree on so many substantive topics.
110. The Report of the Special Committee gave rise to a stimulating discussion in which most of the delegations present took part. This discussion also took into account the note by the Director-General on the measures proposed for the implementation of the Report's recommendations. During this discussion many of the delegates stressed the importance of agrarian reform as a prerequisite for economic development and the urgency to carry it out where outmoded agrarian structures existed. Many valuable comments were also made on several specific topics such as the participation of peasants and rural workers in the agricultural development process; agricultural productivity; agricultural supporting services (credit, marketing, technical and financial assistance, etc.); avoiding obstacles to agrarian reform, agricultural employment and agrarian reform strategies. The representative of the ILO praised the Report and emphasized the cooperations of the ILO and FAO in matters of
common concern relating to agrarian reform.
111. The Conference congratulated the Special Committee on the work it had accomplished, and broadly approved the contents of its Report, including the strategy for agrarian reform outlined therein. The Conference agreed that FAO had an important role to play in assisting the process of agrarian reform. The Conference emphasized that any decision concerning land reform and the strategy ultimately adopted by each individual country was a matter solely for the government concerned. The Conference took note of observations made by some delegations on the experiences of their countries as recorded in the Report.
112. The Conference then examined a draft resolution on agrarian reform submitted by the delegations of eleven countries, calling for the adoption of measures giving effect to the strategy proposed in the Report, Discussion centred on the recommendations concerning the creation of a Rural Institutions Development Committee and the elevation of the Rural Institutions Division to the rank of department.
113. After considerable discussion, a compromise wee finally reached to the effect that the Agriculture Committee to be created by FAO should pay special attention to the social issues of agricultural development, and in particular to those concerning the reform of agrarian structures. The Conference also welcomed the Director-General's proposal to convene a session of the Special Committee on Agrarian Reform in 1973. While some delegations supported the possibility of creating a Rural Institutions Department, most delegations were opposed to this suggestion for the time being. The Conference accordingly further invited the Director-General to study which measures would be best adapted to strengthen the structure of the Organization in the field of rural development and especially in agrarian reform, and, in consultation with the appropriate Committees of the Council, to present to the Fifty-Ninth Session of the Council proposals to that end, within the limits of resources
approved by the Conference for the forthcoming biennium.
114. The Conference then adopted the following Resolution:
Resolution 3/71
Special Committee on Agrarian Reform
THE CONFERENCE
Noting the Report of the Special Committee on Agrarian Reform prepared pursuant to Resolution 5/69 of its Fifteenth Session and recommending a strategy for initiating or accelerating, as appropriate, the eradication of outmoded forms of land tenure and, in general, the improvement of agrarian structures and related institutions,
Mindful that Resolution 2542 (XXIV) of the United Nations General Assembly indicates that social progress and development requires the establishment of forms of land ownership and means of production which exclude any form of exploitation of human beings and create conditions of true equality among them,
Considering that the part of the Report dealing with the nature and objectives of agrarian reform sets forth a conceptual framework that defines this process as a whole and as an integral part of the economic and social development of a country, inasmuch as development does not consist only in increasing production and productivity but also in achieving an equitable distribution of national income and obtaining the full participation of peasants and rural workers in the implementation and administration of the reform of agrarian structures,
Having examined the progress made in regard to agrarian reform during the First Development Decade, the obstacles that prevented a greater advance, and the strategy recommended for furthering it in a form that will make it possible to take account of the specific situation of each region and country,
Giving due consideration to the recommendations that the Report makes to international agencies and, especially, the recommendations addressed to FAO in order that the latter may best exercise its proper function in the agrarian reform field,
Bearing in mind that, as indicated in the Report of the Special Committee, agrarian reform is a prerequisite for economic and social development and that without it my countries could not achieve the goals of the Second Development Decade,
1. Welcomes the views contained in the Report concerning: the nature and objectives of agrarian reform as a comprehensive process integrated into the economic and social development of countries; social justice for peasants and rural workers; the urgency of implementing it; its relation to increased production and productivity in agriculture; the improved use of natural resources; the full employment of human resources; and the dissemination and adaptation of technological advances for the benefit of the broad peasant masses;
2. Recommends to Member Nations of the Organization in which defective and outmoded structures of land tenure, agricultural production and supporting services, or inappropriate uses of the land, still exist, that they give careful study to the recommendations on reform strategy contained in the Report of the Special Committee and that they apply them in a manner consistent with the conditions prevailing in each of them and with the principles on social development approved by the United Nations General Assembly;
3. Requests that the Director-General forward the Report to the Secretary-General of the United Nations for consideration by its relevant bodies, and to the Specialized Agencies as provided in Resolution 5/69, and that the published Report include an Addendum embodying the observations made in the Conference on the experience of the countries covered in the Report;
4. States its agreement with the recommendations of the Report regarding the importance that FAO should give in all its activities to the social aspects of participation of peasants and rural workers in the reform and administration of agrarian stuctures, to equitable income distribution, and to improvement of the level of living and to research and education in the rural sector;
5. Recommends to the Committee on Agriculture that it give adequate attention in the conduct of its activities to the rural development aspects, and particularly to those bearing on the reform of agrarian structures, and that it should consider establishing a sub-committee for that purpose;
6. Welcomes the suggestions of the Director-General for a Fourth Session of the Special Committee on Agrarian Reform in late 1973; (to the extent possible, the studies referred to in Section 4, Part VIII of the Report should be completed prior to this Session);
7. Requests that the Director-General present to the Fifty-Ninth Session of the Council, in consultation with the committees thereof, a study on possible measures to strengthen the structure of the Organization in the rural development field, and particularly in that of agrarian reform, within the budget level approved by the Sixteenth Session of the Conference;
8. Recommends to the Governments of the Member Nations furnishing technical and/or financial assistance to developing countries that they give serious consideration to projects that follow the guidelines contained in the Report of the Special Committee with regard to cooperation by international agencies.
(Adopted, 24 November 1971)
<section>7</section>
VI. PART II. Activities and programmes of the organization
A. Review of the organization's activities and programmes (including Regular Programme and Field Activities )
B. Programme of work and budget, 1972-73
C. Medium-term plan
D. Relations and consultations with international organizations on PROGRAMME matters of common interest
A. Review of the organization's activities and programmes (including Regular Programme and Field Activities )
Planning of Aid Programmes
Harmonizing of Intra-Regional Agricultural Development
Agricultural Research
Programming of Field Operations
Implementation
Regional Offices and Country Representatives
Consideration of Extra-Budgetary Activities
Format of "The Work of FAO"
115. The Conference reviewed document C 71/4 and related documents on this subject. The attention of the Conference was also drawn by the Representative of the Director-General to the wider implications of the work of FAO in development support, including, on the one hand, the political aspects of its work and, on the other, the way in which it operates.
116. The Conference was informed that it was important to emphasize that FAO received its policy guidance from Member Nations, but that its cooperation with other agencies, and in particular with financing bodies, also had to be kept in view.
117. It was pointed out that FAA's dialogue with governments was guided by the new UNDP policy which stipulated that country programmes were prepared by governments themselves in accordance with their specific priorities and with the help of all members of the UN family under the guidance of the UNDP Resident Representative. However, FAO retained its basic mission of elaborating on a continuing basis a policy and strategy for agricultural development. This mission underlaid its dialogue, carried out at country level with the departments concerned, by the FAO Country Representatives who were also the Senior Agricultural Advisers to the UNDP Resident Representatives. At the same time, the Regional Representatives of FAO were responsible for regular contact with higher government levels and were substantially involved in development action concerning several countries or a whole region.
118. The Conference noted that the content of the programmes and projects, in progressively more numerous cases, was bound to reflect the progress achieved in the recipient countries. As national competence improved and increased quantitatively, the role of international experts wee modified, and responsability for projects changed hands. Training programmes too were modified. But the fact remained that international cooperation, even if it represented only a small proportion of total development efforts, took on an added value when, for instance, it came to setting up new institutions, applying advanced techniques and preparing approaches to sources of international finance.
119. It wee indicated that while FAO retained its responsibility for guiding the policies on rural development, and its role as executing agent for internationally financed programmes, the Director-General intended to place the competence of FAO at the disposal of the bilateral programmes, without however laying claim to a leading role in the execution thereof.
120. The Conference noted that FAA's relations with the other international agencies, and in particular with the financing organizations, were governed by a spirit of complete partnership.
121. It was further noted that the second mayor considerations was the way in which FAO operated in project implementation. Certain points deserved to be emphasized. In the case of preinvestment, the Organization had at present 329 ongoing projects in 97 countries, and would spend in the present year $84 million provided by UNDP, $10 million provided by government projects by bilateral programmes, and $2.5 million for those of FFH. The refocusing of the work in the Area Service Division and the use of modern management methods throughout the operational segments of the Organization had made it possible to diminish the delays in execution. The use of associate experts had increased the Organization's capacity.
122. Attention wee called to the fact that in the case of investment, qualitative ant quantitative improvements had been achieved as a result of collaboration with the World Bank and the Regional Banks. New categories of projects which had formerly been unacceptable to the banks were now being financed and there were other new trends in FAA's work. A Consultative Group, which included FAO, the World Bank and UNDP, as well as the largest bilateral programmes and foundations had been set up to guise and to provide financial assistance for agricultural research on an international basis FAO provided the secretariat for that body's Technical Advisory Committee. In the field of modern processing of scientific and technical information, FAO was taking effective action at national ant international levels. Also in the field of social science there was increasing awareness of the need to pay more attention to the factors of human ant social development.
Planning of Aid Programmes
123. There wee general support in the Conference for the principle of integrated planning of aid programmes. This wee seen as a process of continuing dialogue between governments and FAO, other multilateral agencies, ant bilateral aid agencies. This would raise their effectiveness while preserving flexibility, and would help raise the level of their enduring impact in the implementation of national development policies. One example wee the FFH which, the Conference believed, could improve communications support and other assistance in operations at the field level.
124. The Conference endorsed the principle that the investment of money and experts alone did not constitute development. Agricultural development implied a continuing increase in, and changing patterns of production and distribution; equally it had to aim to provide for the training of producers and to create a better environment for human beings. As FAO court not hope to cover more than a fraction of all the action that wee necessary, the role of FAO projects wee therefore seen above all as a catalyst to initiate development action on a wider scale. It wee therefore essential that FAO projects be carefully selected ant formulated to give the maximum effect. This would require careful attention to project objectives, particularly their feasibility and the market potential for the expected increase in output; maximum use should also be made of local staff to ensure their full understanding and close involvement.
125. The Conference emphasized the importance of Agricultural Development Planning and welcomed its choice as the ''Sixth Area of Concentration''. This would help ensure the optimum utilization of multilateral and bilateral aid.
Harmonizing of Intra-Regional Agricultural Development
126. In this context FAA's responsibility was seen primarily as being at the international development strategy level, such strategy being interrelated with those at the regional and national levels. Delegates agreed that FAO'S role would be to focus attention on the advantages to be derived from harmonizing intra-regional agricultural production, trade and development activity. This had become a matter of increasing importance in view of the ''Green Revolution'' as a result of which some countries that had formerly been substantial food importers had, or soon would become, self-sufficient or exporters themselves. It was recognized that in the case of developing countries the objective of self-sufficiency and development of agriculture as part of the wider strategy of economic development required special attention.
Agricultural Research
127. The importance of agricultural research relating to the problems of developing countries was recognized. However, the present programme of such research in developing countries was in many ways inadequats as there ware gape in a number of important areas. FAO could materially help overcome the effect of these deficiencies, since it was uniquely placed to deal with the problems of international cooperation and coordination of agricultural research, and the dissemination of its results.
Programming of Field Operations
128. In referring to the procedures of country programming there was general appreciation of the importance of Country Briefs and several delegates expressed a desire for these to be made available to all member governments requesting them. There wee general acceptance of the need for an integrated approach to development and delegations wished to have more precise indications on the extent to which FAA's pre-investment work had led to fruitful investment which wee the principal aim.
129. The Conference recognized that while the formulation of Country Programmes was the responsibility of recipient governments, FAO should cooperate with them and advise them, in the light of its experience in the implementation of field projects and its knowledge of the world agricultural situation. The Conference also recognized that donor governments had no direct involvement in the mechanics of formulating a Country Programme document, although Consultation with bilateral donors in each country might be envisaged.
Implementation
130. The importance of improving the efficiency of project implementation was recognized. It was noted that while the time-lag between project approval and project implementation had been greatly reduced in recent years it wee still too long. The Conference urged FAO to continue its efforts to improve project implementation, but recognized that much would depend on the selection of projects which could draw strongly on local support. The Conference stressed that much also depended on the personality, understanding and sense of involvement of experts engaged in projects and on the human relationships between international experts and national technicians.
131. Several delegations concurred in the increased use of high-level short-term consultants as opposed to the traditional long-term experts provided under moat UNDP programmes. The Conference appreciated the steps taken to broaden the base for recruitment of FAO experts. There wee a special need for FAO to provide market-oriented assistance which was geared not simply to improvement of production but to the production of saleable products. The Conference felt there was a welcome change in FAA's approach and in the quality and techniques of the assistance offered.
132. The Conference emphasized the importance of training of local staff, not only through fellowships abroad but also within the country. Some disappointment was expressed that there had been no increase in the number of training courses and seminars held in recent years; on the other hand the recognition given in document C 71/4 to the importance of expanding the effort in training was welcomed. The Conference also welcomed the increased use of associate experts, noted with satisfaction that certain donor countries were willing to finance associate experts from developing countries, and supported the recommendations made in this respect.
133. In connexion with the desirability of greater flexibility in the operation of field projects the Conference noted that there had been a substantial increase in the amount of sub-contracting and felt that consideration should be given to further increasing this practice taking into account new procedures. It notes that the Programme Committee intended to give closer consideration to this subject at its next session in 1972. The need to widen the base of FAA's procurement work to take all sources of supply into consideration was also mentioned.
Regional Offices and Country Representatives
134. The importance of FAO representation in the countries was repeatedly emphasized. and the Conference expressed the view that the Senior Agricultural Advisers (SAA)/FAO Country Representative should enjoy authority to act in accordance with the responsibilities with which he was entrusted. The recent UNDP/FAO Agreement on SAA/FAO Country Representatives was accepted although some countries expresses reservations. The Conference noted that the Agreement was to be reviewed after two years of operation, and urged that the executive heads of FAO and UNDP give serious consideration to the need to further expand the corps of S. SAA/FAO Country Representatives.
135. The Conference welcomed the proposed measures to strengthen the Regional Offices because they could render valuable support in country programming under the ''UNDP Consensus'' and in regional planning in addition to their other functions. Several delegates felt, however, that they should have been strengthened even further to enable them to properly carry out their important roles of assistance to developing countries. It wee suggested that one way of accomplishing this, without imposing any additional strain on FAA's already-strained financial resources would be by means of transfers of appropriate Headquarters posts to the regional and country office. Others felt that no irreversible measures should be taken concerning the strengthening of the Regional Offices whilst waiting for the results of the study mentioned below.
136. The Conference endorsed fully the Council's concurrence in the intention of the Director-General and the Programme and Finance Committees to conduct an in-depth study of the inter-relationships between the various segments of Headquarters, the Regional Offices and SAA/FAD Country Representatives in the light of the UNDP Consensus and the agreement concluded on 22 October 1971 with the Administrator of UNDP. The Conference while recognizing the urgency of the completion of the study expressed the view that it would be desirable to have it reviewed by the next series of Regional Conferences before the final presentation at the autumn 1972 Session of the Council after consideration by the Programme and Finance Committees.
Consideration of Extra-Budgetary Activities
137. The Conference noted that the proportion of extra-budgetary finances to total funds available to FAO had risen from 59 percent in 1962 to 74 percent in 1971, a trend which would probably continue. Since the Conference had to consider FAA's work in its entirety, it would be necessary to improve the review of FAA's extra-budgetary resources. The Conference endorsed the view of the Fifty-Sixth Session of the FAO Council that inadequate attention was being given under existing arrangements for the review of extra-budgetary activities. The Conference therefore requested the Council to study the problem and make recommendations on how the existing machinery could be fully utilized to accomplish this task.
Format of "The Work of FAO"
138. The Conference supported the new format of The Work of FAO. While the purpose of the document was essentially to give a report of FAA's activities during the past biennium, the document was also seen as a statement of development action for the future. The illustration of the close relationship between the Regular Programme and field activities was welcomed. It wee felt essential that the Conference should be able to study the work of FAO as a whole rather than under separate categories as this was closer to the realities of FAA's operations. While regretting that the report did not mention the European Regional Office separately in Chapter 3, the Conference agreed that the document was useful, and that the new format, a distinct improvement on previous ones, should be continued and further improved.
B. Programme of work and budget, 1972-73
Chapter 1 - General Policy and Direction
Chapter 2 - Technical and Economic Programmes
Chapter 3 - Field Programmes and Development Support
Chapter 4 - Special Programmes
Chapter 5 - General Programme Services
Chapter 6 - General Support
Chapter 7 - Miscellaneous Expenditure
Chapter 8 - Contingencies
Chapter 9 - Special Budgetary Authorizations
Chapter 10 - Transfer to Tax Equalization Fund
139. The Conference considered the Programme of Work and Budget presented by the Director General, including the addenda and supplements, in the light of the comments of the Fifty Sixth and Fifty-Seventh Sessions of the Council.
140. It welcome its presentation in programme budget form, noting that all of FAA's operations in terms of objectives and programmes of work were shown together with the allocation of both Regular Programme and extra-budgetary funds. It noted that the main part of the Programme of Work and Budget, Chapter 2, Technical and Economic Programmes, was built on the five Areas of Concentration plus Agricultural Development Planning.
141. The Conference recognized that strict comparisons between 1970-71 and 1972-73 figures were not possible in all cases because 1970-71 figures were only the best approximations of full or pro-rata staff time and other inputs which could be made in the short time available for conversion to the programme budget. Full and precise information was given on programme changes, however, in the Director-General's Introduction and in the explanatory notes. It also recognized that the narrative portions of the Programme of Work and Budget were in the early stages of development, and that improvements were planned for the 1974-75 Programme of Work and Budget following the progressive adoption, as from 1 January 1972, of a Management Information System which would include time reporting, of preparation of work plans and better definitions of objectives.
142. The Conference recognized that its report could not reflect in detail all the views expressed by individual delegates on items within programmes. However, these views were recorded in the verbatim reports of discussions and would be taken into account by the Director-General in planning future activities. It was agreed therefore that the Conference report should record only the general consensus reached on programmes.
Chapter 1 - General Policy and Direction
143. The Conference was informed that apart from additional funds proposed for 1.1, Governing Bodies, and a slight increase for travel, the additional amounts budgeted for 1972-73 were exclusively cost increases with no change in the establishment or services. The only significant substantive change in Chapter I was the transfer of the Programme Formulation Unit from the Development Department to the Office of the Director-General.
144. The Conference felt that sufficient provision should be made for additional requirements under 1.1, Governing Bodies, because of the increasingly important role of the Conference and Council in policy control and direction of the work of the Organization. It was noted in particular that provision should be made for interpretation facilities for the Committee of-the-Whole of the Council, that every effort should be made to keep the number and length of documents to an absolute minimum and that the secretariat should provide more up-dated information on the timing of meetings to assist Governments to schedule their participation at these meetings. The Conference was informed that if additional funds were required for interpretation facilities for the Council's Committee-of-the-Whole, the Director-General would endeavour to obtain these funds from savings during the forthcoming biennium.
145. The Conference agreed to the transfer of the Programme Formulation Unit to the Office of the Director-General because while the Development Department was primarily concerned with field programmes. the Programme Formulation Unit was more involved with the Regular Programme and with the work of the Organization as a whole.
146. While the Conference expressed full confidence in, and support for, the work of the Policy Advisory Bureau (PAB), it believed that this particular unit should remain small. The Conference accepted the explanation that PAB was not in any sense an operational unit and there was no intention to enlarge its advisory staff As regards any overlapping of work between PAB and the International Agency Liaison Division (DDL), the Conference wee informed that PAB had been established as a small ''brain trust" or ''think-tank'' comprising a few highly qualified specialists whose task wee to advise the Director-General on certain organization-wide policy matters, specifically concerning the Perspective Study of World Agricultural Development (PSWAD). Its responsibilities relative to PSWAD were financed from Sub-Programme 2.6.1.4 in Chapter 2. The International Agency Liaison Division on the other hand was the spokesman for FAO in its relations with international organizations both
within and without the United Nations System. It was particularly involved in matters relating to inter-agency coordination having a bearing on FAA's activities and participation in inter-secretariat and inter-governmental bodies such as ACC, ECOSOC and the General Assembly and relations with the inter-governmental and non-governmental organizations.
147. With the above observations the Conference approved Chapter 1 of the Programme of Work and Budget.
Chapter 2 - Technical and Economic Programmes
a) Programme Objective 2.1: Mobilization of Human Resources
b) Programme Objective 2.2: Increasing Yields (HYV)
c) Programme Objective 2.3: The Protein Problem
d) Programme Objective 2.4: War on Waste
e) Programme Objective 2.5. Earning and Saving of Foreign Exchange
f) Programme Objective 2.6: Agricultural Development Planning
g) Summary-Chapter 2
a) Programme Objective 2.1: Mobilization of Human Resources
148. The Conference reaffirmed the high priority assigned to this area by its Fifteenth Session and noted that both Regular Programme and extra-budgetary resources were greater than those assigned to other areas. The Conference emphasized that continuing and strengthened Regular Programme support to this area was essential to provide the foundation for successful action in all other areas of concentration.
149. The Conference supported the stress placed on Programme 2.1.1, Agrarian Reform. Some delegates agreed that FAO should not become involved in deciding national land reform policies, but should, on request, assist governments in implementing such policies. Other delegates considered that financing of FAA's work in this field should be drawn primarily from extra-budgetary resources. Work planned in farm unit analysis wee welcomed.
150. The Conference recognized that 2.1.2, Institutional Framework for Agricultural and Rural Development, was of crucial importance for effective and efficient action in promoting development. Work in this area involved not only establishment and strengthening of individual institutions, but also bringing these together in the promotion of integrated agricultural and rural development. In this connexion, reference was made to the valuable guidance provided by the Report of the Symposium on Agricultural Institutions for Integrated Rural Development (Rome, July 1971) held under the sponsorship of the Swedish International Development Authority (SIDA) and FAO. It was also recommended that pilot projects of the Comilla type should be encouraged. The Conference especially cited Sub-Programme 2.1.2.2 Cooperatives and other Farmers' Organizations; 2.1.2.3, Agricultural Banking and Credit, and 2.1.2.4, Agricultural Marketing and Farm Supply, including better distribution systems,
as deserving increased emphasis. The fact that the Joint Committee for the Promotion of Agricultural Cooperatives (COPAC) wee now fully operational, and bringing together FAO, ILO and other international governmental and non-governmental agencies for concerted action in the field of cooperation, was noted with appreciation. The view was expressed that FAO, in carrying out its work in the crucial area of agricultural banking and credit, should enlist the cooperation of central and agricultural banks.
151. The Conference supported the proposed activities in the areas covered by Sub-Programmes 2.1.2.5, Organization and Management of Land and Water Development Schemes, 2.1.2.6, Strengthening of Forestry Institutions and Services, 2.1.2.7, Strengthening of Fishery Institutions and Services, 2.1.2.8, Strengthening of Livestock and Veterinary Institutions and Services, and 2.1.3.0, Nutrition and Home Economics.
152. In respect to Sub-Programme 2.1.2.8, the proposal to issue the Animal Health Year Book every third year, rather than annually and to up-date this issue by annual supplements, was approved. Support was also given to the proposal to publish a Quarterly FAO Animal Review.
153. The Conference stressed the importance of implementing the recommendations of the World Conference on Agricultural Education and Training (Copenhagen, 1970) and of the World Forestry Education Conference (Stockholm, 1971). The Conference welcomed the proposal to hold a consultation on Fisheries Education in 1972. In reviewing Sub-Programme 2.1.2.1, Organization of Agricultural and Rural Ministries, Departments and Related Institutions, some delegates considered that more stress should be placed on fellowship training and field action projects, and less on seminars.
154. The proposed programme on Agricultural Extension under Sub-Programme 2.1.3.3, was welcomed, but some delegates considered that FAO should do more in the area of community development in cooperation with other interested agencies. It was also considered that FAA's policy in the field of rural youth should be defined more specifically as one element in achieving effective coordination with other extension activities.
155. With regard to Sub-Programme 2.1.3.2, Organization and Coordination of General Agricultural Research Facilities and Services, the Conference noted that FAO had been primarily concerned with helping governments design national organizations or systems for planning and coordinating the establishment and implementation of national agricultural research programmes. Its activities in this field also included promotion of regional and inter-regional research activities and assistance to governments in developing their research programmes. in specific technical, economic, social and institutional fields. The Conference urged the Director-General to take more active interest in agricultural research and help countries establish cooperative programmes in the needed fields.
156. The vital importance of work in nutrition and home economics was stressed and the need for close linkage with agricultural extension was noted. Education and training activities proposed in the specialized fields of Land and Water, Plant Production and Protection, Forestry, Fisheries, Animal Production and Health, Food and Agriculture Industries, Agricultural Engineering and Farm Management, were all strongly supported.
157. The Conference accepted the work proposed under Programme 2.1.4, Improving Rural Life. While differing views were expressed on Sub-Programme 2.1.4.1, Rural Sociology, the importance of this work in promoting balanced economic and social development was recognized. Attention was drawn to the fact that substantial extra-budgetary resources were becoming available, particularly through the United Nations Fund for Population Activities for work under Sub Programme 2.1.4.2, Planning for Better Family Living, although Regular Programme Budget support for this purpose was modest. It was also noted that substantial extra-budgetary resources were available through WFP and UNICEF to support 2.1.4.3, Feeding Programmes.
b) Programme Objective 2.2: Increasing Yields (HYV)
158. The Conference reviewed the Programme Objective Increasing Yields (HYV) with its 5 programmes. and 22 substantive sub-programmes. It noted that a high proportion of the total funds available for this programme objective were extra-budgetary.
159. The Conference agreed that the coverage of activities was adequate and that the form of presentation furnished the essential detail. Further consideration might however be given to the possibility of combining sub-programmes whish appeared to be closely related.
160. The Conference urged that work on the various sub-programmes concerned with 2.2.1. Surveys and Planning, be given continued emphasis due to their basic importance in programmes for increasing yields. It endorsed the emphasis on the interpretation of soil and water data for practical purposes and welcomed the information that the World Soil Map would be available in 1973. It was stressed that surveys of grassland, forest resources and surface water resources should take full advantage of contributions which could be made through remote sensing.
161. Considering the Programme 2.2.2, Development of Physical Resources, the Conference took note of the alarming deterioration of valuable arable lands through erosion, salinity, alkalinity and waterlogging, particularly in the arid and semi-arid regions and stressed that adequate resources should be provided for the activities under 2.2.2.1, Land Development and Reclamation. It felt that the activities on 2.2.2.2, Water development, deserved continuing support, including promotion of modern irrigation techniques. With regard to 2.2.2.3, Crop Ecology, the Conference welcomed the activities of the Inter-Agency Coordinating Group in Agricultural Biometeorology, and urged closer collaboration between agronomists and meteorologists. The Conference stressed the role of range and pasture improvement under 2.2.2.4, Improvement of Pastures, Rangelands and Fodders, in livestock production and land conservation and suggested that efforts be increased; particularly in the Far East.
The Conference emphasized the need for training in this field and was informed that a tropical pasture training course would be held in the Far East. The Conference endorsed the activities in 2.2.2.5, Afforestation and Reforestation, and requested that more consideration be given to organizing regional training centres on planting techniques. The Conference endorsed Sub-Programme 2.2.2.6, Aquatic Resources Development, and appreciated its contribution to high-value protein production.
162. The Conference noted that the activities of Programme 2.2.3, Genetic Improvement, Production and Distribution of Bio-Resources, especially suited FAA's role and that all the sub-programmes should receive continuing strong support. Close collaboration should be established with national institutes working in this area. Recognizing the crucial role of improved varieties in increasing yields, the Conference recommended that Sub-Programme 2.2.3.1, Breeding, Introduction and Production of Seed and Planting Material, be given high priority. It emphasized the importance of better production, quality control and distribution of seeds and urged that these activities be given high priority. The Conference noted with appreciation the offer of the Austrian Government to host an international aymposium on seeds. It suggested that special attention be given to training and research on seed technology and hoped that proposals for an integrated Seed Programme would emerge from the
first session of the Committee on Agriculture. With regard to the semen donation scheme under 2.2.3.3, Animal Breeding and Genetics, the Conference emphasized the need for careful planning and supervision at all stages, taking into account problems of adaptation to diverse environments. Research into the improvement of local breeds should also receive emphasis where appropriate, and where the individual country considers this to be of importance.
163. In reviewing the Programme 2.2.4, Improvement in Application of Inputs, Production Practices and Management, the Conference underlined the important role of 2.2.4.1, Soil Management, Fertility and Fertilizer Use and 2.2.4.2, Water Application, Management and Use, particularly in helping to promote the efficient use of fertilizer and water in the production of high-yielding cereals and other improved crops. In referring to 2.2.4.3, Production of Rice, Wheat, other Cereals, Grain Legumes, Roots and Tubers, the Conference, aware of the significant advances especially in wheat production, urged that FAO give more emphasis to grain legumes and rice. The Conference recognized the importance of roots and tubers (particularly cassava) as staple foods in tropical regions, and felt that adequate attention should be given to these crops. The Conference urged that the training of plant breeders and agronomists be further strengthened in collaboration with national and international
agencies. The Conference recognized the value of the Near East Cereal Improvement Project, and suggested that other crops such as grain legumes and rice be included in the programme and similar projects be developed in other regions. Support was expressed for the establishment on a Near East Regional Food Crops Research Institute. Regarding 2.2.4.4, Silviculture and Management, the Conference urged that increased attention be given to the regeneration of natural and man-made forests. The Conference recognized the value of the activities in 2.2.4.5, Forest Logging, Transportation and Equipment, in reducing costs and suggested that training in improved working techniques especially in Africa be intensified.
Reviewing Sub-Programmes 2.2.4.6, Land and Water Use Economics and Farm Management, 2.2.4.7, Agricultural Machinery Equipment and Farm Buildings and 2.2.4.8, Farming Systems and Agro Industry Planning, the Conference recognized the importance of full employment for the rural population and requested the Director-General to pay increasing attention to labour intensive farming systems and methods, with particular reference to multiple cropping and greenhouse techniques. The Conference urged the Director-General to expand his work on promoting small scale mechanization including improvements in the use of animal-drawn equipment and hand tools.
164. Mention was made of the need for work on fruits and vegetables, further mention of which was also noted under Programme Objective 2.5, Earning and Saving of Foreign Exchange.
165. The Conference agreed that 2.2.5.1, the Joint FAD/IAEA Programme should continue to receive due attention and future work under this programme should be considered further by the Programme Committee and the Council in the coming biennium. It was suggested that the different elements should be shown under the relevant programme objectives instead of all together under Chapter 2.2. The Conference felt that the relative emphasis on food irradiation should be reconsidered and that isotope studies of pesticide residues, merited high priority. In the field of mutation breeding emphasis should be placed on the major food crops such as rice as well on vegetatively propagated crops. The Conference noted the potential value of the sterile male technique but, recognizing the high initial costs and long-term research needed, suggested concentration on a few more important insect species.
166. Regarding Sub-Programme 2.2.6.1, Agriculture Department-Departmental Direction, the Conference endorsed the proposal to hold an expert consultation on the subject of remote sensing. The Conference considered that FAO should closely follow developments in the field to take advantage of this technique in its work, wherever applicable.
c) Programme Objective 2.3: The Protein Problem
167. The Conference noted that other aspects of the Protein Problem were dealt with under other Areas of Concentration, in particular cereals and grain legumes under 2.2, Increasing Yields. It was suggested that consideration should be given to re-arranging the order of the sub-programmes under Programme 2.3.1, Determination of Requirements and Resources, into a more logical sequence, as follows: ''Food Composition and Nutrition Requirements" (2.3.1.5): ''Food Consumption Statistics'' (2.3.1.3); ''Food and Nutrition in Relation to Agricultural Development'' (2.3.1.6); ''Protein Food Supplies and Consumption Studies'' (2.3.1.4); ''Aquatic Resources Surveys'' (2.3.1.1); ''Livestock Surveys, Evaluation and Planning'' (2.3.1.2). Sub-Programme (2.3.2.4), Nutritional Developments, Semi-and Non Conventional, might be transferred from Programme 2.3.2, Increasing Production, to Programme 2.3.3, Promotion of Consumption. It was noted, however, that there might be technical
difficulties about such re-arrangements at this stage.
168. The Conference noted that the fisheries Sub-Programme 2.3.1.1, Aquatic Resource Surveys and Evaluation, and 2.3.2.3, Fish Production, were allocated a large proportion of the funds budgeted under this programme objective, but recognized that the Fisheries Department was vertically organized and that this Regular Programme expenditure, together with the extra budgetary funds so generated, arose from requests of Member Governments and international activities. A large share of the fishery activities of the Organization was concerned with this programme objective.
169. In developing Sub-Programme 2.3.1.1, Aquatic Resource Surveys and Evaluation, the Conference requested that existing data be used to identify gaps in present knowledge and that future surveys be designed to fill those gaps. The importance of the work carried out under this Sub-Programme was recognized, particularly in relation to coming international conferences.
170. The importance of the work on 2.3.2.3 Fish Production, wee recognized especially in respect to advice to governments on the formulation and development of fishery technology. It was suggested that commercial firma could contribute significantly in this field.
171. Some overlapping of sub-programmes under the Protein Problem with other programme objectives called for close cooperation between operational units. For instance action in the fields of Livestock Surveys, Evaluation and Planning (2.3.1.2) must be coordinated closely with Improvement of Pastures, Rangelands and Fodders (2.2.2.4), which wee included in Programme Objective Increasing Yields. Cooperation between units responsible for Food Promotion, Applied Nutrition and Home Economies (2.3.3.1) should be maintained ant strengthened with those in charge of Feeding Programmes(2.1.4.3) in Programme Objective Mobilization of Human Resources, with particular regard to evaluation of results.
172. The Conference endorsed Sub-Programmes 2.3.1.2, Livestock Surveys, Evaluation and Planning; 2.3.2.1, Animal Nutrition and Feed Efficiency; and 2.3.2.2, Animal Husbandry and Management. It expressed the view that activities should be accelerated especially in relation to dairy production in developing countries. Emphasis should be given to improved methods of production of pigs, poultry, sheep and goats in all regions as appropriate. The Conference appreciated the work which wee in hand supported by Australian FFH funds, to produce a definitive publication on the domestic water buffalo.
173. The activities proposed under Sub-Programme 2.3.1.5, Food Composition and Nutritional Developments, and 2.3.1.6, Food and Nutrition in Agricultural Development, were endorsed but it was suggested that low priority be given at this time to studies of trace elements in human nutrition, in view of the present state of knowledge and research on the subject.
174. The Conference requested that high priority be given to the sub-programme concerned with the development of formulated protein foods for infants, young children and expectant and nursing mothers (2.3.2.4) and to that concerned with food promotion, applied nutrition and to some countries home economics (2.3.3.1). Within these sub-programmes the importance of consumer education and marketing was stressed.
175. The Conference noted that the formal aspects of inter-agency relations and activities concerning The Protein Problem were also discussed under Item 14 of the Conference Agenda.
<section>8</section>
d) Programme Objective 2.4: War on Waste
176. Programme 2.4.1, Conservation of Environment and Natural Resources, was of mayor concern to the Conference. Concern wee expressed about the feasibility of carrying out such a programme with the resources proposed. It was also stressed that environmental protection should not dominate decisions at the expense of the economic growth of developing countries.
177. Considering the basic importance of 2.4.1.1, Soil and Water Conservation and 2.4.1.3, Forest and Wildlife Conservation, the Conference requested high priority to be given to these sub-programmes. It stressed the need for increased activities in the field of watershed management and wind erosion control. The Conference was informed that these matters would be covered by the Sub-Programmes mentioned above. It was informed that there would be a seminar on sand dune fixation in Sub-Programme 2.4.1.3, Forest and Wildlife Conservation. Further attention was also called to the need for stabilizing lands under shifting cultivation, and cooperation was offered by the Delegation of India for a workshop on this problem.
178. In the field of environmental protection, the Conference recognized the importance of using household waste after processing by compostage, as organic fertilizers and recommended to FAO to promote the necessary research and experiment to determine the proper method of processing and use.
179. The Conference emphasized the importance of Sub-Programme 2.4.1.2, Exploration, Evaluation and Conservation of Plant Genetic Resources, in view of the risk of disappearance of useful genetic stocks for further breeding work.
180. The Conference stressed the importance of insuring better protection of forests against fire, and was informed that this problem would be given increased attention, from an ecological point of view, under Sub-Programme 2.4.1.3, Forest and Wildlife Conservation.
181. At the Twenty-Third General Assembly of the European Confederation of Agriculture, held recently in Santa Cruz de Tenerife (Spain), a proposal was approved for the establishment of a World Forestry Day, for which the cooperation of all concerned international organizations was requested. This proposal was intended to publicize in the entire world the very significant role which forests play for humanity through their direct and indirect beneficial effects. It was felt that such an event would also make an important contribution toward solving the problems of conservation of natural resources. The Conference recommended that FAO should support the establishment of a World Forestry Day, and cooperate in an appropriate manner to this end with Member Nations.
182. The Conference gave general support to Sub-Programmes 2.4.1.4, Improvement of the Aquatic Environment and Control of Aquatic Pollution, and 2.4.1.5 Management of Fishery Resources. The need to avoid duplication of efforts was stressed. The Conference took note of the United Nations inter-agency coordination being effected through the ACC Sub-Committee on Marine Science and its Application, and through the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) and the Group of Experts on the Scientific Aspects of Marine Pollution (GESAMP). Some delegates felt that the establishment of marine national parks should be given a lower priority, although their importance for tourism and as reserves for wild aquatic resources was underlined.
183. Recognizing the increasing problems of hazards and waste resulting from food contamination and in view of the need for further acceleration in the tempo of the work of the Codex Alimentarius Commission, the Conference considered it important that consideration be given, within available resources, to strengthening Sub-Programme 2.4.1.6, Food Additives and Food Control. It was felt that FAO should give increased assistance to the developing countries in the drafting of suitable food legislation, and the creation of necessary infrastructures for food control, not only for consumer protection but also in the interest of facilitating international trade.
184. The Conference considered that the control of livestock diseases was fundamental to all programmes. aimed at improving the productivity of meat and milk animals and considered that more emphasis should be placed on disease eradication. It was hoped that more funds would be forthcoming from extrabudgetary sources for Sub-Programme 2.4.2.4, Prevention and Control of Animal Diseases and Pests. The regional aspects of disease control were stressed, particularly with regard to the prevention and control of epizootics, and it was urged that research on all aspects of disease control should be supported and promoted.
185. With regard to Sub Programme 2.4.2.2, Control of Pests and Diseases in Growing Crops, the Conference noted that the recommendations of its Fourteenth and Fifteenth Sessions pertaining to the transfer of Headquarters' desert locust staff from the inter-regional UNDP project to the Regular Programme would be partly implemented in the Programme of Work and Budget for 1972-73. The Conference suggested that in future biennia the remaining elements in locust control should be transferred to the Regular Programme in order to place the work on a permanent basis. The Conference also noted that the recommendation of its Fifteenth Session regarding the establishment of a Headquarters' post, to deal with the resistance of agricultural pests to pesticides and integrated pest control, had been implemented. The Conference regretted, however, that the post on weed control had been abolished in spite of the increasing importance of weed control in agricultural improvement, and requested
that it be re-established, if at all possible.
186. In view of the ever-increasing importance of plant quarantine, the Conference recommended that the relevant Sub-Programme 2.4.2.1, Plant Quarantine, should be strengthened and adequately staffed, including a senior supervisory officer, if at all possible.
187. The Conference reiterated the recommendation of its Fifteenth Session that the provisions of the International Plant Protection Convention, dealing with the motel phytosanitary certificate, be re-examined. It noted that an expert consultation of representatives of regional plant protection organizations was programmed for 1972-73, but since regional organizations were advisory bodies without legislative and regulatory power, it recommended instead that an ad hoc consultation, with invitations extended to all Member Nations, should be organized as soon as possible in the forthcoming biennium, and that funds be sought for such a consultation. The Conference appreciated the offer made by the Government of Canada to make available again the services of an expert for a short term to assist FAO in this connexion.
188. The Conference emphasized the importance of the work on agricultural pesticides and integrated pest-control. Increased attention should also be given to the problems of pesticide residues in food and their effects on wildlife and on the environment in general.
189. The Conference considered that losses caused by rodents and grain-eating birds during both the pre-and post-harvest stages were particularly important in many developing countries, and recommended that field programmes. to reduce these losses, as well as losses caused by storage infestation, be expanded as much as possible with extra-budgetary funding.
190. The Conference attached great importance to the programme for reducing losses that occur during storage, distribution and utilization of agricultural products.
191. The Conference noted that the budgets for Sub-Programme 2.4.3.2, Timber Treatment, Storage and Distribution, had been reduced through shifts to other sub-programmes. Considering the losses occasioned by the under-utilization of tropical woods and during timber processing, there was some feeling that special attention nevertheless be given to this subject.
192. In view of their perishable nature, efficient preservation, distribution and marketing of fish and fish products were important. The Conference recommended increasing attention be paid to Sub-Programme 2.4.3.3, Distribution of Fish and Fish Products.
193. The importance of Sub-Programme 2.4.2.4, Milk and Dairy Products, was emphasized and the proposal for the establishment of a new Meat and Milk Service was approved.
194. Emphasis was placed on the elimination of waste at village and family level and in particular on the need for research in this field. The Conference noted that extra-budgetary funds were expected for the Sub-Programme 2.4.3.6, Management of Family Food Resources and Consumer Education.
195. The Conference recommended that special attention be given to Sub-Programme 2.4.3.5, Storage Structure, Equipment and Techniques. Special problems were being created by increased yields, and from multi-cropping when harvest came during a wet period. In view of foreign exchange problems, with special reference to the drying and storage of food crops, the programme for developing designs based on local materials for storage structures at farm and village level was commended.
e) Programme Objective 2.5. Earning and Saving of Foreign Exchange
196. The Conference recognized this as a field of work which was growing in scope and importance. Foreign exchange earned through agricultural exports or saved on agricultural imports remained indispensable to a large majority of developing countries as the principal means of financing capital and other imports essential to their development. Moreover, as basic production objectives of many developing countries, especially in the food area, were increasingly realized, the expansion of export outlets was becoming a major developmental goal in its own right, comparable to that of production expansion in previous decades. But this would give rise to new problems in international trade. Thus, export expansion and import substitution, progressively achieved by individual countries, tended to sharpen competition in world agricultural markets, which called for adjustment measures at the national and international levels.
197. It was stressed that, to succeed in enlarging their foreign exchange resources, governments of developing countries must increase not only the volume of exports of agricultural commodities, but also the unit values of these exports. The latter called for larger exports of non-traditional high-value goods, especially processed and semi-processed products. It was noted, therefore, that on the national plane, governments of the developing countries were seeking assistance from FAO in increasing their processing capacity, improving the quality and variety of their products, establishing more advanced stages of processing, diversifying their agricultural sectors, and identifying markets for their exportable products. At the international level, intergovernmental cooperation was needed to deal with the problems of surpluses and market instability, of trade barriers and protectionist policies, and of the growing threat to a number of agricultural products posed by competition
from synthetics.
198. The Conference supported FAA's direct assistance to member countries not only in continuing factual studies, but also in taking more positive action in implementing sound national and regional programmes. and projects aimed at increasing their export potential or import substitution possibilities, and its work in the field of intergovernmental commodity consultation which required a continuing flow of information research and studies. These activities formed a vital part of current international efforts towards the achievement of the goals of the Second Development Decade which called for an annual expansion of over 7 percent in exports from the developing countries.
199. The growing interaction of FAA's field work and of its Regular Programme activities in this area of concentration was appreciated. In some sub-progresses, however, including those on processing, plant production and protection, forestry and fisheries, trade promotion and animal health and production, the ratio of field to Regular Programme activities was very high. Some concern was expressed at the small increases for some specific sub-programmes, e.g. 2.5.3.5, Processing of Food and Agricultural Products and Utilization of By-products 200.
200. The Conference approved and requested an intensification of FAA's close working relationships in all activities in this area of concentration with many international agencies, and notably with UNCTAD, GATT, the UNCTAD/GATT International Trade Centre, UNIDO, Unesco, WHO, in particular with reference to Codex Alimentarius, OECD, the autonomous commodity study groups and councils, with regional bodies such as Regional Economic Commissions, the Pan American Health Organization, and with specialized organizations such as the International Standards Organization, etc. There was also close cooperation with a large number of professional non-governmental bodies. It was also pointed out that FAO should make full use of studies prepared by other organizations in order to avoid duplication of effort and to save resources. Similarly, FAO made every effort to meet requests from other organizations, although this at times involved unprogrammed activities.
201. The Conference considered that FAO was making a particularly useful contribution to governments in Sub-Programme 2.5.1, Analysis of Commodity Markets and Development of Commodity Policies and Actions, both in the area of research and analysis-which provided the intelligence framework for a wide range of other FAO activities at Headquarters and the field-and in the area of commodity policies aiming at fostering sound conditions of production and trade. The latter objective was the end-purpose of much of this area of concentration, and it would increase in importance as FAA's work on adjustments gathered momentum. The Organization's main instruments in this work, apart from the Conference and Council, were the Committee on Commodity Problems, its eleven commodity study groups and various fishery and forestry committees and commissions. While many of these groups had been mainly concerned with the identification and analysis of problems, some of them hat sponsored informal
trading arrangements and others were working on approaches to solutions of the problems of market stability and growth.
202. The Conference expressed some concern at the difficulties of setting up new commodity bodies, especially in the case of tobacco and pepper. The need for flexibility in scheduling sessions of existing bodies was stressed, with a view to releasing funds for the holding of meetings on other problem commodities. It was recognized, however, that flexibility wee being already exercised to the extent possible by the Director-General in consultation with the governments concerned. A number of commodity meetings had been postponed, while others were brought forward, reflecting the relative urgencies of the respective situations. The Conference felt that it was important to vary the frequency of commodity meetings in accordance with the situation of particular commodities and that the CCP should thoroughly evaluate the activities of its subsidiary bodies, with a view to discontinuing the subsidiary bodies, whose existence was no longer Justified. The importance of FAA's work on
2.5.1.3, Food Aid Principles, Policies and Consultations, particularly the activities of the Consultative Sub-Committee on Surplus Disposal, was also emphasized.
203. The Conference singled out FAA's activities in trade promotion 2.5.2.1, Commodity Trade Promotion, 2.5.2.2, Forest Products, Marketing and Trade Promotion, and 2.5.2.4, Fishery Products Marketing, as some of the most promising ways of assisting developing countries. Work in this field consisted of a wide range of activities including marketing improvements, quality control, end-use research and provision of an export-oriented content in FAA's field programmes. and projects. The Conference noted that close cooperation had been developed with the UNCTAD/GATT International Trade Centre, one notable example of which had been the Joint endeavours towards developing an institutional framework for expanding the export and use of tropical forest products which were of mayor interest to many developing countries.
204. The Conference laid stress on the significance of timber trend studies, and welcomed the proposal for a new study on timber trends in the Par East Region (2.5.1.5, Studies of Forestry Markets). It also welcomed the offer of the Government of Finland to provide facilities for a training centre in saw milling. It noted with satisfaction the useful results achieved at the consultation on housing sponsored by the Government of Canada and was informed that a meeting would shortly be held between representatives of the U.N. Housing Centre, UNIDO, FAO and the Government of Canada to draw up a follow-up programme.
205. Sub-Programme, 2.5.3.1, Industrial and Horticultural Crops, received support, although it was suggested that a set of priorities might be established in this work. Horticultural crops and tropical and sub-tropical fruits and vegetables in particular offered development opportunities from the point of view of employment, nutrition and exports. Strengthening of work in this field wee suggested, especially through the organization of training courses and more assistance in the production of vegetables, tropical fruits and exotic flowers as an aspect of diversification. The Conference hoped that it would be possible to hold in the 1972-73 biennium the Third Session of the FAO Commission on Horticultural Production in the Near East and North Africa, and welcomed the offer of the Eghyptian Government to host this Session.
206. As regards industrial crops, the Conference drew attention to the need for keeping under review the question of competition between synthetics and natural products. It also hoped that FAA's work in the field of oilseeds court be intensifies. In this respect, the use of glandless cotton should be encouraged.
207. Particular attention was paid to the importance of assisting developing countries in promoting their forest industries with a view to the impact of processed forest products on the earning sat saving of foreign exchange.
208. Stress was given to the need of developing countries for assistance in fish processing technology (2.5.3.4, Fishery Industries), for example in furthering the use of powdered fish products for human consumption and in developing cooperative arrangements with industries in the developed countries aimed at the manufacture of fishing gear and equipment in developing countries. The importance of marketing of fish products was also stressed (2.5,1.6, Studies of Fishery Markets). The Conference, in noting the importance of interregional trade, urged that attention should also be paid to intra-regional trade in fish and fishery products, identifying the constraints on this trade and suggesting ways of overcoming them.
209. The Conference emphasized the importance of the meat hygiene and slaughterhouse development aspects of Sub-Programme 2.5.3.3, Animal Products. Attention was directed to the importance of livestock disease control and the establishment and recognition of disease-free zones in stimulating the export of animal products, especially meat and meat products.
f) Programme Objective 2.6: Agricultural Development Planning
210. The Conference noted that Programme Objective 2.6 was important. It further noted that this Programme Objective was concerned with all facets of economic and social development, and supported the Member Nations' and the Organization's efforts at agricultural development in general, by providing elements of a global framework for national planning and by helping countries and multinational groups to improve their plans and planning capacity.
211. The Conference noted that important planning activities were in addition carried out under some other programme objectives, particularly 2.2, Increasing Yields and 2.3, the Protein Problem.
212. In discussing the activities concerned with 2.6.1.1, General Agricultural Development Planning, the Conference stressed the importance of FAO planning experts assisting in the planning work of the countries where they serve, particularly to build institutions which strengthen the Member Nations' planning capacity. The Conference emphasized the importance of FAO training activities in improving the planning capacity of Member Nations, and it was suggested that the achievements and impact of these activities might be reviewed. The Conference noted the shift from bilingual international training courses in agricultural planning every two years to monolingual (alternately) courses held annually in different official languages of the Organization. It was recognized that this might lead to some loss in terms of the exchange of experience and ideas from different backgrounds, but this would be compensated for by the fact that it was thus possible to double the capacity of
these courses without an increase in expenditure. By selecting participants and lecturers from a wide range of backgrounds it should be possible to maintain the breadth and stimulus of the courses. The Conference stressed the importance of coordinating carefully the work on concepts and techniques of planning under this sub-programme with that on administrative structures for planning under Sub-Programme 2.1.2.1, Organization of Agricultural and Rural Ministries, Departments and Related Institutions.
213. With regard to 2.6.1.2, Economic Intelligence, Outlook and Analytical Studies, it was suggested that the analytical studies proposed under this sub-programme should include an examination of costs of production of commodities in different countries, but it was cautioned that there were methodological difficulties involved. Also the study of the impact of national agricultural policies on other countries was considered important. The Conference welcomed the planned new work on crop insurance. The Conference stressed the importance of more attention to social aspects of development in the proposed situation and outlook work.
214. In discussing the work under 2.6.1.3, Agricultural Commodity Projections, some concern was expresses about what seemed to be conflicting advice on commodity production by FAO and other agencies such as IBRD. In the Director-General's view, however, it was a question of the difference between global studies of commodity prospects and the economic feasibility of individual countries to compete in the export market for a given commodity, even if globally there was a present or prospective, surplus situation. The Conference was informed that the Director-General would welcome requests through UNDP for assistance in formulating national commodity policies as a follow-up of its global commodity projections.
215. Regarding 2.6.1.4, Perspective Study of World Agricultural Development (PSWAD), a number of delegates considered that it was not the function of the PAB to get heavily involved in specific operational tasks. They felt that in the medium term the involvement of PAB in such work should be reduced so that it could concentrate on its originally intended advisory role. Disappointment was expressed about the limitation to South America of the perspective study, and it was hoped that in the course of further work it would be possible to include other countries.
216. In discussing 2.6.2.1, Project Appraisal and Evaluation, the Conference agreed that evaluation of ongoing or terminated projects ant country programmes was an important function, ant some delegates thought it would have to be strengthened in the future. The Conference stressed the need for an interdisciplinary approach, ant welcomed the assurance that such an approach wee in fact being followed. The plans to conduct methodological work on appraisal and evaluation were generally welcomed.
217. The Conference agreed that the work on 2.6.2.2, Basic Statistics, and 2.6.2.3, Statistics Development, as well as the related activities in forestry and fisheries under 2.6.2.4, Forestry Statistics, Analysis and Planning, and 2.6.2.5, Fishery Statistics, Analysis and Planning, made an essential contribution to improved national planning. In reply to an enquiry about the relative priorities amongst the large number of activities covered by 2.6.2.2, the Conference was informed that all the activities listed would not necessarily be carried out with the same degree of depth and country coverage. For example, work on compilation of economic accounts for agriculture would be largely concentrated on production accounts. It wee also explained that the proposed work on supply/utilization balances would be linked with the work on agricultural production accounts so as to cover both quantity and value aspects. In relation to 2.6.2.3, Statistics Development, it was explained that
the decennial world census of agriculture, would remain a focal point of FAA's promotional efforts for development of agricultural statistics, and that the programme contemplated in 1972-73 would emphasize the links to be established between the census and current statistics so as to cover all the major aspects of agricultural statistics on a continuing basis. As regards the coordination of statistical work at Headquarters between the Economic and Social, Forestry and Fisheries Departments, the Conference was informed that well functioning interdepartmental machinery existed for the purpose, and the harmonization of concepts and working methods was already far advanced. With regard to coordination of statistical work between agencies of the UN family it was pointed out that appropriate machinery existed in the form of the ACC Sub-Committee on Statistics which included among its tasks the avoidance of duplication of requests of information from countries.
218. The Conference recognized that a basic requirement for much of the organization's work in the area of current reporting and analytical studies was the availability of up-to-date statistical and other information from Member Nations. The Conference welcomed the information that steps were being taken by the secretariat to ensure, with the cooperation of member governments and national FAO Committees, a more adequate and speedy flow of such information.
219. Several delegates notes with regret that it was proposed to discontinue the publication of Unasylva The Conference was informed that the possibility of continuing Unasylva was kept under consideration, and that there were hopes that means for this might be found, without additional expenditure for Member Nations. A number of delegates queried the contribution expected from FAO for the Seventh World Forestry Congress, and were informed that Funds-in-Trust arrangements had been made with the host government to cover FAO assistance in the organization of the Congress. FAO was bearing only the cost of its own technical participation.
220. Concerning assistance by FAO to existing non-FAO fisheries bodies, the Conference was informed that after initial help by FAO in the establishment phase, such bodies were expected to carry on their activities under their own budgets, although FAO continued to cooperate with them closely to promote complementarily of research and a common approach to statistics, and sometimes provided services on a reimbursable basis. The Conference noted that FAA's work through its own regional fishery bodies was important in ensuring the rational utilization of fishery resources, and would help to provide a basis for the future development and protection of marine resources.
g) Summary-Chapter 2
221. The Conference felt that in general the programme objectives in this chapter were properly balanced but recognized that this matter would need further review in the coming biennium. It wee informed that the comments and suggestions made by the delegates on the various sub-programmes would be taken into account by the Director-General in implementing this portion of the 1972-73 Programme of Work and Budget. On this understanding, the Conference approved the programme and budgetary proposals presented in this chapter.
Chapter 3 - Field Programmes and Development Support
222. The Conference noted that the new procedures of UNDP, the expansion of FAO/IBRD cooperative activities and the need for coordination of all field programmes regardless of financing source required a variety of structural changes in the Development Department, with the consequent budget implications reflected in the programme of Work and Budget 1972-73. For instance, the FFHC projects unit had been transferred to, and an Operations Centre created in the Area Service Division. Additional resources were allocated to the Investment Centre to service increased collaboration with the IBRD, the Area Banks and with other development finance institutions, notably IDB.
223. The Conference also noted that the FAO/Industry Cooperative Programme was wholly financed by Industry Members, and that the anticipated increase in budget requirements could be expected to receive favourable consideration at the next session of the General Committee of the Programme.
224. There was general support of the Conference for the measures undertaken or planned to gear the FAO development structure, at all levels, to meet FAA's increased responsibilities in the future. At the Headquarters level the Conference in particular emphasised the need for the Area Service Division which, in active and constant association with all parts of the Organization, especially the Technical and Economic Departments, would assist in programming, project formulation and monitoring, would coordinate all FAO field activities on a country basis, and with respect to these activities would liaise with regional and field representatives as well as the sponsoring organizations. Noting the importance of timely investment follow-up to FAA's pre-investment studies, the Conference recognized the need to expand the Work of the Investment Centre, with special attention to strengthening cooperation with the Area Banks.
225. With reference to the in-depth study previously noted in paragraph 136 above, the Conference desires such study should take account of arrangements in force, or under development, within the United Nations System, such as United Nations regionalization. It should also make recommendations on increasing effective relationships between the United Nations Regional Economic Commissions and the FAO Regional Offices, as well as on the role of the Joint Divisions of FAO now outposted in the Economic Commissions.
226. With regard to the resources of the Regional Offices, mentioned in paragraph 135 above, the Conference welcomed the Consultant Fund at the disposal of these Regional Offices as a measure for speedy and flexible involvement by FAO in activities at the field level.
227. The Conference approved the programme and budgetary proposals presented in this chapter.
Chapter 4 - Special Programmes
228. The Conference noted the transfer to the Area Service Division of that portion of the FFH Programme concerned with project operations, consisting of one professional and three General Service posts. It also noted that the 1972-73 programme would concentrate on activities in the areas of information, rural youth and in seeking support from national committees and non-governmental organizations for projects in various Areas of Concentration.
229. It also noted that the proposal for Programme 4.2, the Joint FAD/WHO Food Standards Programme, involved a continuation of the current programme with only a small increase provided for translation services.
230. With regard to Programme 4.3, it was noted that from 1972 André Mayer Fellowships would all be awarded for advanced research as originally intended and that the practice of awarding about half of them for training purposes would be discontinued. This would have the effect of upgrading the standard of the programme. The awards would be made with due regard to geographical representation which meant most of them would in fact continue to go to nationals of developing countries.
231. The Conference noted that 4.4, the Junior Professional Training Programme, would be continued as previously but that it was expected that at least half of the trainees would return to their countries of origin and that not more than half of them would be retained in the service of FAO. It also noted that trainee candidates could be accepted from all Member Nations but that it was expected that most of them would come from developing countries.
232. The Conference approve_ the programme and budgetary proposals presented in this chapter.
Chapter 5 - General Programme Services
a) Programme 5.2.1: Public Information and ''Ceres''
b) Programme 5.2.2: Development Support Communications
c) Programme Objectives 5.3 and 5.5: Documentation and Library
d) Programme Objective 5.4: Legislation
e) Programme Objective 5.6: Language Training
f) Programme Objective 5.7: Publications
a) Programme 5.2.1: Public Information and ''Ceres''
233. The Conference welcomed the general success of Ceres. In this connexion, a number of delegates expressed the view that Ceres was indeed providing a forum for discussion of international development problems At the same time, attention was drawn to its cost of production which should be lowered to the maximum extent possible compatible with its effectiveness. Noting the continued growth of the revenue obtained by Ceres from advertising and sales, and bearing in mind that it had never been envisaged that it would be entirely self-supporting, the Conference requested the Council and the Programme Committee to review this magazine in the context of the overall policy in regard to the publication of periodicals by FAO as well as in the light of the terms of reference for Ceres as defined by the Conference at its Thirteenth Session. The suggestion was made that the Director General should consider whether publishing Ceres quarterly instead of bi-monthly might not bring about
a reduction in its net budgetary cost to the Regular Programme.
b) Programme 5.2.2: Development Support Communications
234. The Conference stressed the value of filmstrips and films in the field of agricultural information, for training purposes particularly those showing practical ways of improving agricultural production and in the motivation and involvement of local populations. The Conference recommended that where possible the opportunity should be taken to undertake co-productions of filmstrips and films in association with developing countries and thus enjoy the benefit of their contribution in the presentation of these audio-visual aids.
c) Programme Objectives 5.3 and 5.5: Documentation and Library
235. The Conference noted that these two programme objectives were complementary, and that these activities would be further integrated, during 1972-73, to meet a common objective: better dissemination and utilization of technical and scientific information, in agriculture and related fields, among Member Nations.
236. For this purpose, emphasis should be put on the development and implementation of information systems, through international cooperation in agricultural documentation. The main lines of activities would be an expansion of the services to the users of the Library and the Documentation Centre, an increased technical assistance programme for the establishment of national or regional agricultural documentation centres, and the development of international information networks and systems, such as CARIS (agricultural research information system), AGLINET (a network of Agricultural Libraries) and AGRIS (an international system for economic, scientific and technological information in agriculture).
237. As regards AGRIS the Conference indicated its interest and support for the establishment of such an international information system, subject to the necessary external contributions from participants in the system.
238. The Conference accordingly adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 4/71
International Information System for the
Agricultural Sciences and Technology (AGRIS)
THE CONFERENCE,
Having been informed of the results achieved by FAO and international experts in the study of AGRIS (Levels I and II),
Noting the recent developments in information transfer techniques, and the role they can play in all sectors of social and economic development and particularly in agriculture, nutrition and allied fields,
Having seen the interest shown by FAO Member Nations in the establishment of such an international information system,
Also noting the interest shown within the United Nations System for information transfer, recently evidenced by the Conference held in Unesco for the establishment of a Worldwide Information System for Science and Technology (UNISIST) to which AGRIS brings a positive contribution,
Desiring that the proposed system be worldwide and for this purpose be sponsored and coordinated by FAO so that it would benefit both the developing and developed countries,
1. Invites the Director-General to pursue his efforts for further development of AGRIS and, in particular, endeavour to:
(a) Seek further support from interested outside bodies and institutions, as well as from Member Nations for the rapid implementation of AGRIS-Level I;
(b) Pursue, with available means at his disposal and with outside support as he can enlist, the detailed technical preparations needed for implementation;
(c) Establish the structural bases of the AGRIS-Level I structure, i.e. through negotiations with the main, national or other, agricultural information services, already in existence or being presently developed;
(d) Start a first limited implementation on an operational basis in 1973;
(e) Pursue, together with the implementation of AGRIS-Level I, the study of AGRIS Level II, which constitutes an indispensable complement of Level I;
2. Requests the Director-General to report on progress made to the next sessions of the FAO Council and Conference, and, in accordance with this progress, to include the AGRIS project and suitable financial provisions in FAA's next Programe of Work and Budget for 1974-75.
(Adopted, 23 November 1971)
d) Programme Objective 5.4: Legislation
239. The Conference noted that a single Legal Office was established under the direction of the Legal Counsel, which included the Legislation Branch which was transferred from the Office of General Affairs and Information.
e) Programme Objective 5.6: Language Training
240. The Conference noted that under Programme Objective 5.6, the Language Training Programme, which had been favourably reviewed by the Finance Committee and the Council on the basis of the substantial development of this activity in the first two years of its operation, would be maintained at its present level during the coming biennium. Except for cost increases, including adjustments in the basis of remuneration of the teaching staff, there would be no expansion of available resources in 1972-73.
<section>9</section>
f) Programme Objective 5.7: Publications
241. The Conference noted that the total funds available for publications and documents work, amounting to $8 405 000, were distributed, except for a small residual amount, among all sub programmes, but would be pooled and managed centrally on behalf of all divisions. The Publications Division would be accountable to the users for the funds and the execution of the programme. The capacity of the Organization to issue publications and documents would remain substantially stabilized in 1972-73. The Arabic translation programme of 1.8 million words planned for 1970-71 had been fully carried out and about the same volume of Arabic translation was planned for 1972-73.
242. In line with the guiding principles governing FAO policy on publications and documents, adopted by the Council at its Fifty-Fifth Session (November 1970), the Director-General had placed more emphasis on publications of lasting value, especially for the transfer of knowledge at the farm, village and teaching levels. The Conference approved the proposed publications and documents programme as set forth in C 71/3-Sup. 1 (including its corrigendum) noting also that the Publications Division would supply the necessary documentation services for sessions, conferences, etc., as listed in C 71/3-Sup. 2, Rev. 1.
243. In connexion with observations made about the cost of Ceres, about the proposed new Quarterly FAO Animal Review and the possible discontinuation of the forestry quarterly Unasylva (listed in the publications programme under the heading ''If resources permit'' ), the Conference requested the Council and its Programme Committee in 1972 to review the Organization's policy concerning the publication of periodicals, taking into consideration the many expressions of support for the continuation of Unasylva and all relevant factors such as the purpose, readership, periodicity and cost of the various periodicals issued.
244. In accordance with Financial Regulation 6.9, the Conference approved the estimates presented for expenditure to be borne by the Publications Revolving Fund in 1972-73, out of revenue. These estimates included $70 000 to cover the reprinting of publications for which a sales demand existed, $50 000 for personal services for sales promotion purposes, $60 000 for other sales promotion expenditures, and $329 000 for the development of Ceres, subject to the condition previously laid down in Conference Resolution 7/69 that expenditure financed out of income from Ceres must be kept within the amount of firm advertising commitments and firm sales.
245. The Conference approved the programme and budgetary proposals presented in this chapter.
Chapter 6 - General Support
246. The Conference noted that this Chapter covered under three programme objectives such supporting services as Administration (6.1), Audit (6.2) and Common Services (6.3) and contained practically no increases in programme resources. Exceptionally, $50 000 was provided for management training. This was more than counterbalanced by the Director General's action to deduct $100 000 from the original estimates for General Operating Expenses. The Conference endorsed the continuing emphasis on the role of management training, as well as other aspects of programme-related in-service training activities, as essential to achieving increasingly effective operations.
247. The Conference was informed of the action being taken by the Director-General to improve staff/management relations in the light of the recommendations of the Special Committee chaired by Ambassador Brynolf Eng of Sweden, dealing with such varied aspects as staff participation in programme activities, career and promotion policies, staff evaluation, staff development and training, rotation between Headquarters and the field, and special field staff problems.
248. The Conference also noted that, in Programme 6.3.1-Computer Services, computer costs were being budgeted under, and allocated directly to, all pertinent 1972-73 programmes and sub-programmes and that only a residual amount of $39 617 was provided directly to the Computer Services under the Regular Programme. Three other programme objectives administered by the Administration and Finance Department were covered in other chapters namely Programme Objectives 4.3 Fellowships, 4.4 Junior Professional Training, and 5.6 Language Training.
249. The Conference approved the programme and budgetary proposals presented in this chapter.
Chapter 7 - Miscellaneous Expenditure
250. The Conference noted that the additional funds provided under this chapter, which concerned primarily the direct costs of FAO participation in institutions of the United Nations common system, covered only increased costs. It concurred with the proposal of the Director-General to reduce the original estimate for one of these activities (the Inter Organizational Board on Information Systems and Computerization) from $100 000 to $50000 by assigning existing FAO staff to a special task force.
Chapter 8 - Contingencies
251. The Conference agreed with the Director-General that the $350 000 originally proposed for Contingencies in 1972-73-the same as for 1970-71-should be reduced to $200 000 in order to achieve essential savings.
Chapter 9 - Special Budgetary Authorizations
252. The Conference noted that this chapter reflected certain special items which were applicable during the 1970-71 biennium, to cover a proportion of the anticipated increased costs for staff remuneration, as well as expenditure entailed in implementation of the management improvement measures programme, but that no funds were necessary under this chapter for 1972-73. The Conference was informed that moat of the amounts shown for 1970-71 under this heading had already been distributed over user-chapters, thus reducing considerably the provisions indicated under Chapter 9.
Chapter 10 - Transfer to Tax Equalization Fund
Budgetary Appropriations 1972-73
253. The Conference reviewed the budgetary implications involved in the establishment of the Tax Equalization Fund as of 1 January 1972, in line with the earlier authorization of the Eleventh Conference Session (1961) and its relation to the Staff Assessment scheme, in effect since 1 January 1964. It noted in particular that while the amount of $14 300 000 being transferred to the Tax Equalization Fund was included in the ''gross'' 1972-73 budget, this would have no effect on the contributions payable by Member Nations which do not levy taxes on FAO emoluments.
254. The Conference approved the programme and budgetary proposals presented in Chapters 7 through 10.
Budget Level
255. The Conference noted that in C 71/3 the Director-General had originally proposed a working budget level of $87 090 000; that the Programme and Finance Committees had recommended adjustments to the Fifty-Sixth session of the Council involving a reduction of $405 800; and that the Fifty-Seventh session of the Council had recommended acceptance of the Director General's proposals for further reductions of net $686 200. The combined reductions of $1 092 000 reduced the working budget level to $85 998 000 and the assessment budget to $79 618 000 (rounded to $79 620 000 for assessment purposes). This increase amounted to a working budget increase of $13 780 000 over 1970-71. Of this $12 619 970 or 17.5 percent was for cost increases and $1 160 030 or 1.6 percent for programme increases. In addition to the latter, shifts of resources amounting to about $1.6 million from lower to higher priority activities had been proposed in C 71/3.
256. The Conference was informed that current estimates of additional salary and wage increases for 1972-73 amounted to about $4 755 000, but that the Draft Programme of Work and Budget included only $1 963 000 for this purpose so that a potential amount of around $2 792 000, plus an estimated $756 000 in exchange losses (estimated as at 1 November 1971), totalling about $3 550 000, was unbudgeted.
257. The Conference approved the Draft Programme of Work and Budget for 1972-73 as amended by C 71/3-Add. 2 and the amended budget level of $85 998 000. The Conference further approved the Director-General's proposal to reduce the budgetary appropriations by the amount of $4 338 000 to be included in a consolidated UNDP Agency Costs Budget.
258. The Conference accordingly adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 5/71
a) Budgetary Appropriations 1972-73
THE CONFERENCE,
Having considered the Director-General's Programme of Work and Budget and the conclusions reached by its Commissions,
Approves the Programme of Work proposed by the Director-General for 1972-73;
Resolves that for the financial period 1972-73:
1. Appropriations are voted for the following purposes:
Chapter 1 -General Policy and Direction $ 5 129 740
Chapter 2 -Technical and Economic Programmes $ 37 773 476
Chapter 3 -Field Programmes and Development Support $ 16 968 984
Chapter 4 -Special Programmes $ 2 900 330
Chapter 5 -General Programme Services $ 5 819 000
Chapter 6 -General Support $ 16 798 470
Chapter 7 -Miscellaneous Expenditure $ 408 000
Chapter 8 -Contingencies $ 200 000
Chapter 9 -Special Budgetary Authorizations
Total effective Working Budget $ NIL
Chapter 10 -Transfer to Tax Equalization Fund
Total Appropriations (Gross) $ 14 300 000
2. The appropriations (gross) voted in paragraph 1 above, shall be reduced by the amount of $4 338 000, which amount shall be included in a consolidated UNDP Agency Costs Budget; and, accordingly, the above Chapter totals shall be amended by the Director General, as appropriate;
3. The appropriations (gross) voted in paragraph 1 as amended by the Director-General in accordance with paragraph 2, shall be financed by assessment on Member Nations after deduction of Miscellaneous Income in the amount of $2 340 000, thus resulting in assessments against Member Nations of $93 620 000;
4. In establishing the actual amounts of contributions to be paid by individual Member Nations, the assessment of each Member Nation shall be reduced by any amount standing to its credit in the Tax Equalization Fund; provided that the credits of a Member Nation that levies taxes on the salaries, emoluments and indemnities received from FAO by staff members who are nationals of such Nation, shall be reduced by the estimated amounts of such taxes to be reimbursed to the staff member by FAO
5. The contributions due from Member Nations in 1972 and 1973 shall be paid in accordance with the scale adopted by the Conference at its Sixteenth Session; which contributions, after the deduction of amounts standing to the credit of Member Nations in the Tax Equalization Fund, result in net amounts payable totalling US $79 620 000 as set out in Appendix E to this Report.
(Adopted 22 November 1971)
259. The Conference further approved the proposal to deal with the problem of unbudgeted costs firstly, by withdrawing $1 million from the Working Capital Funds, immediately after January 1972, to be reimbursed from the 1970-71 cash surplus provided that Member Nations paid their contributions in good time; secondly, by further savings of $600 000 the sources of which would be determined by the Director-General; and thirdly, if necessary, and on approval by the Council, by further withdrawing of approximately $2 million from the Working Capital Fund.
260. In reaching these conclusions, the Conference expressed its serious concern with the continuing problem of rising costs, both as regards the immediate effect on the budget level, particularly as regard the very small amount available for an increase in programme activities, and as regards the implications for the future.
261. The Conference emphasized the need to increase efficiency and improve management in order to reduce costs and to provide more resources for strengthening certain programme activities recommended by the Conference, and to be more selective in the definition of objectives and choice of priorities so as to avoid duplication of activities internally and with other international organizations, and to concentrate resources on effective execution of high-priority activities of benefit to Member Nations.
262. In this connexion, it wee felt that the Council, with the advice of the Programme and Finance Committees, should closely consider the question of priorities at its future sessions. Reference was also made to the desirability of reducing the costs of travel, meetings and certain general operating expenses (on which it wee noted, the Director-General had received recommendations from a consultant which he would shortly be studying and, as far as possible, implementing in the light of the views of the Conference). Reference was made to the need to control more closely the creation of new posts and upgrading. The Conference gave general approval to the initial recruitment of more staff members on fixed-term appointments as a means of creating greater flexibility and avoiding unnecessary continuing commitments.
263. In approving the Draft Programme of Work and Budget for 1972-73 there was further discussion of the Director-General's proposal for strengthening the Regional Offices.
264. The Conference welcomed the new programme budget format which considerably facilitated a better review of the work of the Organization and the determination of priorities. The Conference noted that further development of the programme budgeting system was already in hand and recommended the implementation of the steps necessary to provide in the Programme of Work and Budget 1974-75 a clearer definition of objectives, improvement in the narratives, and fuller information on cost and other increases. In view of the greater flexibility afforded by the new system, it was felt that in the interest of control of the use of resources the Annexes should be retained and should be more informative on proposed organizational, grading and other changes. The importance of providing adequate information on the breakdown of objects of expenditure was stressed.
265. As regards the budgetary situation, the Conference recognised the difficult situation in which the Director-General had been placed by circumstances beyond his control and appreciated the efforts he had made to mitigate these. Reference wee made to the effect of the recent currency changes on the real coat to Member Nations of their contributions. Regret wee expressed at the departure, involved in withdrawals from the Working Capital Fund, from the principles of full budgeting, and it was considered that the budget level should have been increased. The Conference re-endorsed the principle of full budgeting, which should be implemented in future, but considered that in view of the exceptional circumstances there was no practical alternative on this occasion but to approve the proposed level of $85 998 000 and to have recourse to the Working Capital Fund if and when necessary.
C. Medium-term plan
266. The Conference welcomed the Medium-Term Plan as a major advance in the medium-term planning of the Organization, as requested in Conference Resolution 9/69, and as a valuable instrument for determining the global role, policies and planning of the future activities of FAO, in line with the objectives of the Second Development Decade and FAA's competence and capacities.
267. The Conference endorsed the value of basing the Medium-Term Plan on the same general format as that of the Work of FAO and the Programme of Work ant Budget 1972-73, since this provided a concrete and practical structure for appraisal of past, present and future use of resources and an instrument for deciding priorities, but considered that some flexibility in the structure of presentation of the Medium-Term Plan might be desirable in future.
268. The Conference welcomed the Director-General's intention to improve the content and presentation of the Medium-Term Plan in its biennial revision. It requested that consideration should be given to the possibility of more sharply defining strategies and the proposed FAO activities related thereto, providing better and more selective indications of priorities, and, if possible, some variants related to different levels of resources. The Conference also stressed the need for regular evaluation of the effectiveness of both the Regular Programme and extra-budgetary activities, and recommended the development of such evaluation within the framework of the planned system of Programme, Planning and Budgeting as soon as possible.
269. As regards the projections in the Plan, the Conference considered that having regard to the problem of continuing cost increases and doubts about the availability of extra-budgetary funds at the projected rate, the projections and gradings should be regarded as trend indicators and not as financial targets.
270. The Conference stressed the need for concentration of effort and more rigorous selection of priorities. In this connexion, it noted that only one sub-programme wee expected to diminish. The Conference considered that unless many more activities were reduced or even eliminated, the limited amount of resources would be too thinly spread, and that it wee accordingly essential to select priorities rigorously both as regards the balance between Areas of Concentration and between the various sub-programmes and programme elements contained therein.
271. It was stressed that while FAO must retain the flexibility to respond to the requests of Member Nations, many activities were national priorities which were not necessarily the highest priorities for FAO action under the Regular Programme. A number of suggestions were put forward for improving the determination of priorities by the Conference. Others felt, however, that given the interests of different countries and different regions, it was unlikely that a clear consensus could be reached by the Conference and that it wee not only the duty of the Director-General, but it wee inevitable that the responsibility for proposing priorities should rest with him, subject to adjustment in the light of recommendations and suggestions by the Governing Bodies. It was also considered that the Regional Conferences had an important role in the consideration of priorities in a regional context for aggregation and rationalization in the global Conference document.
272. A large number of suggestions were made in discussion concerning the concept of Areas of Concentration, individual programmes and sub-programmes, mainly for selective strengthening of activities within Areas or within sub-programmes. The Conference requested the Director General, to take these suggestions into account in revising the Medium-Term Plan and in shaping the Draft Programme of Work and Budget for 1974-75. The Conference expressed the hope that the Director-General's initial suggestions for revision of the Medium-Term Plan would be available for review by the Fifty-Ninth Session of the Council.
273. In the field of Mobilization of Human Resources the Conference stressed in particular the importance of education and training and agrarian reform. As regards Increasing Fields, mention was made of a number of crops requiring attention and stress was laid on the rational development and use of soil and water resources. In the Area dealing with the Protein Problem, the importance of nutrition activities in general and the production and equitable distribution of protein sources were emphasized. As regards Environment and War on Waste, the importance of FAA's activities within its fields of special competence and capacity was stressed. Particular emphasis was given to the priority of control of diseases and pests and improvement of storage. Full support was given to the work under Earning and Saving of Foreign Exchange and Agricultural Development Planning in view of their importance to national planning, intra-regional cooperation, and the solution of trade problems.
274. In general and with particular reference to special problems of the environment and of employment, the Conference stressed the need to avoid duplication with the role of other Agencies but also the necessity for organization-wide consciousness of the importance of these problems to successful development in qualitative as well as quantitative terms.
275. The Conference generality endorsed the proposals in the Medium-Term Plan concerning FAA's role in the field of research.
276. As regards paragraph 188 of the Medium-Term Plan, the Conference endorsed the view that the determination of political, economic and social systems wee the responsibility of individual Member Governments. It also considered that on request the Organization should provide valuable positive advice and assistance to governments in the context of their individual circumstances and FAA's experience elsewhere.
277. With regard to Part IV of the Plan, considerable stress was laid on the need for strengthening investment and pre-investment activities in the developing countries. The Conference stressed the implications of the strategy for food and agricultural development within the strategy for the Second Development Decade, particularly as regards the overall problems of international trade.
278. In conclusion, the Conference emphasized the necessity for FAO to achieve greater impact by concentration of its efforts, and adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 6/71
Medium-Term Plan
THE CONFERENCE,
Welcoming the measures adopted by the Director-General in compliance with Resolution 9/69.
Considering that the objectives, general guidelines, and order of priorities among the requirements of the Medium-Term Plan (C71/15), deserve the support of the Member Nations,
1. Approves the Medium-Term Plan as a general framework for the planning and programming of the activities of the Organization by the Director-General, and for review of those activities by the Council and its committees, subject to the extent to which the programmes of work and budget for the biennia 1974-75 and 1976-77 are approved in the then prevailing circumstances;
2. Requests the Council to have its committees re-examine the trend indicators for the programmes and sub-programmes and the flexibility of the various modes of action in order to arrive at an economical and effective use of the resources of the Regular Programme and the extra-budgetary funds in keeping with the recommendation to be included in the report of the Sixteenth Session of the Conference;
3. Urges Governments to limit their requests for the creation of new sub-programmes inside the coming Programme of Work and Budget for 1974-75;
4. Requests the Director-General to submit to the Committee on Agriculture, the Committee on Fisheries, the Committee on Forestry and the Committee on Commodity Problems, preliminary sub-programme proposals in a form which firstly, will permit each of these Committees to make recommendations on the priorities which should be accorded to the sub-programmes coming within their terms of reference, and secondly, will result in marked elimination of low priority activities for consideration in preparation of the 1974-75 Programme of Work and Budget;
5. Further requests the Director-General to bring together these recommendations in a form which will allow the Regional Conferences to be held during 1972 to express effective judgments on the priority recommendations;
6. Also requests the Director-General, in consultation with the Programme and Finance Committees, subsequently to present to the Council a balanced and coordinated presentation of programme priorities for inclusion in the Programme of Work for 1974-75 in a form that will permit the Council to indicate to the Director-General where readjustments should be made;
7. Also requests the Director-General after these consultations to continue to adjust objectives, priorities and needs, and to present to the Sixtieth Session of the Council and to the Seventeenth Session of the Conference a revised medium-term plan for the period 1974-79;
8. Also requests the Director-General to draw to the attention of all Member Nations the importance of the procedures envisaged in the resolution with a view to ensuring effective participation of Member Nations in the work of the four standing Committees of the Council.
(Adopted, 22 November 1971)
D. Relations and consultations with international organizations on PROGRAMME matters of common interest
Matters Arising from Discussions in the UN General Assembly. ECOSOC and ACC
Progress Report on Cooperation between FAO and UNDP
Decolonization
FAA's Participation in the UN Conference on the Human Environment, Stockholm, 1972
UN Joint Inspection Unit
FAO Activities Related to International Agricultural Research
Relations with Intergovernmental and International Non-Governmental Organizations
Matters Arising from Discussions in the UN General Assembly. ECOSOC and ACC
279. The Conference took note of the report of the Director-General on matters arising from recent discussions in the General Assembly, ECOSOC and ACC which indicated developments on important inter-agency matters, and the manner in which the Director-General was cooperating with other organizations of the UN System.
280. In response to a request made during discussions of the Programme of Work and Budget for a statement on the present status of cooperation between FAO and UNIDO, notably in the fields of fishery and forest industries, the Conference wee informed that UNIDO, which had been consulted, would prefer to respond to the request by a joint statement of the two Organizations and that it was not possible to prepare such a statement at short notice.
281. In the absence of a UNIDO representative the Conference felt that meaningful discussions were not possible. A suggestion was made that there should be an intergovernmental committee or a request to the UN Joint Inspection Unit to look into the obstacles still hampering effective cooperation. At the same time, the Conference was reminded that in view of the complex nature of the whole industrial development process in which UNIDO was involved, it would be desirable to have a Joint statement prepared before considering any other action.
282. The Conference accordingly requested the Director-General to arrange for the preparation of a joint statement in cooperation with the Executive Director of UNIDO on the subject in time for submission to the Programme Committee at its Spring 1972 Session and, subsequently, to the Fifty-Ninth Session of the Council. The statement should indicate the present status of the working of the Agreement setting out guidelines for cooperation between FAO and UNIDO in the field of industrial development and identify problem areas in which respective responsibilities of the two Organizations still required clearer definition. The statement should also indicate whether it would be helpful to have the relationship between the two organizations reviewed by the Joint Inspection Unit or perhaps by an intergovernmental committee. In this regard, the Conference recalled the earlier request made at its Fifteenth Session urging that outstanding issues, notably in respect of an integrated
approach to forestry and forest management and the production, processing and marketing of forest products, be resolved expeditiously in a pragmatic manner, having regard to the considerable expertise built up over many years by FAO in this field.
283. The Conference considered the special report on the ''Green Revolution'' which provided a mutually acceptable framework for inter-agency cooperation to further the introduction and extension of the application of new varieties of high-yielding food crops and the complex range of measures required to support it. The Conference recalled its discussions on the substantive aspects of the paper when it considered the Director-General's proposals for the Programme of Work and Budget for 1972-73 and his Medium-Term Plan, and the importance which it attached to the suggestions made to sustain and promote the Green Revolution.
284. The Conference noted the continuing nature of the action on this subject in cooperation with other organizations and taking into account the suggestions it had made. It further endorsed the proposal that the report on the Green Revolution be a major item for discussion at the 1972 FAO Regional Conferences, especially since the spread of the new technology to new areas and its adaptation to other crops would have to be determined within the context of specific and varying local situations and needs.
285. The Conference also considered a document on the production and use of edible protein, which contained relevant chapters of the Strategy Statement on Action to Avert the Protein Crisis in the Developing Countries, prepared by a panel of experts and submitted by the Secretary-General of the United Nations to the Fifty-First Session of ECOSOC.
286. The Conference also heard a statement by Professor Bo Vahlquist, a member of the Protein Advisory Group of the United Nations System (PAG) who, in accordance with a recommendation contained in ECOSOC Resolution 1640 (LI), had been invited by the Director-General to participate in the discussions. Professor Vahlquist expressed appreciation of the positive response of FAO to the ECOSOC resolution mentioned, and outlined the origins and activities of PAG with an indication of the manner in which it would assist the members of the UN System in solving the problem of malnutrition. In paying tribute to FAA's contribution to progress in the protein field, he stressed the need for continued and expanded cooperation among the agencies of the UN System, with a view to solving increasingly urgent problems such as those of the pre-school child.
287. The Conference attached great importance to an intensification of the measures necessary to solve protein malnutrition, and in this connexion recalled the suggestions made in the course of the discussions of the Programme of Work and Budget and the Medium-Term Plan.
288. The Conference was also informed of the Director-General's proposal that the problem of closing the protein gap should be the subject of another major item for discussion at the 1972 FAO Regional Conferences. This would bring the subject, which was of basic importance to social and economic progress, more forcibly to the attention of national planning officials at the highest level.
289. The Conference agreed that the FAO Council should undertake a comprehensive review every year of the contributions being made by the FAO towards a solution of the malnutrition problem, within the framework of certain broad guidelines.
290. The Conference then adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 7/71
Increasing the Production and Use of Edible Proteins
THE CONFERENCE,
Recognizing FAO's leading role and constitutional responsibility in raising levels of nutrition and standards of living of the populations of the world,
Recalling Resolution 2/69 of its Fifteenth Session on closing the protein gap,
Noting with satisfaction the further developments in various other intergovernmental bodies designed to intensify measures in this important sector and notably the recent ECOSOC Resolution 1640 (LI) on edible protein,
Noting in particular the substantive chapters of the report of the Expert Panel on ''Action to Avert the Protein Crisis in the Developing Countries'', submitted by the Secretary-General to the Fifty-First Session of ECOSOC,
Noting further the close correlation between these substantive recommendations and the broad lines of action of FAO envisaged in its Programme of Work for 1972-73, in the Medium-Term Plan, and the Director-General's statement of intent to intensify further FAA's work, notably in fields of nutrition surveys, semi-conventional proteins and special feeding programmes,
Welcoming the action taken by the Director-General in cooperation with others, in promoting the expansion of PAG to serve the UN System as a whole, and in accordingly having it renamed the "Protein Advisory Group of the United Nations System",
Noting with satisfaction the recent decision of the IBRD to become a sponsor of the PAG, which also reflects its interest in including action to improve levels of nutrition in its future programme,
Recalling finally the importance given to the need for raising further the levels of nutrition, food production (particularly protein foods) and food utilization in the goals of the Second Development Decade,
1. Decides that the FAO Council should undertake a comprehensive review every year of the progress being made by the Organization, in its contribution within the overall UN effort, to solve the protein problem and to provide it with appropriate recommendations;
2. Invites the Council for this purpose to consider setting up a body of seven members to review the work of the Organization in this field;
3. Commends to the Council the following draft statement of recommendations for consideration:
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ACTION
1. General Approach
(a) The solution of the protein problem should be sought as part of the answer to the malnutrition problem as a whole, in the context of economic and social development.
(b) The prime responsibility rests with the government of the country suffering from malnutrition, and should be expressed in the formulation of a national food and nutrition policy as part of planned development.
(c) The long-term solution to protein/calorie malnutrition will be found in the increase in purchasing power of the populations affected, especially those in the lower income groups, supported by effective programmes for nutrition education and other long-term action.
(d) To improve the present situation without delay, immediate action is required on the part of governments to initiate and implement special programmes directed to improving the protein/calorie nutrition of vulnerable groups of the population: namely, expectant and nursing mothers, infants, preschool children and school children.
2. Long-Term Activities
(a) To provide a firm basis for formulating food and nutrition policies, food consumption and household budgetary surveys designed to relate existing consumption patterns to the economic status of the household and to standards of nutrition are necessary.
(b) At national level increased production of foodstuffs, particularly protein foods, to meet energy requirements and needs for protein, minerals and vitamins is urgently needed to improve existing standards of nutrition and to provide for population increase.
(c) Government planners should be trained in food policy and food economics.
(d) To increase purchasing power and to achieve redistribution of income every effort must be made to raise levels of employment, this leading to better levels of nutrition and augmented production capacity.
(e) To improve the use of available food, nutrition education of the general public and nutrition training for agricultural personnel and school teachers is of mayor importance.
3. Short-Term Activities
(a) The most important way to reach the low income groups in developing countries requiring supplementary feeding is through feeding programmes using both conventional foods and semi-conventional foods as appropriate. These feeding programmes must be designed and directed specifically to the particular groups concerned. FAO should assist governments in setting up such programmes using local foodstuffs and foods contributed by the World Food Programme and UNICEF.
(b) To reach the vulnerable groups themselves it is necessary to prepare foods specially formulated so that energy, protein minerals and vitamins are concentrated into a bulk which can be consumed to meet nutritional requirements. Such foods should be prepared on a commercial basis from locally available raw materials, possibly with initial assistance from WFP.
(c) Governments, having responsibility for improving nutritional status, can help in the commercialization of formulated protein foods by purchasing them for inclusion in nationally supported feeding programmes conducted through ministries of health, labour and social welfare and departments of education in school feeding programmes.
(d) With the advice of the Protein Advisory Group, means to incorporate new and unconventional sources of food acceptable to the population needing them should be studied and implemented where possible. Single-cell protein and amino acid fortification are examples.
(e) Programmes need to be developed to prevent waste of foodstuffs through control of diseases in plants and animals; through improved storage, processing, distribution and marketing; and by the development of food legislation and food quality control.
(f) Since most of the food distributed by WFP goes to recipients in most need of improved nutrition, the enlargement of its resources, especially in protein foods, will make a substantial contribution to reducing malnutrition.
4. Action by FAO
FAA's activities, taking into account the report of the Expert Panel, will place particular emphasis on the following points:
- assistance to Member Governments in the development of food policies and plans by conducting food consumption and household budgetary surveys;
- the organization of seminars or short courses in food policy and food economics for government planning staff;
- assistance in stepping up the production, processing and distribution of conventional high-protein food stuffs (legumes, meat, milk, fish and cereals of high-protein quality);
- help to countries in the formulation, commercialization and promotion of protein-rich foods for the vulnerable groups;
- support for government feeding programmes for school children, workers and others at risk of malnutrition;
- assistance in nutrition education and the best use of family resources through such programmes as Planning for Better Family Living;
- urgent attention to the design and application of measures to increase awareness of the problem and of its far reaching consequences on the well-being of present and future generations in all countries;
- intensification of cooperation with other members of the UN System, especially the financing organizations, namely UNDP, UNICEF, IBRD and WFP and possible bilateral sources of assistance in order to increase the resources necessary for implementing practical programmes of action.
(Adopted, 22 November 1971)
<section>a</section>
Progress Report on Cooperation between FAO and UNDP
291. The Conference took note of the progress of cooperation with UNDP over the last two years and of the arrangements described in the Revised Memorandum of Understanding concerning the integration of UNDP ant FAO Field Offices at the country level, the latter having been already discussed under other items of the Agenda.
292. Although certain reservations were stated, the Conference expressed satisfaction with the progress of cooperation with UNDP, noting that about 30 percent of total UNDP earmarkings for projects in 1971 had been allocated to FAO, representing the most significant portion assigned to any single Agency.
293. As regards the cooperation between FAO ant UNDP, some delegations indicated the need for the Senior Agricultural Advisers/FAO Country Representatives to maintain their own identity and for due account to be taken of them in all aspects of agricultural development.
294. The importance of the UNDP Consensus and in particular of country programming was stressed.
295. The opinion was expressed that, in order to make full use of the country programming process, the Director-General should continue to consider the possibilities of including in it also the pre-investment activities of the Investment Centre.
296. With regard to the ECOSOC resolution recommending the Executing Agencies to adapt their structures with a view to the requirements of the Consensus, the Conference recognized that the organization of the Area Service Division had contributed to the coordination of efforts in programming and project formulation. Furthermore, evaluation activities had been effectively coordinated through the Evaluation Service and follow-up investment was assured through the close cooperation of the Investment Centre.
297. Several delegations expressed their concern over the dispersal of control of operations under the present system of operations services, which led to undesirably complicated and lengthy procedures. Other opinions were expressed that control of implementation could be organized on a departmental basis, such as is the case presently in the Forestry and Fisheries Departments. The opinion was also expressed by some delegations that such control could for all departments be centralized in a single unit. These views were based on the conviction that, unless responsibility for the implementation of UNDP projects was more centralized, FAO would not be able to meet either requirements of the multi-disciplinary approach, which would characterize many field projects in the future, or the quantum of FAO executed projects expected in the context of the five-year Indicative Planning Figure (IPF) ear markings. However, some other delegations did not agree with the above
recommendations and opinions and suggested that the potential advantages of the recent reorganization have yet to come to full fruition.
298. While noting the commendable yet relatively recent and limited experience of the operations Centre and of the Operations Board in dealing with specific problems in project execution, the Conference requested the Director-General to explore further measures for improving project delivery and execution, and to report his findings to the Fifty-Ninth Session of the Council.
299. The Conference further requested the Director-General to prepare a more exhaustive documentation to be placed before the Council covering the rate of implementation, possible shortcomings and other relevant information affecting the performance of field activities.
300. The delegate of Tanzania raised the problems of relations between FAO and UNDP as affecting FAA's implementation of UN General Assembly Resolution 2704 (XXV). The resolution appealed for more aid from organizations of the United Nations System to the peoples fighting for freedom in Africa. In his opinion, the need for UN advice and assistance, including assistance from UNDP, was extremely great, and he hoped that a number of programmes would be aimed at these countries. The delegate pointed out that the Council had already debated FAA's part in this connexion, and it was agreed that there were certain activities within the competence of FAO which could be undertaken to give aid to the African countries without further delay. He also regretted that a report on FAA's activities concerning the implementation of the General Assembly resolution had not been presented to the Conference.
Decolonization
301. Having considered a report of the General Committee on decolonization, the Conference later adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 8/71
Decolonization
THE CONFERENCE,
Recalling the relevant resolutions of the United Nations General Assembly relating to possible assistance to the peoples under colonial and apartheid regimes, and in particular recalling Resolution 2704 (XXV) which, among other things repeated the General Assembly's ''... urgent appeal to the Specialized Agencies and the organizations within the United Nations System to render all possible moral and material assistance to the peoples struggling for their liberation from colonial rule and, in particular, to work out, with the active cooperation of the Organization of African Unity, and, through it, of the national liberation movements concrete programmes for assisting the peoples of Southern Rhodesia, Namibia, and the Territories under Portuguese Administration, including in particular the populations in the liberated areas of those Territories'',
Noting with satisfaction that the Director-General has already sent a mission to confer with the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and, through it, with the OAU-recognized liberation movements of some of the countries concerned, which has already submitted a report outlining some of the possible areas for action by FAO in compliance with that resolution (see document CL 57/8 Rev.1),
Considering that the Council has discussed the implementation by FAO of that resolution of the General Assembly during its Fifty-Fifth and Fifty-Sixth Sessions, and further that it deliberated on the mission's report at its Fifty-Seventh Session,
Aware that assistance from the organizations of the UN System is usually made available to refugees with the cooperation of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
1. Authorizes the Director-General to carry out, in collaboration with the other organizations of the UN System where necessary, those activities mentioned in the mission's report which lie within the competence of the FAO with respect to all the territories concerned and as indicated in the resolution of the General Assembly;
2. Further authorizes the Director-General-once the necessary consultations have been completed with regard to the remaining areas-to similarly include the implementation of the approved recommendations in the overall programme to be undertaken by FAO for all the peoples striving to liberate themselves from colonial domination and all forms of apartheid as a contribution to their early liberation, and as a contribution to their rapid development;
3. Re-affirms its adhesion to the principles of the resolutions of the UN General Assembly which oppose any collaboration with or assistance to the colonial or racist regimes;
4. Requests the Director-General to implement the relevant General Assembly resolutions within the mandates of FAO, and to make periodic reports to the Council on the implementation of this resolution.
(Adopted, 24 November 1971)
FAA's Participation in the UN Conference on the Human Environment, Stockholm, 1972
302. The Conference noted with satisfaction that the Director-General had established an Inter-Departmental Working Group on Natural Resources and the Human Environment to ensure effective coordination of FAA's activities in this area. It commended the active role played by FAO, through this Working Group, in the preparation for the UN Conference on the Human Environment to be held at Stockholm in June 1972.
303. The Conference was informed of the recent developments in the formulation of proposals for the Action Plan to be launched by the Stockholm Conference. It was noted that several of these action proposals are closely related to FAA's Programme Objective 2.4, War on Waste, and also to other sub-programmes. The Conference therefore requested the Council to review at its Fifty-Ninth Session the relevant components of the FAO Programme of Work and Budget for 1972-73 in the light of the Plan of Action adopted and the immediate measures recommended by governments at Stockholm in 1972. It also recommended that the Council consider the implications of this Action Plan for the biennium 1974-75 and the Medium-Term Plan of the Organization.
304. It was recommended that the Organization should wait for the outcome of the Stockholm Conference before implementing new actions in this field, and the Director-General was requested to review priorities, policy and future plans in the light of the Stockholm Conference's resolutions, and to report to the Council as mentioned above.
305. The Conference approved the views of the Director-General that the establishment of new international institutions or mechanisms to deal with environmental matters separately from development activities should be avoided. To this end, the Conference recommended the strengthening of FAA's capabilities and coordination in its own field of competence and a closer cooperation of the Organization with existing UN Specialized Agencies.
306. The Conference stressed the importance of the conservation of natural resources for maintaining both the quality of the environment and the development of agriculture, forestry and fisheries. Attention was also called to the waste disposal and pollution problems associated with agro-industries. It was also pointed out that most of the actions for the protection of the human environment should be taken at national and regional levels.
307. The Conference recommended that FAO should take a leading role in the protection of the environment in the conservation of natural resources at international level and thereby assist in protecting the vital interests of agriculture, forestry and fisheries and their positive role for economic growth and improvement of the environment in developing countries:
UN Joint Inspection Unit
308. The Conference took note of the Review of the Work of the UN Joint Inspection Unit (JIU) and of the Fifty-Seventh Session of the Council's report on JIU. It directed its attention to the question of the extension of the UN Joint Inspection Unit beyond 31 December 1973.
309. The Conference noted that the United Nations General Assembly had extended JIU on the existing experimental basis for a further period of two years beyond 31 December 1971 and that at the same time it had requested the views of, inter alia, the governing bodies of the specialized agencies concerned, in advance of a review of the question of JIU which would be carried out at the Twenty-Seventh Session of the UN General Assembly.
310. The Conference was informed that the Programme and Finance Committees and the Council had given considerable attention to this matter over the past two years and that these bodies proposed to carry out a more detailed review of the work of JIU at their 1972 sessions. The Conference supported the proposal.
311. The Conference accepted the views of the Council on this subject. Specifically, it endorsed the Council's expression of strong support for the continuation of JIU. At the same time, it agreed that changes might be made in the Unit's terms of reference, structure and procedures to enhance the effectiveness of services rendered to the members of the UN family.
312. The Conference requested that its position on this subject be transmitted through the appropriate channels to the UN General Assembly.
FAO Activities Related to International Agricultural Research
313. The Conference strongly supported the initiative taken by the Director-General in cooperating with the UNDP and IBRD to sponsor a Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research. It noted that the purpose of the Consultative Group was to identify major gaps and problems in existing agricultural research being conducted for or on behalf of the developing countries, on which a strong concentration of resources might result in a significant breakthrough with important consequences for more rapid development of the agricultural sector which should be understood in its broadest sense, to include fisheries and forestry. This new international effort would not affect the ongoing work on FAO in other fields of research nor would it detract from the necessity for continuation of strong research efforts at the national level. On the contrary, it was intended that any international research activities, whether they involved new initiatives or strengthening of existing
facilities, would serve to complement current national and regional work.
314. Welcoming the establishment a Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) to the Consultative Group composed of eminent scientists representative of diverses disciplines and of different geographical regions, the Conference noted with approval that FAO had been charged with forming the Secretariat of that Committee. The TAC would draw its information on international research needs from several sources including FAO Headquarters and Country and Regional Representatives, and from the members of the Consultative Group including the representatives to be appointed to the Group from the developing regions of the world. The Conference was informed that in the deliberations of the TAC to date note had been taken of the findings of FAA's Ecological Zone Conferences, strong emphasis had been placed on research related to protein needs of developing countries, and that the role of, and the need for, strengthening socio-economic research had been fully realised.
315. The Conference stressed the need to assemble better knowledge on current research programmes and facilities, as well as for the exchange of information between scientists in both developed and developing countries along the lines proposed in FAA's CARIS and AGRIS projects. This was considered essential for the identification of future research needs. to ensure that best use was made of existing research systems, and to facilitate. communication and cooperation between research establishments with consequent possibilities of economies of resources.
316. The Conference noted with satisfaction the proposal of the Consultative Group to widen its membership through full member status of representatives from the developing regions of the world and noted that FAO had been asked to arrange at the Conference for the selection by its member countries of one country to represent each region. It considered such representation absolutely essential in order to ensure that the needs of the developing nations could be brought to the notice of the Consultative Group at the earliest possible stage in discussions regarding the continued financing of ongoing international research or the allocation of resources to new undertakings. Considerable reservations were expressed, however, as to whether one country from each of the developing regions of the world, as proposed by the Consultative Group, could adequately serve the needs of those regions. It was pointed out that the great diversity of conditions within the regions would make it
virtually impossible for any one individual adequately to express the views on, and needs for, research in the region as a whole.
317. A strong feeling was indicated that the short notice received of this request of the Consultative Group would not permit of an adequate discussion regarding their representation, and it was believed that the selection of representatives could better be done by the FAO Council. It was recognized that time was of the essence if developing country representation wee to be possible at the second meeting of the Consultative Group on 3 December 1971 and it was further noted that any proposal to increase the membership over and above that invited by the Consultative Group would require the prior approval of that Group.
318. The Conference recommended that the FAO Council propose two countries from each of the five developing regions of the world, Africa, Asia and the Far East. Eastern/Southern Europe. Latin America and the Near East to serve on the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research. It was suggested by some delegations that consideration should be given to selection of such representatives from amongst individuals with adequate administrative and technical experience to permit their active participation in the deliberations of the Group. It further requested that the FAO Regional Conferences should be the principal forum for briefing the selected representatives of each region on the research needs and priorities for that region.
319. The Conference then adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 9/71
Emphasis on Research
THE CONFERENCE,
Having considered that it should be more in the interest of the developing countries to have FAA's activities effectively concentrated on some few major items of agricultural development, in accordance with the priorities laid down in the Medium Term Plan,
Welcoming the tendency of the Programme of Work and Budget for 1972-1973 to concentrate resources, in a significant way, on agricultural development planning as well as on matters related to the growth of outlets in the markets of the industrialized countries,
Convinced that a similar emphasis should be placed on agricultural research, including research on end-uses for primary products, taking into consideration regional needs,
Taking account of the efforts already made by developing countries in the field of agricultural research,
1. Authorizes the Director-General to present to the Seventeenth Session of the Conference a Programme of Work and Budget in which, within programmes and subprogrammes, greater emphasis would be placed on encouraging agricultural research, including research on end-uses for primary products, taking also into consideration regional needs;
2. Further authorizes the Director-General to intensify contacts with the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research in order to harmonize that emphasis with the work of the said Group;
3. Recommends that FAO, in cooperation with order interested agencies, support to the fullest extent possible the programmes whether nationally or internationally orientated, of existing research institutions in developing countries, so as to ensure the maximum utilization of their scientific and technical resources and to reinforce them by appropriate means if this should prove necessary;
4. Recommends to the Director-General to include in the Agenda of the competent Council Committees an item regarding needs and priorities on research for development purposes;
5. Requests the Director-General to submit a proposal to the Fifty-Ninth Session of the Council concerning the exchange of information and the organization of cooperation between Member Nations and institutions both in research and the related field of development, in order to promote scientific and technological advancement of agriculture in the developing countries;
6. Agrees that research priorities established at Regional Conferences should be offered as guidelines in the choice of regional projects to be financed by the Consultative Group;
7. Emphasizes that any adjustments necessary to enable these recommendations to be implemented in the 1974-75 Programme of Work and Budget should to the maximum extent possible not entail additional contributions to the Regular Programme from Member Nations and that as required efforts should be made to obtain extra budgetary resources.
(Adopted 22 November 1971)
Relations with Intergovernmental and International Non-Governmental Organizations
320. The Conference took note of a report on some of the new or more significant developments between FAO and Intergovernmental Organizations (other than the United Nations and Specialized Agencies! and non-governmental organizations that had taken place since its Fifteenth Session. It also noted the report on an informal meeting of representatives of international non-governmental organizations attending the Sixteenth Session of the Conference.
<section>b</section>
VII. PART III. Constitutional and administrative matters
A. Constitutional and legal matters
B. Administrative and financial matters
A. Constitutional and legal matters
Amendments to Article V.6 of the Constitution
Amendment to Article VII of the Constitution-Duration of the Term of Office of the Director-General
Amendment to Article XI of the Constitution
Opening of the Committee on Fisheries to All Interested Member Nations
Functions and Term of Office of the Independent Chairman of the Council
Amendments to the FAO "Basic Texts"
Committee on Commodity Problems
Increase in the Number of Council Seats
Statutory Report on the Status of Conventions and Agreements and on Amendments thereto
Granting of Official Status to International `Ion-Governmental Organizations
FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission
Amendments to Article V.6 of the Constitution
a) Establishment of a Committee on Forestry
b) Establishment of a Committee on Agriculture
a) Establishment of a Committee on Forestry
321. The Conference recalled that it hat, at its Fifteenth Session, stresses the need for a standing committee wherein the heads of forest services of all Member Nations could periodically review forestry problems of an international character and advise the Director General on the medium ant long-term programme of work of the Organization in the field of forestry and on its implementation. The Conference had accordingly requested the Council to advise the Director-General how best to satisfy the wish of the Conference.
322. The Conference noted that the Programme Committee and the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters (CCLM), to whom the matter hat been referred by the Council, reaches the conclusion that the wish of the Conference could most appropriately be met by establishing a Committee on Forestry as a standing committee of the Council, open to all interested Member Nations, under Article V, paragraph 6, of the Constitution. The Council at its Fifty Fifth Session endorsed this conclusion as well as the proposals of the Programme Committee ant the CCLM regarding the procedure for the appointment of members, the level of representation of Member Nations at sessions of the Committee on Forestry, and the periodicity of such sessions.
323. The Conference examined the recommendations of the Council including the proposed amendment to the Constitution and the text of a new rule to be inserted in the General Rules of the Organization defining the structure, composition, terms of reference, and operating procedures of the proposed Committee on Forestry. The Conference unanimously supported the proposal for establishing a Committee on Forestry.
324. In the course of the deliberation on this proposal, several delegates stressed the importance of the conservation of forest resources for the protection of the human environment. Emphasis was also places on the role which the Committee on Forestry might play in advising on the promotion of forest industries in developing countries and on the marketing of their forest products. The view was expressed that the activities of regional forestry commissions might be reviewed in the light of the establishment of the Committee on Forestry.
325. Some delegations strongly supported the views expressed by the Council that the emphasis of the work of the Committee on Forestry should be on the medium and longer-term programmes of the Organization and not on the Regular Programme of Work.
326. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 10/71
Establishment of a Committee on Forestry
THE CONFERENCE,
Recalling that at its Fifteenth Session (November 1969), it had stressed the need within the FAO machinery, for a standing committee, wherein heads of forest services of all Member Nations could (a) conduct periodic reviews of forestry problems of an international character ant appraise such problems with respect to possible effective action by FAO for their solution; and (b) advise the Director-General on the medium and long-term programmes of work of the Organization in the field of forestry and their implementation,
Concurring with the recommendations of the Council that the objective stated by the Conference could most appropriately be met by establishing a Committee on Forestry as a standing committee of the Council under the provisions of Article V, paragraph 6 of the FAO Constitution,
Further concurring with the recommendation of the Council that members of the Committee on Forestry be appointed by the Council for a period of two years, and that the Committee be composed of those Member Nations which notify the Director-General of their interest in the work of the Committee and of their intention to participate actively in the efficient discharge of the Committee's mandate,
Sharing the view of the Council that Member Nations of the Committee on Forestry should be represented as far as possible by their most senior officers responsible for forestry,
Adopts the following amendments to Article V, paragraph 6 of the Constitution:
''6. To assist the Council in performing its functions, the Council shall appoint a Programme Committee, a Finance Committee, a Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters, a Committee on Commodity Problems, a Committee on Fisheries and a Committee on Forestry. These Committees shall report to the Council and their composition and terms of reference shall be governed by rules adopted by the Conference.''
Amends Rule XXV.3(a) of the General Rules of the Organization to read as follows:
''3.(a) appoint a Programme Committee, a Finance Committee, a Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters, a Committee on Commodity Problems, a Committee on Fisheries and a Committee on Forestry''
Further amends the General Rules of the Organization by adding after Rule XXX a new Rule, the text of which shall read as follows:
RULE XXXI
Committee on Forestry
1. The members of the Committee on Forestry provided for in paragraph 6 of Article V of the Constitution shall be appointed by the Council for a period of two years at the session of the Council immediately following the regular session of the Conference. The Committee shall be composed of those Member Nations which notify the Director General in writing of their desire to be appointed as members of the Committee in view of their interest in forestry and of their intention to participate actively in the efficient discharge of the Committee's mandate. The Director-General shall determine and communicate to all Member Nations the latest date by which such notifications shall be made, and shall submit a list of such notifications to the Council not later than on the day set by the Council for the appointment of the members of the Committee.
2. Members of the Committee should as far as possible be represented by their most senior officers responsible for forestry.
3. The Committee shall determine the date and place of its sessions. Normally, the Committee shall hold one session during each biennium, to be convened by the Director General in consultation with the Chairman of the Committee. The Committee shall preferably meet early in the non-Conference years.
4. If required, the Committee may hold additional sessions on the call of its Chairman or the Director-General, or on request submitted in writing to the Director-General by the majority of the members of the Committee.
5. The Committee shall:
(a) Conduct periodic reviews of forestry problems of an international character and appraise such problems with a view to concerted action which could be undertaken by Member Nations and the Organization in order to resolve such problems,
(b) Review the programmes of work of the Organization in the field of forestry and their implementation,
(c) Advise the Director-General on the future programmes of work of the Organization in the field of forestry and on their implementation,
(d) Review specific matters relating to forestry referred to the Committee by the Council or the Director-General, or places by the Committee on its Agenda at the request of a Member Nation in accordance with the rules of procedure of the Committee, ant make recommendations as may be appropriate,
(e) Report to the Council ant Bender advice to the Director-General, as appropriate, on matters considered by the Committee.
6. Any recommendations adopted by the Committee which affects the programme or finances of the Organization shall be reported to the Council with the comments of the appropriate subsidiary committees of the Council. The reports of the Committee should, as in the case of certain other Committees established under Article V of the Constitution, also be places before the Conference.
7. The Director-General or his representative shall participate in all meetings of the Committee and may be accompanied by such officers of the staff of the Organization as he may designate.
8. The Committee shall elect its own Chairman among its members. It may adopt and amend its own rules of procedure, which shall be consistent with the Constitution ant the General Rules of the Organization.
9. The Committee may, when necessary, establish sub-committees, subsidiary working parties or study groups, subject to the necessary funds being available in the relevant chapter of the approved budget of the Organization, and may include in the membership of such sub-committees, subsidiary working parties or study groups Member Nations that are not members of the Committee and Associate Members. The Council may admit to membership of sub-committee, subsidiary working parties and study groups established by the Committee nations which, while not Member Nations or Associate Members of the Organization, are members of the United Nations. Former Member Nations of the Organization thee have withdrawn leaving arrears of contributions shall not be admitted to membership of sub-committees, subsidiary working parties and study groups until such time as they have paid up all such arrears, or the Conference has approved an arrangement for the settlement thereof, or unless the Council
in special circumstances decides otherwise with respect to such admission.
10. The subsidiary bodies referred to in the preceding paragraph may adopt or amend their own rules of procedure, which shall be approved by the Committee on Forestry and shall be consistent with the rules of the Committee.
(Adopted, 19 November 1971)
b) Establishment of a Committee on Agriculture
327. The Conference noted that the Council at its Fifty-Fifth Session had endorsed a recommendation of the Programme Committee for the creation of a Committee on Agriculture, under Article V, paragraph 6 of the Constitution, which should be open to all interested Member Nations. It further noted that the Programme Committee and the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters (CCLM) to whom the matter had been referred by the Council for detailed consideration, had formulated proposals regarding the procedure for the appointment of members, the level of representation of Member Nations at sessions of the Committee on Agriculture and the periodicity of such sessions, and that the Council at its Fifty-Sixth Session had endorsed these proposals and the draft resolution prepared by the CCLM.
328. The Conference examined the recommendations of the Council, including the proposed amendment to the Constitution and the text of a new rule to be inserted in the General Rules of the Organization, defining the structure, composition, terms of reference and operating procedures of the proposed Committee on Agriculture.
329. There was a general consensus on the desirability of establishing a Committee on Agriculture as a standing committee of the Council, open to all interested Member Nations. However, in the course of the deliberations, a number of questions were raised and certain proposals were made as regards the terms of reference of the proposed Committee and its relationship with other statutory and regional bodies.
330. Wir regard to the terms of reference, the Conference accepted a proposal to the effect that they should include structural aspects related to agriculture and rural development in general. It was also suggested that questions pertaining to land and water, including irrigation, should receive particular attention and that problems connected with watershed management might be studied in conjunction with the Committee on Forestry.
331. Several delegates questioned the exclusion of the review of short-term programmes from the terms of reference of the Committee and wondered whether these terms of reference should not, in this respect, be brought into line with those of the Committees on Forestry and on Fisheries which did not contain this limitation. It was pointed out that the Council, on considering this question, had reached the conclusion that, in view of the purpose for which the Committee was proposed, the. terms of reference of the Committee on Agriculture should only mention medium and long-term programmes Some delegations strongly supported the above views of the Council on the work of the Committee.
332. In the course of the debate a proposal was made that the Committee's authority to establish subsidiary bodies should not be limited to exceptional cases. The Conference noted, however, that the Council had stressed the importance of maintaining the concept of a single committee dealing with selected items on a multi-disciplinary basis, and had also stressed that subsidiary and ad hoc bodies should be established only in exceptional circumstances.
333. Several delegates mentioned the risk of duplication or overlapping of the functions of the Committee on Agriculture with those of other Committees, in particular, the Committee on Commodity Problems. The Conference was informed that both the Programme Committee and the Council had given careful consideration to this problem, and that paragraph 7 of the proposed Rule on the Committee on Agriculture specifically provided that the basic responsibility of the Committee on Commodity Problems for reviewing commodity and related trade problems of an international character, had to be taken into account by the Committee on Agriculture. Some delegates also emphasized the need for cooperation, on matters of common interest, with Regional Conferences and commissions of FAO and Regional Economic Commissions of the United Nations.
334. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution l 1/71
Establishment of a Committee on Agriculture
THE CONFERENCE,
Conscious of the need for ensuring an integrated approach to the planning and execution of the Organization's programmes in the various fields of agriculture,
Considering that the problems connected with these programmes are of a multi-disciplinary nature, comprising technical, economic, institutional and social aspects,
Concurring with the recommendation of the Council that these problems might best be examined at the intergovernmental level by a Committee on Agriculture to be established as a standing committee under Article V, paragraph 6, of the Constitution,
Further concurring with the recommendation of the Council that members of the Committee on Agriculture be appointed by the Council for a period of two years, and that the Committee be composed of those Member Nations which notify the Director-General of their interest in the work of the Committee and of their intention to participate actively in the efficient discharge of the Committee's mandate,
Taking note of the view of the Council that Member Nations of the Committee on Agriculture should, as far as possible, be represented by senior officers highly qualified to contribute to a multi-disciplinary consideration of issues before the Committee,
Adopts the following amendment to Article V, paragraph 6, of the Constitution:
''6. To assist the Council in performing its functions, the Council shall appoint a Programme Committee, a Finance Committee, a Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters, a Committee on Commodity Problems, a Committee on Fisheries, a Committee on Forestry and a Committee on Agriculture. These Committees shall report to the Council and their composition and terms of reference shall be governed by rules adopted by the Conference.''
Amends Rule XXV.3 (a) of the General Rules of the Organization to read as follows:
''3. (a) appoint a Programme Committee, a Finance Committee, a Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters, a Committee on Commodity Problems, a Committee on Fisheries, a Committee on Forestry and a Committee on Agriculture.''
Further amends the General Rules of the Organization, by adding a new Rule, the text of which shall read as follows:
Rule XXXII
Committee on Agriculture
''1. The Members of the Committee on Agriculture provided for in paragraph 6 of Article V of the Constitution shall be appointed by the Council for a period of two years at the session of the Council immediately following the regular session of the Conference, The Committee shall be composed of those Member Nations which notify the Director General in writing of their desire to be appointed as members of the Committee in view of their interest in agricultural problems within the Committee's mandate and of their intention to participate actively in the efficient discharge of such mandate. The Director-General shall determine and communicate to all Member Nations the latest date by which such notifications shall be made, and shall submit a list of such notifications to the Council not later than on the day set by the Council for the appointment of the members of the Committee.
2. Members of the Committee should, as far as possible, be represented by delegations consisting of senior officers highly qualified to contribute actively to a multidisciplinary consideration of the subjects on the agenda of the Committee.
3. The Committee shall determine the date and place of its sessions. Normally, the Committee shall hold one session during each biennium, to be convened by the Director General in consultation with the Chairman of the Committee. The Committee shall preferably meet early in the non-Conference years.
4. If required, the Committee may hold additional sessions on the call of the Director General in consultation with its Chairman, or on request submitted in writing to the Director-General by the majority of the members of the Committee.
5. The Committee shall:
(a) Conduct periodic reviews and appraisals on a higly selective basis, of agricultural problems, with a view to concerted action by Member Nations and the Organization;
(b) Advise the Council on the medium-and longer-term programme of work of the Organization in selected fields of agriculture and on its implementation, with emphasis on the integration of all social, technical, economic, institutional and structural aspects related to agricultural and rural development in general;
(c) Review specific matters relating to agriculture referred to the Committee by the Conference, the Council or the Director-General, or placed by the Committee on its agenda at the request of a Member Nation in accordance with the rules of procedure of the Committee, ant make recommendations as may be appropriate;
(d) Report to the Council and render advice to the Director-General as appropriate, on any other matter considered by the Committee.
6. For the purpose of the present rule, the term "agriculture'' does not include fisheries and forestry matters which are within the terms of reference of the Committee on Fisheries and the Committee on Forestry respectively.
7. The Committee shall establish appropriate procedures for determining its agenda in respect of each session, bearing in mind the desirability of ensuring an interdisciplinary consideration of all relevant aspects of a limited number of major issues, and taking into account the basic responsibility of the Committee on Commodity Problems for reviewing commodity and related trade problems of an international character.
8. Any recommendation adopted by the Committee affecting the programme or finances of the Organization or concerning legal or constitutional matters shall be reported to the Council with the comments of the appropriate subsidiary committees of the Council. The reports of the Committee shall also be placed before the Conference.
9. The Director-General or his representative shall participate in all meetings of the Committee and may be accompanied by such officers of the staff of the Organization as he may designate.
10. The Committee shall elect from among its members, its chairman and the other officers. It may adopt and amend its rules of procedure, which sall be consistent with the Constitution and the General Rules of the Organization.
11. The Committee may, on an exceptional basis, establish subsidiary or ad hoc bodies where it considers that such action is conducive to facilitating its own work and will not adversely affect the multi-disciplinary consideration of questions submitted to the Committee for examination. Before taking a decision on the establishment of any subsidiary or ad hoc body, the Committee shall examine the administrative and financial implications of such decision, in the light of a report to be submitted by the Director-General. The Committee shall define the terms of reference, composition and, as far as possible, the duration of the mandate of each subsidiary or ad hoc body.
12. (e) The Committee may include in the membership of such subsidiary or ad hoc bodies Member Nations that are not members of the Committee and Associate Members; (b) The Council may admit to membership of subsidiary or ad hoc bodies established by the Committee, nations which, while not Member Nations or Associate Members of the Organization, are members of the United Nations; (c) Former Member Nations of the Organization that have withdrawn leaving arrears of contributions shall not be admitted to membership of subsidiary or ad hoc bodies of the Committee until such time as they have paid up all such arrears, or the Conference has approved an arrangement for the settlement thereof, or unless the Council in special circumstances decides otherwise with respect to such admission.
13. The subsidiary or ad hoc bodies referred to in paragraph 11 may adopt or amend their rules of procedure, which shall be approved by the Committee and shall be consistent with its rules of procedure.
(Adopted, 19 November 1971)
Amendment to Article VII of the Constitution-Duration of the Term of Office of the Director-General
335. The Conference had before it the proposal made by the Council at its Fifty-Sixth Session for an amendment of the provisions of Article VII of the Constitution relating to the term of office of the Director-General. Article VII provided for the appointment of the Director General for an initial term of four years, with the possibility of reappointment for two successive terms of two years, after which he would not be eligible for reappointment. The Council had proposed that this Article be amended to provide for a single term of six years non-renewable.
336. Some delegates expresses reservations with regard to the proposal for a single six-year term, pointing out that this term of office might be too long in the event that a Director General no longer enjoyed the confidence of Member Nations. It was also pointed out that the proposal would preclude the Conference from appointing a Director-General for a second term of office even where Member Nations felt that it would be in the best interest of the Organization to extend his term of office. These delegates, therefore, reaffirmed their position in favour of a four-year term with the possibility of reappointment for a further four-year term.
337. A large majority of delegates, however, supported the recommendation of the Council providing for a term of six years non-renewable. They emphasized that the principle of non re-elegibility had the advantage of eliminating the side-effects of a re-election and of allowing the Director-General to concentrate all his attention on the discharge of his functions, thus ensuring stability and continuity in the work of the Organization.
338. The Conference therefore decided to amend paragraph 1 of Article VII so as to provide for a single term of six years non-renewable. It further endorsed the proposal of the Council to amend the provision of Article VII relating to the appointment of a Director-General, should a vacancy occur before the expiration of his predecessor's term of office.
339. The Conference concurred with the recommendation of the Council that, as a transitional measure, the present Director-General should be eligible for reappointment for a single term of four years.
340. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 12/71
Term of Office of the Director-General
THE CONFERENCE
Considering the advisability of giving the Director-General 8 reasonable and sufficiently long-term of office to allow him to carry out positive and effective work toward the achievement of the goals of the Organization, by enabling him to concentrate all 0a attention on the functions of his high position,
Having noted the proposals made at the Fifty-Fifth Session of the Council for an amendment of the provisions of Article VII of the Constitution relating to the term of office of the Director-General,
Having examined the relevant draft amendment recommended by the Council at its Fifty-Sixth Session,
Decides that:
Article VII of the Constitution is hereby amended to read as follows:
THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL
1. There shall be a Director-General of the Organization who shall be appointed by the Conference for a term of six years, after which he shall not be eligible for reappointment.
2. The appointment of the Director-General under this Article shall be made by such procedures and on such terms as the Conference may determine.
3. Should the office of Director-General become vacant during the above-mentioned term of office, the Conference shall, either at the next regular session or at a special session convened in accordance with Article III, paragraph 6 of this Constitution, appoint a Director-General in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article. However, the duration of the term of office of a Director-General appointed at a special session shall expire at the end of the year of the third regular session of the Conference following the date of his appointment.
4. Subject to the general supervision of the Conference and the Council, the Director General shall have full power and authority to direct the work of the Organization.
5. The Director-General or a representative designated by him shall participate, without the right to vote, in all meetings of the Conference and of the Council and shall formulate for consideration by the Conference and the Council proposals for appropriate action in regard to matters coming before them.''
The provisions of Article VII as amended above shall apply to the appointment of any Director-General other than the present incumbent of that office. The present Director General shall be eligible for reappointment for a single term of four years.
(Adopted, 19 November 1971)
Amendment to Article XI of the Constitution
341. The Conference recalled that at its Fifteenth Session it hat considered the difficulties encountered in the implementation of the provisions of Article XI of the Constitution pertaining to the submission of periodic reports by Member Nations and Associate Members, and had agreed that the matter should be further considered by the Council, the Programme Committee and the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters with a view to proposing to the Sixteenth Session of the Conference an appropriate amendment to Article XI to bring it up-to-date.
342. Having considered the recommendations of the Council and the text of the proposed amendment, the Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 13/71
Amendment of Article XI
THE CONFERENCE
Recalling the conclusions reached at its Fifteenth Session concerning the difficulties encountered in the implementation of the provisions of Article XI of the Constitution pertaining to the submission of periodic reports by Member Nations and Associate Members,
Recalling further its decision that the matter should be considered by the Council, the Programme Committee and the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters with a view to proposing an appropriate amendment to Article XI, designed to bring that constitutional provision up-to-date,
Having considered the draft amendment submitted by the Fifty-Sixth Session of the Council, in the light of recommendations made by the Programme Committee at its Nineteenth Session and by the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters at its Twenty-Fourth Session,
Decides that Article XI of the Constitution is hereby amended to read as follows:
ARTICLE XI
1. All Member Nations and Associate Members shall communicate regularly to the Director General on publication, the texts of laws and regulations pertaining to matters within the competence of the Organization which the Director-General considers useful for the purposes of the Organization.
2. With respect to the same matters, all Member Nations and Associate Members shall also communicate regularly to the Director-General statistical, technical and other information published or otherwise issued by or readily available to, the government. The Director-General shall indicate from time to time the nature of the information which would be most useful to the Organization and the form in which this information might be supplied.
3. Member Nations and Associate Members may be requested to furnish, at such times and in such form as the Conference, the Council or the Director-General may indicate, other information, reports or documentation pertaining to matters within the competence of the Organization, including reports on the action taken on the basis of resolutions or recommendations of the Conference.''
(Adopted, 24 November 1971)
Opening of the Committee on Fisheries to All Interested Member Nations
343. The Conference recalled that it had, at its Fifteenth Session, recommended that the Council examine the possibility of converting the Committee on Fisheries into a Committee open to all interested Member Nations. It noted that the Council had considered this matter taking into account reports of the Committee on Fisheries, the Programme Committee and the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters, and had recommended that the Committee on Fisheries should be open to all interested Member Nations for a trial period of four years, after which the situation should be reviewed.
344. The Conference examined the recommendation of the Council including the proposed suspension of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of Rule XXX of the General Rules of the Organization for a period of four years so as to make it possible for the Committee on Fisheries to be composed of those Member Nations which had notified the Director-General in writing of their desire to be appointed as members of the Committee in view of their interest in the work of the Committee and their intention to participate actively, for a two-year period, in the efficient discharge of the Committee's mandate. In the course of the discussions, delegates stressed the complexity of fishery problems which resulted from their international nature. They considered it desirable therefore, that all interested Member Nations should be able to take part as full members in the work of a body which was already contributing significantly to the achievement of the purposes of the Organization and was the leading
intergovernmental body for the discussion of matters related to fisheries.
345. While some delegates noted that an enlarged Committee on Fisheries might not be able to fulfil its functions as expeditiously end efficiently as at present, they concurred with the majority view. The Conference agreed that the potential benefits far outweighed any such possible drawback, and expressed the firm hope that the opening of the Committee to all interested Member Nations would further increase its effectiveness. In this respect, the Conference stressed the need for all members of the enlarged Committee to participate actively in its work and to be represented by their most senior officers responsible for fisheries.
346. Some delegates strongly supported the views expressed by the Council that the emphasis of the work of the Committee on Fisheries and its sessions in non-Conference years should be on the medium-and longer-term programmes of work of the Organization and not on the regular Programme of Work.
347. A number of delegates would have favoured the opening of the Committee on Fisheries on a permanent basis. The majority of delegates, however, deemed it preferable to gain experience with the working of the Committee. The Conference, therefore, concurred with the recommendation of the Council that membership in the Committee should be opened on a trial basis for a period of four years.
348. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 14/71
Change in the Structure of the Committee on Fisheries
THE CONFERENCE,
Recalling the recommendation made at its Fifteenth Session to the effect that the Council should contemplate the possibility of changing the character of the Committee on Fisheries, whose current membership consists of 34 Member Nations, by converting it into a committee open to all interested nations,
Having considered the recommendations made by the Council at its Fifth-Fifth Session with regard to the change in the structure of the Committee on Fisheries,
Decides that:
1. The Committee on Fisheries shall be open to all interested Member Nations for a trial period of four years, at the end of which the structure and composition of the Committee and the method of the appointment of its members shall be reviewed by the Conference.
2. The appointment of the members of the Committee shall be carried out in accordance with the following procedure:
(a) The members of the Committee on Fisheries provided for in paragraph 6 of Article V of the Constitution shall be appointed for a period of two years by the session of the Council immediately following the regular session of the Conference;
(b) The Committee shall be composed of those Member Nations which notify the Director-General in writing of their desire to be appointed as members of the Committee in view of their interest in the work of the Committee and their intention to participate actively, for a two-year period, in the efficient discharge of the Committee's mandate;
(c) The Director-General shall determine and communicate to all Member Nations the latest date by which such notifications shall be made and shall submit a list of such notifications to the Council not later than on the day set by the Council for the appointment of the members of the Committee.
3. Members of the Committee should, as far as possible, be represented by their most senior officers responsible for fisheries.
The provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 ant 3 of Rule XXX of the General Rules are hereby suspended in accordance with Rule XXXIX paragraph 1 of the General Rules of the Organization, for a period of four years.
(Adopted, 19 November 1971)
Functions and Term of Office of the Independent Chairman of the Council
349. The Conference recalled that, at its Fifteenth Session (November 1969), it had requested the Council to prepare appropriate amendments to the FAO Basic Texts regarding the functions and term of office of the independent Chairman of the Council for consideration at its Sixteenth Session, taking into account the views it had expressed regarding this matter. The recommendations made by the Council at its Fifty-Seventh Session (November 1971) were set out in Document C 71/LIM/19.
350. The Conference endorsed the conclusions reaches by the Council to the effect that no amendment to the Basic Texts wee necessary with respect to the method of election of the Chairman of the Council; the concept of ''independence'' and the qualifications that the Chairman of the Council should possess; his functions during and between Council sessions; and the principle of rotation of the post between regions.
351. With respect to the duration of the term of office of the Chairman of the Council, the Conference considered a draft resolution submitted to it by the Council containing an amendment to Rule XXIII-1 of the General Rules of the Organization, whereby the two-year term of office of the Chairman of the Council provided for in the Rule would be non-renewable.
352. In the course of discussion a proposal was made that the Chairman of the Council should be appointed for a term of office of two years renewable for one further term.
353. A number of delegates were in favour of the draft resolution as submitted by the Council, considering that a limitation of two years on the term of office of the Chairman of the Council would in no way prevent him from fulfilling his functions efficiently and would accelerate the rotation of the post between Regions. It was pointed out that, since a person chosen to fill this post would be a person of already great experience, he would be able to discharge his duties effectively regardless of the length of his service.
354. On the other hand, a majority favoured the proposal that the two-year term of the Chairman of the Council be renewable for one further two-year term. These delegates stressed that the experience which the Chairman of the Council would gain if he remained in office for two periods of two years would enable him to exercise his duties more effectively. They considered that in any case a certain degree of flexibility was desirable, and were opposed to the adoption of a rigid provision which, at the end of two years, would exclude all possibility of continuity and would oblige the Conference to appoint a new Chairman, even if it were convinced that it would be in the best interest of the Organization to extend the term of office of the incumbent. It was also observed that the adoption of this more flexible solution would, of course, leave the Conference free to decide not to renew a Chairman's term of office, if it so wished. Some delegates also considered that the term of
office of the Chairman of the Council should bear a closer relationship to that of the Director-General which, according to the amended text of Article VII of the Constitution, would be for six years non renewable.
355. The Conference agreed with the recommendation of the Council that the amendment to Rule XXIII.1 (GRO) would not apply to the Chairman of the Council appointed at the Fifteenth Session of the Conference.
356. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 15/71
Functions and Term of Office of the Independent Chairman of the Council
THE CONFERENCE,
Recalling that at its Fifteenth Session it considered the functions of the independent Chairman of the Council, and that it requested the Council to prepare, for consideration at its Sixteenth Session, appropriate amendments to the Basic Texts taking into account the view expressed at the Conference,
Noting that this matter had been considered by the Council at its Fifty-Sixth Session, by the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters at its Twenty-Fifth Session and again by the Council at its Fifty-Seventh Session,
Decides to amend paragraph 1 of Rule XXIII of the General Rules of the Organization to read as follows:
RULE XXIII
CHAIRMAN OF THE COUNCIL
1. In pursuance of paragraph 2 of Article V of the Constitution the Chairman of the Council shall be appointed for two years the Conference shall appoint an independent Chairman of the Council under the following conditions
(a) The Chairman of the Council shall be appointed for a term of office of two years which shall be renewable for the same period after which it shall not be renewable.
(Sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) to become sub-paragraphs (b) and (c)).
Decides further that the above amendment to paragraph 1 of Rule XXIII shall not apply to the Chairman of the Council appointed by the Conference at its Fifteenth Session.
(Adopted, 24 November 1971)
<section>c</section>
Amendments to the FAO "Basic Texts"
a) Arabic as an Official Language of the Organization and as a Working Language for Limited Purposes
b) Other Amendments
a) Arabic as an Official Language of the Organization and as a Working Language for Limited Purposes
357. The Conference recalled that at its Fourteenth and Fifteenth Sessions it had taken decisions regarding the introduction of Arabic as a working language for limited purposes and that it had also, at its Fifteenth Session, adopted an authoritative Arabic text of the Constitution. The Conference noted that the Director-General had submitted to the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters (CCLM) the question whether amendments were necessary to the FAO Basic Texts in order to reflect these decisions, and that this question had been considered by the Council at its Fifty-Sixth Session (June 1971).
358. The Conference endorsed the recommendation made by the Council that Rule XXXVIII of the General Rules of the Organization be amended in order to provide that Arabic be included in the fiat of official languages of the Organization, and to specify that Arabic was a working language for limited purposes.
359. Some delegates, while welcoming the progress that had been achieved with respect to the use of the Arabic language, expressed the hope that Arabic would eventually be used to the same extent as English, French and Spanish.
360. The Conference noted with satisfaction that the CCLM would continue to study the question of ''official'' and ''working'' languages, with a view to defining with greater precision the legal and other implications of the use of these terms in FAO.
361. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 16/71
Arabic as an Official Language of the Organization and as a Working Language for Limited Purposes
THE CONFERENCE,
Bearing in mind the decisions taken at its Fourteenth and Fifteenth Sessions regarding the use of Arabic as a working language for limited purposes,
Considering that the question whether the Basic Texts required amendment to reflect these decisions had been considered by the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters and the Council,
Noting that at its Fifteenth Session it had amended Article XXII of the Constitution so as to provide that the Arabic text be equally authoritative as the English, French and Spanish texts,
Decides to endorse the recommendations of the Fifty-Sixth Session of the Council on this question, and to amend Rule XXXVIII of the General Rules of the Organization by the addition of the words underlined, to read as follows:
'' Arabic, Chinese, English, French and Spanish shall be the official languages of the Organization. English, French and Spanish shall be the working languages and Arabic shall be a working language for limited purposes.''
(Adopted, 24 November 1971)
b) Other Amendments
362. The Conference was informed that the Council, at its Fifty-Fifth Session, had suggested that the Director-General examine, in consultation with the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters (CCLM), the FAO Basic Texts and report on inconsistencies contained therein and problems arising from the application of the Basic Texts.
363. In two reports presented in response to this suggestion, the CCLM had made proposals for amendments to the General Rules of the Organization, which had been endorsed by the Council at its Fifty-Sixth and Fifty-Seventh Sessions. The Conference concurred with these proposals, and adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 17/71
Harmonization of the FAO ''Basic Texts''
THE CONFERENCE,
Noting the suggestion made by the Council at its Fifty-Fifth Session, that the Director General examine, in consultation with the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters (CCLM), the Basic Texts of the Organization and report to the Council on any inconsistencies contained therein and any problems arising from the application of the Basic Texts,
Considering the proposals made by the CCLM and endorsed by the Council at its Fifty-Sixth Session, for certain amendments to the Basic Texts, with a view to eliminating inconsistencies and ambiguities and to bring certain provisions up-to-date,
Further considering the recommendation made by the Council at its Fifty-Seventh Session, aiming at a harmonization of the provisions defining the qualifications of members of the Programme and Finance Committees,
Adopts the following amendments to the General Rules of the Organization:
(i) The term ''United Nations Development Programme'' is substituted for the term ''Expanded Technical Assistance Programme'', in the following Rules;
Rule II.2(c) (v)
Rule XXIV.2 (a)(ii)
Rule XXVI.7(a)(iii)
(ii) The term ''Secretary-General of the Conference and Council'' is substituted for the term ''Secretary-General''.
Rule XXII.10(c)
Rule XXIII.1(a)
Rule XXVI.2
Rule XXVII.2
Rule XXIX.2
Rule XXXIII.1(a)
The term ''Secretary-General of the Conference and Council'' is substituted for the term ''Secretary-General of the Conference or Council'', in Rule XXX.2.
(iii) The first sentence of Rule XII.3(b) is hereby amended to read as follows:
''(b) Except as otherwise provided in these Rules, in the case of an election by the Conference to fill simultaneously more than one elective place, the required majority shall be the smallest number of whole votes necessary to elect no more candidates than there are seats to be filled.''
(iv) The expression ''Chairman of the Conference'' is substituted for the expression ''Chairman of the Conference or Council'', in Rule XII.11(h).
(v) The first sentence of Rule XXVI-1 and of Rule XXVII-1, respectively, is hereby amended to read as follows:
''Rule XXVI
Programme Committee
1. The Programme Committee provided for in paragraph 6 of Article V of the Constitution shall be composed of a Chairman, six other members, and a first, second and third alternate, all selected by the Council in a personal capacity [from among qualified individuals who have participated in Conference and Council sessions and in other technical activities of the Organization.] from among individuals who have shown a continued interest in the objectives and activities of the Organization, have participated in Conference or Council sessions and have special competence and experience in economic, social and technical matters pertaining to the various fields of the Organization's activities."
''Rule XXVII
Finance Committee
1. The Finance Committee provided for in paragraph 6 pf Article V of the Constitution shall be composed of a Chairman, four other members, and a first, second and third alternate, all selected by the Council in a personal capacity [from among individuals in the government service of Member Nations, for their special competence in finance and administration.] from among individuals who have shown a continued interest in the objectives and activities of the Organization, have participated in Conference or Council sessions and have special competence and experience in administrative and financial matters.''
Endorses the recommendations of the Council that, in view of the importance of the Basic Texts for the proper functioning of the Organization, the examination should be pursued, due regard being given, within the framework of that examination, to suggestions formulated during deliberations of the Conference and Council.
(Adopted, 24 November 1971)
Committee on Commodity Problems
a) Method of Balloting for Elections to the CCP
b) Nomenclature of CCP Subsidiary Bodies and Membership of Commodity Study Groups
a) Method of Balloting for Elections to the CCP
364. The Conference recalled that at its Fifteenth Session it had decided to review at its present session the method of balloting for elections to the Committee on Commodity Problems, in the light of any recommendations submitted by the Council. The Council had considered this matter at its Fifty-Seventh Session and concluded that the method of balloting adopted had caused some difficulties. After having discussed possible alternatives, it had submitted to the Conference a draft resolution suspending Rules XXIX.1 to 3 of the General Rules of the Organization and providing for the opening of membership of the Committee on Commodity Problems to all interested Member Nations on a trial basis, for an experimental period of two years.
365. In the course of the debate the majority of the delegates considered that, taking into account the limited number of sessions during a biennium, an experimental period of two years would be too short. The Conference decided therefore that the experimental period should be four years, as in the case of the Committee on Fisheries.
366. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 18/71
Change in the Structure of the Committee on Commodity Problems
THE CONFERENCE,
Noting the views of the Council and the Committee on Commodity Problems regarding the structure and composition of this Committee,
Having considered that it would be desirable to open the Committee on Commodity Problems to all interested Member Nations on a trial basis,
- I -
Decides that:
1. The Committee on Commodity Problems shall be open to all interested Member Nations for a trial period of four years, at the end of which the structure and composition of the Committee and the method of appointment of its members shall be reviewed by the Conference;
2. The appointment of the members of the Committee shall be carried out in accordance with the following procedure:
(a) The members of the Committee on Commodity Problems provided for in paragraph 6 of Article V of the Constitution shall be appointed by the Council for a period of two years at the session of the Council immediately following the regular session of the Conference;
(b) The Committee shall be composed of those Member Nations which notify the Director General in writing of their desire to be appointed as members of the Committee in view of their interest in the work of the Committee ant their intention to participate actively, for a two-year period, in the efficient discharge of the Committee's mandate;
(c) The Director-General shall determine and communicate to all Member Nations the latest date by which such notifications shall be made and shall submit a list of such notifications to the Council not later than on the day set by the Council for the appointment of the members of the Committee.
3. Members of the Committee should, as far as possible, be represented by their most senior officers concerned with commodity problems of an international character.
- II -
The provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of Rule XXIX of the General Rules of the Organization are hereby suspended in accordance with paragraph 1 of Rule XXXIX of the General Rules of the Organization, for a period of four years.
(Adopted 19 November 1971)
b) Nomenclature of CCP Subsidiary Bodies and Membership of Commodity Study Groups
367. The Conference noted that certain subsidiary bodies of the Committee on Commodity Problems (CCP) had given rise to a problem regarding their nomenclature. This question had been examined by the CCP itself, by the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters (CCLM) and by the Council at its Fifty-Fifth Session (November 1970) and its Fifty-Seventh Session (November 1971).
368. The Conference endorsed the recommendations made by the Council. Accordingly, the Conference decided that commodity study groups should henceforth be renamed ''Intergovernmental Commodity Groups'', that bodies established by these groups should be called ''Sub-Groups'' and that bodies established by sub-groups should be called ''Working Parties''. It was decided that reference to "subsidiary working Parties'' in Rule XXIX-9 of the General Rules of the Organization (GRO) should be replaced by ''ad hoc subsidiary bodies'', and that Rule XXIX-9 of the General Rules of the Organization and Financial Regulation 5.9 should be amended accordingly. Rule XXIX-9 (GRO) should also be amended in order to make it clear that Intergovernmental Commodity Groups were open to all Member Nations and Associate Members of the Organization which indicated to the Director-General their interest in becoming members of such groups. The Conference further decided to invite the Committee on
Commodity Problems to amend Rule VII-1 of its Rules of Procedure in order to reflect the amendments that had been made to Rule XXIX-9 of the General Rules of the Organization.
369. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 19/71
Nomenclature of CCP Subsidiary Bodies
THE CONFERENCE,
Noting that the nomenclature of the subsidiary bodies of the Committee on Commodity Problems dealing with single commodities or groups of related commodities has been examined by the Council, the Committee on Commodity Problems and the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters,
Considering that certain clarifications regarding the eligibility for membership of such subsidiary bodies of the Committee on Commodity Problems are desirable,
1. Decides to endorse the recommendations of the Council set out in document C 71/LIM/20 and to amend Rule XXIX-9 of the General Rules of the Organization, and Financial Reputation 5.9 as follows:
"Rule XXIX
9. The Committee may, when necessary, establish sub-committees, [subsidiary working parties or commodity study groups]; intergovernmental commodity groups and ad hoc subsidiary bodies, subject to the necessary funds being available in the relevant chapter of the approved budget of the Organization. [and] It may include in the membership of such sub-committees for subsidiary working parties) and ad hoc subsidiary bodies, Member rations which are not members of the Committee and Associate Members. [The Council may admit to membership of commodity study groups established by the Committee] Membership of intergovernmental commodity groups established by the Committee shall be open to all Member Nations and Associate Members of the Organizations and the Council may admit to membership of such groups, nations which, while not Member Nations or Associate Members of the Organization, are members of the United Nations. It may authorize the Director-General to invite at their
request nations which, while not Member Nations or Associate Members of the Organization are Members of the United Nations, to attend consultations, convened under paragraph 1 (e) of Rule XXIV of the General Rules of the Organization, on individual commodities and participate in the discussions, with the right to vote and to hold office. Former Member Nations of the Organization which have withdrawn leaving arrears of contributions shall not be admitted to membership in [commodity study groups] intergovernmental commodity groups or attend consultations on individual commodities until such time as they have paid up all such arrears or the Conference has approved an arrangement for the settlement thereof, or unless the Council, in special circumstances, decides otherwise with respect to such admission.''
''Financial Regulation 5.9
Non-Member Nations of the Organization that are Members of [commodity study groups] intergovernmental commodity groups: ...''
2. Invites the Committee on Commodity Problems to amend Rule VII-1 of its Rules of Procedure, as follows, by deleting the words in square brackets and adding the words underlined:
''Rule VII
1. In accordance with the provisions of Rule XXIX-9 of the General Rules of the Organization, the Committee may, when necessary, establish sub-committees, [subsidiary working parties or commodity study groups] intergovernmental commodity groups and ad hoc subsidiary bodies, subject to the necessary funds being available in the relevant chapter of the approved budget of the Organization. [and] It may include in the membership of such sub-committees [or subsidiary working parties] and ad hoc subsidiary bodies, Member Nations that are not members of the Committee and Associate Members. [The] Membership of [commodity study groups] intergovernmental commodity groups established by the Committee [may include] shall be open to all Member Nations and Associate Members of the Organization and the Council may admit to membership of such groups, nations which, while not Member Nations or Associate Members of the Organization, are members of the United Nations.''
3. Decides that the characteristics included in the definition of the term ''commodity study group'' adopted by the Council at its Fortieth Session shall apply to intergovernmental commodity groups, it being understood that non-Member Nations of the Organization that are Members of the United Nations shall be admitted to membership of intergovernmental commodity groups on the conditions specified in Rule XXIX-9 of the General Rules of the Organization.
(Adopted, 24 November 1971)
Increase in the Number of Council Seats
370. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 20/71
Increase in the number of Council seats
THE CONFERENCE,
Considering that the number of Member Nations has substantially increased since its Fourteenth Session at which it fixed the number of Council seats in Resolution 12/67,
Noting the changes that have occurred in the composition of the regional groups established by the Conference for the purposes of elections to the Council,
Considering the desirability of giving the greatest possible number of Member Nations an opportunity to serve on the Council and of ensuring balanced geographical representation in accordance with the provisions of Article XXII-3 of the General Rules of the Organization,
Requests the Council:
1. In consultation with the Programme and Finance Committees and the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters, to examine the advisability of increasing the number of Council seats, taking all aspects of the problem into consideration, especially the admission of new Members to the Organization, as well as the geographical distribution of the seats:
2. To prepare and submit to the Conference at its next regular session a detailed report on the matter, all relevant recommendations and, if appropriate, a suitable draft amendment to Article V.1 of the Constitution of the Organization.
(Adopted, 23 November 1971)
Statutory Report on the Status of Conventions and Agreements and on Amendments thereto
371. Rule XXI-5 of the General Rules of the Organization provides that ''the Director-General shall resort to the Conference whenever a convention, agreement, supplementary convention or agreement has, in accordance with its terms, come into force or ceased to be in force, or has been amended and the amendments come into force.''
372. The Conference considered documents C 71/31 and C 71/31 Corr. 1 entitled ''Statutory Report on the Status of Conventions and Agreements and on Amendments thereto'' which were submitted in accordance with the above-mentioned requirement.
373. In addition, the Conference was informed that on 17 November 1971 the Government of the Socialist Republic of Romania had deposited with the Director-General an instrument of adherence to the Internacional Plant Protection Convention, dated 11 October 1971.
374. The Conference took note of the above statutory report as well as the additional information given in the preceding paragraph.
Granting of Official Status to International `Ion-Governmental Organizations
375. The Conference took note of the statutory report by the Director-General on relations with international non-governmental organizations.
FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission
376. The Conference recalled that, at its Fifteenth Session, it had suggested that the Codex Alimentarius Commission should re-examine the principles governing the elaboration of standards for regions or groups of countries, as reflected in Rule VI.3 of the Rules of Procedures of the Commission.
377. The Conference noted the views of the Commission as reflected in the Report of its Seventh Session, and concurred with the conclusion of the Council that the appropriateness and timing of any amendment to Article VI.3 of the Rules of Procedure could be left to the Commission and its Executive Committee.
378. The Conference further recalled that it had, at its Fourteenth Session, recommended that the FAD/WHO Committee of Government Experts on the Code of Principles concerning Milk and Milk Products should align its procedures with those of the Codex Alimentarius Commission. It took note of the fact that the text governing the elaborations, adoption and acceptance of standards for milk and milk products had been revised by the Codex Alimentarius Commission and subsequently accepted by the Committee of Experts on Milk and Milk Products.
379. The Conference noted with satisfaction that the alignment of procedures which it had recommended had now been effected.
B. Administrative and financial matters
Audited Accounts
Scale of Contributions, 1972-73
Assessment of New Member Nations
Reimbursement of Withdrawals from the Working Capital Fund
Payment of Contributions-Haiti and Paraguay
Amendments to the Financial Regulations
Staff Commissary Profits
Emoluments of the Director-General
Management/Staff Relations
Audited Accounts
380. The Conference reviewed the accounts and the reports of the External Auditor thereon, as submitted by the Fifty-Fifth and the Fifty-Seventh Sessions of the Council. It expressed its appreciation of the reports as presented, particularly as they included comments of a substantive nature.
381. In reply to a question from one delegation, the Conference was informed that the financial statements for the merged UNDP overhead costs budget for 1972-73 would not reflect the full costs of carrying out UNDP activities. The UNDP, the United Nations, and the specialized agencies would be involved in developing a systems design in 1972-73 to identify such costs.
382. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 21/71
Audited Accounts
THE CONFERENCE,
Having considered the Reports of the Fifty-Fifth and Fifty-Seventh Session of the Council,
Having examined the following audited accounts and the External Auditor's Reports thereon:
(a)-Regular Programme, 1968-69 C 71/5
(b)-Freedom from Hunger Campaign, 1969 C 7118
(c)-European Commission for the control of Foot-and-Mouth Disease, 1969 C 71/9
(d)-UNDP (Technical Assistance Sector), 1969 and 1970 C 71/6, C 71/12
(e)-UNDP (Special Fund Sector), 1969 and 1970 C 71/7, C 71/13
(f)-World Food Programme, 1469 and 1970 C 71/10, C 71/14
(g)-Trust Funds, 1969 C 71/11
Adopts the above audited accounts.
(Adopted, 24 November 1971)
Scale of Contributions, 1972-73
383. The Conference, at its Eighth Session, in November 1955, had decided that the FAO Scale of Contributions would in future be derived directly from the United Nations Scale of Assessments as in force during the calendar year of the Conference Session, and that such a scale would be applicable to the two following years.
384. The proposed Scale of Contributions for 1972-73, based on the United Nations Scale for 1971-73, had been recommended by the Fifty-Sixth Session of the Council for adoption by the Conference, subject to the appropriate adjustments arising from the admission of new Members. The Conference examined the thus amended Scale of Contributions for 1972-73 which incorporated the assessments of new Members, and adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 22/71
Scale of Contributions 1972-73
THE CONFERENCE,
Having considered the Report of the Fifty-Sixth Session of the Council,
Adopts for use in 1972-73 the Scale of Contributions set out in Appendix F to this Report, which is derived directly from the United Nations Scale of Assessments for 1971-73.
(Adopted 19 November 1971)
385. One delegation indicated that the continued increase in its country's contribution during the last four years was of considerable concern because of the heavy financial burden involved. Another delegation suggested that the basis of determining the FAO Scale of Contributions should be considered at future sessions of the Council.
Assessment of New Member Nations
386. In accordance with the provisions of Article XVIII.3 of the Constitution, Rule XIX.3 of the General Rules of the Organization and Financial Regulation V.8, the Conference decided that the additional contribution for 1971 from the two Associate Members that had become full Members, Bahrain and Qatar, would be $1 277.60 each. This represented the difference between the full contribution of 0.04 percent and the Associate Membership contribution of 0.024 percent for the last quarter of 1971.
387. In accordance with the same provisions, the Conference decided that the contribution to be paid by the newly admitted Member Nations, Fiji, the Maldives, Oman and Swaziland, for the year 1971 would be $ 3 200 each.
388. In accordance with Financial Regulation VI.2 (b) (ii) the Conference decided that all six new Members, Bahrain, Fiji, the Maldives, Oman, Qatar and Swaziland, should pay an advance of $ 1 800 each to the Working Capital Fund.
Reimbursement of Withdrawals from the Working Capital Fund
389. The Conference, as recommended by the Council at its Fifty-Seventh Session, agreed that an amount of $1 786 304 of the expected 1970-71 cash surplus be withheld ant used to reimburse the Working Capital Fund for the amounts withdrawn as set out in the Report of the Council. It was informed that, provided Member Nations paid their contributions in good time, the cash surplus which would accrue at the end of the 1970-71 biennium would be adequate to reimburse the Working Capital Fund in respect of the amounts withdrawn.
390. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 23/71
Reimbursement of Working Capital Fund from Cash Surplus in 1970-71, for Withdrawals
Made in 1968-69 and 1070-71
THE CONFERENCE,
Noting that the Council, at its Fifty-First Session, had authorized the withdrawal from the Working Capital Fund of up to $150 000 to finance a study to improve FAA's methods, systems, procedures and practices, and that an amount of $127 656 had actually been withdrawn to meet part of these costs,
Noting that the Council at its Fifty-Fifth Session had authorized the withdrawal from the Working Capital Fund of up to $1 650 000 to finance additional expenditure resulting from increases in staff remuneration,
Noting that the Director-General under the provisions of Conference Resolution 17/69, acting on the recommendation of the Advisory Panel of Experts set up to advise him on initial control activities against the Desert Locust in emergencies and after consultation with the Chairman of the Finance Committee, had withdrawn $8 650 from the Working Capital Fund for the purpose of an emergency survey in the Spanish Sahara,
Noting that in accordance with Financial Regulation 6.5(b) advances made from the Working Capital Fund to finance emergency expenditures shall be reimbursed by such method as the Conference determines,
Further noting that the Director-General expected that, provided Member Nations duly paid their contributions in good time, a substantial cash surplus would arise in the 1970-71 biennium,
Decides that, notwithstanding the provisions of Financial Regulation 6.1(b), such cash surplus as may arise in the 1970-71 biennium shall be withheld and used to the extent necessary to reimburse the Working Capital Fund in respect of the above-mentioned withdrawals.
(Adopted.24 November 1971)
391. The Conference expressed its concern that heavy withdrawals from the Working Capital fund might endanger the capacity of the Fund to serve its primary purpose to advance monies to the General Fund to finance budgetary expenditures pending receipt of contributions to the budget.
392. In view of the difficult budgetary situation faced by the Organization, the Conference appealed to all Member Nations to ensure that outstanding obligations be paid as soon as possible, and that assessments for the coming biennium be settled promptly when due. Delays could have adverse repercussions on budgetary resources in 1972-73.
393. The Conference stressed that the special measures approved by it in the present difficult financial situation should be considered exceptional, and adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 24/71
Reimbursement of Working Capital Fund from Cash Surplus 1970-71 for Withdrawal Made in 1972-73
THE CONFERENCE,
Noting that the Council at its Fifty-Seventh Session had authorized 8 withdrawal from the Working Capital Fund of $1 000 000 to meet unbudgeted costs in the 1972-73 biennium resulting from increases in Headquarters Professional staff remuneration, in Headquarters General Service staff remuneration and from unbudgeted losses due to changes in exchange rates,
Noting that in accordance with Financial Regulation 6.5(b) advances made from the Working Capital fund shall be reimbursed by such method as the Conference determines,
Further nothing that the Director General expected that, provided Member Nations duly paid their contributions in good time, a substantial cash surplus would accrue in the 1970-71 biennium and that such surplus would he adequate to cover the withdrawal referred to in the first paragraph of this resolution, in addition to the Amounts needed to reimburse the Working Capital Fund in respect of withdrawals referred to in Conference Resolution 23/71,
Decides that, notwithstanding the provisions of Financial Regulation 6.1(b), the balance of such cash surplus as may accrue in the 1970-71 biennium, after reimbursement of the Working Capital Fund in respect of the withdrawals referred to in Conference Resolution 23/71, shall be withheld and used as far as possible and to the extent necessary to reimburse the Working Capital Fund in respect of the above mentioned withdrawal.
(Adopted, 24 november 1971)
Payment of Contributions-Haiti and Paraguay
394. The Conference considered the reports of the General Committee concerning the proposal of the Governments of Haiti and Paraguay to liquidate their outstanding contributions over a ten-year period, in addition to paying each current contribution in the calendar year of assessment.
395. The Conference, having considered the difficult economic and financial position of Haiti and Paraguay, adopted the following resolutions, stressing however that this should not be regarded as constituting a precedent:
Resolution 25/71
Payment of Contributions-Haiti
THE CONFERENCE,
Noting that the Government of Haiti has made a proposal that it liquidate its outstanding contributions over a period of 10 years in addition to paying each current contribution in the calendar year of assessment,
Decides that:
1. Notwithstanding Financial Regulation 5.5, Haiti's outstanding contributions, totalling $ 50 281.47, shall he settled through the payment of ten annual instalments:
2. The first instalment, to he paid in 1972, shell be $5 029.47 and each of the following, nine annual instalments shall he $5 028.00;
3. The annual payment of the instalments referred to above, together with the payment of each current contribution in the calendar year of assessment and any advances to the Working Capital Fund shall he considered as fulfilment of Haiti's financial obligations to the Organization.
(Adopted, 19 November 1971)
Resolution 26/71
Payment of Contributions-Paraguay
THE CONFERENCE,
Noting that the Government of Paraguay has made a proposal that it liquidate its outstanding contributions over a period of 10 years in addition to paying each current contribution in the calendar year of assessment,
Decides that:
1. Notwithstanding Financial Regulation 5.5 Paraguay's outstanding contributions, totalling S73 197.73, shall be settled through the Payment of ten annual instalments:
2. The first instalment, to be paid in 1972, shall be $7 317.73 and each of the following nine annual instalments shall be $7 320.00:
3. The annual payment of the instalments referred to above, together with the payment of each current contribution in the calendar year of assessment and any advances to the Working Capital Fund shall be considered as fulfillment of Paraguay's financial obligations to the Organization.
(Adopted, 22 November 1971)
Amendments to the Financial Regulations
a) Regulation III: Budget
b) Regulation XII: External Audit
a) Regulation III: Budget
396. The Conference, noting that the Council at its Fifty-Fifth Session had endorsed the Director-General's proposals to introduce a programme-budget format for the 1972-73 Programme of Work and Budget, agreed to adopt the Council's recommendation that Financial peculation III.3 he so amended that future budgets would he presented substantially on a programme basis. The Conference therefore, adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 27/71
Amendment to Financial Regulation III
THE CONFERENCE,
Recalling that at its Fifteenth Session it expressed the view that the presentation of future budgets should he substantially on a programme basis,
Noting that the Director-General's draft Programme of Work and Budget for 1972-73 is fully presented on a programme budget basis,
Recognizing that the introduction of programme budgeting requires the amendment of Financial Regulation III, as recommended by the Council at its Fifty-Fifth Session,
Adopts the following amendments to the Regulation:
REGULATION XII
The Budget
3.3. The budget estimates shall he presented on a programme-budget basis and divided /by function/ into chapters and programme objectives, and where necessary into programmes and sub-programmes /sub-chapters: chapters and sub-chapters shall be divided by object of expenditure into articles and where necessary into sub-articles/. The budget estimates shall include the programme of work for the financial period, such information annexes or explanatory statements as may be requested on behalf of the Conference or the Council and such further annexes or statements as the Director General may deem appropriate.
(Adopted, 24 November 1971)
b) Regulation XII: External Audit
397. The Conference took note of the recommendation submitted by the Ad Hoc Committee of Experts established to examine the Finances of the United Nations and the Specialized Agencies and endorsed by the Council, that each organization should try as far as possible to reconcile and standardize its financial regulations when making the necessary amendments thereto. The first regulation to be standardized was Regulation XII relating to External Audit. The Conference therefore adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 28/71
Financial Regulation XII
THE CONFERENCE.,
Noting the desire of the Ad Hoc Committee of Experts established to examine the Finances of the UN and the Specialized Agencies to standardize the financial regulations of the organizations,
Decides that the Financial Regulation XII is hereby amended to read as set out in appendix G to this Report.
(Adopted, 24 November 1971)
Staff Commissary Profits
398. The Conference noted that, in accordance with Resolution 69 of the Seventh Session of the Conference. one percent of the total sales of the Staff Commissary was paid to the Organization in reimbursement for facilities and indirect services made available by the Organization to the Commissary. For 1970 this payment amounted to $20 093.26 which, as noted by the Council, was appreciably more than the cost of services rendered by the Organization.
399. The Conference agreed with the recommendation of the Council that the reimbursement be reduced from one percent to one half percent as of 1 January 1971, and that one half percent be transferred to the Staff Welfare Fund for the financing of social and sporting activities.
400. The conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 29/71
Staff Commissary Profits
THE CONFERENCE,
Having noted that for the year 1970, in accordance with Resolution No. 69 of the Seventh Session of the Conference, the Staff Commissary transferred an amount of $20 093.26 to the Organization in payment for facilities and indirect services made available to the Commissary during that year,
Having been informed that a lesser contribution from the Staff Commissary would meet the cost of facilities and indirect services extended by the Organization,
Desiring to make provision for a contribution for social, sports or other staff welfare activities,
Decides:
1. As of 1 January 1971 to reduce from 1 percent to 0.5 percent of the total sales of the Staff Commissary the amount to be paid, as an expense of the Commissary operation, to the Organization in reimbursement for facilities and indirect services made available to the Commissary,
2. That the equivalent of 0.5 percent of total sales of the Staff Commissary be paid to the Staff Welfare Fund for social and sports or other staff welfare activities: and
3. That any net profits of the Staff Commissary shall continue to be transferred to the Staff Welfare Fund as heretofore, for use in accordance with policies and procedures to be developed jointly by the Director-General and the staff.
(Adopted, 24 November 1971)
Emoluments of the Director-General
401. The Conference, on the recommendation of the Council, adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 30/71
Salary of the Director-General
THE CONFERENCE,
Noting that, in accordance with decisions of the General Assembly of the United Nations and the FAO Council, the salaries in the Professional and Director categories had been increased by 8 percent gross, after incorporation of two classes of DOS: adjustment, effective 1 July 1971,
Decides that, effective 1 July 1971, the salary of the Director-General shall be increased from $47 000 ($30 100 net) to $56 000 cross ($34 600 net) per year, and that the post adjustment rate of the Director-General shall be $1 380 Per year.
(Adopted. 24 November 1971)
Management/Staff Relations
402. Tribute was paid to the work of the Special Committee on Management/Staff Relations under the chairmanship of Ambassador Eng of Sweden. It was felt that the work of this Committee would surely prove to be an important factor in improving these relations.
<section>d</section>
VIII. PART IV. Appointments and elections
A. Admission of new member nations
B. Election of council members
C. Appointment of the independent chairman of the council
D. Appointment of the director-general
E. Appointment or member government representatives to the staff pension committee
A. Admission of new member nations
403. The Conference had before it the applications for membership from Bahrain, Fiji, Maldives, Oman, Qatar and Swaziland, all of which had been submitted within the time limit prescribed by Rule XIX of the General Rules of the Organization. They contained or were supplemented by the formal instrument required under Article II of the Constitution, and were thus found in order.
404. The Conference proceeded to a secret ballot on the six applications, in accordance with Article II-2 of the Constitution and Rule XII-9 of the General Rules of the Organization.
405. The results of the voting were as follows:
Number of ballot papers issued: 105
Admission of Bahrain
Number of votes cast 100
Majority required 67
Votes for 100
Votes against None
Abstentions 5
Admission of Fiji
Number of botes cast 101
Majority required 68
Votes for 101
Votes against None
Abstentions 4
Admission of Maldives
Number of votes cast 101
Majority required 68
Votes for 101
Votes against None
Abstentions 4
Admission of Oman
Number of votes cast 100
Majority required 67
Votes for 99
Votes against 1
Abstentions 5
Admission of Qatar
Number of votes cast 101
Majority required 68
Votes for 101
Votes against None
Abstentions 4
Admission of Swaziland
Number of votes cast 101
Majority required 68
Votes for 101
Votes against None
Abstentions 4
406. The Conference accordingly admitted Bahrain, Fiji, Maldives, Oman, Qatar and Swaziland as Members of the Organization.
B. Election of council members
407. The Conference elect the following Member Nations for membership in the Council
Period: November 1971-31 December 1974
Regions and Seats
Members
Africa (3) Kenya
Morocco
Sierra Leone
Europe (2) Hungary
Switzerland
Latin America (3) Brazil
Colombia
Venezuela
Near East (2) Iran
Syrian Arab Rep.
North America (2) Canada
United States of America
Period: January 1973-November 1975
Africa (2) Dahomey
Ethiopia
Asia and Far East (2) India
Pakistan
European Region (3) Denmark
France
United Kingdom
Latin America (1) Chile
Near East (2) Egypt
The Sudan
Southwest Pacific (1) Australia
C. Appointment of the independent chairman of the council
408. Having proceeded to a secret ballot in conformity with Rule XII.9 (a) of the General Rules of the Organization, the Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 31/71
Appointment of the Independent Chairman of the Council
THE CONFERENCE,
Having proceeded to a secret ballot, in accordance with the provisions of Rule XII of the General Rules of the Organization,
1. Declares that Michel Cépède is appointed independent Chairman of the Council for a period of two years, that is, until the end of the regular session of the Conference to be held in 1973; and
Having noted the recommendations submitted by the General Committee in conformity with Rule XXIII of the General Rules of the Organization,
2. Decides that the conditions of appointment, including the allowances attached to the office of the independent Chairman of the Council, shall be as follows:
(a) An annual allowance of the equivalent of $ 7 500 to cover representation expenses and secretarial assistance in the Chairman's home station, on the understanding that the Director-General will provide secretarial assistance when the Chairman attends sessions of the Council or Conference; one half of the allowance shall be payable in U.S. dollars, the balance being payable, in whole or in part, in the currency of the home country of the Chairman, or in Italian fire, according to his desire;
(b) A per diem allowance at the rate of $ 32.00 while the Chairman is absent from his home station on Council business, the allowance being reduced to $ 12.00 per diem while the Chairman is in travel status;
(c) Travel expenses, including the above per diem allowance, shall be defrayed by the Organization, in conformity with its regulations and existing practices, when the Chairman attends sessions of the Council, of the Programme and Finance Committees, of the Conference, or when he is invited by the Council or by the Director-General to travel for other purposes.
(Adopted, 25 November 1971)
D. Appointment of the director-general
409. The Conference noted that a proposal had been made by the Council for an amendment to the provisions of Article VII of the Constitution relating to the duration of the term of office of the Director-General and that, in view of the necessity to consider this proposal before proceeding to the appointment of the Director-General, it did not seem possible to effect the appointment within the first three working days following the opening of the session, as required under the last sentence of Rule XXXIII.1(a) of the General Rules of the Organization (GRO); acting upon the recommendation of the Council endorsed by the General Committee, the Conference therefore decided in conformity with Rule XXXIX.1 GRO to suspend that provision.
410. After having considered and decided upon the proposed amendment, the Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 32/71
Appointment of the Director-General
THE CONFERENCE,
Acting in accordance with Article VII of the Constitution and Part II of Resolution 12/71, adopted by the Sixteenth Session of the Conference on 19 November 1971,
Having proceeded to a secret ballot as laid down in Rule XII of the General Rules of the Organization,
1. Declares that Addeke Hendrik Boerma is appointed to the office of Director-General, for a period of four years, from 1 January 1972, the term of office expiring on 31 December 1975; and
Having considered the recommendations regarding the conditions of appointment of the Director-General submitted by the General Committee in accordance with Rules X-2(j) and XXXIII-1(b) of the General Rules of the Organization,
2. Resolves that the Director-General shall receive a gross annual salary of $56 000 ($34 600 net) per annum, with a post adjustment rate of $1 380 per annum, payable in accordance with the rules governing salary payments to staff members of the Organization; that in addition he shall receive a representation allowance at the rate of $12 500 net per annum, payable half in United States dollars and half in Italian fire; and that he shall be entitled to all allowances and benefits accruing to staff members under the Staff Regulations; and
3. Further resolves that the terms ant conditions of service of the Director-General shall be governed by the relevant provisions of the Staff Regulations subject, however, to the provisions of the contract to be signed by the Chairman of the Conference on behalf of the Organization and by the Director-General elect, in accordance with Rule XXXIII-1(c).
(Adopted, 25 November 1971)
E. Appointment or member government representatives to the staff pension committee
411. In accordance with Article 6(c) of the Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, the Conference appointed three Members and three Alternates to the Staff Pension Committee for the period 1 January 1972 to 31 December 1973, as follows:
M.I.K. Khalil
Agricultural Counsellor
Permanent Representative of Pakistan to FAO
Embassy of Pakistan
Rome
N. Oliveti
Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative of Italy to FAO
Permanent Mission of Italy to FAO
Rome
Carlos Perez del Castillo
Ambassador of Uruguay to FAO
Permanent Mission of Uruguay to FAO
Rome
as Members of the FAO staff Pension Committee, and:
S.G. Bath
First Secretary
Permanent Representative of Brazil to FAO
Embassy of the Federative Republic of Brazil
Rome
Chester R. Benjamin
Directorate for Agricultural Agencies
Bureau of International Organization Affairs
Department of State
Washington D.C., U.S.A.
E. Lube
Counsellor (Agriculture)
Alternate Permanent Representative of the Federal Republic of Germany to FAO
Embassy of the Federal Republic of Germany
Rome
as Alternate Members.
<section>e</section>
IX. PART V. Other matters
A. People's republic of China
B. Retirement of Oris V. Wells
C. Date and place of the seventeenth session of the conference
A. People's republic of China
412. The Conference having heard a statement by the Director-General, adopted the following resolution recommended by the General Committee:
Resolution 33/71
People's Republic of China
THE CONFERENCE,
Recalling that China, after having participated in the Hot Springs Conference in 1943, became a founding Member of FAO in 1945 by accepting the Constitution of the Organization.
Recalling further that, after its establishment in 1949, the Government of the People's Republic of China in a telegram to the Director-General of FAO dated 12 May 1950 affirmed that it was the only legal government representing the Chinese people,
Considering Resolution 2758 (XXVI) of 25 October 1971, by which the General Assembly of the United Nations decided to restore all its rights to the People's Republic of China and to recognize the representatives of its Government as the only legitimate representatives of China in the United Nations and ''in all the Organizations related to it'',
Considering further that the General Assembly of the United Nations, in its Resolution 396 (V) of 15 December 1950, recommended that the attitude adopted by the General Assembly concerning the representation of a Member State should be taken into account by the Specialized Agencies,
Noting the exchange of telegrams between the Director-General of FAO and the Government of the People's Republic of China dated respectively 2 November and 23 November 1971,
Pursuant to Resolution 2758 (XXVI) of the General Assembly of the United Nations,
1. Authorizes the Director-General, when the People's Republic of China manifests the wish to resume its place in the Organization, to take all appropriate measures to bring into effect the resumption by China of its place in the Organization;
2. Authorizes further the Director-General to take all necessary measures concerning financial questions, taking into account any action that may be taken by the United Nations in this respect and after consultation with the competent organs of FAO;
3. Requests the Director-General to transmit the text of the resolution to the Government of the People's Republic of China.
(Adopted 25 November 1971)
B. Retirement of Oris V. Wells
413. Recognizing the exceptional nature of such a tribute, the Conference adopted the following resolution by acclamation:
Resolution 34/71
Retirement of Oris V. Wells
THE CONFERENCE,
Noting with regret the retirement of Oris V. Wells from the Organization at the end of December 1971, after eight years of service as Deputy Director-General,
Mindful also of his earlier active association with the Organization first as a delegate of the United States of America and later as Assistant Director-General, Economics Department,
Recognizing unanimously his outstanding services and devotion to the purposes of the Organization,
Conveys to Oris V. Wells its deep appreciation and gratitude for his truly remarkable contribution to the life and efforts of FAO, and its warm wishes for happiness and success in the future.
(Adopted 25 November 1971)
C. Date and place of the seventeenth session of the conference
414. The Conference decided that its Seventeenth Session should be held in Rome in 1973, at a period other than the Ramadan.
<section>f</section>
X. Appendixes
A. Agenda for the sixteenth session of the conference
B. List of delegates and observers attending the sixteenth conference session member nations
C. List of documents
D. Statement by the director-general concerning China
E. Statement showing the computation of contributions for 1972 and 1973
F. Scale of contributions 1972-73
G. Proposed text of financial regulation XII relating to external audit
A. Agenda for the sixteenth session of the conference
INTRODUCTORY-PROCEDURE OF THE SESSION
1. Election of Chairman and Vice-Chairmen
2. Appointment of General Committee and Credentials Committee
3. Adoption of the Agenda
4. Arrangements for the Session and Allocation of Agenda Items
5. Admission of Observers
PART I-MAJOR TRENDS AND POLICY QUESTIONS IN FOOD AND AGRICULTURE
6. World Situation and Outlook
(a)-Salient Features of the World Food and Agricultural Situation
(b)-Commodity Problems
(c)-Fishery Problems
7. Perspective Study of World Agricultural Development and International Strategy for the Second Development Decade
8. World Food Programme
9. Second World Food Congress, The Hague, June 1970 (Action arising out of)
10. Report of the FAO Special Committee on Agrarian Reform
PART II-ACTIVITIES AND PROGRAMMES OF THE ORGANIZATION
11. Review of the Organization's Activities and Programmes (including Regular Programme and Field Activities)
12. Programme of Work and Budget, 1972-73
13. Medium-Term Plan
14. Relations and Consultations with International Organizations on Programme Matters of Common Interest
(a) - Matters Arising from Discussions in the UN General Assembly, ECOSOC and ACC
(b) - Progress Report on Cooperation between FAO and the UNDP
(c) - FAA's Participation in the UN Conference on the Human Environment, Stockholm,-1972
(d) - UN Joint Inspection Unit-
(e) - FAO Activities Related to International Agricultural Research
(f) - Relations with Intergovernmental and International Non-Governmental Organizations
PART III-CONSTITUTIONAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS
A. Constitutional and Legal Matters
15. Amendments to Article V.6 of the Constitution
(a) - Establishment of a Committee on Forestry
(b) - Establishment of a Committee on Agriculture
16. Amendment to Article VII of the Constitution-Duration of the Term of Office of the Director-General
17. Amendment to Article XI of the Constitution-Article XI Reports
18. Amendment to Rule XXX GRO-Opening of the Committee on Fisheries to all Interested Member Nations
19. Functions and Term of Office of the Independent Chairman of the Council
20. Amendments to the FAO Basic Texts
(a) - Arabic as an Official Language of the Organization and a Working Language for Limited Purposes
(b) - Other Amendments
21. Committee on Commodity Problems
(a) - Method of Balloting for Elections to the CCP
(b) - Nomenclature of CCP Subsidiary Bodies and Membership of Commodity Study Groups
22. Statutory Report on Status of Conventions and Agreements and Amendments thereto
23. Other Constitutional and Legal Matters
(a) - Granting of official Status to International Non-Governmental Organizations
(b) - FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission
B Administrative and Financial Matters
24. Audited Accounts
(a) - Regular Programme, 1968-69
(b) - Freedom from Hunger Campaign, 1969
(c) - European Commission for the Control of Foot-and-Mouth Disease, 1969
(d) - United Nations Development Programme, Technical Assistance Sector, 1969 and 1970
(e) - United Nations Development Programme, Special Fund Sector, 1969 and 1970
(f) - World Food Programme, 1969 and 1970
(g) - Trust Funds, 1969
25. Scale of Contributions, 1972-73
26. Reimbursement of Withdrawals from the Working Capital Fund
27. Amendments to the Financial Regulations
(a) - Regulation III: Budget
(b) - Regulation XII: External Audit
28. Other Financial and Administrative Matters
PART IV-APPOINTMENTS AND ELECTIONS
29. Applications for Membership in the Organization
- Bahrain
- Fiji
- The Republic of Maldives
- The Sultanate of Oman
- Qatar
- Swaziland
30. Election of Council Members
31. Appointment of the Independent Chairman of the Council
32. Appointment of the Director-General
33. Appointment of Member Government Representatives to the Staff Pension Committee
PART V-OTHER MATTERS
34. Date and Place of the Seventeenth Session of the Conference
35. Other Matters
<section>g</section>
B. List of delegates and observers attending the sixteenth conference session member nations
AFGHANISTAN
Delegate Abdul HAKIM
Minister of Agriculture and Irrigation Kabul
Alternate Toryalai OSMAN
Embassy of Afghanistan Rome
Alternate Abdul MAJID
President of Planning
Department Ministry of Agriculture Kabul
Alternate M.A. KHAMOSH
President of the Livestock and Veterinary Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation Kabul
ALGERIA
Délégué Abdelghani AKBI
Ambassadeur de la République Algérienne
Démocratique et Populaire en Italie
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO Rome
Suppléant Mohamed Tayeb NADIR
Directeur des Etudes et de la Planification,
Ministère de l'Agriculture et de la Réforme Agraire Alger
Suppléant Mohamed ABDELAZIZ
Directeur de la Réforme Agraire,
Ministère de l'Agriculture et de la Réforme Agraire Alger
Adjoint Ahmed AMRANI
République Algérienne, Democratique et Populaire Rome
Adjoint Brahirn AISSA
Premier Secrétaire, Ministère des Affaires Etrangères Alger
Conseiller Bachir CHENNI
Conseiller Technique, Ministère de l'Agriculture et de la Réforme Agraire Alger
Conseiller Zouaoui RECCAM
Conseiller Technique, Ministère de l'Agriculture et de la Réforme Agraire Alger
ARGENTINA
Delegado Antonio A. DI ROCCO
Ministro de Agricultura Buenos Aires
Suplente E. TAKACS
Subsecretario de Ganadería Buenos Aires
Suplente C. SANCHEZ AVALOS
Jefe del Grupo de Trabajo de Organismos Agrarios Internacionales Buenos Aires
Suplente J.C. VIGNAUD
Representante Permanente Alterno de Argentina ante la FAO Roma
Adjunto A. AMIGO
Ingeniero Agrónomo
Ministerio de Agricultura Buenos Aires
Adjunto J. VALLEGA
Consejero Agrícola
Embajada de la República Argentina Roma
Adjunto L. GENTA
Secretario Comercial
Embajada de la República Argentina Roma
Adjunto L. AGUIRRE DEL CASTILLO
Secretario del Ministro de Agricultura Buenos Aires
Asesor Jose D. FALDINI
Consultor de la Comisión asesora pare la promoción de las exportaciones a la C.E.E. Buenos Aires
AUSTRALIA
Delegate Ian SINCLAIR
Minister of Primary Industry Canherra
Alternate Walter IVES
Secretary, Department of Primary Industry Canberra
Alternate Archer Roy MEAD
Director of Agriculture Tasmania
Alternate Stuart Francis HARRIS
Director
Bureau of Agricultural Economics Canherra
Associate Miss Mary McPHERSON
Counsellor, Australian Embassy Rome
Associate Peter Burbury CLARE
Commercial Counsellor
Australian Embassy Rome
Associate Edward Leslie JENKINS
Agricultural Representative London
Associate Morven DALL
Senior Project Officer Department of Primary Industry Canberra
Associate Ray Cedric BOLDUAN
Executive Officer Bureau of Agricultural Economics Canberra
Associate John Alfred STAFFORD
Agricultural Attache Australian Embassy Rome
Adviser Mrs. Phyllis Irene FROST
President Australian Freedom from Hunger Committee Sydney
Adviser Francis Joseph McAVOY
President Queensland Canegrowers Council Brisbane
AUSTRIA
Delegate Rudolf SEUHS
Chairman of the Austrian National FAO Committee and of the FFHC Committee
Vienna
Associate Hermann REDL
Ministerialsekretär
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry Vienna
Associate Karl HAAS
Permanent Representative of Austria
to FAO Rome
Associate Hansjörg HUG
Secretary
Embassy of Austria Rome
BAHRAIN
Delegate Ibrahim bin HAMED AL-KHALIFAH
Director of Agriculture Manama
Alternate Siddiq AL-ALAWI
Head of Plant Protection Section
Department of Agriculture Manama
BARBADOS
Delegate Anderson MORRISON
Parliamentary Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture, Science and Technology Bridgetown
Alternate C.M. THOMPSON
Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture, Science and Technology Bridgetown
Alternate E.C. PILGRIM
Chief, Agricultural Officer
Ministry of Agriculture, Science and Technology Bridgetown
BELGIUM
Délégué R. VAN HAUWERMEIREN
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent de la Belgique auprès de la FAO Rome
Suppléant Joseph DE BRUYN
Ambassadeur
Chef adjoins de la Direction des Nations Unies
Ministère des Affairs Etrangères Bruxelles
Suppléant André REGNIER
Représentant Permanent adjoins de la
Belgique auprès de la FAO Rome
Conseiller M^me S. VERVALCKE
Directeur d'Administration a la
Coopération multilatérale
Ministère des Affaires Etrangères et de la Coopération au Développement Bruxelles
Conseiller Ph. d'OTREPPE de BOUVETTE
Président du Comité national belge de la FAO Bruxelles
Conseiller E. DE LANGHE
Conseiller au Cabinet du Ministre de la Coopération au Développment Bruxelles
Conseiller J.M. POSWICK
Conseiller
Délégation Permanente de la Belgique auprès des Conférences Economiques Internationales Bruxelles
Conseiller A. J. HUBERT
Ingénieur principal au Ministère de l'Agriculture
Secrétaire du Comité national beige de la FAO Bruxelles
Conseiller Gérard SURQUIN
Secrétaire d'Administration
Direction générale des Relations
Economiques Extérieures
Ministère des Affaires Etrangères Bruxelles
BOLIVIA
Delegado Jose Gil REYES
Ministro de Asuntos Campesinos y Agricultura La Paz
Suplente Jose Antonio AYALA CANEDO
Subsecretario del Ministerio de
Asuntos Campesinos y Agricultura La Paz
Suplente Franz ONDARZA LINARES
Ex-Presidente de la Cámara de Diputados La Paz
Suplente Severo S. VAILATI
Cónsul General de Bolivia en Milán Milán
Adjunto Enzo CERLINI
Ex-Consul de Bolivia en Roma
BOTSWANA
Delegate A.M. DAMBE
Minister of Agriculture
Gaberones
Alternate George WINSTANTLEY
Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture Gaberones
Associate H. METTRICK
Chief Agricultural Economist Gaberones
BRAZIL
Delegate Joso Baptista PINHEIRO
Ambassador of Brazil in the Federal
Republic of Germany
Bonn
Alternate Luiz PARENTE de MELLO
Minister Counsellor
Chargé d'Affaires a.i.
Embassy of Brazil Rome
Alternate Joaquim Francisco de CARVALHO
Secretary-General
Brazilian Institute of Forestry Development
Alternate Enio VILANOVA CASTILHOS
Director
National Institute of Colonization and Land Reform Brasilia
Associate Miss Marina de BARROS e VASCONCELLOS
Counsellor, Ministry of Foreign Affairs Brasilia
Associate So F. GIARISCHI BATH
First Secretary
Embassy of Brazil
Permanent Representative of Brazil to FAO Rome
Associate J.M. RUIZ de GAMBOA
Head, Division of Conferences and Organisms
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Brasilia
Associate Francisco Manuel ROCHA POMBO VERA FILHO
Director, Office of Economic Analysis and Agricultural Policy
Ministry of Agriculture Brasilia
Associate Julián M. CHACEL
Research D-rector-Institute of Economics Rio de Janeiro
Associate Haroldo PEREIRA TRAVASSOS
UNDP/SUDEPE Fishery Development Plan Rio de Janeiro
Associate Miss Wilmary DIAS MACIEL
Third Secretary
Division of Conference and Organisms
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Brasilia
BULGARIA
Délégué Ivan RANCHEV
Vice-Ministre de l'Agriculture et des Industries alimentaires
Vice-President du Comité national bulgare pour la FAO Sofia
Suppléant Diko Varbanov DEKOV
Premier Secrétaire
Ambassade de la République populaire de Bulgarie
Représentant Permanent de la Bulgarie auprès de la FAO Rome
Adjoint Dobromir STOILOV
Expert en Chef au département de la
Coopération internationale, Ministère de
l'Agriculture et des Industries alimentaires Sofia
Adjoint Kiril TANOUCHEV
Expert en Chef au Département de la
coopération internationale Ministère de
l'Agriculture et des Industries alimentaires Sofia
Adjoint Guéorgui LIACOV
Expert au Département des Affaires économiques
Ministère des Affaires Extrangères Sofia
BURMA
Delegate Ye GAUNG
Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture and Forests Rangoon
Alternate Ba HNIN
Deputy Director (Extension)
Agriculture Department Rangoon
Associate Tint HLAING
Director
Fishery Department Rangoon
Associate Hla MYINT
Chief Executive Officer (Agriculture)
Agriculture and Rural Development
Corporation Rangoon
Associate Nyi Nyi THAN
Second Secretary
Embassy of Burma Rome
BURUNDI
Délégué Albin NYAMOYA
Ministre de l'Agriculture et de l'Elevage
Bujumbura
Suppléant Libérat NIYONDAGARA
Directeur du Département de l'Agronomie Bujumbura
Suppléant Jacques RUVAKUBUSA
Directeur du Département de l'Elevage Bujumbura
Suppléant Jean NTAWE
Directeur du Département de l'Information agricole Bujumbura
CAMEROON
Délégué René GOBE
Secrétaire d'Etat au Développement rural du Cameroun oriental Yaoundé
Suppléant Tata SAKAH
Secrétaire d'Etat au Développement rural du Cameroun occidental Buea
Suppléant Daniel ASSOUMOU MBA
Directeur Adjoint de l'Agriculture du Cameroun oriental Yaoundé
Adjoint Rober E.G. BURNLEY
Directeur de l'Agriculture du Cameroun occidental Buea
Adjoint Zacharie OLE
Directeur des Eaux et Forets du Cameroun oriental Yaoundé
Adjoint Daniel DANG MEKOULA
Secrétaire permanent des
Comités nationaux de la
Campagne mondiale contre la Faim Yaoundé
Adjoint Pierre VOUNDI MBITA
Chef du Service Relations Extérieures,
Chargé des Organisations Internationales au Secrétariat d'Etat au Développement rural Yaoundé
Conseiller R. ONANA SHE
Docteur Vétérinaire au Secrétariat
d'Etat a l'Elevage du Cameroun oriental Yaoundé
Conseiller Ruben MBON
Economiste au Ministère du Plan et de l'Aménagement du Territoire Yaoundé
CANADA
Delegate H.A. OLSON
Federal Minister of Agriculture Ottawa
Alternate S. B. WILLIAMS
Deputy Minister
Department of Agriculture
J.R. MESSER
Minister of Agriculture
Regina, Saskatchewan
Alternate R.P. POIRIER
Assistant Deputy Minister (Economics)
Department of Agriculture Ottawa
Alternate F. SHEFRIN,
Chairman Canadian Interdepartmental FAO
Committee
Department of Agriculture Ottawa
Associate R.D. GILBERT
Deputy Minister
Department of Agriculture and Rural Development Fredericton,
Associate D.R. REDMOND
Director, Forestry Relations
Directorate
Department of Environment (Forestry) Ottawa
Associate Claude PINEAU
Director, UN Programme Division
Multilateral Programmes Branch
CIDA Ottawa
Associate J.D.L. ROSE
Counsellor
Canadian Embassy Rome
Associate H.E. RYAN
First Secretary (Agriculture)
Canadian Embassy
Alternate Permanent Representative of Canada to FAO Rome
Associate R. ROBILLARD
International Programmes Division
Department of Finance Ottawa
Associate J.S, LOHOAR
Secretary, Canadian Interdepartmental
FAO Committee
Department of Agriculture Ottawa
Adviser C. MUNRO
President, Canadian Federation of Agriculture Ottawa
Adviser W. MILLER
Vice-President
National Farmers Union Ontario
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Délégué Christian SOMBODEY
Ministre des Eaux, Forêts, Chasses et Pêches et des Mines
Bangui
Suppléant Dieudonné WALLOT
Charge d'Affaires a.i.
Représentant Permanent de la
République Centrafricaine auprès de la FAO Rome
Adjoint Raymond DAMANGO
Directeur Général des Eaux, Forêts,
Chasses, Pêches et des Mines Bangui
Adjoint Jean-Pierre LE BOUDER
Charge du Bureau d'Etudes et de
Coordination au Ministère de
l'Agriculture et de l'Elevage Bangui
CEYLON
Delegate H. S. R. B. KOBBEKADUWA
Minister of Agriculture and Lands Colombo
Alternate A.T.M. SILVA
Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture and Lands Colombo
Associate P.T. JINENDRADASA
Director of Agriculture Colombo
Associate M.R. PERERA
First Secretary
Embassy of Ceylon
Permanent Representative of Ceylon to FAO Rome
CHAD
Délégué Victor ROUMBA
Directeur de l'Agriculture Fort-Lamy
Conseiller Mahamat TOUADET
Directeur de l'Elevage et de la production animale Fort-Lamy
Conseiller Raymond MATTA
Directeur des Eaux et Forêts Fort-Lamy
CHILE
Delegado Luis RIFFO
Subdirector de la Oficina de
Planificación Agrícola (ODEPA) Santiago
Suplente Carlos VASALLO
Embajador de Chile en Italia
Representante Permanente de Chile ante la FAO Roma
Suplente Sergio PIZARRO MACKAY
Ministro Consejero
Embajada de Chile Roma
Suplente José CARVAJAL
Jefe del Departamento Institucional de ODEPA Santiago
COLOMBIA
Delegado Armando SAMPER
Ex-Ministro de Agricultura Bogotá
Suplente Antonio ALVAREZ RESTREPO
Embajador de Colombia en Italia Roma
Suplente Jaime GARCIA PARRA
Federación Nacional de Cafeteros Bogotá'
Suplente Antonio BARBERENA
Gerente de la Reforma Agraria Bogotá
Suplente Gonzalo BULA HOYOS
Ministro Consejero
Asesor Especial del Gobierno colombiano pare la FAO,
Cónsul General de Colombia en los Países Bajos Amsterdam
Suplente Humberto RUIZ VARELA
Consejero
Embajada de Colombia
Representante Permanente de Colombia
ante la FAO Roma
CONGO PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF THE-CONGO
Délégué Théodore Gervais MAVOUNGOU
Conseiller
Ambassade de la République Populaire du Congo Rome
COSTA RICA
Delegado Carlos DI MOTTOLA BALESTRA
Embajador
Representante Permanente de Costa Rica ante la FAO Roma
Suplente Fernando RUNNEBAUM VOLIO
Ministro Consejero
Representante Permanente Alterno de Costa Rica ante la FAO Roma
Adjunto Luis CARLOS ESTRADA
Primer Secretario
Embajada de Costa Rica Roma
Asesor Sra. Marina DI MOTTOLA
Secretaria San Jose
CUBA
Delegado Pelegrín TORRAS DE LA LUZ
Director de Organismos Económicos en la Comisión Nacional de Colaboración
Vice-Presidente del Comité nacional de la FAO La Habana
Suplente Fernando LOPEZ MUINO
Embajador
Misión Permanente de Cuba ante la FAO
Representante Permanente de Cuba ante la FAO Roma
Adjunto Adolfo COSSIO RECIBO
Subdirector de la Dirección Económica del Instituto Nacional de Reforma Agraria La Habana
Adjunto Miguel Alfonso MARTINEZ
Jefe del Departamento de Asuntos Sociales y Culturales
Dirección de Organismos y Conferencia Internacionales
Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores La Habana
Adjunto Jose GONZALEZ ROJAS
Primer Secretario,
Misión Permanente de Cuba ante la FAO
Representante Permanente Alterno de Cuba ante la FAO Roma
CYPRUS
Delegate Panayiotis TOUMAZIS
Minister of Agriculture and
Natural Resources Nicosia
Alternate Rogiros MICHAELIDES
Director-General
Ministry of Agriculture and
Natural Resources Nicosia
Associate Theodosis CHRISTOU
Director of the Agricultural
Research Institute Nicosia
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Delegate Emil CAKAJDA
Vice-Minister of Agriculture and Food Prague
Alternate Jaroslav ROSA
Director of Department
Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Food Prague
Alternate Jan TOMCANI
Director of the Department for Agricultural
Planning
Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Food Prague
Alternate Miroslav BELAN
Federal Ministry of Foreign Affairs Prague
Adviser Jiri NEUMANN
Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Food Prague
Adviser Milan MLCOUSEK
Third Secretary
Embassy of the Socialist Republic of Czechoslovakia Rome
DAHOMEY
Délégué Mama CHABI
Ministre du Développement Rural et de la Coopération Cotonou
Suppléant Maximilien GRIMAUD
Directeur de l'Agriculture Porto-Novo
Conseiller Francis d'ALMEIDA
Secrétaire General du Comité Dahoméen
de la Campagne Mondiale contre la Faim Cotonou
DENMARK
Delegate Ib FREDERIKSEN
Minister for Agriculture
Alternate H.J. KRISTENSEN
Acting Consellor
Chairman, Danish National FAO Committee
Associate Wilhem ULRICHSEN
Assistant Under-Secretary of State for
International Development Co-operation
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Associate Carl THOMSEN
Professor, The Royal Veterinary and
Agricultural University
Associate Henning NORMANN
Head of Department
Statistical Bureau of Denmark
Associate Jørgen PEDERSEN
Head of the Secretariat of the Federation of Danish Smallholders' Association
Associate A. Vesten PETERSEN
Head of Department
Danish Agricultural Council
Associate C. Valentin HANSEN
Agricultural Counsellor
Royal Danish Embassy
Permanent Representative of Denmark to FAO Rome
Associate Søren VOSS
Head of Section
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Adviser Henrik WANSCHER
Head of Section
Ministry of Agriculture
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Delegado Vicente BURNEO
Ministro de la Producción
Quito
Suplente Fabián EGUIGUREN MUÑOZ
Embajador del Ecuador en Italia
Representante Permanente del Ecuador ante la FAO Roma
Adjunto Jose AYALA-LASSO
Ministro de la República
Embajada del Ecuador Roma
EGYPT, ARAB REPUBLIC OF
Delegate Sayed MAREI
Deputy Prime Minister for
Agriculture and Irrigation Cairo
Alternate Hassan All EL-TOBGY
Under-Secretary of State for
Agriculture Rome
Alternate Ahmed Ibrahim EL SHABASI
Under-Secretary of State for Agriculture Cairo
Alternate Saleh El Din Abdel WAHAB EL ABD
Under-Secretary of State for the
Ministry of Land Reclamation Dokhi-Cairo
Associate Hassan Kamal HASSANEIN
Commercial Counsellor
Embassy of the Arab Republic of Egypt Rome
Associate Mohamed Kamel HENDY
Director-General
Department of Agricultural
Economics and Statiatics
Ministry of Agriculture Cairo
Associate Ahmed Mahmoud RASSEM
Director, Foreign Agricultural
Relations Department
Ministry of Agriculture Cairo
Associate Mohamed F. SHARAF
Director, International
Organizations and Conferences
Division
Ministry of Agriculture Cairo
Associate Helmy Ibrahim SALEM
Head FAO Branch
Foreign Relations Department
Ministry of Agriculture Cairo
Associate Ismail Mostafa ROUSHDY
Commercial Secretary
Department of International Economic
Organizations
Ministry of Economic and Foreign Trade Cairo
EL SALVADOR
Delegado Julio Adalberto RIVERA
Embajador de El Salvador
Washington
Suplente Carlos Adalberto ALFARO
Embajador de la República de
El Salvador en Italia Roma
Adjunto Mario CORTES REYNADO
Agregado Militar, Embajada de El Salvador Roma
ETHIOPIA
Delegate Abbebe RETTA
Minister of Agriculture
Addis Ababa
Alternate Zegeye ABBERU
Vice-Minister of Agriculture Addis Ababa
Associate Berhanou WAKWOYA
General Manager, Livestock, Meat Board Addis Ababa
Associate Mengesha WORKENEH
General Manager, Grain Corporation Addis Ababa
Associate Woldearegay REDDA
Assistant Minister of Agriculture Addis Ababa
Associate Mulugetta BEZZABEH
Head of Agricultural Planning and Programming Unit Addis Ababa
FIJI
Delegate Berenado VUNIBOBO
Secretary for Agriculture,
Fisheries and Forests Suva
FINLAND
Delegate Samuli SUOMELA
Minister of Agriculture and Forestry
Helsinki
Alternate Antero PIHA
Director-General
National Board of Forestry Helsinki
Associate Jouko VUORINEN
Director
Agricultural Research Centre Helsinki
Associate Viljo HOLOPAINEN
Director
Forest Research Institute Helsinki
Associate Matti HÄKKÄNEN
Chief of Bureau
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Helsinki
Associate Antti LASSILA
First Secretary
Embassy of Finland
Permanent Representative of Finland to FAO Rome
Associate Antti NIKKOLA
Chief of Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry Helsinki
Associate Miss Maija PEKKARINEN
Assoc. Professor
Department of Nutritional Chemistry
University of Helsinki Helsinki
Associate Pekka NISKANEN
Inspector, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry Helsinki
Associate Holger MAURIA
Forestry Adviser
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry Helsinki
Associate Veli OLLIKAINEN
Attaché
Ministry for Foreign Affairs Helsinki
Associate Matti UUSITALO
Central Union of Agricultural
Producers Helsinki
FRANCE
Délégué Michel COINTAT
Ministre de l'Agriculture
Paris
Suppléant Jean de VAISSIERE
Inspecteur général de l'Agriculture Paris
Suppléant Albert de SCHONEN
Ministre plénipotentiaire
Représentant permanent de la France auprès de la FAO Rome
Suppléant Bernard TOUSSAINT
Ministre plénipotentiaire Paris
Suppléant Gérard WEILL
Secrétaire général au Comité inter ministériel de l'Agriculture et de l'Alimentation Paris
Suppléant Henri JANTON
Contrôleur d'Etat au Ministère de l'Economie et des Finances Paris
Conseiller Mlle HENRICH
Conseiller au Cabinet du Ministre de l'Agriculture Paris
Conseiller Jacques CHOUILLOU
Sous-Directeur au Ministère de l'Agriculture Paris
Conseiller Pierre COSSEVIN
Administrateur civil au Ministère de l'Economie et des Finances Paris
Conseiller Paul HALIMI
Administrateur civil au Ministère de l'Agriculture Paris
Conseiller Mlle Dominique RODIER
Chargée de mission au Ministère de l'Agriculture Paris
Conseiller Guy HERLEDON
Chef du Département rural au Secrétariat d'Etat aux Affaires étrangères (Coopération) Paris
Conseiller Jean BIDAUT
Charge de mission pour les relations
Extérieures au Secrétariat d'Etat aux Affaires étrangères (Coopération) Paris
Conseiller Roger FAUQUES
Directeur de Recherche à l'Office de la
Recherche scientifique et technique Outre-Mer Paris
Conseiller Jacques ALLIOT
Administrateur au Groupement d'études et de recherches d'agronomie tropicale
Conseiller André ANGLADETTE
Inspecteur General de la Recherche Agronomique Paris
Conseiller
spécial Madame Jeanne PICARD
Membre du Conseil Economique et Social Paris
Conseiller
spécial Jean DELEAU
Membre du Conseil Economique et Social Paris
GABON
Délégué François NGUEMA NDONG
Ministre d'Etat charge de l'Agriculture,
de l'Elevage et de l'Economie rurale Libreville
Suppléant Rigobert LANDJI
Ministre des Eaux et Forêts Libreville
Suppléant Lubin Martial NTOUTOUME OBAME
Ambassadeur du Gabon en Italie Rome
Adjoint Edouard TEALE
Premier Conseiller
Ambassade du Gabon
Représentant Permanent du Gabon auprès de la FAO Rome
Conseiller David EDOU-NDONG
Directeur des Services Agricoles Libreville
Conseiller Etienne OSSINGA
Directeur des Eaux et Forêts Libreville
GAMBIA
Delegate H. O. SEMEGA-JANNEH
Minister of Agriculture and Natural Resources Bathurat
Alternate L.J. MARENAH
Director of Agriculture Bathurat
Continue
<section>h</section>
Continued
GERMANY, FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF-
Delegate Josef ERTL
Federal Minister of Food, Agriculture and Forestry Bonn
Alternate Fritzwerner PIRKMAYR
Ministerialdirigent
Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry Bonn
Alternate Horst GOLTZ
Ministerialdirigent
Federal Ministry of Economic
Cooperation Boon
Alternate Wolfgang A.F. GRABISCH
Ministerialrat
Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry Bonn
Alternate Mrs. Irene HAAS
Ministerialraetin
Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry Bonn
Alternate Eberhart LUHE
Counsellor
Embassy of the Federal Republic of Germany
Alternate Permanent Representative of the Federal Republic of Germany to FAO Rome
Associate Herbert KOETTER
Professor, Institute for Agrarian
and Economic Affairs of the Friedrich Wilhelms University Bonn
Associate Juergen DETKEN
Regierungsdirektor
Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry Bonn
Associate Hans-Joachim von ROHR
Oberregierungsrat
Federal Ministry of Economic Cooperation Bonn
Associate Bernd von SYDOW
Diplomlandwirt
Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry Bonn
GHANA
Delegate K. SAFO-ADU
Minister of Agriculture Accra
Alternate L.P. TOSU
Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture Accra
Associate A.A. LARYEA
Chief Agricultural Officer
Ministry of Agriculture Accra
Associate J,N.N. ADJETEY
Chief Fisheries Officer
Ministry of Agriculture Accra
Associate Mrs. E. KWAWU
Secretary
National Freedom From Hunger
Campaign Committee Accra
Adviser H.B. OBENG
Officer-in-charge, Soil
Research Institute,
Academy Post Office Kwadaso
GREECE
Délégué Panayotis PAPAPANAYOTOU
Sous-secrétaire d'Etat
Ministère de l'Economie Nationale
Charge du Secteur de l'Agriculture Athènes
Suppléant Jean GEROULANOS
Président du Comité national grec de la FAO Athènes
Suppléant Sotirios KONSTANTOPOULOS
Conseiller
Ambassade de Grèce
Représentant Permanent de la Grèce auprès de la FAO Rome
Adjoint Panayotis MARGAROPOULOS
Directeur Général des Forêts
Ministère de l'Economie nationale Athènes
Adjoint Georges GRIGORIOU
Directeur des Etudes Agricoles et Economiques et de la Planification
Ministère de l'Economie nationale Athènes
Adjoint Alexandre VAYENAS
Premier Secrétaire
Ambassade de Grèce Rome
Adjoint Constantin TSIBOURIS
Attaché Agricole
Ambassade de Grèce Rome
GUATEMALA
Delegado Angel Arturo RIVERA GARCIA
Embajador de Guatemala en Italia
Representante Permanente de
Guatemala ante la FAO Roma
Suplente Eduardo CABRERA PASSARELLI
Secretario
Embajada de Guatemala Roma
GUINEA
Délégué Seydou KEITA
Ambassadeur de Guinée pour l'Europe occidentale
Représentant Permanent de la Guinée auprès de la FAO Rome
Suppléant Jean Syrogianis CAMARA
Attaché d'Ambassade
Charge des Organismes internationaux Rome
HAITI
Délégué Louis MARS
Ambassadeur d'Haiti près le Saint-Siege Rome
Suppléant François GUILLAUME
Ambassadeur d'Haïti auprès du
Gouvernement de la République italienne Rome
HONDURAS
Delegado Virgilio AGUILUZ ORELLANA
Subsecretario de Recursos Naturales Tegucigalpa
Suplente George ST. SIEGENS
Asesor del Gobierno Tegucigalpa
Adjunto Jose Roberto OLIVA HERRERA
Subdirector Instituto Nacional Agrario Tegucigalpa
Adjunto Carlos H. MATUTE
Consejero Económico Tegucigalpa
Adjunto Oscar H. PINTO
Vicepresidente del Banco Nacional de Fomento Tegucigalpa
Asesor Sra. Da Grazia Maria VALLONE GRANDOLINI
Secretaria
Embajada de Honduras Roma
HUNGARY
Delegate Imre DIMENY
Minister for Agriculture and Food Budapest
Alternate Kalman KAZARECKI
Vice Minister for. Agriculture and Food
Chairman of the Hungarian National FAO
Committee Budapest
Alternate Karoly KARCSAI
Secretary-General of the Hungarian
National FAO Committee Budapest
Alternate Jozsef VARGA PERKE
Counsellor, Ministry of Foreign Affairs Budapest
Associate Miklos VILANYI
Head of Department, Ministry of Finance Budapest
Associate Erno HARS
Counsellor, Ministry of Foreign Affairs Budapest
Associate Laszlo VEKONY
Permanent Representative of the Hungarian People's Republic to FAO Rome
Associate Gabor HIDVEGI
Counsellor, Hungarian National FAO
Committee Secretariat Budapest
Adviser L. SZABO
Chief of Cabinet of the Minister for Agriculture and Food Budapest
Adviser I. KOVACS
Expert of the Ministry of Agriculture and Foot Budapest
Adviser J. SZABO
Adviser of the Hungarian National
FAO Committee Budapest
Adviser Mrs. J. DURR
Officer, Hungarian National FAO
Committee Secretariat Budapest
INDIA
Delegate Fakhruddin ALI AHMED
Minister of Food and Agriculture New Delhi
Alternate T.P. SINGH
Permanent Secretary
Department of Agriculture, Community Development and Cooperation
Ministry of Food and Agriculture New Delhi
Associate T.N. SARAF
Counsellor (Agriculture)
Embassy of India
Permanent Representative of India to FAO Rome
Associate Ram SARAN
Economic and Statistical Adviser
Ministry of Food and Agriculture New Delhi
Associate Amrik Singh CHEEMA
Agricultural Commissioner
Ministry of Foot and Agriculture New Delhi
Associate Kamala PRASAD
Deputy Secretary
Ministry of Food and Agriculture New Delhi
Associate Abu HAKIM
Special Assistant to the Minister of Agriculture and Deputy Secretary,
Ministry of Foot and Agriculture New Delhi
Associate B.N. BROOAH
Private Secretary
Minister of Food and Agricultura New Delhi
INDONESIA
Delegate Tojib HADIWIDJAJA
Minister of Agriculture Djakarta
Alternate S.W. SADIKIN
Director-General of Agriculture Djakarta
Alternate Soegeng AMAT
Agricultural Attache
Embassy of Indonesia
Permanent Representative of Indonesia to FAO Rome
Associate J. HUTABARAT
Department of Agriculture
Secretary of National FAO Committee Djakarta
Associate H. SAANIN
Assistant to the Minister
Department of Agriculture Djakarta
Alternate Soemarjo SOSROWARDOJO
Ambassador of the Republic of Indonesia in Italy Rome
Associate K. SIAGIAN
Minister Counsellor
Economic Affairs
Embassy of Indonesia Rome
Associate Gde Arsa KADJAR
Chief, Information and Cultural Section
Embassy of Indonesia Rome
IRAN
Delegate Manssur ROUHANI
Minister of Agriculture and Natural Resources
Teheran
Alternate Abbas DAVATCHI
Dean, Faculty of Agriculture
Teheran University
Chairman, Iran National FAO Committee Teheran
Alternate Hussein SADECH
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Iran to FAO Rome
Associate Mohammad KAZEMI
Member, Executive Board, Plan Organization Teheran
Associate Hossein SEPEHRI
Under-Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture Teheran
Associate Parviz MEHDIZADEH
Chief, Natural Resources Research
Institute
Ministry of Natural Resources Teheran
Associate Mansour FERDOWS
Director, Animal Husbandry
Organization
Ministry of Agriculture Teheran
Associate A. Firouz MAHDAVI
Director-General, Soil Institute of Iran
Ministry of Agriculture Teheran
Associate Manouchehr MOTAMED
University Professor
Member of FAO National Committee Teheran
Associate Ziaeddin BEHRAVESH
Counsellor, Permanent Mission of Iran to FAO Rome
Associate Morteza TALIEH
Second Secretary
Embassy of Iran Rome
Associate Hassan SABETI RAMMATI
Director, Nutrition Department
Ministry of Health Teheran
IRAQ
Delegate Nafith Jalal HUWAIZI
Minister of Agriculture Baghdad
Alternate Hashim AL KANDURRY
President of Agricultural Machinery and Stations Baghdad
Associate Haidar EL-HAIDARI
Director-General of Plant Protection Baghdad
Alternate Sami KASSIR
Director-General of Animal Husbandry Baghdad
Associate Hazim CHALMERAN
Secretary-General of National Committee of World Food Programme Baghdad
Associate Zaid R. ALDAGHISTANY
Director of Planning Division
Ministry of Agriculture Baghdad
Associate Mamdooh ABDULHAMID
Minister Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative of Iraq to FAO Rome
IRELAND
Delegate M.J. BARRY
Secretary,
Department of Agriculture and Fisheries Dublin
Alternate D.J. BUCKLEY
Deputy Secretary,
Department of Agriculture and Fisheries Dublin
Alternate P. GRIFFIN
Principal Officer
Department of Agriculture and Fisheries Dublin
Associate J.S. ROWAN
Senior Agricultural Inspector
Department of Agriculture and Fisheries Dublin
Associate J. HURLEY
Higher Executive Officer
Department of Agriculture and Fisheries Dublin
Associate Michael FITZGERALD
First Secretary
Embassy of Ireland Rome
ISRAEL
Delegate Chaim GVATI
Minister of Agriculture and Development Jerusalem
Alternate Felix Dan MAAS
Special Adviser to the Minister of Agriculture and Development Jerusalem
Alternate Shimon MAZE
Minister Plenipotentiary
Embassy of Israel
Permanent Representative of Israel to FAO Rome
Alternate E. ZIPPORI
Counsellor-Economic Affairs
Associate Yehezke BARNEA
Counsellor, Embassy of Israel Rome
Associate Mrs. L.M. ROMAN
Director
Technical Assistant and Foreign
Relations Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture and Development Jerusalem
Associate Moshe KOLAR
Deputy Director
Forestry Department
Israel Lands Authority Haifa
ITALY
Délégué Lorenzo NATALI
Ministre de l'Agriculture
President du Comité national italien FAO Rome
Suppléant Ottorino BORIN
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent de l'Italie auprès de la FAO Rome
Suppléant Giuseppe Ugo PAPI
Secrétaire général du Comité national italien de la FAO Rome
Suppléant Nardo OLIVETI
Conseiller
Représentant permanent adjoint de l'Italie auprès de la FAO Rome
Conseiller Antonio FERONE
Inspecteur en Chef
Comité national italien de la FAO Rome
Conseiller Lamberto TOZZI
Directeur de Division
Comité national italien de la FAO Rome
Conseiller Orazio GRAZIANI
Directeur de Division
Comité national italien de la FAO Rome
Conseiller Fulvio TONNARELLI GRASSETTI
Directeur de Section
Ministère du Trésor Rome
Conseiller M^me Francesca ZAFARANA
Attaché de Presse
Comité national Italien de la FAO Rome
Conseiller M^me Elena MAMONE
Directeur de Division
Comité national italien de la FAO Rome
Conseiller Curzio CANEVA
Comité national Italien de la FAO Rome
IVORY COAST
Délégué' Gervais ATTOUNGBRE
Ambassadeur de Côte-d'Ivoire en Italie
Représentant Permanent auprès de la FAO Rome
Suppléant Joseph AKA-ANGHUI
Directeur Général du Développement agricole Abidjan
Suppléant Ibrahim TOURE
Secrétaire Général du Comité national
de l'Alimentation en Cote-d'Ivoire Abidjan
Adjoint Abdou VIEYRA
Directeur des Pêches continentales et de la Pisciculture Abidjan
Conseiller Ladji KAMARA
Directeur Adjoint des Pêches maritimes et lagunaires
Ministère de la Production animale Abidjan
Conseiller Djémis KOFFI
Chef de Service autonome des Affaires domaniales
Ministère de l'Agriculture Abidjan
Conseiller Zagoté LOHOURIGNON
Ingénieur des Eaux et Forêts Abidjan
JAMAICA
Delegate K.G.A. HILL
Counsellor, Jamaica High Commission London
JAPAN
Delegate Osamu MORIMOTO
Vice-Minister of Agriculture and Forestry Tokyo
Alternate Kyo ANDO
Minister, Embassy of Japan
Permanent Representative of Japan to FAO Rome
Alternate Masaaki SEO
Head of the Specialized Agencies
Division, United Nations Bureau
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Tokyo
Associate Koremoto TAKAHASHI
First Secretary
Embassy of Japan Rome
Associate Hisashi ANEHA
Assistant Chief, International
Cooperation Division,
International Affairs Department,
Agricultural Economic Bureau,
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry Tokyo
Associate Akira SASAO
Technical Official, Planning Division,
International Affairs Department
Agricultural and Forestry Economic Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Tokyo
Associate Koya MIMURA
First Secretary
Embassy of Japan Rome
Associate Seiichi OKUBO
International Cooperation Division,
International Affairs Department
Agricultural and Forestry Economic Bureau,
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry Tokyo
Associate Atsushi TAKEGUCHI
Specialized Agencies Division
United Nations Bureau
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Tokyo
JORDAN
Delegate Omar Abdalla OOKHGAN
Minister of Agriculture Amman
Alternate Khalil LUBANI
Under-Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture Amman
Alternate Salah JUM'A
Deputy Director General,
Agricultural Credit Corporation Amman
Alternate M.S. HAWAMDEH
Vice-President of the
Natural Resources Authority Amman
Alternate Hisham NUSEIBEH
Director
Veterinary Services Amman
KENYA
Delegate Jeremiah Joseph Mwaniki NYAGAH
Minister for Agriculture Nairobi
Alternate Joseph KIBE
Permanent Secretary,
Ministry of Agriculture Nairobi
Alternate Paul Thiongo MIRIE
Director of Agriculture,
Ministry of Agriculture Nairobi
Alternate Joseph GATUIRIA
Deputy Secretary,
Ministry of Agriculture Nairobi
Associate Zephania OWIRO
Head, Animal Production Division
Ministry of Agriculture Nairobi
Associate Wenceslaus Mwaura NJOROGE
Deputy Director, Veterinary Services,
Ministry of Agriculture Nairobi
Associate Denis WARE
Head, Economic Planning Division,
Ministry of Agriculture Nairobi
Associate Alvan Munyambu KARANGA
Under-Secretary, Ministry of
Natural Resources Nairobi
Associate Onesimus MBURU
Chief Conservator of Forests,
Ministry of Natural Resources Nairobi
Associate Norbert ODERO
Director of Fisheries,
Ministry of Tourism & Wildlife Nairobi
Adviser Mrs. Jael MBOGO
General Secretary,
Freedom from Hunger Committee Nairobi
KHMER REPUBLIC
Délégué Song SOR
Ministre de l'Agriculture Phnom-Penh
Suppléant Tong-Lip HO
Directeur de la Division des Recherches agronomiques
Conseiller technique au Ministère de l'Agriculture Phnom-Penh
Adjoint Leang Cheav PAN
Inspecteur General du Ministère de l'Agriculture
Directeur du Service des Eaux, Forêts et Chasses Phnom-Penh
KOREA (REPUBLIC OF)
Delegate Duck Choo MOON
Ambassador Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiary of the Republic of
Korea in Italy Rome
Alternate Kap-Soo HAN
Director
Agricultural Administration Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry Seoul
Associate Yong Chol AHN
Counsellor
Embassy of the Republic of Korea Rome
Associate Ju In SONG
Agricultural Attaché
Embassy of the Republic of Korea
Permanent Representative of Korea to FAO Rome
Associate Sung-Hwan HA
Fisheries Attaché
Embassy of the Republic of Korea Rome
Associate Kew Il LEE
Third Secretary
Bureau of International Relations
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Seoul
Associate Chul Ryong CHUNG
Officer
International Cooperation Office
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry Seoul
KUWAIT
Delegate Salem ALMANNAI
Assistant Under-Secretary
Director, Agriculture Department Kuwait
Alternate Mohamed Matouq AL-BAKHIT
Superintendent of Plant Production
Department of Agriculture Kuwait
Alternate Ahmed SHARHAN
Head of Fisheries Division Kuwait
LAOS
Délégué Houmphanh SAIGNASITH
Ministre de l'Economie Nationale Vientiane
Suppléant Tiao Somsavath VONGKOTH
Directeur de l'Agriculture Vientiane
Adjoint Boun Nong SIPHA
Sous-Directeur de la Vulgarisation
Agricole Vientiane
LEBANON
Délégué Kamal KHOURY
Ministre de l'Agriculture Beyrouth
Suppléant Malek BASBOUS
President du Plan Vert Beyrouth
Suppléant Sultan HAIDAR
Directeur General de la Production animale
Ministère de l'Agriculture Beyrouth
Suppléant Fouad KHOURY
Charge d'Affaires a.i.
Ambassade du Liban Rome
LESOTHO
Delegate S.N. MASERIBANE
Deputy Prime Minister
Minister of Agriculture,
Cooperative and Marketing Maseru
Alternate J.R.L. KOTSOKOANE
Permanent Secretary for Agriculture,
Cooperatives and Marketing Maseru
Associate D.R. PHORORO
Deputy Director of Veterinary Services Maseru
Associate G.L. MOCHOCHOKO
Agricultural Officer
(Extension and Farmer Training Centres) Maseru
LIBERIA
Delegate Julius E. COOPER
Under-Secretary for Agriculture Monrovia
Alternate Anthony T. SAYEH
Assistant Secretary of Agriculture for Forestry Monrovia
Associate D. James A. SIRLEAF
Director, Agricultural
Extension Services Monrovia
Associate Louis A. RUSS
Head, Economic Planning and Management
Department of Agriculture Monrovia
LIBYAN ARAB REPUBLIC
Delegate Abdulbari KHALIL
Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab Republic to FAO Rome
LUXEMBOURG
Délégué André ROBINET
Attaché au Ministère de l'Agriculture et de la Viticulture Luxembourg
Suppléant Eugene WEYMERSKIRCH
Préposé de service au Ministère de l'Agriculture et de la Viticulture Luxembourg
MADAGASCAR
Délégué Raphael JAKOBA
Ministre de l'Agriculture et de l'Expansion Rurale Tananarive
Suppléant Alfred BOTRALAHY
Ambassadeur de Madagascar en Italie
Représentant permanent de Madagascar auprès de 18 FAO Rome
Adjoint Gabriel ANDRIANASOLO
Premier Conseiller a l'Ambassade de Madagascar Rome
Adjoint Raymond RABEHARISOA
Secrétaire Général du Ministère de l'Agriculture et de l'Expansion Rurale Tananarive
Adjoint Roger RAJOELISOLO
Directeur de la Production Agricole Tananarive
Adjoint Andrianarisoa RALAIALITIANA
Chef du Bureau de Liaison avec les Organismes Internationaux du Ministère de l'Agriculture et de l'Expansion Rurale Tananarive
Adjoint Adrien RAKOTOARIVONY
Chef du Service de la Programmation Régionale au Ministère du Plan
Georges RAMANANTSOAVINA
Directeur des Eaux et Forêts Tananarive
Adjoint M^me Odette RASOARIMAHATRA
Chef de Section des Aides Internationales au Ministère des Finances Tananarive
Adjoint Henri ANDRIANTSILANIARIVO
Ingénieur d'Agriculture
Représentant permanent adjoins
de Madagascar auprès de la FAO Rome
MALAWI
Delegate Watson Binnie DELEZA
Acting Director of Extension and
Training Zomba
Alternate Bertie Austin MAOSA
First Secretary
Malawi High Commission London
MALAYSIA
Delegate Ghazali JAWI
Minister of Agriculture and Lands Kuala Lumpur
Alternate Simon Dembap MAJA
Deputy Chief Minister, Sarawak Kuching
Alternate Hong Jung CHEW
Deputy Director-General,
Ministry of Agriculture and Lands Kuala Lumpur
Associate Ahmad BAKRI
Assistant Secretary,
Ministry of Agriculture and Lands Kuala Lumpur
Associate Nik Mahmood bin NIK MOHAMED
Director, Veterinary Services
Ministry of Agriculture and Lands Kuala Lumpur
Associate Yoong Swee YIN
Fisheries Officer
Ministry of Agriculture and Lands Kuala Lumpur
Associate Alfred JABU
Agricultural Officer, Sarawak Kuching
MALI
Délégué Sidi COULIBALY
Ministre de la Production Bamako
Suppléant Jean Djigu KEITA
Directeur des Eaux et Forêts Bamako
Adjoint Sékou SISSOKO
Directeur de l'Agriculture Bamako
Adjoint Karamoko DOUMBIA
Conseiller Technique
Ministère de la Production Bamako
MALTA
Delegate Paul XUEREB
Minister of Trade, Industry,
Agriculture and Tourism Valletta
Alternate Carmel John MALIA
Ambassador of Malta in Italy Rome
Alternate Anthony S. FARRUGIA
Director of Agriculture and Forestry Valletta
Alternate M.C. MONTEBELLO
Director, Milk Marketing Undertaking
Ministry of Agriculture Valletta
Alternate I. MOSKOVITS
Counsellor (Agriculture)
Embassy of Malta
Permanent Representative of Malta to FAO Rome
Associate M.V. GAUCI
Counsellor
Embassy of Malta Rome
Associate M.V. CAMILLERI
Second Secretary
Embassy of Malta Rome
MAURITANIA
Délégué Youba CHEIKH BENANI
Directeur de l'Agriculture Nouakchott
Continue
<section>i</section>
Continued
MAURITIUS
Delegate Setcam BOOLELL
Minister of Agriculture and Natural Resources Port-Louis
Alternate R. BURRENCHOBAY
Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources Port-Louis
MEXICO
Delegado Marcos RAMIREZ GENEL
Subsecretario de Agricultura y Ganadería Mexico
Suplente Francisco MEDINA ASCENSIO
Embajador de Mexico en Italia
Representante Permanente de Mexico ante la FAO Roma
Adjunto Francisco RAMOS CANTORAL
Director General de Asuntos
Internacionales, Secretaría de Agricultura y Ganadería Mexico
Adjunto Luciano BARRAZA ALLANDE
Director General de Economía Agricola,
Secretaría de Agricultura y Ganadería Mexico
Adjunto Sra. Da Ninfa SANTOS
Representante Permanente
Suplente de Mexico ante la FAO Roma
MOROCCO
Délégué Nor EL GHORFI
Ambassadeur du Royaume du Maroc auprès de la FAO Rome
Adjoint Hussein FARAJ
Directeur de la Recherche Agronomique Rabat
Adjoint Driss TOULALI
Chef de la Division des Affaires économiques
Ministère de l'Agriculture Rabat
Adjoint Mohamed GUERRAOUI
Directeur de l'Administration générale
Ministère de l'Agriculture Rabat
Adjoint Abdelmoula BERRADA
Directeur Scientifique a la Recherche Agronomique Rabat
NEPAL
Delegate Gyanendra Bahadur KARKI
Minister of Food, Agriculture, Forest and Land Reform Kathmandu
Alternate Surendra Raj SHARMA
Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture and Food Kathmandu
NETHERLANDS, KINGDOM OF THE
Delegate P.J. LARDINOIS
Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries The Hague
Alternate Abe S. TUINMAN
Minister Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative of the Netherlands to FAO Rome
Associate E.S. PIETERS KWIERS
Head, Department for Agriculture, Animal Husbandry
and Fisheries for the island territory of Curaçao,
Netherlands Antilles Willemsted
Curaçao
Associate A.G. SMIT
Director for Agriculture,
Animal Husbandry and Fisheries, Surinam Paramaribo
Associate G.P. TIGGELMAN
Counsellor, Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries Wageningen
Associate F. DEELEMAN
Director, Division for Agricultural Aid to Developing Countries,
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries The Hague
Associate H. RIEM
Division for Agricultural Commerce,
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries The Hague
Associate Jan BERTELING
International Organizations
Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs The Hague
Associate Miss P.F.M. VAN DER TOGT
Liaison officer for FAO Affairs, Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries The Hague
Adviser Jan MEIJER
Ambassador
Director-General for International
Cooperation, Ministry of Foreign Affairs The Hague
Adviser C. FLORIS
Assistant Secretary
Committee for International Affairs
Public Board of Agriculture The Hague
Adviser J.M.H. TIMMERS
Assistant Agricultural Attaché
Embassy of the Netherlands Rome
Adviser Boudyn UYTHOF
Member of the Netherlands Committee
for International Youth Work Amsterdam
NEW ZEALAND
Delegate D.J. CARTER
Minister of Agriculture Wellington
Alternate A.T. JOHNS
Director-General of Agriculture Wellington
Alternate R.B. ATKINS
Counsellor
Embassy of New Zealand Rome
Associate G.J. BATTEN
Agricultural Adviser
New Zealand High Commission London
Associate E.R. WOODS
First Secretary and Assistant Trade
Commissioner,
Embassy of New Zealand Rome
NICARAGUA
Delegado Alfonso LOVO CORDERO
Ministro de Agricultura y Ganadería Managua
Suplente Ernesto MATAMOROS MEZA
Embajador de Nicaragua en Italia Roma
Adjunto Bosco MATAMOROS HUECK
Agregado Cultural
Embajada de Nicaragua
NIGER
Délégué Nereo GALLIANI
Consul du Niger a Bari Bari
NIGERIA
Delegate J.O.J. OKEZIE
Commissioner for Agriculture and Natural Resources Lagos
Alternate Bukar SHAIB
Permanent Secretary, Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources Lagos
Alternate D.D. OBUNGE
Charge d'Affaires
Embassy of Nigeria Rome
Adviser B.S. OLORUNTOBA
Director
Federal Department of Agriculture Lagos
Adviser A.M. OSENI
Director
Federal Department of Forestry Ibadan
Adviser E.O. BAYAGBONA
Director, Federal Fisheries
Service Lagos
Adviser J.A. EWEKA
Chief Agricultural Planning
Officer Lagos
Adviser Mu'azu ABDUL MALIK
State Counsel, Federal Ministry of Justice Lagos
NORWAY
Delegate Thorstein TREHOLT
Minister of Agriculture Oslo
Alternate Klaus SUNNANAA
Director-General of Fisheries Bergen
Alternate Hans Kristian SEIP
Director-General of Forestry Oslo
Associate Bjarne ROBBERSTAD
Secretary-General,
Ministry of Agriculture Oslo
Associate Gunnar GUNDERSEN
Director, Administrative Department,
Directorate of Fisheries Bergen
Associate Torbjörn CHRISTIANSEN
Counsellor, Royal Norwegian Embassy,
Permanent Representative of Norway to FAO Rome
Associate Aage BOTHNER
Head of Division,
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Oslo
Associate Arne LOCHEN
Secretary-General,
National Nutrition Council
(FAO Committee) Oslo
Associate Finn REISEGG
Director, Norwegian Institute of Agricultural Economics Oslo
Associate Kjell RAASOK
Head of Division,
Ministry of Fisheries Oslo
Associate Olav LINDSTAD
Counsellor,
Norwegian Agency for International Development Oslo
OMAN (SULTANATE OF)
Delegate Abdul HAFIZ SALIM RATEB
Minister of Economic Affairs Muscat
Alternate Abdullah Hamdan EL-WAHIBI
Assistant-Director of Agriculture Muscat
Alternate Ahmed Thabit AL-BUSAID
Secretary to the Minister Muscat
PAKISTAN
Delegate M.H. SUFI
Adviser to the President for Agriculture and Works Islamabad
Alternate Hamid NAWAZ KHAN
Ambasador of Pakistan in Italy Rome
Alternate M.A. BAJWA
Joint Secretary, Agriculture Wing,
Government of Pakistan Islamabad
Associate Salahuddin AHMED
Secretary of Agriculture, Government of East Pakistan Dacca
Associate M.I.K. KHALIL
Agricultural Counsellor,
Embassy of Pakistan
Permanent Representative of Pakistan to FAO Rome
Associate S. Barkat AHMED
Officer on Special Duty,
Agriculture Wing
Government of Pakistan Islamabad
PANAMA
Delegado Sra. Da. Mirla PANIZA DE BELLAVITA
Enviado Extraordinario y Ministro
Plenipotenciario de Panama ante la FAO Roma
Delegado Anibal FERNANDEZ
Consejero
Embajada del Paraguay Roma
PERU
Delegado Enrique VALDES ANGULO
Ministro de Agricultura Lima
Suplente Miguel de LAS CASAS
Director General
Cooperación Técnica y Económica Internacional
Ministerio de Agricultura Lima
Suplente Benjamín SAMANEZ CONCHA
Director General, Reforma Agraria y
Asentamiento
Ministerio de Agricultura Lima
Adjunto Pedro ALIBERT DEL BUSTO
Asesor del Ministro de Agricultura Lima
Adjunto D. José Santiago ARRIOLA SARMIENTO
Agregado Agrícola
Representante Permanente del Perú ante la FAO Roma
Adjunto Ramón PEREZ PRIETO
Director General de Cooperación Técnica y Económica
Ministerio de Pesquería Lima
PHILIPPINES
Delegate Arturo TANCO Jr.
Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources Manila
Alternate Jose ALEJANDRINO
Ambassador of the Philippines in Italy
Permanent Representative of the Philippines to FAO Rome
Associate Silvestre SARMIENTO
Budget Director
National Food and Agriculture Council Manila
Associate Virgilio R. CARANGAL
National Coordinator
White Corn and Feed Grain Programme
National Food and Agriculture Council Manila
Associate Mrs. Rica BERNAS
Consultant
Assistant to the Chairman, National
Food and Agriculture Council
Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources Manila
Associate Amador T. GERVACIO
Executive Secretary
Philippine National FAO Committee Manila
Associate Inocencio A. RONQUILLO
Chief, Division of Marine Fisheries Biology
Philippine Fisheries Commission Manila
POLAND
Délégué Jozef OKUNIEWSKI
Ministre de l'Agriculture Varsovie
Suppleant Wojciech CHABASINSKI
Ambassadeur de la République Populaire
de Pologne en Italie
Représentant Permanent auprès de la FAO Rome
Suppleant Antoni CZARKOWSKI
Vice-Directeur
Département des Organisations
Internationales
Ministère des Affaires Etrangères Varsovie
Suppleant Mme^ Ewa RASZEJA-TOBIASZ
Vice-President
Comité national polonais de la FAO Varsovie
Adjoint Czeslaw MUSZALSKI
Chef de Division,
Département des Organisations Internationales
Ministère des Affaires Etrangères Varsovie
Adjoint Henryk PODEDWORNY
Secrétaire
Comité national polonais de la FAO Varsovie
Conseiller Stanislaw BERGER
Secrétaire,
Comité polonais de la Lutte contre la Faim Varsovie
PORTUGAL
Delegate Lopo CANCELLA DE ABREU
Member of Parliament, Former Cabinet
Minister and Chairman of the Portuguese
National FAO Committee Lisbon
Alternate Joäo de SA COUTINHO
Charge d'Affaires of Portugal in Italy
and Permanent Representative of Portugal to FAO Rome
Alternate Daniel DUARTE SILVA
Commodore and Vice-President of the
Portuguese National FAO Committee Lisbon
Alternate Arménio FRANCA da SILVA
Inspector-General
Ministry of Economics Liabon
Alternate Ruy de ARAUJO RIBEIRO
Director-General of Economics
Ministry of Overseas Lisbon
Alternate D. Luís BRAMAO
Senior Research Professor,
Department of Agriculture
Ministry of Economics Liabon
Alternate Jose Eduardo HELLO GOUVEIA
Department of International Relations
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Liabon
Adviser Alberto ALVES LOPES
Vice-President
National Institute for Fishery Development Lisbon
Adviser Ilíndio BARBOSA
Senior Inspector, Ministry of Overseas Liabon
Adviser Jose V.J. CARVALHO CARDOSO
Research Professor, National
Agricultural Research Station
Department of Agriculture
Ministry of Economics Lisbon
Adviser Manuel TELES de VASCONCELOS
Senior Inspector of Agriculture
Department of Agriculture,
Ministry of Economics Lisbon
Adviser Pompeu de ALMEIDA
Provincial Inspector,
Forestry Department
Ministry of Overseas Luanda
Adviser Mrs. Maria de LOURDES RAMOS MATAFOME
Veterinarian Officer,
Ministry of Overseas Lisbon
Adviser Fernando VELOSO LOPES GAIO
Forestry Officer
Directorate of Forestry
Department of Agriculture
Ministry of Economics Lisbon
QATAR
Delegate Sultan AL KUWARI
Director of the Agricultural
Affairs Department Doha
Alternate A. AL-MANA
Head of Economy and Statistics Section Doha
Associate I. AL-BADER
Head of Horticulture Section
Department of Agriculture Doha
ROMANIA
Délégué Angelo MICULESCU
Ministre-Secrétaire d'Etat du Ministère de l'Agriculture, de l'Industrie Alimentaire, de la Sylvicultureet des Eaux Bucarest
Suppléant Filip TOMULESCU
Adjoint du Ministre de l'Agriculture, de l'Industrie Alimentaire, de la Sylviculture et des Eaux Bucarest
Suppléant Iacob IONASCU
Ambassadeur de la Republique Socialiste de Roumanie en Italie
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO Rome
Conseiller Octavian CARARE
Directeur au Ministère de l'Agriculture, de l'Industrie
Alimentaire, de la Sylviculture et des Eaux Bucarest
Conseiller Eugen BUCIUMAN
Secrétaire General du Comité national roumain de la FAO Bucarest
Conseiller Dragos SERBANESCU
Conseiller au Ministère des Affaires Etrangères Bucarest
Conseiller Tiberiu MURESAN
Directeur de l'lnstitut de
Recherches pour les Céréales et Plantes Techniques FUNDULEA Bucarest
Conseiller Laurentiu BUIA
Chef de secteur a l'Académie des Sciences Agricoles et Sylvicoles Bucarest
Coneeiller Ion SFIRLEA
Conseiller au Ministère de l'Agriculture, de l'Industrie Alimentaire, de la Sylviculture et des Eaux Bucarest
SAUDI ARABIA
Delegate Hassan AL-MISHARI
Minister of Agriculture and Water Riyadh
Alternate Mohamed AL-FAISAL
Deputy Minister of Saline Water
Conversion Affaires
Ministry of Agriculture and Water Jiddah
Associate Abdul Rahman bin AHMED
Assistant Director of Budget Unit
Ministry of Agriculture and Water Riyadh
Associate Abdul Mohsin SUDEARY
Director-General of Training
Ministry of Agriculture and Water Riyadh
Associate Ali MOSALLAM
Director-General of Organization and Management, Planning and Budget Riyadh
Associate Hassan HAJRA
Director-General, Public Land Management Riyadh
Associante Adnan T. SAMMAN
Director, Administrative Affairs,
Saline Water Conversion Affairs Jiddah
Associate Abdullah Ibrahim AL-HUDAITHI
Head of Technical Affairs Division,
Minister's Office
Ministry of Agriculture and Water Riyadh
SENEGAL
Délégué Habib THIAM
Ministre du Développement rural Dakar
Suppléant Medoune DIENE
Directeur des Services agricoles Dakar
Suppléant Louis GUEYE
Représentant Permanent du Senegal auprès de la FAO Rome
Adjoint Malick DIA
Directeur de l'Océanographie et des Pêches maritimes Dakar
Adjoint Babacar DIOP
Directeur de la Société sénégalaise d'armement pour la pêche Dakar
Adjoint Bayoro DIALLO
Secrétaire général exécutif du Comité national sénégalais CMCF/FAO Dakar
SIERRA LEONE, THE REPUBLIC OF
Delegate A.G. SEMBU-FORNA
Minister of Agriculture and Natural Resources Freetown
Alternate Sulaiman Ansumana JABATI
Ambassador of the Republic of Sierra Leone in Italy Rome
Alternate G.B. MASON
Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources Freetown
Adviser S.A. KAWA
Chief Agriculturist Freetown
Adviser J.S. SAWYERR
Chief Conservator of Forests Freetown
Adviser L.F. PABS - GARNON
Chief Veterinary Officer Freetown
Adviser J. T. SHORYNKEH-SAWYERR
Chief Fisheries Officer
Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources Freetown
Adviser J. ROCHE
Assistant Agricultural Director Freetown
SOMALI DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC
Delegate Mohamed Jama ELMI
Counsellor (Charge d'Affaires)
Embassy of the Democratic Republic of Somali Rome
Alternate Sido ROBLE SIMBA
Economic and Commercial Counsellor
Embassy of the Democratic Republic of Somali Rome
Alternate Mohamed Ibrahim SCERIF
Agricultural Planning Economist Mogadiscio
SPAIN
Delegado Tomás ALLENDE Y GARCIA-BAXTER
Ministro de Agricultura Madrid
Suplente Luis GARCIA de OTEYZA
Subsecretario de Agricultura,
Presidente del Comité Nacional
Español pare la FAO Madrid
Suplente Fernando MARCITLLACH
Director General de Pesca Marítima Madrid
Suplente Angel LABAYEN FERNANDEZ-VILLAVERDE
Ministro Consejero,
Embajada de España Roma
Suplente Arturo CAMILLERI LAPEYRE
Secretario General Técnico del Ministerio de Agricultura Madrid
Suplente Felix SAN SEBASTIAN
Subdirector General de Cooperación pare el Desarrollo Madrid
Suplente Guillermo ESCARDO PEINADOR
Secretario General del Comité Nacional
Español pare la FAO Madrid
Suplente Ramon ARMENGOD LOPEZ
Primer Secretario
Embajada de España Roma
Suplente Alberto BALLARIN MARCIAL
Director de la Sección Española de Derecho Agrario Madrid
Adjunto Ricardo de RADA MARTINEZ
Subdirector General de la Defensa de la Riqueza Forestal
Ministerio de Agricultura Madrid
Adjunto Antonio FERNANDEZ Y GONZALEZ
Agregado Agrónomo
Embajada de España
Representante Permanente de España ante la FAO Roma
Asesor Francisco-Javier GARCIA-RAMOS ITURRALDE
Jefe del Negociado de Oficinas
Agronómicas en el Extranjero
Servicio Exterior Agrario, Ministerio de Agricultura Madrid
Asesor Miguel BUENO GOMEZ
Jefe del Departamento de Estudios del Servicio Nacional de Concentración Parcelaria y Ordenación Rural Madrid
Asesor M.D. Milagros ALLENDE
Jefe de Asuntos Generales
Servicio Exterior Agrario Madrid
Asesor Juan María CORTES FERNANDEZ
Director Adjunto de Recursos de la
Comisaría General de Abastecimientos y Transportes Madrid
SUDAN, DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE
Delegate Wadie HABISHI
Minister of Agriculture Khartoum
Alternate Kamil MANSOUR
Under-Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture Khartoum
Associate Gaafar KARAR
Under-Secretary
Ministry of Animal Production Khartoum
Associate Yousif Hassan SAID
Director Department of Agricultural
Economics and Statitics
Ministry of Agriculture Khartoum
Associate Abdalla BABIKER
Development Officer
Ministry of Cooperation and Rural Development Khartoum
Associate Amir Abdalla KHALIL
Agricultural Attaché
Embassy of the Democratic Republic of the Sudan Rome
SWAZILAND (KINGDOM OF)
Delegate O.Z. DHLAMINI
Under-Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture Mbabane
Alternate A. KHOZA
Senior Veterinary Officer
Ministry of Agriculture Mbabane
Alternate P.L. NSIBANDE
Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs Mbabane
SWEDEN
Delegate Ingemund BENGTSSON
Minister of Agriculture Stockholm
Alternate Ivan ECKERSTEN
Under-Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture Stockholm
Alternate Claes SENNING
Head of Division
Ministry of Agriculture Stockholm
Associate Eric KRONMARK
Member of Parliament Stockholm
Associate Hugo BERCH
Consultant
Ministry of Agriculture Stockholm
Associate Boerje BILLNER
Head of Department
Ministry for Foreign Affairs Stockholm
Associate Erik CORNELL
Permanent Representative of Sweden to FAO Rome
Associate Lennart HJELII
Professor
Agricultural College of Sweden Stockholm
Associate Joeran HULT
Director-General
National Swedish Board of Fisheries Gothenburg
Associate Harald HAAKANSSON
Director
Federation of Swedish Farmers' Associations Stockholm
Associate Lars JONSSON
Secretary, Ministry for Foreign Affairs Stockholm
Associate Carl Henrik LAGERFELT
Head of Section
Ministry of Agriculture Stockholm
Associate Claes-Erik ODHNER
Doctor of Agriculture
Swedish Confederation of Trade Unions Stockholm
Associate Karl Fredrik SVAERDSTROEM
Professor
Agricultural College of Sweden Uppsala
Associate Jarl E. TRANAEUS
Permanent Representative of the Swedish
International Development Authority (SIDA) to FAO Rome
SWITZERLAND
Délégué Ernst BRUGGER
Conseiller Federal
Chef du Département fédéral de l'Economie publique Berne
Suppléant Jean-Claude PIOT
Directeur de la Division de l'Agriculture
Département fédéral de l'Economie publique Berne
Suppléant Hans POPP
Vice-Directeur de la Division de l'Agricultures
Département fédéral de l'Economie publique Berne
Adjoint M. Raymond JUNOD
Conseiller national
Directeur de la Chambre vaudoise d'agriculture Lausanne
Adjoint Gaspard BODMEK
Chef de la Section Nations Unies et
Organisations internationales
Département politique fédéral Berne
Adjoint Paul HOHL
Secrétaire du Comité' national suisse de la FAO Berne
Adjoint Alfred CARDINAUX
Représentant permanent de la Suisse auprès de la FAO Rome
Adjoint Richard GAECHTER
Coopération technique
Département politique fédéral Berne
Adjoint Serge SALVI
Coopération technique
Département politique fédéral Berne
Adjoint Heinz HOFER
Collaborateur technique
Division du commerce
Département fédéral de l'Economie publique Berne
Adjoint Rene JURI
Directeur de l'Union suisse des paysans Brugg
Adjoint Gaudenz RUF
Attaché
Ambassade de Suisse Rome
Conseiller P. MOCK
Vice-Directeur de Nestle S.A. Vevey
SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC
Delegate Mohamed HAIDAR
Deputy Minister of Agriculture and Agraria Reform Damascus
Alternate Michel ABDULLAH
Director, Soils Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform Damascus
Associate Abdulkader Al-NAYAL
Deputy Director of Irrigation and Planning
State Agricultural Planning Commission Damascus
TANZANIA
Delegate D.N.M. BRYCESON
Minister for Agriculture and Co-operatives Dar-es-Salaam
Alternate P.S. QORRO
Junior Minister for Agriculture and Co-operatives Dar-es-Salaam
Associate H.M. KASIGA
Director of Administration and Planning Dar-es-Salaam
Associate F.M. MAHENDEKA
Field Officer I Dar-Es-Salaam
Adviser S.W.C. MAREALLE
Regional Director of Agriculture Mbeya
Adviser S. KHAMISI
Regional Director of Agriculture Moshi
Adviser O.H. TESHA
Counsellor, Embassy of Tanzania Rome
Adviser S. BANDIO
Fisheries Officer Dar-es-Salaam
Adviser C. MBANDO
Forestry Officer Mbeya
THAILAND
Delegate M.R. Chakratong TONGYAI
Minister of Agriculture Bangkok
Alternate C. AMATAYAKUL
Ambassador of Thailand in Italy Rome
Alternate Prida KARNASUT
Under-Secretary of State
Ministry of Agriculture Bangkok
Alternate M.C. CHAKRABANDHU
Rector of Kasetsart University Bangkok
Associate Siribongse BOON-LONG
Inspector-General
Ministry of Agriculture Bangkok
Associate Phit PANYALAKSHANA
Director-General
Department of Agriculture
Ministry of Agriculture Bangkok
Associate Chua WONGSONGSARN
Director of Education and Research Division
Department of Livestock Development
Ministry of Agriculture Bangkok
Associate Chalermsag NAGSWASDI
Special Grade Economist
Ministry of Economic Affairs Bangkok
Associate Pimol CHITMAN
Chief, Economic Services Division
Bureau of the Budget
Office of the Prime Minister Bangkok
Continue
<section>j</section>
Continued
TOGO
Délégué Eusèbe CHILLOH
Directeur de la Société Régionale d'Aménagement et de Développement maritime
Ministère de l'Economie rurale Lomé
Suppléant Sylvian Esso BATCHASSI
Directeur adjoins de la Société Régionale d'Aménagement et de Développement des Plateaux
Ministère de l'Economie rurale Lomé
Suppléant Antoine MEATCHI
Conseiller technique
Ministère de l'Economie rurale Lomé
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
Delegate Lionel Marconi ROBINSON
Minister of Agriculture, Lands and Fisheries Port of Spain
Alternate Charles H. ARCHIBALD
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Trinidad and Tobago to FAO Geneva
Alternate N. HAZEL
Counsellor
Trinidad and Tobago Permanent Mission to the United Nations Geneva
Adviser Foster BISSESSAR
Director, Agricultural Planning Div.
Ministry of Agriculture, Lands and Fisheries Port of Spain
TUNISIA
Délégué Mohamed GHEDIRA
Secrétaire d'Etat a l'Agriculture Tunis
Suppléant Ahmed NOUREDDINE
Ambassadeur de Tunisie en Italie Rome
Suppléant Mohamed JARRAYA
Sous-Directeur au Ministère de l'Agriculture Tunis
Adjoint Salah MIDAH
Chef de la Division de la Production agricole
Ministère de l'Agriculture Tunis
Adjoint Mahmoud GHELICI
Sous-Directeur au Ministère de l'Agriculture Tunis
Adjoint Sadok DJELLOULI
Ingenieur Principal
Ministère de l'Agriculture Tunis
Conseiller Mohsen BEL HADJ AMOR
Premier Secrétaire
Ambassade de Tunisie Rome
TURKEY
Delegate Orhan DIKMEN
Minister of Agriculture Ankara
Alternate Tansug BLEDA
Counsellor
Embassy of Turkey
Permanent Representative of Turkey to FAO Rome
Alternate Kemal BILGIC
Secretary-General
Turkish National FAO Committee Ankara
Associate Ismail BILIR
Deputy Director-General
Directorate of Livestock Development
Projects
Ministry of Agriculture Ankara
Associate Ibrahim UNAL
Commercial Counsellor
Embassy of Turkey Rome
Associate Sadettin NURGUN
Director of Section
Department of International Economic
Organizations
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Ankara
Associate Kemal KAPTAN
Director of Department
Ministry of Agriculture Ankara
Associate Atilla SIMSEK
Department of Processing and Marketing of Agricultural Products
Ministry of Agriculture Ankara
UGANDA
Delegate Fabiano Luc OKWAARE
Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Co-operatives Kampala
Alternate Herbert Semu Kanabi NSUBUGA
Permanent Secretary/Commissioner of Veterinary Services and Animal Industry Kampala
Associate Patrick Frederick KUNYA
Commissioner of Agriculture Kampala
Associate Saul Nelson SEMAKULA
Chief Fisheries Division
Ministry of Animal Industry Kampala
Associate Clement Paul BABULA
Representative from the President's Office Kampala
Adviser Mrs. Sarah N. KIYINGI
Agricultural Officer in Home Economics Entebbe
UNITED KINGDOM
Delegate Anthony KERSHAW
Parliamentary Under-Secretary
Foreign and Commonwealth Office London
Alternate D. WILLIAMS
Under-Secretary
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
(Overseas Development Administration)
Chairman, National FAO Committee London
Alternate R.S. PORTER
Director-General of Economic Planning
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
(Overseas Development Administration) London
Alternate A.R. MELVILLE
Chief Natural Resources Adviser
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
(Overseas Development Administration) London
Alternate K.G. ASHTON
Assistant Secretary
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
(Overseas Development Administration) London
Alternate W.G. LAMARQUE
Counsellor, British Embassy
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom to FAO Rome
Associate K.G.W. FROST
Principal
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
(Overseas Development Administration)
Secretary, National FAO Committee London
Associate R.W. HOLMWOOD
Principal
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food London
Adviser Mrs. T.C. WALLACE
Private Secretary to the
Parliamentary Under-Secretary
Foreign and Commonwealth Office London
Adviser Miss R. MILLER
National Farmers' Union London
Adviser E. PARRY
National Union of Agricultural Workers London
Adviser Miss B. HOLT
Higher Executive Officer
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
(Overseas Development Administration) London
Adviser Mrs. K.B. YATES
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
(Overseas Development Administration) London
Adviser Miss I.J. GRANT
British Embassy Rome
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Delegate Andrew J. MAIR
Deputy Assistant Secretary for International Affairs and Commodity Programs Department of Agriculture Washington,
Alternate Paul J. BYRNES
Counselor for FAO Affairs American Embassy
Permanent Representative of the U.S.A. to FAO Rome
. Alternate Ervin L. PETERSON
Deputy Assistant Administrator
Bureau for Technical Assistance Agency for International Development Department of State Washington, D.C.
Alternate Ralph W. PHILLIPS
Director, International Organizations Staff Office of Assistant Secretary for International Affairs and Commodity Programs Department of Agriculture Washington, D.C.
Alternate George von PETERFFY
Deputy Assistant Secretary
Bureau of International Organizations Affairs
Department of State Washington, D.C.
Congressional
Advisers: The Honorable Lawton M. CHILES
United States Senate Washington, D.C.
The Honorable Robert B. MATHIAS
United States House of Representatives Washington, D.C.
The Honorable Joseph P. VIGORITO
United States House of Representatives Washington, D.C.
Advisers: Chester R. BENJAMIN
Directorate for Agricultural Agencies
Bureau of International Organizations Affairs
Department of State Washington, D.C.
Radboud L. BEUKENKAMP
Agricultural Attaché
American Embassy 00187 Rome
Harry L. COBURN
Second Secretary for FAO Affairs
American Embassy
Deputy Permanent Representative of the U.S.A. to FAO 00187 Rome
Walter K. DAVIS
Development Affairs Officer, FAO Relations Office American Embassy 00187 Rome
Carrol F. DEYOE
Liaison Officer, USDA-FAO
Office of Agriculture and Fisheries
Bureau of Technical Assistance
Agency for International Development Department of State Washington, D.C.
Mrs. Prudence FOX
Division of International Agreements and Organizations
National Marine Fisheries Service
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Department of Commerce, Interior Building Washington, D.C.
John O. GRIMES
Secretary of Delegation
Office of International Conferences
Bureau of International Organizations Affairs
Department of State Washington, D.C.
Kenneth A. HAINES
Associate Director
International Programs Division
Agricultural Research Service
Department of Agriculture Washington, D.C.
Clark E. HOLSCHER
Director
Division of International Forestry
Forest Service
Department of Agriculture Washington, D.C.
Lowell C. KILDAY
Agency Director
Directorate for Agricultural Agencies
Bureau of International Organizations Affairs
Department of State Washington, D.C.
Hamilton C. LAUDANI
Director, European Regional
Research Office
Department of Agriculture
American Embassy 00187 Rome
Miss Ruth M. LEVERTON
Science Adviser
Agricultural Research Service
Department of Agriculture Washington, D.C.
Lee R. PARAMORE
International Organizations Staff
Office of Assistant Secretary for International Affairs and Commodity Programs
Department of Agriculture Washington, D.C.
John R. SCHAUB
Staff Assistant to the Administration
Economic Research Service
Department of Agriculture Washington, D.C.
Roderick TURNBULL
Director, Public Affairs
Kansas City Board of Trade Kansas City,
Missouri
UPPER VOLTA
Délégué Antoine DAKOURE
Ministre de l'Agriculture, de l'Elevage,
des Eaux et Forêts et du Tourisme Ouagadougou
Suppléant Léopold Wantissé SIRY
Directeur du Développement rural Ouagadougou
Adjoint Georges SANOGOH
Mécanographie Ouagadougou
Adjoint Emmanuel BALIMA
Chef du Service de la Production animale Ouagadougou
Adjoint Casimir ZIBA
Chef du Service de la Protection Ouagadougou
URUGUAY
Delegado Carlos PEREZ DEL CASTILLO
Embajador
Representante Permanente del Uruguay ante la FAO Roma
Suplente Jorge C. ELENA
Director de la Oficina de Programación y Política Agropecuaria del Ministerio de Ganaderia y Agricultura Montevideo
Adjunto A. Arturo NAVARRO
Coordinador del Departamento de Asistencia Tecnica y Organismos Internacionales
Ministerio de Ganadería y Agricultura Montevideo
Adjunto Diego ZORRILLA DE SAN MARTIN
Representante Permanente Alterno del Uruguay ante la FAO Roma
VENEZUELA
Delegado Gastón VIVAS BERTHIER
Presidente del Banco Agrícola y Pecuario Caracas
Syplente Isaías MEDINA SERFATY
Representante Permanente de Venezuela ante la FAO Roma
Adjunto Luis LA CORTE
Presidente de la Comisión Permanente de Agricultura y Política Agraria de la Cámara de Diputados del Congreso Nacional Caracas
Adjunto Arnaldo RON PEDRIQUE
Director del Instituto Agrario Nacional Caracas
Adjunto Sra. Pola de ORTIZ
Jefe de la Oficina Técnica de
Asuntos Agrícolas Internacionales
Ministerio de Agricultura y Cría Caracas
Adjunto Alberto BRUGNOLI CRUCIANI
Representante Permanente Alterno de Venezuela ante la FAO Roma
Adjunto Fabio VILLACIS SUAREZ
Coordinador del Sector Agrícola de la Oficina de Coordinación y Planificatión de la Presidencia de la República
(CORDIPLAN) Caracas
VIETNAM, REPUBLIC OF
Delegue CAO-VAN-THAN
Ministre de la Réforme agraire et du Développement de l'Agriculture, de l'Elevage et des Pêches Saigon
Suppléant NGUYÈN-VÀN-HIÊ
Ambassadeur de la République du Viet-Nam en Italie
Représentant Permanent auprès de la FAO Rome
Suppléant NGUYÈN-HAI-BINH
Assistant du Ministre de la Réforme agraire Saigon
Adjoint PHAM-HUY-LÂN
Directeur général de l'Agriculture,
Ministère de la Réforme agraire Saigon
Adjoint TRÂN-QUANG-MINH
Directeur de Cabinet
Ministère de la Réforme agraire Saigon
Adjoint NGUYÊN-DINH-MO
Chef du Service des Relations Internationales
Ministère de la Réforme agraire Saigon
YEMEN ARAB REPUBLIC
Delegate Abdul Gabbar AHMED ALMUGAHED
Minister of Agriculture Sana'a
Alternate Hashim ALHOTHI
Permanent Representative of the Yemen Arab Republic to FAO Rome
Adviser A.A. EL-ERYANI
Co-Manager Wadi Zabid Project Zabid
YEMEN, PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF
Delegate Muhammad Sulaiman NASSER
Minister of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform Aden
Alternate Nasser Mohamed AMER
Director, Department of Irrigation
Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform Aden
Associate Ali Aidarus SAKKAF
Director of Agriculture Aden
Associate Khalid Ibrahim HARIRI
Director-General
Public Corporation Fish Wealth Aden
YUGOSLAVIA
Delegate Milovan MARKOVIC
Assistant Federal Secretary for Foreign Affairs Belgrade
Alternate Valdimir STIPETIC
Member of the Executive Council of the Socialist
Republic of Croatia Zagreb
Alternate Vladimir DAMJANOVIC
Adviser to the Federal Secretary for Agriculture
Secretary of the Yugoslav National
Commission for Co-operation with FAO Belgrade
Associate Milan TRKULJA
Counsellor in the Executive Council of the Assembly of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina Novi Sad
Associate Blagoja NIKOLOVSKI
Adviser to the Republic Secretary for Agriculture and Forestry of the Socialist
Republic of Macedonia Skopje
Associate Miss Velinka BABIC
Counsellor in the Federal
Secretariat for Agriculture Belgrade
Associate Bozidar CRNJAK
First Secretary
Embassy of the Federative Socialist
Republic of Yugoslavia Rome
Associate Zoran RAICEVIC
Third Secretary in the Federal
Secretariat for Foreign Affairs Belgrade
ZAIRE, THE REPUBLIC OF
Délégué Jean A. MUEMA
Conseiller au Bureau du President
de la République Kinshasa
ZAMBIA
Delegate R.C. KAMANGA
Minister of Rural Development Lusaka
Alternate K.H. NKWABILO
Ambassador of the Republic of Zambia in Italy Rome
Alternate E.I.L. WILLIMA
Permanent Secretary of the
Ministry of Rural Development Lusaka
Alternate L.M. MUMEKA
Assistant Secretary,
Ministry of Rural Development Lusaka
Associate B.O.M. CHIYABWE
Deputy Chief Conservator of Forests Lusaka
Associate J.B. MUBANGA
Deputy Director
Fisheries Department Lusaka
Associate E.E.W. MBEWE
First Secretary
Embassy of Zambia Rome
PERMANENT OBSERVATION FOR THE HOLY SEE
HOLY SEE
The Most Reverend Agostino FERRARI-TONIOLO
Permanent Observer to FAO
REPRESENTATIVES OF UNITED NATIONS AND SPECIALIZED AGENCIES
UNITED NATIONS
Ismat T. KITTANI
Assistant Secretary-General for Inter-Agency Affairs New York
Albert DOLLINGER
Special Representative in Europe for Coordination and ACC Affairs New York
Erwin K. BAUMGARTEN
Director of the United Nations Information Center Rome
ECONOMIC COMMISSION FOR EUROPE
Janez STANOVNIK
Executive Secretary Geneva
ECONOMIC COMMISSION FOR AFRICA
Ali EL TOM
Chief
ECA/FAO Joint Agricultural Division Addis Ababa
Frank E. PINDER
Special Adviser to the Executive Secretary Addis Ababa
UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT
Jean-Pierre MARTIN
Director
Division for Conference Affairs and
External Relations Geneva
Gordon UNSWORTH
Chief, Conference Servicing Section
Division for Conference Affairs and External Relations Geneva
UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN'S FUND
Erwin K. BAUMGARTEN
Director of the United Nations
Information Center Rome
UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
Rafik ASHA
Senior Financial Adviser to the Administrator New York
OFFICE OF THE UN HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES
Mrs. Laura CARUGNO
Officer-in-charge
UNHCR Branch Office for Italy Roma
WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME
F. AQUINO
Executive Director
T.C.M. ROBINSON
Deputy Executive Director
O. MATZKE
Director,
Project Management Division
F.M. USTUM
Director
Resources Management Division
William N. FRALEIGH
Chief External Relations Branch
INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANIZATION
P.P, FANO
Director, ILO Branch Office Rome
Mrs. Vera SEMPRINI
Assistant to the Director,
ILO Branch Office Rome
UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANIZATION
Robert THISSEN
Liaison Officer
Division for Relations with International Organizations Paris
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
Arthur KARASZ
Director of the European Office Paris
Lioner J.C. EVANS
Director
Agriculture Projects Department Washington
Fritz STEUBER
Liaison Officer
European Office Paris
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY
André FINKELSTEIN
Deputy Director-General
Department of Research and Isotopes Vienna
Björn SIGURBJORNSSON
Deputy Director,
Joint FAD/IAEA Division of Atomic Energy in Foot and Agriculture Vienna
Maurice FRIED
Director of the Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Atomic Energy in Food and Agriculture Rome
WORLD METEOROLOGICAL ORGANIZATION
Cecil M. TAYLOR
Chief, Scientific and Technical Section Geneva
GENERAL AGREEMENT ON TARIFFS AND TRADE
J.H. KRAUS
Counsellor, Agriculture Division Geneva
EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY
Sicco L. MANSHOLT
Vice-President de la Communauté Bruxelles
Bruno SUSSMILCH
Administrateur principal
Direction générale de l'agriculture Bruxelles
Livio MARINUCCI
Chef de la Division ''Organisations et Accords internationaux concernant l'agriculture
Direction générale de l'agriculture Bruxelles
Placido TALIANI de MARCHIO
Chef de Division Bruxelles
Mlle Jacqueline BENOIT
Administrateur a la Direction Générale de l'Agriculture ''Organisations et accords internationaux concernant l'agriculture'' Bruxelles
OBSERVERS FROM INTERGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS AFRO-ASIAN RURAL RECONSTRUCTION ORGANIZATION
Krishan CHAND
Secretary General New Delhi
T.N. SARAF
Counsellor (Agriculture)
Embassy of India Rome
COUNCIL OF ARAB ECONOMIC UNITY
Abtel-Moneim EL-BANNA
Secretary-General Cairo
COUNCIL OF EUROPE
Mlle Renate PAPKE
Secrétaire de la Commission de l'agriculture
Assemblée consultative Strasbourg
COUNCIL FOR MUTUAL ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE
Rolf GERBING
Deputy Secretary General of the Council Moscow
T.D. KALINOV
Director of the Food Industries Division Moscow
Siegfried HOFFMANN
Counsellor to the Agricultural Division Moscow
INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
Juan Carlos LANGLOIS
Alternate, Special Representative in Europe Paris
INTER-AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF AGRICULTURAL SCIENCES
Jose Emilio G. ARAUJO
Director-General San Jose
INTERNATIONAL OFFICE OF EPIZOOTICS
Armenio FRANCA B SILVA
Former President of the Office
and Permanent Representative to FAO Paris
LEAGUE OF ARAB STATES
Hassan Naguib M. ABDALLAH
First Attaché Cairo
Fouad M. KOUSSA
Director of the Economic Department Cairo
ORGANIZATION OF AFRICAN UNITY
J.D. BULIRO
Assistant Secretary-General-in-charge
of Food and Agricultural. Matters Addis Ababa
JOINT AFRICAN AND MALAGASY ORGANIZATION
Séraphin Ogou DAIX
Chef du Développement économique et. Social Yaoundé
ORGANIZATION FOR ECONOMIC COOPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT
M. VAN LENNEP
Secretary-General Paris
A. SIMANTOV
Director for Agriculture Paris
G. VIATTE
Head of the Agricultural Markets Division Paris
OBSERVERS FROM NON-GOUVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS ASSOCIATED COUNTRY WOMEN OF THE WORLD
Mrs. Peggy E. WEBSTER
Observer in Italy Rome
BOY SCOUTS WORLD BUREAU
Selwyn O. FIELD
Director of Financial Resources Geneva
CATHOLIC INTERNATIONAL UNION FOR SOCIAL SERVICES
Soeur Maria Herminia RODRIGUEZ de ARMAS
Permanent Representative to FAO Roma
COMMISSION OF THE CHURCHES ON INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
Richard M. FAGLEY
Executive Secretary Geneva
EUROPEAN ASSOCIATION FOR ANIMAL PRODUCTION
K.O. van SELLE
Secretary-General Rome
INTERNATIONAL ALLIANCE OF WOMEN
Mrs. Lohini ARULPRAGASAM London
INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR CEREAL CHEMISTRY
Jean BURE
Vice-President Massy,
France
G. FABRIANI
Member of the Executive Committee Schwechat.
Austria
INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF AGRICULTURAL LIBRARIANS AND DOCUMENTALISTS
Keiichiro HARADA
Vice-President Rome
INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION OF AGRICULTURAL ENGINEERING
Renato ROSSINI
Directeur de l'Institut de Génie Rural de l'Université de Bologne Bologna
INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON IRRIGATION AND DRAINAGE
Attilio CAPPARELLI
Secretary of the Italian National Committee Rome
Vicenzo PILO
Member of the Italian National Committee Rome
INTERNATIONAL CONFEDERATION OF FREE TRADE UNIONS
T. BARRY-BRAUNTHAL Brussels
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE OF CATHOLIC CHARITIES-CARITAS INTERNATIONALIS
The Rev. Othmar F. RINK
Chief of CI Delegation to FAO Rome
Miss Virginia FORMICHI
Assistant Regional Director Rome
Miss Loretta PESCHI
Youth Committee Secretary Rome
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATIVE ALLIANCE
Livio MALFETTANI
Chairman of the Agricultural Committee Rome
Luigi MARSULLO
Secretary for Agriculture London
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC UNIONS
F.W.G. BAKER
Executive Secretary Rome
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF WOMEN
Luciana CORCOS
Permanent Representative Paris
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCERS
Jean DELEAU
Président Paris
Roger SAVARY
Secretary-General Paris
M. CRACKNELL
Deputy Secretary-General Paris
Filippo CORTESI
Liaison Officer with FAO Rome
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF BEEKEEPERS' ASSOCIATIONS (APIMONDIA)
Veceslav HARNAJ
President Bucarest
Silvestro CANNAMELA
Secretary-General Rome
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF PLANTATION. AGRICULTURAL AND ALLIED WORKERS
T.S. BAVIN
General Secretary Geneva
INTERNATIONAL MEDICAL ASSOCIATION FOR TUT STUDY OF LIVING CONDITIONS AND HEALTH
Hector DESCOMPS
Vice-Président Paris
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION OF CONSUMERS UNIONS
Mrs. Elise STEENRERG Rome
INTERNATIONAL RAIFFEISEN UNION
W. SCHIFFGEN
Secretary-General Bonn
INTERNATIONAL RAYON AND SYNTHETIC FIBRES COMMITTEE
Giovanni BALELLA
Vice-President Paris
INTERNATIONAL UNION OF FAMILY ORGANIZATIONS
Mlle Marie-Jo MOLY Paris
INTERNATIONAL UNION OF FORESTRY RESEARCH ORGANIZATIONS
A. de PHILIPPIS
Director of THE Institute of Silviculture Florence
DAN PACIFIC SOUTH EAST ASIAN WOMEN'S ASSOCIATION
Mrs. Patricia Mary OJALA
Representative in Italy Rome
WORLD CONFEDERATION. OF LABOUR
Antonio PICCHI
Représentant Permanent Rome
Miss Anna BARONE
Département de l'agriculture des ACLI Bruxelles
WORLD FEDERATION OF TRADE UNION
Loris ABIATTI
Secrétaire général de l'UIS Agriculture Prague
Jan KABOUREK
Chef du Service des activités a l'ONU et ses Institutions spécialisées Prague
Giuseppe CASADEI
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO Rome
Gianfranco NANNI Rome
WORLD UNION OF CATHOLIC WOMEN'S ORGANIZATIONS
Mrs. E. McADOO
Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Mrs. Genevieve GARZERO
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Donna O. DORIA PAMPHILI
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
WORLD YOUNG WOMEN'S CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATION
Miss Alice PAQUIER
Consultant for Social and International Questions Geneva
Miss Mary ROSSI
National General Secretary, YMCA of Italy Rome
<section>k</section>
C. List of documents
C 71/1
Agenda for the Conference
C 71/2
The State of Food and Agriculture-Preliminary Version
- Chapter I (World Review)
- Chapter II (Review by Regions)
C 71/3
The Director-General's Programme of Work and Budget 1972-73 and
ANNEXES
C 71/3-Corr.1
(Corrigendum to above)
C 71/3-Corr.2
(Corrigendum to above)
C 71/3-Sup. 1
Programme of Work and Budget 1972-73. List of Publications and Main
Documents proposed for issue in 1972-73
C 71/3-Sup.1 Corr.1
(Corrigendum to above)
C 71/3-Sup.2-Rev.1
Programme of Work and Budget for 1972-73. List of Sessions of FAO
Commissions, Committees and Working Parties, Panels of Experts,
Conferences and Consultations under the Regular Programme in 1972-73
C 71/3-Add.1
Addendum to Programme of Work and Budget 1972-73. Arrangements for
Senior Agricultural Advisers/FAO Country Representatives
C 71/3-Add.2
Addendum to Programme of Work and Budget 1972-73
C 71/3-Add.2-Corr.1
(Addendum to above)
C 71/4
The Work of FAO-Accountability Report for the Regular and Field
Programmes 1970-71
C 71/4-Sup.1
Addendum to above (Appendix C,
Publications Programme 1970-71)
C 71/5
Regular Programme-Financial Report and Statements 1969-Vol. I
C 71/6
UNDP/TA-Financial Report and Statements 1969-Vol. II
C 71/7
UNDP/SF-Financial Report and Statements 1969-Vol. III
C 71/8
FFHC-Financial Report and Statements 1969-Vol. IV
C 71/9
European Commission for the Control of Foot-and-Mouth Disease-
Financial Report and Statements 1969-Vol. V
C 71/10
World Food Programme-Financial Report and Statements 1969-Vol. VI
C 71/11
Trust Funds-Financial Report and Statements 1969-Vol. VII
C 71/12
Financial Report and Statements 1970-UNDP (TA) Vol. II
C 71/13
Financial Report and Statements 1970-UNDP (SF) Vol. III
C 71/14
Financial Report and Statements 1970-WFP Vol. IV
C 71/15
Medium-Term Plan
C 71/16
International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development Decade
C 71/16-Corr.1
(Corrigendum to above)
C 71/17
Arrangements for the Sixteenth Session of the Conference and Allocation of Agenda Items
C 71/17-Sup.1
Arrangements for the Conference-Resolutions Committee of the Conference
C 71/18
Admission to the Session of Representatives and Observers of International Organizations
C 71/19
Inter-Agency Relations and Consultations on Matters of Common
Interest-Part II-The Green Revolution
C 71/20
World Situation and Outlook-Fishery Problems
C 71/21
Action Arising out of the Second World Food Congress
C 71/22
Report of the FAO Special Committee on Agrarian Reform
C 71/22-Sup.1
Special Committee on Agrarian Reform-Director-General's Note
on Measures Proposed for Implementation of Recommendations in the Report
C 71/23
Inter-Agency Relations and Consultations on Matters of Common
Interest-Part I-Matters arising from discussion in the UN
General Assembly ECOSOC and ACC
C 71/24
(S and F only) FAO Participation in the Preparation of the UN Conference on the Human Environment
C 71/24-Rev-1
(E only) FAO Participation in the Preparation of the UN Conference on the Human Environment
C 71/25
Review of the Work of the Joint Inspection Unit
C 71/26
FAO Activities Related to International Agricultural Research
C 71/27
Amendments to Article V.6 of the Constitution-Establishment of a Committee on Forestry and a Committee on Agriculture
C 71/28
Amendment to Article VII of the Constitution-Duration of the Term of Office of the Director-General
C 71/29
Amendment to Article XI of the Constitution-Article XI Reports
C 71/30
Opening of the Committee on Fisheries to all interested Member Nations
C 71/31
Statutory Report on Status of Conventions and Agreements and on Amendments thereto
C 71/31-Corr.1
(Corrigendum to above)
C 71/32
Other Constitutional and Legal Matters-FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission
C 71/32-Corr.1
(Corrigendum to above)
C 71/33
Agricultural Commodity Projections 1970-1980
C 71/34
Progress Report on Cooperation between FAO and UNDP
C 71/34-Add.1
Progress Report between FAO and UNDP-Revised Memorandum of Understanding Concerning the Integration of UNDP and FAO Field Offices at the Country Level
C 71/35
Amendments to the Financial Regulations-The Budget-Regulation III
C 71/36
Applications for Membership in the Organization
C 71/37-Rev.1
Election of Council Members
C 71/37-Rev.1-Add.1
List of FAO Member Nations by Regions
C 71/38
Appointment of Member Governments' Representatives to the Staff Pension Committee
C 71/39
Arabic as an Official Language of the Organization and a Working Language for Limited Purposes
C 71/40
Other Amendments to the FAO Basic Texts
C 71/41
Perspective Study of World Agricultural Development and International Strategy for the Second Development Decade
C 71/41-Corr.1
(E and F only)
(Corrigendum to above)
C 71/42
Perspective Study of World Agricultural Development: Comments on the Indicative World Plan by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
C 71/42-Corr.1
(F only)
(Corrigendum to above)
C 71/42-Corr.2
(S only)
(Corrigendum to above)
C 71/43
Perspective Study of World Agricultural Development: Comments on the Indicative World Plan by the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance
C 71/44
Relations with International Organizations (excluding United Nations and Specialized Agencies)
C 71/45
Granting of Official Status to International Non-Governmental Organizations
C 71/46
Inter-Agency Relations and Consultations on Matters of Common
Interest-Part III-Edible Protein Production and Use
C 71/47
Appointment of the Independent Chairman of the Council
C 71/INF Series
C 71/INF/1
Sixteenth Session of the Conference-Information for Delegates and Observers-BOOKLET
C 71/INF/2
Excerpts from Regulations Governing Voting and Elections by the Conference
C 71/INF/3-Rev.1
Member Nations of FAO, Council Members, and Members of Council Committees
C 71/INF/4
Nomination Form for Council Election
C 71/INF/5
Checklist of Preparatory Documents
C 71/INF/6
Admission of New Members
C 71/INF/7-Rev.1
List of documents at 23 November 1971
C 71/INF/8
FOURTH DRAFT
List of Delegates and Observers
C 71/INF/9
Presentation of the B.R. Sen Annual Awards 1970-1971
C 71/INF/10-Rev.1
Provisional Checklist of Documents for Commission II
C 71/INF/11
People's Republic of China
C 71/INF/12-Rev.1
Provisional Checklist of Documents for Commission III
C 71/INF/13
Note on the Proposed International Information System for the Agricultural Sciences and Technology (AGRIS)
C 71/INF/14
Provisional Checklist of Documents for Commission I
C 71/INF/15
Increasing the Production and Use of Edible Proteins
C 71/INF/16
Statement by G. Bula Hoyos, Delegate of Colombia, on Item 13-Medium Term Plan
C 71/LIM/Series
C 71/LIM/1
First Report of the General Committee
C 71/LIM/2
Comunication from the Ambassador of Turkey
C 71/LIM/3
Scale of Contributions 1972-73
C 71/LIM/4
1971 McDougall Memorial Lecture ''Mankind and Civilization at Another Crossroad''
C 71/LIM/5
Report of Informal Meeting of International Non-Governmental Organizations
C 71/LIM/6
Proposal by Jordan
C 71/LIM/7
Proposal by Venezuela
C 71/LIM/8
Introductory Statement by W.H. Pawley to Commission I on Item 7 Perspective Study of World Agricultural Development and International Strategy for the Second Development Decade
C 71 /LIM/9
Firts Report of the Chairman of the Credencials Committee to the Conference
C 71/LIM/9-Corr.1
(F only)
(Corrigendum to above)
* C 71/LIM/10
Commodity Problems
* C 71/LIM/11
Country Programming
* C 71/LIM/12
UN Joint Inspection Unit
* C 71/LIM/13
Programme Budget Allotment Controls
* C 71/LIM/14
Programme of Work and Budget 1972-73 (Director-General's revised
proposals)
* C 71/LIM/15
Medium-Term Plan
* C 71/LIM/16
WFP: Draft Resolution for the Conference Setting out the Pledging
Target for the 1973-74 Biennium
* C 71/LIM/16. Corr.1
(F only)
(Corrigendum to above)
* C 71/LIM/17
Preparations for the 16th Session of the Conference
* C 71/LIM/18
Constitutional and Legal Matters: FAO Basic Texts
* C 71/LIM/19
Functions and Term of Office of the Independent Chairman of the Council
* C 71/LIM/20
Committee on Commodity Problems
* C 71/LIM/21
Financial Position of the Organization
* C 71/LIM/22
Working Capital Fund-Withdrawals and Reimbursements
* C 71/LIM/23
Audited Accounts
* C 71/LIM/24
Amendment to the Financial Regulations
C 71/LIM/25
(No document)
C 71/LIM/26
Report of the Nominations Committee
C 71/LIM/27
Appointment of the Director-General
C 71/LIM/28
(No document)
C 71/LIM/29
(F and S only)
Revised Timetable for the Conference
C 71/LIM/29-Rev.1
(E only)
Revised Timetable for the Conference
C 71/LIM/30
Opening Statement by the Director-General
C 71/LIM/31
Statement by P. Terver to Commission II
C 71/LIM/32
Second Report of the General Committee
C 71/LIM/33
First Report of the Resolutions Committee
C 71/LIM/34
Second Report of the Resolutions Committee
C 71/LIM/35
Third Report of the Resolutions Committee
C 71/LIM/36
Budgetary Appropriations 1972-73
C 71/LIM/37
Fourth Report of the Resolutions Committee
C 71/LIM/38
Third Report of the General Committee
C 71/LIM/39
Fifth Report of the Resolutions Committee
C 71/LIM/40
Fourth Report of the General Committee
C 71/LIM/41
Sixth Report of the Resolution Committee
C 71/LIM/42
Seventh Report of the Resolutions Committee
C 71/LIM/43
Emoluments of the Director-General
C 71/LIM/44
Eighth Report of the Resolutions Committee
C 71/LIM/45
Ninth Report of the Resolutions Committee
C 71/LIM/46-Rev. 1
Tenth Report of the Resolutions Committee
C 71/LIM/47
Eleventh Report of the Resolutions Committee
C 71/LIM/48
Fifth Report of the General Committee
C 71/LIM/49
Twelfth Report of the Resolutions Committee
C 71/LIM/50
Thirteenth Report of the Resolutions Committee
C 71/LIM/51
Sixth Report of the General Committee
C 71/LIM/51-Corr.1
(S only)
(Corrigendum to above)
C 71/LIM/52
Special Committee on Agrarian Reform
C 71/LIM/53
Functions and Term of Office of the Independent Chairman of the Council
C 71/LIM/54
Special Committee on Agrarian Reform
C 71/LIM/55
Fourtheenth Report of the Resolutions Committee
C 71/LIM/56
Fifteenth Report of the Resolutions Committee
C 71/LIM/57
Seventh Report of the General Committee
C 71/LIM/58
Eighth Report of the General Committee
C 71/LIM/59
Resolutions on AGRIS
C 71/LIM/60
Acceptance Speech by Dr. A.H. Boerma to the Sixteenth Session of the Conference on his re-appointment as Director-General
C 71/LIM/61
Acceptance Speech by Professor M. Cépède to the Sixteenth of the Conference on his re-appointment as Independent Session Chairman of the Council
C 71/LIM/62
Statement by the Director-General concerning China
C 71/LIM/63
Ninth Report of the General Committee
C 71/LIM/64
Sixteenth Report of the Resolutions Committee
C 71/LIM/65
Tenth Report of the General Committee
C 71/REP/Series
C 71/REP/1
Draft Report of Commission III-Part 1
C 71/REP/2
Draft Report of Commission III-Part 2
C 71/REP/3
Draft Report of Commission II-Part 1
C 71/REP/4
Draft Report of Commission II-Part 2
C 71/REP/5
Draft Report of Plenary-Part 1 (from Commission III)
(Revision of C 71/REP/1 and C 71/REP/2)
C 71/REP/6
Draft Report of Commission III-Part 3
C 71/REP/7
Draft Report of Commission III-Part 4
C 71/REP/8
Draft Report of Commission I-Part 1
C 71/REP/8-Sup.1
(Supplement to above)
C 71/REP/8-Sup.2
(Supplement to above)
C 71/REP/9
Draft Report of Plenary-Part 2 (from Commission II)
(Revision of C 71/REP/3 and C 71/REP/4)
C 71/REP/10
Draft Report of Commission I-Part 2
C 71/REP/11
Draft Report of Commission I-Part 3
C 71/REP/12
Draft Report of Plenary-Part 3 (from Commission III)
(Revision of C 71/REP/6 and C 71/REP/7)
C 71/REP/13
Draft Report of Commission l-Part 4
C 71/REP/14
Draft Report of Plenary-Part 4 (from Commission I)
(Revision of C 71/REP/9 and part of C 71/REP/10)
C 71/REP/14-Sup.1
(Supplement to above)
C 71/REP/15
Draft Report of Plenary-Part 5
C 71/REP/16
Draft Report of Plenary-Part 6 (from Commission I)
(Revision of C 71/REP/11, C 71/REP/13 and part of C 71/REP/10)
C 71/PV Series
C 71/PV/1 to C 71/PV/14
C 71/PV/14-Add.1
C 71/PV/15 to C 71/PV/23
First to Twenty-Third Draft Verbatim Records of Plenary
C 71/I/PV/1 to C 71/I/PV/19
First to Nineteenth Draft Verbatim Records of Commission I
C 71/II/PV/1 to C 71/II/PV/18
First to Eighteenth Draft Verbatim Records of Commission II
C 71/III/PV/1 to C 71/III/PV/ 7
First to Seventh Draft Verbatim Records of Commission III
* Extract from report of the Fifty-Seventh of the Council
D. Statement by the director-general concerning China
(Delivered in Plenary in the afternoon of Tuesday, 23 November 1971)
Mr. Chairman,
I should like to use this opportunity to submit to the Conference a question of great importance on which I would like to obtain your guidance, that is the question of China.
As you know, the General Assembly of the United Nations adopted on 25 October 1971 Resolution 2758 (XXVI) restoring the lawful rights of the People's Republic of China in the United Nations and "in all the Organizations related to it". This Resolution was formally brought to the attention of all Specialized Agencies by the Secretary-General of the United Nations and in response to it the Council authorized me on 2 November 1971 to invite the People's Republic of China to seek formal membership in FAO and, if it so wished, to attend the present session of the Conference; this decision was transmitted on the same day by cable to Prime Minister Chou En Lai' the relevant part of the Report of the Council together with the text of the statement I had made before the Council has been brought to the attention of the Conference in Document C 71/INF/11. Today I received a cable from the Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic acknowledging receipt of my cable,
reading as follows:
"Mr. A. Boerma, Director-General, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome.
'Your cable of November 2 has been received with regard to your authorized invitation to our country to be a formal member of the Food and Agriculture Organization and attend the Conference being held in Rome. I have the honour to inform you that because of the shortage of time we do not plan to send persona to attend the Conference presently in session. Highest consideration'
Chi Peng-Fei, Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic of China
Peking, November 23, 1971''
While, as you will note, no reference was made in this cable to formal membership in FAO, there is reason to believe that China will be interested in resuming its place in the Organization and it may well be that a positive move will be made after the close of the Conference session.
Before submitting for your guidance the questions and alternatives with which I would be faced in that case, I should like to recall briefly the historical background concerning China's position in FAO:
- In 1943 China participated in the Hot Springs Conference which was the first step for the foundation of this Organization.
- On 16 October 1945 China signed the FAO Constitution and became an ''original" member by virtue of Article XXI and Annex I of the Constitution.
- On 30 September 1949 the People's Republic of China was proclaimed, the Government of which by that time controlled the whole mainland of China.
- On 18 November 1949, Foreign Minister Mr. Chou En Lai addressed a telegram to the Secretary General of the United Nations affirming the right of his Government to represent China in the United Nations; in the ensuing debates in the United Nations, reference was also made to the question of representation in the Specialized Agencies.
- On 12 May 1950 a similar telegram was addressed by Chou En Lai to the Director-General of FAO; the telegram was circulated to Member States and the Council at its Ninth Session taking place at the time. However, no action was taken by the Council or the Conference on this matter.
- On 15 December 1950 the General Assembly of the United Nations adopted a Resolution - Resolution No. 396 (V)-recommending that in controversial questions of representation the attitude of the General Assembly should be taken into account in the Specialized Agencies.
- On 27 July 1951 the Government of the "Republic of China'' (Taiwan) notified its intention to withdraw from FAO with effect from 21 July 1952.
- Since the recent General Assembly Resolution, that is the Resolution of 25 October 1971, restoring its rights to the Government of the People's Republic of China, a number of Specialized Agencies (i.e. Unesco, ILO and ICAO) have already taken action similarly recognizing this Government as the legitimate representative in those organizations. A similar action was taken by GATT.
I feel it is necessary now for the Conference to consider the ways by which China could resume its place also in our Organization. As I mentioned before, China was an ''original'' member, that is to say it became a member in accordance with Article XXI of the Constitution simply by depositing an instrument of acceptance and signing the Constitution; as for all original members, no Conference vote on admission was required. I should also like to point out that in two other cases where original members had withdrawn from FAO and subsequently wished to rejoin the Organization, this was effected by the normal admission procedure by a two-thirds majority vote of the Conference and not by following the simplified procedure I just mentioned.
Now, what would happen if the People's Republic, after the end of this Conference session, expressed its desire to be again a full member of FAO? Should the procedure followed in the two previous cases be applied to this case, this would mean that China could only be admitted in two years time at the next regular session of the Conference or at a special session convened for the purpose. In view of the delay involved in the event of admission at the next regular session, and the somewhat cumbersome and expensive procedure obtaining in case of a special session, both solutions would seem to be undesirable for the Organization, and possibly for China itself. I should like to recall in this connexion that all delegations which have spoken on the subject, during the Fifty-Seventh Session of the Council, and also during the present session of the Conference, expressed the hope that the People's Republic of China would resume in the near future its place in the Organization. Some
delegations particularly stressed the necessity for a speedy and unformalistic attitude in this matter.
I have been advised that it would be legally possible for the People's Republic of China to resume, without being formally readmitted, the seat of China if it so wishes, since the notice of withdrawal given in 1951 by the Government of the ''Republic of China'' (Taiwan) emanated from a Government whose right to represent the State of China had already at that time been formally contested. This notice of withdrawal would not be held against the Government of the People's Republic of China which had no part in it and which has now been recognized as being the legitimate representative of China. This Government has indeed not been in a position to exercise, since the time of its establishment in 1949, the membership rights in FAO and has been prevented from making its contribution to the achievement of the aims of the Organization. Even if the People's Republic had wished in the past to take its place in FAO, it may be assumed that it would not have been recognized as the
legitimate representative of China in view of the position taken by the United Nations General Assembly in the past, which, as I said earlier, was to be taken into account by the Specialized Agencies.
Under the present circumstances, the Government of the People's Republic, which has been recognized as the legitimate representative of China, should not, in my personal view, be deprived of the possibility of availing itself of the rights deriving from original membership in the Organization. As a consequence, it would be permissible for the People's Republic to resume its place in FAO without any special formality. In that event, it would not be necessary to defer the matter until 1973 or to convene a special session of the Conference.
If the Conference agrees with this approach it may wish to authorize me to inform accordingly the Government of the People's Republic of China and to make, at the appropriate time, and, where necessary, after consultation with the competent organs of FAO such arrangements as may be required to enable China to resume its place in the Organization.
<section>l</section>
E. Statement showing the computation of contributions for 1972 and 1973
Member Nation
Gross
Assessments
per annum
Less: Credits payable per annum
from Tax Equalization Fund per annum
Net Contributions
Afghanistan
Algeria
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Bahrain
Barbados
Belgium
Bolivia
Botswana
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burma
Burundi
Cameroon
Canada
Central African Rep.
Ceylon
Chad
Chile
Colombia
Congo, People's Rep.
Costa Rica
Cuba
Cyprus
Czechoslovakia
Dahomey
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Ethiopia
Fiji
Finland
France
Gabon
Gambia, The
Germany, Fed. Rep. of
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Guinea
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Ivory Coast
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kenya
Khmer Republic
Korea, Rep. of
Kuwait
Laos
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Morocco
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Romania
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Somalia
Spain
Sudan, The
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Uganda
United Kingdom
United States of America
Upper Volta
Uruguay
Venezuela
Vietnam, Rep. of
Yemen Arab Republic
Yemen, People's Democratic Rep. of
Yugoslavia
Zaire
Zambia
TOTAL
46 810 000^a
(or 79 620 000 for 1972-73 biennium)
a Financing of 1972-73 Budget in accordance with Conference Resolution 5/71 (see pare. 258 of the Conference Report)
Total Appropriations (Gross)
Less: Estimate for 1972-73
Administrative and Operational Servicing Costs accruing from United Nations Development Programme
Small Scale Projects (TA)-See paragraph 2 of Conference Resolution 5/71
Miscellaneous Income-See paragraph 3 of
Conference Resolution 5/71
Gross assessments for 1972-73 biennium
Divided into two equal parts pursuant to Financial Regulation 5.3 and distributed between Member Nations in accordance with the Scale of Contributions adopted for 1972-13 (Conference Resolution 22/71) to give total gross assessments per annum
F. Scale of contributions 1972-73
Member Nation
Scale 1972-73
Scale 1970-71
Afghanistan
Algeria
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Bahrain 1/ 2/
Barbados
Belgium
Bolivia
Botswana
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burma
Burundi
Cameroon
Canada
Central African Rep.
Ceylon
Chad
Chile
Colombia
Congo, People's Rep. of
Costa Rica
Cuba
Cyprus
Czechoslovakia
Dahomey
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Ethiopia
Fiji 2/
Finland
France
Gabon
Gambia, The
Germany, Fed. Rep. Of 3/
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Guinea
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Ivory Coast
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kenya
Khmer Republic
Korea, Rep. of 3/
Kuwait
Laos
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives 2/
Mali
Malta
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Morocco
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Oman 2/
Pakistan
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar 1/ 2/
Romania
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Somalia
Spain
Sudan, The
Swaziland 2/
Sweden
Switzerland 3/
Syria
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Trinidad & Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Uganda
United Kingdom
United States of
Upper Volta
Uruguay
Venezuela
Vietnam, Rep. Of 3/
Yemen Arab Republic
Yemen, People's
Yugoslavia
Zaire
Zambia
1/ Associate Member in the 1970-71 Scale of Contributions.
2/ Member admitted at Sixteenth Session of Conference, November 1971.
3/ Not members of the United Nations. Their contributions are based on the percentage races at which they contribute to certain UN activities.
<section>m</section>
G. Proposed text of financial regulation XII relating to external audit
Regulation XII
External Audit
Appointment
Regulation 12.1 An External Auditor, who shall be the Auditor-General (or person exercising an equivalent function) of a Member Nation, shall be appointed in the manner and for the period decided by the Council.
Tenure of Office
Regulation 12.2 If the External Auditor ceases to hold the office of Auditor-General (or equivalent function) in his own country, his tenure of office as External Auditor shall thereupon be terminated and he shall be succeeded as External Auditor by his succesor as Auditor-General. The External Auditor may not otherwise be removed during his tenure of office except by the Council.
Scope of Audit
Regulation 12.3 The audit shall be conducted in conformity with generally accepted common auditing standards and, subject to any special directions of the Finance Committee, in accordance with the Additional Terms of Reference set out in Annex I to these Regulations.
Regulation 12.4 The External Auditor may make observations with respect to the efficiency the Financial procedures, the accounting system, the internal financial controls and, in general, the administration and management of the Organization.
Regulation 12.5 The External Auditor shall be completely independent and solely responsible for the conduct of the audit.
Regulation 12.6 The Finance Committee may request the External Auditor to perform certain specific examinations and issue separate reports on the results.
Facilities
Regulation 12.7 The Director-General shall provide the External Auditor with the facilities he may require in the performance of the audit.
Regulation 12.8 For the purpose of making a local or special examination or of effecting economies of audit cost, the External Auditor may engage the services of any national Auditor-General (or person exercising an equivalent function) or commercial public auditors of known repute or any other person or firm who, in the opinion of the External Auditor, is technically qualified.
Reporting
Regulation 12.9 The External Auditor shall issue a Report on the audit of the financial statements and relevant schedules, which shall include such information as he deems necessary in regard to matters referred to in Financial Regulation 12.4 and in the Additional Terms of Reference.
Regulation 12.10 The External Auditor's Reports shall be transmitted through the Finance Committee, together with the audited financial statements, to the Council in accordance with any directions given by the Finance Committee. The Council shall examine the financial statements and the audit reports and shall forward them to the Conference with such comments as it deems advisable. The Report on the interim accounts shall be submitted to the Finance Committee.
MEMBERS OF FAO COUNCIL
The compaction of the Council until 31 December 1972 is as follows:
Independent Chairman: Michael Cépède
Argentina^2
Germany. Fed. Rep. of^2
Nevv Zealand^1
Syria^3
Brazil^3
Hungary^3
Norway^1
Tanzania^1
Canada^3
India^1
Pakistan^1
Togo^2
Ceylon^2
Indonesia^2
Peru^2
United Kingdom^1
Chile^1
Iran^3
Philippines^2
United States of America^3
Colombia^3
Italy^2
Romanie^2
Upper Volta^1
Egypt^1
Japan^2
Saudi Arabia^1
Venezuela^3
France^1
Kenya^3
Sierra Leone^3
Zaire^2
Morocco^3
Switzerland^3
Term of office until 31 December 1972
^2 Term of office until conclusion of Seventeenth Session of the Conference, November 1973
^3 Term of office until 31 December 1974
The composition of the Council from 1 January 1973 is as follows:
Independent Chairman: Michel Cépède
Argentina^1
Denmark^3
Italy^1
Sudan, The^3
Australia^3
Egypt^3
Japan ^1
Switzerland^2
Brazil^2
Ethiopia^3
Kenya^2
Syria ^2
Canada^2
France^3
Morocco^2
Togo^1
Ceylon^1
Garmany^1 Fed. Rep. of
Pakistan^3
United Kingdom^3
Chile^3
Hungery^2
Peru ^1
United States of America^2
Colombia^2
India^3
Philippines^1
Venezuela^3
Dahomey ^3
Indonesia ^1
Romania ^1
Zaire^1
Iran^2
Sierra Leone^2
Term of office until conclusion of Seventeenth Session of the Conference, November 1973 ^
Term of office until 31 December 1972 ^
Term of office until conclusion of Eighteenth Session of the Conference, November 1975
FAO MEMBERS
(as at 27 November 1991)
MEMBER NATIONS (160)
Afghanistan
Gambia
Norway
Albania
Germany
Oman
Algeria
Ghana
Pakistan
Angola
Greece
Panama
Antigua and Barbuda
Grenada
Papua New Guinea
Argentina
Guatemala
Paraguay
Australia
Guinea
Peru
Austria
Guinea-Bissau
Philippines
Bahamas
Guyana
Poland
Bahrain
Haiti
Portugal
Bangladesh
Honduras
Qatar
Barbados
Hungary
Romania
Belgium
Iceland
Rwanda
Belize
India
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Benin
Indonesia
Saint Lucia
Bhutan
Iran, Islamic Republic of
Samoa
Bolivia
Iraq
Sao Tome and Principe
Botswana
Ireland
Saudi Arabia, Kingdom of
Brazil
Israel
Senegal
Bulgaria
Italy
Seychelles
Burhna Faso
Jamaica
Sierra Leone
Burundi
Japan
Solomon Islands
Cambodia
Jordan
Somalia
Cameroon
Kenya
Spain
Canada
Korea, Republic of
Sri Lanka
Cape Verde
Kuwait
Sudan
Central African Republic
Laos
Suriname
Chad
Latvia
Swaziland
Chile
Lebanon
Sweden
China
Lesotho
Switzerland
Colombia
Liberia
Syria
Comoros
Libya
Tanzania
Congo
Lithuania
Thailand
Cook Islands
Luxembourg
Togo
Costa Rica
Madagascar
Tonga
Côte d'lvoire
Malawi
Trinidad and Tobago
Cuba
Malaysia
Tunisia
Cyprus
Maldives
Turkey
Czechoslovakia
Mali
Uganda
Democratic People's Rep. of Korea
Malta
United Arab Emirates
Denmark
Mauritania
United Kingdom
Djibouti
Mauritius
United States of America
Dominica
Mexico
Uruguay
Dominican Republic
Mongolia
Vanuatu
Ecuador
Morocco
Venezuela
Egypt
Mozambique
Viet Nam
El Salvador
Myanmar
Yemen
Equatorial Guinea
Namibia
Yugoslavia
Estonia
Nepal
Zaire
Ethiopia
Netherlands
Zambia
Fiji
New Zealand
Zimbabwe
Finland
Nicaragua
France
Niger
Gabon
Nigeria
