<title>ADCP/REP/80/13 - Curriculum for the Training of Aquaculturists in the Asian Aquaculture Network</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
This Curriculum for multidisciplinary training in Aquaculture is based on a basic text prepared by a Task Force headed by Mr. H.P.C. Shetty, Director, College of Fisheries, Mangalore (India). The other members who contributed were Mr. Alan Bowers, Department of Marine Biology, Port Erin, University of Liverpool (U.K.), Dr. Y.C. Shang, University of Hawaii (U.S.A.), Dr. F.A. Pagan, Puerto Rico (U.S.A.), Dr. T.V.R. Pillay (FAO), Dr. H. Rabanal (FAO), and Mr. U.W. Schmidt (FAO).
<section>2</section>
INTRODUCTION
One of the major constraints to the development of aquaculture in most countries has been recognized to be the scarcity of trained personnel, particularly those with broad-based training and experience in practical aspects of aquaculture production. The core personnel required for aquaculture have been identified as senior aquaculturists and technicians or extension workers. ^1/. While the large number of technicians or extension workers needed for the implementation of development programmes have to be trained in their own countries with special focus on production systems of relevance to those countries and the socio-economic conditions under which they have to be applied, the small number of senior aquaculturists who need multidisciplinary broad-based training in all significant aspects of aquaculture will have to be trained on a regional or sub-regional basis. The Asian Network of Aquaculture Centres has been established under the regional project (RAS/76/003) sponsored
by several governments of the region and supported by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). The project is executed by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) within the framework of the UNDP/FAO Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme and has as its main objectives the implementation of systems-oriented applied research, training of senior aquaculture personnel and establishment of an information system. The project has at present three Regional Aquaculture Lead Centres, viz., The Freshwater Aquaculture Research and Training Centre in Dhauli (Bhubaneswar), Orissa, India; National Inland Fisheries Institute, Bangkok, Thailand and Aquaculture Department of the Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Centre (SEAFDEC) in Tigbauan, Iloilo, Philippines. A fourth Lead Centre is now under construction in Wuxi, China.
1^/ UNDP/FAO (1976) Aquaculture Planning in Asia - Report of the Regional Workshop on Aquaculture Planning in Asia, Bangkok, Thailand, 1-17 October 1975: 15 pp.
Nature and duration of training
The training offered at the Regional Lead Centre of the Asian Network is intended to equip candidates for senior positions in fishery or allied departments of government, semi-government agencies or private industries to plan and execute aquaculture programmes. It is multidisciplinary in nature and will cover all essential aspects of aquaculture, including selection of sites, design and construction of aquaculture facilities, breeding and rearing of cultivable organisms, relevant physico-chemical, biological and environmental aspects, post-harvest technology, socio-economics and planning.
Although theoretical instruction will be given on all aspects, the training will be heavily oriented to practical work and about 80 percent of the time will be devoted to laboratory and field work. Special attention will be devoted to aquaculture production systems that have immediate application in the region.
The training will initially be for a period of one year, with three 14-15 week academic sessions and two 4-5 week breaks which are expected to be utilized largely for project work and field visits.
Venue
The training headquarters will be in the Regional Lead Centre at SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department in Tigbauan, Iloilo, Philippines, where classroom, laboratory and dormitory facilities will be available. The farm facilities of the Department will be used for practical work as appropriate. Part of the instruction, especially on freshwater aquaculture, will be organized at the Regional Lead Centres in India and Thailand.
Candidates for training
The maximum number of candidates to be admitted for a training course will be 25. The candidates have to be sponsored by their governments and should have some assurance of being employed in aquaculture activities on the completion of training. FAO will invite governments to nominate candidates well in advance of each training session. The minimum academic qualification required is a university degree in biology, fisheries science, or related disciplines. Preference will be given to candidates with previous experience in aquaculture or fisheries work. Final selection of candidates will be made by FAO based on the recommendation of a selection committee.
Medium of instruction
English.
Training Schedule
The training schedule (see annexure) shall consist of 5-day weeks (Monday-Friday) and 8-hour days (from 8 to 12 and from 14 to 18 hours). Detailed programmes of practical and field work will be developed in accordance with the progress of experimental and demonstration work at the regional lead Centre of the network. However, strong emphasis on practical work will be maintained. The ratio of theoretical instruction to practical work in individual courses will range from 1:1 to 1:5. In addition to the scheduled theory and practical classes, the trainees are required to participate in actual production programmes with a view to becoming proficient in aquaculture practices. Each trainee will be required to participate in one or more practical field assignments and to raise an aquaculture crop using one of the systems of culture. This shall be carried out either alone or with one or more of the other trainees, depending on the nature of the project. The inter-sessional breaks
will be largely used for work on the allotted projects and for visits to aquaculture sites. The trainees are required to maintain complete records of their laboratory and field work and to prepare a report on their project work. The project report shall be submitted at least a fortnight before the completion of the course.
Evaluation procedure
The performance of the trainees shall be judged by a system of continuous evaluation. There shall be three written or oral tests in each academic session (term), spaced out over the duration of the session. There will thus be nine tests in all. Each test shall consist of objective and subjective types of questions. Marks shall also be awarded on the performance and diligence of the trainees in laboratory and field work, practical records and project work. A minimum of 60 percent marks in the aggregate will be required for eligibility for the award of diploma. A report on the performance and progress of each trainee shall be sent to his/her government at the end of every term.
The allotment of marks shall be as follows:
(i) written tests 40%
(ii) performance in practicals 25%
(iii) practical records 15%
(iv) project work 20%
Diploma
A diploma shall be awarded to each successful trainee.
<section>3</section>
I. Introduction to aquaculture
1. Definition of aquaculture; its multidisciplinary nature.
2. Objectives of aquaculture: production of protein-rich human food; improvement of natural stocks through artificial recruitment and transplantation; production of sport fish; production of bait for commercial and sport fishing; production of ornamental fishes; recycling of organic wastes; production of industrial fish and fishery products.
3. Comparative efficiency of aquaculture as a means of protein production.
4. History of aquaculture; its present organization and status.
5. The need for aquaculture and the role of aquaculture in fishery development and management.
6. Different kinds of aquaculture systems in fresh, brackish and marine waters: pond culture; running water culture; culture in recirculating systems; culture in ricefields; cage culture; pen culture; bottom, raft, rack and tray culture of shellfish; culture of economic seaweeds, etc. Monoculture and polyculture; culture of fish in combination with rearing of other animals and/or plants.
7. Levels and patterns of aquaculture industry: extensive, semi-intensive and intensive cultures; small-scale rural aquaculture and large-scale industrial aquaculture.
8. Economic considerations in aquaculture operation.
Practicals
Field trips to selected rural fish farming sites, large-scale fish farming enterprises, integrated aquaculture projects and multi-purpose reservoir development projects.
<section>4</section>
II. Selection of sites for aquaculture
1. Sites suited for different types of aquaculture
Land including swamplands; river and stream beds; coastal areas including bays, estuaries, backwaters, lagoons, salt marshes and mangrove swamps; lakes, reservoirs and irrigation tanks; other existing water bodies.
2. Technical and non-technical considerations in site selection
2.1 Socio-economic, political and legal factors
Quantity and quality of available manpower; social and religious customs; consumer habits; availability and cost of construction materials and equipment; transportation and communication facilities; security of tenure; maritime laws relating to the control of foreshore and sea bed in coastal waters; legal size limits; closed seasons, etc.; industrial and agricultural planning in the area; accessibility; nearness to markets.
2.2 Climatic factors
Temperature, sunshine, rainfall, evapo-transpiration, floods, hurricanes, winds and relative humidity.
2.3 Main environmental factors
(a) Topography and ground elevation: topography of land suitable for aquaculture; low-lying deltaic, coastal and hilly areas with suitable slope to facilitate water supply, drainage and low cost of construction; importance of ground elevation in relation to tidal ranges for locating coastal pond farms; ground elevations suitable for marine farms at different tidal ranges; topography of sea bed sites suitable for sub-littoral enclosures and sea bed cages; stability of shore and banks.
(b) Soil: importance of soil quality in construction of fish farm installations and productivity of overlying waters; the formation and classification of soils; soils suitable or capable of being made suitable for aquaculture; unsuitable soils; soil profiles; methods of studying soil profiles; physical properties of soil (texture, structure, colour, specific gravity, volume, consistency, pore space, etc.,); colloidal properties of soil; soil water; soil-water interface; movement of water in soil; percolation and drainage; inorganic constituents of soil (N, P, K); humus; soil reaction - saline, alkaline and acid soils and methods of correcting their characteristics; soil fertility and factors affecting it; fertilizer requirements for soil improvement; soil conservation.
(c) Water supply, quality and dynamics: main sources of water for aquaculture - ground water, water table and aquafers, rain water, extent and nature of watershed area, irrigation water, water from natural and artificial water bodies; multiple uses of water and aquaculture; assessment of available water supply for inland farms, quantification of water requirements for different types of aquaculture based on sources of supply, inflow, loss due to evaporation and seepage and renewal needs.
(d) Physical features of water: temperature, turbidity, colour, water movements, water conditions and depth; stratification of water; tidal amplitude and its seasonal changes in coastal sites and their bearing on farm elevation and water supply; storm surges, wave action and water currents and their effect on marine aquaculture installations; chemical features of water: pH, dissolved oxygen, acidity, alkalinity, total hardness, nitrogen, phosphates, silicates, salinity, chlorides, chlorine, hydrogen sulphide, free carbon dioxide, sodium, magnesium, potassium, calcium, iron, arsenic, biological oxygen demand and chemical oxygen demand; physico-chemical factors of special importance in aquaculture and their optimum ranges; possible ways of controlling principal factors, such as turbidity, temperature, pH, dissolved oxygen, alkalinity and salinity. Pollution of fishery waters by sewage, pesticides, industrial effluents and possible pollutants from intensive aquaculture; effects
of pollution on fishes, shellfish and fish food organisms; physical, chemical and bioassay of polluted waters, waste waters, sludges and bottom sediments; pollution prevention and abatement measures.
(e) Productivity: concepts of aquatic productivity; primary productivity and its relation to fish/shellfish production in aquaculture; methods of measurement of productivity (oxygen method and C[l4] method). Phyto-biota (bacteria, planktonic and periphytic microscopic algae, macroscopic algae, and submerged, floating and emergent macrovegetation) and zoo-biota (periphytic, benthic, planktonic and other free-swimming animals); important groups of phyto-biota and zoo-biota and their value as fish/shellfish food; inter-relationships of phyto- and zoo-biota; methods of plankton, periphyton and benthos collection and analysis; importance of biota in the biological productivity of water bodies; effect of water quality on productivity; food cycle in water bodies.
(f) Fouling: intensity of fouling and its seasonal fluctuations; effects of fouling on marine aquaculture installations; preventive measures.
(g) Availability of spat: spat availability and its role in deciding on mollusc culture.
(h) Type and density of vegetation: quantitative and qualitative appraisal of vegetation; size and root system; cost of clearance.
Practicals
Collection and study of soil profiles; collection and identification of different types of soil; analysis of soil samples for determining their physico-chemical characteristics (texture, pH, conductivity, organic carbon, available nitrogen, available phosphorus and available potassium); survey of different types of sites; contour mapping.
Collection of water samples, waste waters, sludges and bottom sediments and their analysis for essential physico-chemical parameters, calculation of water supply requirements for selected aquaculture systems; pollution control in aquaculture waters.
Determination of primary productivity of selected aquaculture areas; collection and analysis of plankton, benthos, periphyton and nekton.
<section>5</section>
III. Selection of species for aquaculture
1. Desirable characteristics of aquaculture organisms
Fast growth, short food chain, efficient conversion of food, ready acceptance of compounded feeds, good table quality, disease resistance, ease of breeding in captivity, early maturation, high fecundity, tolerance to a wide range of environmental parameters, no adverse environmental impact, etc.
2. Commonly cultured organisms
Fishes, crustaceans and molluscs; other cultured organisms - seaweeds, frogs, crocodiles and turtles.
3. Biological features of commonly cultured fishes, crustaceans and molluscs
Tolerance limits of salinity, temperature and oxygen tension; growth rates and yields in different types of culture; breeding habits; feeding habits and geographic distribution.
4. Criteria for selection of species for culture
Objectives of culture; geographic and climatic considerations; culture qualities of the organisms; consumer acceptance and marketability; cost of production; domestic consumption versus export.
5. Indigenous versus exotic species
Conditions for introduction of exotic species or strains; procedures for deciding on introductions and transplantations; precautions to prevent adverse effects on local fauna and flora and the spread of infections.
6. Selection of strains of cultivated species for favourable characters
Growth, food conversion, shape and body conformation, resistance to diseases, tolerance of wide fluctuations in environmental factors, meat quality, etc.; use of hybridization techniques for obtaining superior strains and monosex progeny.
Practicals
Identification of cultivated organisms of Asia and their various stages; study of food habits, maturity stages and fecundity of important cultivated organisms.
<section>6</section>
IV. Seed production
1. Seed in aquaculture
Seed as a major determinant for successful culture; growth and survival; role in production costs.
2. Different methods of seed production
2.1 Collection from natural sources
(a) Collection of fish, shrimp and prawn seed: life stages collected from the wild for culture; area suitable for seed collection - feeding and/or breeding grounds, favourable hydrographical conditions (current velocity, depth, salinity, turbidity, topography, etc); different types of gear employed, their mode of operation and relative efficiencies; seasons of occurrence of seed; sorting, holding or storage, conditioning and acclimatization.
(b) Collection of mollusc seed: areas and seasons for spat collection; different types of spat collectors - brushwood and mangrove branches, ropes, tarred sticks, tiles, threaded shells with spacers, plastic plates, etc.; handling and transport of mollusc seed.
2.2 Hatchery production of seed
(a) Brood stock:
(i) Wild-caught fish/prawn/shrimp - precautions in catching and transporting; state of maturity; selection of brood fish from catch; acclimatization; collection of berried shrimps and prawns.
(ii) Farm-reared fish/prawn/shrimp - selection fo brood stock; age and size for spawning.
(iii) Care of brood stock, including feeding and segregation; sex-ratio required for breeding; effect of feeding and environment on gonadal maturity and spawning success; control of spawning by environmental manipulation and hormonal treatment.
(b) Spawning of fish:
(i) Methods of spawning - natural spawning, induced spawning - stripping; hormone injection (hypophysation); hormone injection with stripping.
(ii) Hypophysation of fish - principles underlying hypophysation technique; reproductive physiology of fish in relation to hypophysation; homoplastic and heteroplastic pituitary administration; use of fish, mammalian and synthetic hormones and their combinations; dosages; methods of preservation of pituitary glands in liquid preservatives, drying and by ampouling; pituitary banks.
(iii) Spawning techniques employed, with particular reference to tilapias, carps, trout, catfishes, milkfish, mullets, groupers, gouramis and seabass.
(iv) Hybridization and selective breeding for production of better strains; hybridization for production of all-male progeny of tilapia; sex reversal techniques; principles of fish genetics and their application in hybridization and selective breeding of cultivable fishes.
(c) Spawning of crustaceans: maturation and induced spawning of shrimps and prawns; eye ablation (cauterization) of shrimps and prawns and attainment of maturity; spawning tanks and their operation.
(d) Methods of induced spawning of oysters, mussels and other molluscs: manipulation of temperature in oyster spawning.
3. Incubation and hatching
Different types of hatching installations (hatching ponds, tanks, hapas, jars, troughs, trays, etc.) and their relative efficiencies; suitable sources of water supply for hatcheries; importance of clean water, temperature and flow rate; aeration; open and closed systems; filters and biological conditioning; adhesive and non-adhesive eggs; bacterial and fungal infestations in hatcheries; ultraviolet and antibiotic treatments; effect of temperature/salinity regime on hatching time; size at hatching and viability of larvae; grading of larvae; transport of eggs.
4. Larval rearing
Different types of installations for early rearing of larvae; shape, size and colour of tanks; self-cleaning tanks; hygiene, water supply and lighting; density of stocking; feeding requirements of small-mouthed and large-mouthed larvae, vegetarian and carnivorous larvae; culture of food organisms, such as unicellular algae, protozoans, molluscan larvae, Artemia, rotifers, cladocerans, etc.; use of artificial feeds; feeding frequency and feeding rates; auto-feeders; physiological changes during metamorphosis of flat fish and the special care required; special requirements of mollusc larvae for settling; different types of spat collectors; production of cultchless spat; special requirements of prawn and shrimp larvae - salinity requirements and change of feed at various larval stages.
5. Transfer to nursery ponds
Acclimatization; time of transfer; grading; transportation; release; stocking rates.
6. Transportation
6.1 Live fish (spawn, fry, fingerlings and adults)
(a) Considerations in transport of live fish:
(i) Physiology of respiration in relation to physico-chemical dynamics of the transport medium.
(ii) Toxicology of biological waste products.
(iii) Action of chemical additives.
(b) Causes of mortality in transportation:
(i) Oxygen starvation.
(ii) Accumulation of toxins in the transport medium.
(iii) Hyperactivity, strain and exhaustion.
(iv) Diseases.
(v) Physical injuries.
(c) Conditioning of fish before transportation; special conditioning requirements of brackishwater fish for stocking in fresh water.
(d) Methods of packing and transport:
(i) Transport of hardy fish in baskets and buckets.
(ii) Transport in open and closed systems - in open carriers with or without artificial aeration/oxygenation/water circulation; closed system - in sealed airtight carriers with oxygen; containers used - earthen pots, cans, wooden tubs, barrels, vats, polythene bags, live-fish carrier boats, specially equipped vehicles, etc.
(iii) Packing rates in relation to species, age, size, temperature, duration of transport, means of transport, nature of containers, climate, etc.; formula for packing rates.
(e) Use of chemicals: anaesthetics, antiseptics and antibiotics; dosages.
(f) Chemical control of osmotic pressure, pH and carbon dioxide.
(g) Use of coagulants for removing suspended/colloidal organic matter.
(h) Economics of live fish transport.
6.2 Live shrimps and prawns
Conditioning in cooling tanks; wet transport in open and closed systems; transport in cardboard boxes with sawdust and ice.
7. Economics of different methods of seed production
Practicals
Collection of fish seed, gears used and situations where used, shrimp and prawn larvae and juveniles and seed oysters/mussels from open bodies of water; induced breeding of selected species; hatching and larval rearing, producing at least one crop of fry; packing and transport of live fish (seed and brood fish) and prawns/shrimps.
<section>7</section>
V. Design and construction of pond farms
1. Type of ponds based on source of water supply
Springwater ponds, seepage water ponds, ponds fed by rainwater or run-off, ponds fed by water courses and tide-fed ponds; barrage ponds and diversion ponds - rosary or linked ponds and parallel ponds.
2. General layout of pond farms
Ponds (nursery, rearing, holding, brood, catching, transition or stunting ponds); water control structures (dikes, canals, sluices, monks and pipes); and supporting facilities (road bridges, culverts, workshop, stores, farmhouses, etc.).
3. Planning of farm layout
Preparation of farm layout plan, including water control system, based on physical features of the area, climatic conditions and requirements of farm management (production of fingerlings, table fish from either fry stage or fingerling stage); calculation of area required for nursery space; proportion of nursery ponds to production ponds, proportion of rearing pond area for different stages of rearing and area of holding ponds; determination of shape, size and depth of ponds; advantages of small and large ponds; optimum size of ponds for small-, medium- and large-scale culture operations; arrangement for adjustment of water level and salinity range of individual ponds in coastal farms.
4. Preparation of work plan
Quantification of input requirements; cash estimates; organizing supply of materials, labour and machinery; preparation of work schedule.
5. Site survey
Preparation of contour map; marking out the farm area; survey instruments required - levelling instrument with levelling staff, direct reading tachymeter with staff, theodalite, optical square, bevel protractor, tape and marking staff.
6. Site clearance
Clearance of vegetation from farm site by underbrushing, withering, felling and burning; removal of stumps; collection and later utilization of surface organic deposits as fertilizer or for facing embankments.
7. Design and construction of water control structures
7.1 Water control structures
Water gates and canals, levees or perimeter dikes and subsidiary dikes.
7.2 Basic principles for design
Calculation of water requirements; filling and drainage of pond farms; use of pumps, gravitation and/or tidal force for water supply and drainage.
7.3 Basic data required
For all farms - topography, soil properties, water supply, evapo-transpiration, seepage, magnitude of floods, rainfall, storms and cyclones; for coastal farms only - tidal characteristics and range, river discharge, ground elevation and designed datum level.
7.4 Design and construction of dikes
Determination of height, top width and base width of dikes; slope of dike in relation to soil type and function; construction of dike foundation and wall; measures for maintenance of foundation stability; excavation of core trench and core puddling in case of unsuitable soils; protection and stabilization of dikes - planting of vegetation, use of plastic sheets, bituminous emulsions, concrete, asbestos and timber reinforcements or wire mesh reinforcements; provision of roadways on dikes.
7.5 Levelling and sealing of pond bottom
Levelling of pond bottom, providing slope toward the outlet in case of flatland; sealing of the pond bottom to prevent seepage; materials used for sealing - clay lining, polyethylene or rubber lining, gley or biological plastic, bentonite clay and chemical sealants; construction of drainage ditches on pond bottom to facilitate drainage.
Excavation of elevated sites or portions of pond sites; filling depressions or deep portions; methods of closing natural waterways at some sites or enclosing project area(s).
7.6 Design and construction of water gate structures
Main gate, secondary gates (division boxes) and tertiary gates; their dimensions in relation to volume of water intake and drainage; structure of main gate - tide-stream wing walls (in coastal farms), side walls, bed protection, sill and abutments; construction procedure; materials used.
Different types of inflow and outflow installations employed in individual ponds - Rivaldi valve, elbow joints, bottom water outflow, double sluice overflow, inlet pipes, sluices and monks; types of pipes used - earthenware, concrete, iron, polythene, PVC, asbestos, etc.; installation of overflow pipe or construction of spillway; location and size of spillway.
Construction of diversion canal for diversion of excess or flood waters.
Different types of filters used with water control structures - wire screen, nylon mesh or cloth bag, sand or gravel, saran fibre, etc.
8. Pumps used in fish farms
Type of pump - piston, impeller, water-ram, Archimedean screw; lift, delivery, sludge and submersible pumps; freshwater and saltwater pumps; driving units - electric, diesel and petrol; their horsepower and delivery rates; suction and delivery pipes; foot valves; maintenance of pumps and simple repairs; possible use of wind power or other inexpensive sources of power for pumping.
9. Machinery used in farm construction
Earth-moving machinery - rooters, bulldozers, scrapers, excavators, draglines, clam digger, suction dredgers, crawler (caterpillar), hydraulic ditchers, backhoe, cranes, loaders, and rubber tractors, dumpers, tip trucks and sand pumps.
Earth-packing machinery - rubber rollers, vibrator rollers, road rollers, diesel rams and sheepsfoot rollers.
Construction machinery - electric, diesel and petrol concrete mixers, vibrators, driving rigs and conveyor belts.
Power, working capacity, fuel consumption and running costs of different types of machinery; high capital cost; possibility of contract hire, period hire or cooperative ownership.
10. Economic aspects of pond farm construction
Practicals
Survey of potential sites using land survey instruments; preparation of contour map; calculation of earth work; design of sluices; equipment used in construction; construction of typical pond farms; cost estimates for the construction of selected farms.
<section>8</section>
VI. Pond culture
1. Organisms cultivable in ponds
Species suited for culture in stagnant and semi-stagnant ponds - fishes, crustaceans and molluscs; principal cultivated (freshwater and coastal) warm- and cold-water species in Asia - fishes (Salmo spp., Tilapia spp., Sarotherodon spp., Cyprinus carpio, Clarias spp., Hypophthalmicthys molitrix, Ctenopharyngodon idella, Aristichthys nobilis, Catla catla, Labeo spp., Cirrhina spp., Puntius spp., Chanos chanos, Mugil spp., Lates calcarifer, Epinephelus spp., Lutjanus spp.); - crustaceans (Penaeus spp., Metapenaens spp., Macrobrachium spp., Scylla serrata); - molluscs (Crassostrea spp., Mytilus spp.).
2.1 Control of predatory and weed fishes
Predators in fish ponds - zooplanktons, insects, fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals; methods of their control; weed fishes and their control.
2.2 Control of aquatic vegetation
(a) Role of vegetation in ponds: different kinds of aquatic vegetation in water bodies with special reference to tropical ponds - microphytes and macrophytes; submerged, floating or emergent; adverse effects of excessive growth of aquatic vegetation, including depletion of nutrients and decreased production of plankton; effect of fertilizer application on the growth of vegetation.
(b) Control of algae:
(i) Mechanical method - repeated seining.
(ii) Chemical methods - application of copper sulphate, copper oxychloride, malachite green, powdered superphosphate, monuron, diuron, dichlone, powdered quicklime, etc.
(iii) Biological method - use of herbivorous fish.
(c) Control of undesirable macrovegetation:
(i) By increasing depth of water.
(ii) Manual removal.
(iii) Mechanical methods: different devices for cutting and raking weeds; time and periodicity of cutting; clearance of cut weeds.
(iv) Chemical methods: different kinds of herbicides used - contact herbicides and systematic herbicides; toxicity of herbicides; treatment techniques - methods and dosages of application; effects of herbicide application on water quality, fishes and fish food organisms.
(v) Biological control: use of herbivorous fish and other animals; encouraging the growth of an algal bloom through fertilization; covering the water surface with floating vegetation, such as water hyacinth, Pistia or Salvinia.
3. Improvement and restoration of pond bottom
Draining, drying the bottom; soil cultivation and dredging; benefits accruing thereof; use of right type of sand in shrimp ponds; dispersion of iron oxide in coastal shrimp ponds for eliminating hydrogen sulphide.
4. Control of principal physico-chemical factors of fish production
Temperature, dissolved oxygen, salinity and alkalinity; use of thermal effluents from power plants for faster growth in temperate and cold climates.
5. Liming
Effect of liming; time and methods of liming.
6. Fertilization
Objectives and effects of fertilization; different kinds of inorganic fertilizers (phosphate, potassium and nitrogenous fertilizers) and organic manures (cattle dung, poultry manure, pig manure, sewage sludge, compost, etc.,); micronutrients; use of organic and inorganic fertilizers singly and in combinations: determination of dosages in relation to initial soil and water quality; methods and frequency of application; precautions necessary in the application of fertilizers and manures.
7. Nursery techniques
Stocking rate of fish spawn in relation to food resources and condition of water body; stocking rates of shrimp and prawn larvae in relation to food resources, condition of the pond bed, water runover, aeration facilities and weather; artificial feeding, - feeds commonly used, periodicity and rates of feeding, time and place of feeding, feeding methods, etc. (see page 23); maintenance of water quality and health of larvae/juveniles; prevention of water stratification in shrimp/prawn ponds; methods of selective eradication of fish in shrimp/prawn ponds.
8. Rearing (culture techniques)
8.1 Stocking rates and maximum standing crop
Rates of stocking fry, fingerlings and yearlings in relation to food resources and condition of water body; stocking density and stocking rate; general formula for stocking; relation of production rates to stocking rates and management practices; maximum standing crop or carrying capacity of fish ponds; raising of carrying capacity obtained under normal conditions through fertilization and/or supplementary feeding; influence of species stocked, volume of water and climate on the level of maximum standing crop.
8.2 Routine pond management
Periodic fertilization; checks on water quality and fish and shellfish health; supplementary feeding; control of predators; checking of pond walls (for leaks); water control systems (for leaks and blockage); pond bottom (for excessive deposits of silt and organic matter); control of weeds; liming (if necessary).
8.3 Types of culture
(a) Monoculture: culture of single species of:
(i) same age and size;
(ii) same sex (mono-sex culture), and;
(iii) different size/age groups.
(b) Polyculture: culturing of:
(i) compatible combinations of different species of fishes, fishes and shrimps, fishes and crustaceans, fishes and molluscs;
(ii) predator-forage combinations; determination of percentage of different species used in polyculture in relation to food resources of the pond and supplementary feeding facilities; possible polyculture combinations for Asia and combinations presently practised.
(c) Combination of pond fish culture with crop or animal production:
Fish-cum-chicken farming; fish-cum-pig farming; fish-cum-duck farming; rice-cum-fish culture (see page 13); advantages of integrated farming and recycling of organic wastes.
9. Production rates in different types of pond culture
10. Harvesting
Different methods of harvesting; period of harvesting; single harvest and multiple cropping.
11. Economic aspects of different types of pond culture
Practicals
Experiments on the use of herbicides and piscicides; eradication of insects in ponds; participation in the pond culture of selected, commercially important fishes and prawns/shrimps from nursery stage to harvesting stage, both in freshwater and brackishwater. (Each trainee shall be assigned responsibility, alone or with one or more of the other trainees, for the maintenance of at least one fish pond).
<section>9</section>
VII. Running water culture
1. Definition
2. Prerequisites
Adequate supply of well-oxygenated water and inexpensive and nutritious feed. Advantages: very dense stocking, abundant supply of dissolved oxygen, easy removal of waste products, high rates of production. Disadvantages: requirement of large volumes of water, dependence on artificial feed, high initial cost, energy wastage in swimming against currents.
3. Different types of structures used in running water culture for seed rearing and growing to market size
Raceways, ponds, tunnels, troughs, vats and tanks; materials used in their construction; their shape and dimensions.
4. Raceways
(a) Different designs - long, narrow, rectangular brick or concrete channels, circular channels and flat spirals; semi-raceways; "open" or "flow-through" systems and "closed" systems;
(b) Criteria for selection of site for location of raceways; topography, soil characteristics, erosion control and water supply;
(c) Construction; excavation and/or level building; slide slopes; construction of water control structures or weirs - materials used (concrete, wood, sheet metal, etc.); functions of water control structures (regulation of flow and depth of water, aeration, etc.); effects of shape and slope of raceways on water flow;
(d) Sources of water for raceways; determination of flow rates; methods of filtration/purification in closed systems (see pages 12-13).
5. Culture operation
Species culture in running waters; stage and size of seed used; rates of stocking in relation to flow of water, temperature and feed; feeds, rates and methods of feeding; rate of production and its relation to rate of water flow.
6. Economics of running water culture compared to pond culture and other systems of culture
Practicals
Designing of raceways and other running water culture systems; experimental culture of selected species in running water systems.
<section>a</section>
VIII. Culture in recirculating systems
1. Objectives: the reconditioning and recirculation of water in aquaculture in experimental and production work.
2. Advantages: economy in the use of space and water, possibility of greater control of water quality, feasibility of high rate of stocking, high rate of production.
3. Disadvantages: requirements of elaborate filtration and aeration systems, requirements of specialized technical skill, high cost of equipment and water treatment; requirement of costly high quality feed.
4. Uses of recirculating systems: for incubation, seed rearing, fattening, study of fish feeds, conditioning of fish for markets through removal of bad flavours, etc.
5. Different kinds and designs of reconditioning systems.
6. Reconditioning processes: sedimentation, filtration, aeration, pH control, temperature control, sterilization (ultraviolet sterilization or ozone treatment), degassing, ion exchange.
(a) Sedimentation: purpose; facilities - open clarifiers, channels and lagoons.
(b) Filtration: function and process of filtration; different types of filters (horizontal, upflow, submerged and trickling); hydraulic loading rate and ammonia loading rate of filters; retention time of settling basin for removing settleable solids; backwashing of filters. Different kinds of filtration systems - mechanical, biological and chemical; media used for mechanical filtration (sand, gravel, broken oyster shells, diatomaceous earth, etc.), biological filtration (sand, gravel, crushed limestone, wood slats, plastic rings, styrofoam beads, etc.) and chemical filtration (charcoal, ion exchange resins, etc.); use of floating nitrifying micro-colonies for biological filtration.
(c) Use of centrifugal concentrations for removal of suspended solids.
(d) Aeration: purpose (oxygen input, release of gasses such as CO[2], NH[3] and N[2], and temperature control); different devices for aeration (aspirators, surface aerators, bubblers, etc.).
(e) Buffering systems used for pH control; crushed oyster shell filters, limestone filters and addition of buffering chemicals such as soda, ash or lime.
7. Removal and utilization of sludge.
8. Comparative economics of various types of water reconditioning systems.
9. Culture operation: species of finfish and shellfish cultured in recirculating systems; stages and sizes of organisms reared or held in recirculating systems; density of stocking in relation to flow of water; feeds and feeding rates; rate of production in relation to water flow.
Practicals
Design of different types of recirculation systems and evaluation of their relative efficiencies; operation of experimental recirculating systems.
<section>b</section>
IX. Culture in rice fields
1. Definition
Types of aquaculture in rice fields: combined production of rice and fish or shrimps/prawns alternating and/or simultaneous crops of rice and fish or shrimps/prawns; rotation of rice and fish/prawn crop; use of rice fields as nurseries.
2. General requirements
Adequate irrigation and drainage facilities, absence of seepage; suitable dikes and channels; selection of species for culture that are not harmful to rice.
3. Advantages
Additional protein production, additional income, off-season occupation; higher rice yield; control of pests and weeds, etc.
4. Disadvantages
Requirements of extra quantity of water, extra expenditure for strengthening bunds, meeting requirements of particular types of rice and fish, reduction in rice cultivation area, toxicity of pesticides to fish.
5. Required characteristics of rice for combined culture Strains tolerant of deep water and low temperature.
6. Criteria for selection of species for culture in rice fields
Ability to thrive in shallow waters; tolerance of high temperature, high turbidity and low oxygen levels; quick growth; compatibility with rice production.
7. Cultivable species
Common carp, Asiatic carps, tilapias, catfishes, milkfish, mullets, shrimps and prawns, etc.
8. Water and soil conditions
Depth of water required in relation to type of rice and species cultivated; controlled irrigation for maintaining desired depth, possibility of using brackishwater rice fields for culturing euryhaline and other salt-tolerant species; relation of soil fertility and rice farming practices to fish and shrimp/prawn production.
9. Preparation of rice field for culture
Raising and strengthening of bunds; determination of width and height of bunds in relation to depth of water desired; construction of channels, cross channels and rescue pits; and their dimensions; construction of temporary low inner bunds bordering channels; installation of water control (inlet and outlet) devices with screens; spillway for floodwater escape; planting distance between rice plants; fertilization with organic and/or inorganic manures; rates of fertilizer application.
10. Culture operation
Time of stocking fry, fingerlings or yearlings in relation to rice transplantation, and growth; monoculture and polyculture; stocking rates in relation to type of culture; period of culture; species cultured, size of stocking material; fertilization and artificial feeding, manipulation of water level during and after weeding; method of safe application of agricultural fertilizers during culture; permissible doses and methods of application of pesticides; fertilizers used; methods and rates of application; rates of production; measures for protection from predators; method of harvesting.
11. Economics of culture in rice fields
Practicals
Experimental rice field fish culture with selected, locally available species.
<section>c</section>
X. Cage culture
1. General conditions
Origin and spread of cage culture techniques; advantages (minimal space requirement, very high production per unit area, facility for towing off in case of pollution or other unfavourable conditions (cold winter etc.), safety from predators, suitability for culturing large variety of species, facility to use areas where sea bed is unsuitable for farming, ease of harvest, etc.) and disadvantages (high demand on oxygen and water flow, dependence - on artificial feed, food losses, pollution, rapid spread of disease, risk of theft, conflict with multiple use of natural waters, etc.).
2. Types of cages
Cages occupying the whole water column (from surface to bottom), floating cages, mid-water cages with buoyed "feeding neck" and bottom cages; single and multiple units, rigid and flexible cages; self-supporting and raft-supported cages; selection of type of cage in relation to conditions at farm site.
3. Design and construction
3.1 Selection of site (see Chapter II - Selection of Sites for Aquaculture)
3.2 Layout
Cages, jetties, walkways, buildings for feed preparation and preparation of fish for market; hatchery and nursery pond (where needed).
3.3 Construction
(a) Framework; materials used (wood, bamboo, galvanized scaffolding, aluminium, etc.); support and lifting ropes; frameless cages; shape of net.
(b) Walls, bottom and roof; mesh netting of natural fibre, synthetic fibre, galvanized chain-link or galvanized weld mesh; site fouling tests with different materials to select the material most suited to the area.
(c) Flotation structure: use of rigid collars of metal or plastic (air-filled, foam-filled or fibre-filled), discrete buoys or polydrums.
(d) Linkage of multiple units.
(e) Mooring and anchoring.
(f) Construction of water-breaking structures.
(g) Shapes and dimensions; determination of shape and size in relation to hydrographical conditions, species to be stocked, stocking rate, production target, etc.; relative merits and demerits of large and small cages.
4. Cultivable species
Indigenous and exotic species of fishes, crustaceans and molluscs suitable for cultivation in cages set in fresh, brackish and marine waters; criteria for selection of species for cage culture (see page 3).
5. Farming operations
Production or collection of seed; stocking; stocking rates in relation to species and size of cages; monoculture and polyculture; feeding - feeds used, rate and frequency of feeding, feeding methods and conversion rates; prevention and control of diseases and pests; growth rates and yield; periodic changing or cleaning of nets; monitoring of water quality; moving cages to new localities in case of unfavourable environment; harvesting; selection of optimum size for harvesting.
6. Relative economics of cage culture
Practicals
Design and fabrication of selected types of cages; experiments in cage farming of local species.
<section>d</section>
XI. Pen culture
1. Pen culture as an aquaculture system
Evolution and history of pen or enclosure culture; advantages and disadvantages; pre-requisites for pen culture in inland, estuarine and marine waters; importance of suitable seabed conditions, availability of suitable species, water flow, salinity, temperature, and sheltered conditions.
2. Types of pens
(a) completely isolated enclosures surrounded by a net structure in the middle of a bay with no foreshore;
(b) shore enclosure with a portion of the foreshore extending into deep water surrounded by a net structure, and
(c) bay or lock enclosure with an embankment provided with sluices or net structure only at the entrance.
3. Design and construction
3.1 Selection of site (see Chapter II - Selection of Sites for Aquaculture)
3.2 Design
Concentric and contiguous pens; catwalks; boat locks; ancillary buildings and shelters.
3.3 Construction
(a) Rigid pens:
(i) Embanked pens - concrete, stone or earth embankments with sluices for water circulation.
(ii) Net enclosures - framework or scaffolding and wall of mesh netting; materials used for framework (galvanized scaffolding, wooden or concrete piles, bamboo and/or mangrove stakes, etc.); criteria for the selection of netting material (reasonable life expectancy, resistance to fouling and corrosion, ease of handling and cleaning, etc); netting materials used; their physical properties; resistance to environmental and climatic factors and relative efficiencies; curved corners versus square corners; provision of collars (against jumping fish) and footings and surface covers (against predators); construction of catwalks, feeding platforms, and boat locks.
(b) Flexible pens:
Sinkers, chain-link footrope, headrope, flotation buoys, netting wall (vertical wall and horizontal floating net), strengthening lattice, catwalks and jetties.
(c) Outer barrier nets.
4. Shapes and dimensions of pens
Dimensions of nursery and fattening pens; effect of shape on the behaviour of fish and ease of harvesting.
5. Cultivable species
Species of fishes and crustaceans cultivable in fresh-water, brackish-water and marine pens; selection of single species or combination of species for culture; availability of stock.
6. Farming operations
Hatchery production or collection of seed; clearing nursery and fattening pens of unwanted fauna; stocking of nursery pens; transfer to fattening pens; stocking rates; fertilization and supplementary feeding; maintenance of pens (monitoring of water quality, cleaning, predator and weed control); cropping; selection of optimum size for harvesting.
7. Economics of pen culture
Average yield for different species and combinations of species; cost of construction and maintenance; amortization rate.
Practicals
Design of pen farms suited to selected areas; experiments in pen culture of local species.
<section>e</section>
XII. Culture of molluscs
1. General considerations
Mollusc biology as related to culture; general description of the various systems of mollusc culture (bottom, rack, tray, raft, pole and long line cultures) and their relative efficiencies; hydrographic conditions favouring high production; importance of pollution-free water, adequate water flow, health regulations relating to molluscs and local availability of brood stock.
2. Criteria for selection of site (see Chapter II - Selection of Sites for Aquaculture)
3. Species suitable for cultivation
Indigenous and exotic species of oysters, mussels, clams, scallops and cockles, suitable for cultivation.
4. Procurement of seed
4.1 Hatchery production
Techniques of hatchery spawning of molluscs; genetic modification of stocks.
4.2 Collection of spat
Methods, place and time of collection; types of collectors used (see page 4); measures required for avoiding fouling.
5. Bottom culture
5.1 Special pre-requisites
Firm bottom; adequate tidal flow to prevent silt deposition, for removal of excreta and for supply of oxygen.
5.2 Shell beds
(a) Advantages (easy and cheap maintenance; possibility of using seed culled from other systems) and
Disadvantages (silting; predator attack; relatively poor growth; low yield).
(b) Preparation of bed: type of bottom required; improvement measures, perimeter ditching; construction of low earthen or brush dikes to prevent incursion of sand and sediment; spreading of shell or cultch; levelling; settling.
(c) Culture operation: collection of spat; importance of timing; laying of spat; routine maintenance (raking, washing with water jets; spraying of water on exposed waters, cleaning of ditches, use of lime, etc.); harvesting; grading and cleaning of crop.
5.3 Rock beds
(a) Advantages (ease and inexpensiveness; ease of culling) and
Disadvantages (difficulties in preparing bed; weed and pest growth; low yield).
(b) Construction: type of rocks used; artificial substitutes; weight and size of rocks; consolidation of ground where necessary; piling of rocks; spacing; construction of walkways and puntways.
(c) Culture operation: spatfall, inspection, culling, routine maintenance (turning of rocks, clearance of weeds and other unwanted organisms, seasonal cleaning and repair of beds); harvesting; grading and cleaning of crop.
6. Intertidal and shallow water culture
6.1 Rack culture
(a) Advantages (possibility of using readily available building materials; ease of re-laying; efficiency in catching spat; ease of culling and harvesting, reduced silting, lesser infestation of pests) and Disadvantages (constant demand on time, labour and materials).
(b) Construction: different types of racks; suitable woods; use of bamboos, logs or rough sawn timber; tarring of sawn timber; arrangement and spacing of racks - single line, double line and quadrangular stockades; positioning and fixing of pillars and horizontal beams; attachment of collectors.
(c) Culture operation: timing of spat collection; re-racking of settled collectors; culling, setting out of dislodged shells; routine maintenance; (inspection, refastening, moving of racks to new areas when necessary; replacement of faulty timbers); harvesting; grading and cleaning of crop.
6.2 Tray culture
(a) Advantages (as in rack culture above) and
Disadvantages (need to obtain spat from elsewhere, need for constant maintenance and frequent replacement of wire and wood).
(b) Construction: construction of racks, their spacing and arrangement to carry trays; construction of trays - frames, ends, mesh materials, size of mesh, fastening and stretching, tarring, draining and weathering of wire mesh trays.
(c) Culture operation: setting out of trays, spreading of seed; culling; respreading; routine maintenance (inspection, patching and renewal of fastenings).
6.3 "Bouchot" or pole culture
(a) Advantages (local collection of seed, intensive use of intertidal land, high yield) and
Disadvantages (infestation by borers, susceptibility of crop to predation and theft, need for daily inspection).
(b) Construction: frames and ropes for seed collectors; poles suitable for bouchots; sheathing of bottom of poles in smooth plastic (to prevent predators); size, arrangement and spacing of poles; insertion of poles; perimeter fencing.
(c) Culture operation: collection of seed; transplantation; preparation of "boudins" (tubes of seed); attachment to poles; inspection and culling; routine maintenance (scraping and cleaning); storage cages; harvesting; grading and cleaning.
7. Deepwater culture
7.1 Raft culture
(a) Types: ropes, poles and rens.
(b) Advantages (high yield, use of water column, freedom from silting and pests) and Disadvantages (high cost, need for boat, and fouling of ground).
(c) Construction: construction and/or assembly of basic platform, buoys, anchors and moorings; attachments of poles, ropes, netting tubes, rens, etc. to raft; methods of attachment.
(d) Culture operation: collection of spat; attachment of seed; culling; harvesting; special vessels and equipment required.
7.2 Long lines
(a) Advantages (use of open water, ability to operate under rough conditions) and Disadvantages (difficulty in servicing).
(b) Construction: assembly of constituent parts - anchors, pennants, buoys or drums, longlines and growing lines (hanging rens); methods of attachment.
(c) Culture operation; preparation of rens with seed settled in other areas; stringing on longlines; inspection and culling; harvesting; washing and grading.
8. Depuration of molluscs
Necessity for depuration of molluscs; methods of depuration; bacteriological standards, etc. (see page 28).
9. Economic aspects of different types of mollusc farming
Comparative labour and capital requirement; rates of production; marketability.
Practicals
Collection of oyster and mussel spat; designing of intertidal and deepwater culture devices; experiments in oyster farming.
<section>f</section>
XIII. Seaweed culture
1. Economic seaweeds - species, characteristics, uses
Amount and value of seaweed production; use of seaweeds as food, industrial uses, other uses.
Species gathered and cultivated in Asia - Eucheuma spp., Gracilaria spp., Undaria spp., others; characteristics of major species.
2. Selection of sites
Essential requirements of site - water quality, soil quality, existing vegetation, water mobility, climatic conditions, protection from weather hazards, tidal characteristics; site requirements for particular species.
3. Layout or design of culture plots
Delimitation of boundaries (fencing, buoy markers, etc.); anchorage substrates; orientation of plots in relation to prevailing wind and currents.
4. Culture operations
Selection of stock and seeding; monitoring growth; monitoring environmental fluctuations; watching diseases and other causes of mortality (e.g., grazing by finfish).
5. Harvesting and post-harvest technology
Periodic harvesting and total harvesting; cleaning, washing and drying; storage, preliminary processing and packaging or baling.
6. Marketing and distribution
Markets for seaweeds; local consumption versus export; transportation and distribution; quality control.
Practicals
Visit prospective site(s) for seaweed culture and diagnose suitability for use in seaweed culture; practice some seaweed seeding operations and, if opportunity offers, monitor growth of seaweed planting until harvest.
<section>g</section>
XIV. Stocking of open waters (artificial recruitment and transplantation)
1. Definition
Artificial recruitment to existing fish stocks and transplantation of species to newer areas in open waters (lakes, reservoirs, rivers, irrigation canals, seas and oceans), and stocking of newly-formed reservoirs.
2. Objectives
(a) To increase the stocks of selected species;
(b) To resuscitate the stocks of overfished or environmentally altered water bodies;
(c) To fill ecological niches;
(d) To utilize more fully certain biological resources, and
(e) To compensate the effects of barriers on the migratory routes to spawning grounds.
3. Methods
3.1 Artificial propagation of seed and their release into open waters.
3.2 Stocking of adults into open waters and spawning streams.
3.3 Construction of fishways and artificial spawning channels.
4. General considerations
4.1 Concept of "ocean ranching" - making use of homing behaviour of anadromous fishes (salmon, sturgeon, shad, striped bass, etc.).
4.2 Assessment of the status of fisheries based on natural stocks.
4.3 Assessment of carrying capacity of the receiving waters.
4.4 Selection of suitable species based on the need to utilize available food or the objectives of culture (omnivorous, plankton-feeding, herbivorous or predator species).
4.5 Rates of stocking; size at stocking; frequency of stocking based on the extent of establishment of the introduced species - once only, occasionally or continuously.
4.6 Factors determining the success of transplantation and artificial recruitment.
4.7 Possible effects of transplantation on the indigenous fauna and general ecology of the receiving waters - rapid increase of introduced species and possible elimination of indigenous species, destructive effects of transplanted fish, introduction of new pests, etc.
5. Seed production
Techniques of hatchery production (see also Chapter IV - Seed Production).
6. Stock evaluation
Methods of stock evaluation to assess the success of artificial recruitment.
7. Management measures
7.1 Lakes and reservoirs
Clearance of shallow waters; predator control; installation and proper maintenance of inlets, drainage outlets and spillways; fertilizing and supplementary feeding; introduction of fish food organisms, etc.
7.2 All open waters
Protection against pollution from pesticides and domestic or industrial effluents; maintenance of a balanced population through manipulation of stocking and harvesting; supplementary transplantation with continued artificial recruitment where necessary; methods of harvest, particularly in reservoirs with highly uneven bottoms (special gill nets, seines, cast nets, long lines, traps, light fishing, electrical fishing, etc.).
8. Benefits from artificial recruitment and transplantation
(a) Non-dependence on natural spawning areas;
(b) Increased harvest;
(c) Increased survival rate;
(d) Greater utilization of natural food;
(e) Establishment of productive fisheries in new areas, and
(f) Resuscitation of depleted stocks, etc.
9. Species currently used and indigenous species that could be profitably used in inland and marine waters - fishes, crustaceans and molluscs
10. Economics of artificial recruitments and transplantation
Practicals
Visits to selected artificially stocked reservoirs/lakes and preparation of a report on the status of their fisheries and management measures.
<section>h</section>
XV. Nutrition and artificial feeding
1. Nutritional requirements of cultivated fish and shellfish
Essential nutrients - proteins (essential amino acids), fats, carbohydrates, vitamins and minerals; animal protein versus vegetable protein; importance of dietary calcium level in fish nutrition; differences in nutritional requirements during different life stages and in different systems of culture; maintenance ration and growth ration; feeding experiments to determine optimal levels of nutrient requirements - controlled experiments and pond feeding experiments.
2. Sources of nutrients
Naturally produced food in ponds, extra food produced through fertilization and supplementary feeding; complete artificial feeds.
3. Effects of feeding
Effects of deficiencies in diet on growth, health and survival; effect of diet on the yield of marketable product from the fed animal - dressing percentage and percentage of edible flesh in live animal and dressed carcass; effects of diet on the composition of gain in respect of protein and fat; effect of diet in causing off-flavours.
4. Evaluation of feeds
4.1 Conversion rates and digestibility of feeds
Methods of assessment; factors affecting conversion rate (composition of food, size of fed animal; frequency of feeding; water quality; temperature, etc.); conversion rates of commonly used feeds; gross energy and percentage of available energy in various types of feed materials; relation of available energy to fibre contents of feed; coefficients of digestion; use of indicators in digestibility studies; biological value of proteins.
4.2 Feed analysis
For determining (i) dry matter, ash, protein, lipids and fibre, and (ii) gross energy, minerals (calcium and phosphorus) and vitamins.
4.3 Analysis of faecal matter
4.4 Estimation of total excretion
4.5 Estimation of growth due to natural food and total growth
4.6 Analysis of fish
For determining dressing percentage, composition of gain and presence or absence of off-flavours.
5. Artificial feeds
5.1 Importance of artificial feeding in intensive aquaculture and its advantages; supplemental feeding; complete feeding; effects of environmental factors (temperature, water quality, crowding, etc.) on feeding.
5.2 Criteria for choice of feeds
Acceptability, digestibility, nutritional value, digestion coefficient, conversion rate, availability, cost, etc.
5.3 Different kinds of artificial feeds
(a) Vegetable feeds; agricultural wastes including oil cakes and mill residues, plants, pulses, cereals, tubers, kitchen waste, etc.
(b) Feeds of animal origin: slaughterhouse refuse, fishery byproducts including trash fish and fish meals, etc.
(c) Compounded feeds:
(i) Advantages and need for compounded feeds, including medicated feeds in aquaculture.
(ii) Feed formulation: feed formulation in relation to species to be fed, feeding habits, age and size of animal, system of culture and availability or otherwise of natural food; general composition of compounded feeds (proteins, fats, carbohydrates, cellulose, minerals, vitamins, binders and water); ingredients commonly used; survey of locally available ingredients and their nutritional value; protein sources - animal proteins versus plant proteins or other cheap sources of protein; factors determining feed and ingredient characteristics (protein, fat, fibre, texture, density, colour and carbohydrate); addition of medicaments for combating diseases.
(iii) Feed manufacture - feed mills and their design; component parts of a feed mill bin, pellet mill, cooler, crumble rolls, sifter and elevator. Production flow: importance of steam conditioning in pellet mill operation; consistency, water stability, texture and particle size; binders used; different forms of compounded feeds (hand pellets, expanded pellets, crumbles, blocks and agglomerates); factors determining pelleting rate and pellet quality (protein, fat, fibre and density); use of pelletability chart; packaging; storage and conservation.
6. Feeding procedure
6.1 Method of feeding
Fresh feed: feeding enclosures for floating feed; feeding baskets/trays for soaked feed; feeding at selected points or broadcasting.
Dry feeds: mechanical dispensers - automatic feeders (fixed or mobile) and demand feeders.
6.2 Feeding schedule
Daily ration in relation to water temperature, size of fish and type of feed; adjustments in feeding schedules to suit temperature and feeding conditions.
7. Economic aspects of different types of artificial feeds and feeding
Practicals
Formulation and preparation of feeds for selected fish based on locally available ingredients; observation of animal feed manufacture in a feed mill; feeding experiments to study digestibility and conversion rate of selected feeds.
<section>i</section>
XVI. Sanitation and fish health
1. Pond sanitation
Influence of pond sanitation on fish health and public health; importance of fish health in aquaculture; malaria and bilharzia, and their control measures; factors favouring occurrence of diseases among cultivated fishes and shellfishes (overcrowding, malnutrition and unfavourable water quality).
2. Fish kills
Fish kills due to toxic algae (blue-green algae and dinoflagellates); their control measures.
3. Classification of diseases
According to groups or species of cultivated fish and shellfish affected, organs affected, age of fish, seasons, causative agents and extent of incidence (isolated or epizootic).
4. Causes of diseases
Parasitic (bacteria, virus, fungi, protozoans, worms, crustaceans and mussel larvae), environmental, nutritional and constitutional.
5 Diseases - their aetiology, symptoms and species affected
5.1 Bacterial diseases
"Obligate" and "facultative" bacterial pathogens; important groups of pathogenic bacteria (Aeromonas, Pseudomonas, Corynebacteria, Enterobacteria, Hemophilus, Mycobacteria, Nocardia, Myxobacteria, Streptomyces and Vibrio); common diseases - infectious abdominal dropsy of carps, furunculosis, bacterial kidney disease, "redmouth" disease, ulcer disease, tuberculosis, columnaris disease, tail- and fin-rot, peduncle disease, red pest disease, red spot disease, septicaemia, coldwater disease, exophthalmus, botulinum disease, blue sac disease, nocardia, etc.
5.2 Viral diseases
Infectious haematopoietic necrosis, infectious pancreatic necrosis, viral haemorrhagic septicaemia, ulcerative duermal necrosis, spring viremia of carp, pox disease, kyro-ichthyozoosis, lymphocystis disease, cauliflower disease, swim bladder inflammation, etc.
5.3 Fungal diseases
Saprolegnia infection or dermatomycosis, gill rot or branchiomycosis, "cotton cap" disease and Ichthyophonus disease.
5.4 Diseases caused by protozoans
Costiasis, chilodonelliasis, cyclochaetiasis, whirling disease, ichthyothiriasis, pillularis disease, lenot or pimple disease, milky flesh disease, etc.
5.5 Diseases caused by worms
Ligulosis, gyrodactyliasis, grey pearl disease, worm cataract, diseases due to Dactylogyrus, Cichlidogyrus, Bucephalus, bloodworm nematodes, alanthocephalans, etc.
5.6 Diseases caused by crustaceans
Causative agents - Argulus spp., Lernaea spp., Ergasilus spp., Caligus lacustris, etc.
5.7 Infection by glochidia larvae of freshwater mussels
5.8 Environmental diseases
Causative factors - oxygen deficiency or oversaturation, high acidity, high alkalinity, temperature variations, toxic substances from industrial and sewage effluents, etc.: gas edema, water edema, sunburn, blue sac disease, "pop-eye" or exophthalmus, etc.
5.9 Nutritional diseases
Lipoid hepatic degeneration, enteritis, hepatoma, botulism, aertaminoses, mineral and trace element diseases, and softwater diseases (visceral granuloma, nephrocalcinosis and proliferative kidney disease).
5.10 Tumours in fishes
Benign and malignant tumours; hyperplasia, neoplasia, anaplasia and metaplasia; causes of tumours (adverse chemical or physical stimuli, presence of parasites and hormonal disturbances).
6. Common diseases affecting main cultivated species
7. Common diseases of main organs - skin, eyes, gills and internal organs
8. Effects of diseases
Economic loss through mortality; adverse effect on growth, condition factor, fatigue and reduced fecundity, vulnerability to predation, susceptibility to sub-optimal environmental factors, blood changes.
9. Control techniques for communicable diseases
Immunization, increase of natural and genetic resistance, manipulation of environment (hygiene, prophylaxis and disinfection), and therapy after onset of disease, regular health inspection and certification of eggs, fry and adults for export.
10. Treatment of diseases
10.1 Methods of treatment
(a) Chemical treatment through water (dip, bath or flush treatment);
(b) Chemical treatment through feed, and
(c) Treating fish with chemicals directly.
10.2 Criteria for selection of chemicals for disease control
Ratio between lethal dose for pest and fish, safety of handling, effect on pond's productivity, fish, nearby crops and consumers of fish, duration of half-life, cost, etc.
10.3 Commonly employed chemicals
Copper sulphate, formalin, malachite green, potassium permanganate, hyamine 3500, organophosphorus compounds, antibiotics, sulphonamides, nitrofurans, di-n-butyl tin oxide, euheptin, magnesium sulphate, ammonia, benzalkonium, chloride, acriflavine, iodine, hydrogen peroxide, methylene blue, ozone, sodium chloride, silver nitrate, etc.; their dosages and methods of administration for different diseases; precautions needed.
10.4 National and international aspects of disease control
Coordination and arrangements (International Office of Epizootics, EIFAC, FAO, and other international and national health organizations, etc.); significance of preventive, regulatory and control measures of communicable diseases; importance of health inspection and certifications.
11. Methods of isolation, culture and identification of pathogens
Practicals
Diagnosis of common diseases of selected fish and shellfish, including isolation, culture and identification of the more common bacterial and fungal pathogens; treatment procedures for common diseases.
<section>j</section>
XVII Post-harvest technology
1. Handling of live fish and shellfish
1.1 Removal of off-flavour from fish
(a) Causative agents of off-flavour (Actinomyces, Oscillatoria tenuis, Symploca muscorum, Anabaena circinalis, Volvox aureus); causative compounds (geosmin, mucidone, 2-methylisoborneol).
(b) Practical control measures:
(i) Control in culture systems - minimizing feed wastes, exchange of water, chemical control of blue-green algae, increasing turbidity through mechanical agitation or bottom feeding fish.
(ii) Removal from affected fish - keeping in charcoal-filtered clean flowing water; keeping in pond with frequent exchange of water till flavour improves, keeping in floating bags off the bottom, addition of salt to achieve 10 0/00 salinity (in closed raceways).
(iii) Removal by processing - smoking, steam pre-cooking and addition of vegetable oil before canning.
(c) Influence of temperature on rate of flavour removal and rate of weight loss of fish; method of sensory evaluation for off-flavour.
1.2 Depuration of molluscs
(a) Need for purification of molluscs, conditions favouring concentration of pathogenic micro-organisms by molluscs, bacteriological standards for harvest area and shellfish, certification requirements for import of shellfish to certain countries and markets.
(b) Designs of purification plants.
Criteria for location of plant site.
(c) Different designs of purification plants: layout, plant structure materials, handling equipment, holding baskets, seawater systems, water treatment facilities, purification tank design - size, depth, shape, materials for construction, inflow and outflow piping arrangements, uniform hydraulic flow, cleanability, prevention of disturbance of shellfish by turbulence, vibrations, etc.
(d) Purification process: washing, culling and basketing of shellfish, intake of sea-water, sterilization with chlorine, ultraviolet light or ozone, aeration, temperature control, advantages or disadvantages of process, including cost and flavour of product.
(e) Conditions necessary for successful depuration: maintenance of proper biological state of the molluscs, supply of adequate food to enhance purging of gut, low turbidity, good water quality, proper stacking in depuration tank, prevention of rapid temperature rises to arrest spawning, maintenance of suitable flow rate.
(f) Methods of monitoring and control of harvest area and shellfish:
(i) Fermentation tube test for coliforms, and
(ii) Elevated temperature plate test.
1.3 Holding or temporary storage of live fish, shrimps and prawns before marketing or processing
(a) Objectives:
(i) Maintenance of good condition of animal;
(ii) Improvement of quality of flesh, and
(iii) Minimizing weight loss.
(b) Requirements: supply of clean oxygen-rich water; temperature control; feeding in prolonged holding.
(c) Holding facilities; holding ponds, holding nets, floating boxes, tanks, vats, aquaria.
1.4 Sorting and grading
Species-wise and size-wise; grading devices - grading baskets, mechanical graders and grading nets.
1.5 Transportation of live fish and prawns (see Chapter IV - Seed Production)
1.6 Transportation of fresh fish
Containers used; methods of packing with crushed ice.
2. Fish spoilage
Causes of fish spoilage - autolysis and bacterial spoilage, oxidation and rancidity of fats and protein denaturation; spoilage micro-organisms of fish and fishery products, rigor mortis - pre-rigor, rigor and post-rigor conditions; importance of prolonging pre-rigor and rigor conditions.
3. Methods of evaluating freshness of fish
Organoleptic, chemical (estimation of TVBN and VAN) and microbiological methods.
4. Preparation of fish for processing
Checking for off-flavour, grading, stunning, dressing (scaling or skinning, beheading, cutting of fins and eviscerating), washing and cutting; different forms of preparation - whole or round, drawn, dressed, steak, fillets and comminuted.
5. Preparation of shrimps for processing
Peeling (manual and enzymatic), deveining, washing, different forms of preparation - shell-on, headless, PD, PDC, etc.
6. Preparation of molluscs for processing
Depuration, shucking, washing and packing.
7. Methods of preservation and processing
7.1 Chilling
Icing; determination of quantity of ice required; use of dry ice, liquid nitrogen, cold air, chilled water, refrigerated sea water and refrigerated brine; methods of super-chilling.
7.2 Freezing
Principle underlying freezing technique as a preservative measure; different types of freezers (air blast freezers, hybrid freezers, plate freezers and immersion freezers); cryogenic freezing; treatments before freezing; glazing; use of anti-oxidants; packaging; cold storage; factors limiting shelf-life of frozen products; thawing; cold chain.
7.3 Other methods
Drying, salting, smoking, canning, pickling, fermentation, and preparation of paste products and by-products; their relative merits.
8. Quality control
Methods; national and international standards.
9. Sanitation and hygiene standards for handling and processing establishments, containers, transport vehicles and markets
10. Marketing of fish and shellfish
Importance of consumer research in marketing; marketing patterns based on consumer preferences; packing for the market; use of insulated and refrigerated vans; wholesale and retail marketing.
Practicals
Removal of off-flavour of fish; depuration of molluscs; sorting and grading; packing and transportation of live and freshly killed fish and shellfish; freshness tests; visits to different processing establishments.
<section>k</section>
XVIII. Socio-economic aspects of aquaculture
1. Major socio-economic problems of developing countries
Overpopulation; malnutrition; un- and under-employment; migration; marginalization; low level of education; low agricultural productivity; unequal distribution of income; low internal capital accumulation.
2. Possible contribution of aquaculture in solving the problems
Generation of employment in the rural sector; supply of relatively cheap protein food; improvement of living conditions; better distribution of income; diversification of agrarian production; curbs on migration.
3. Socio-cultural constraints in relation to aquaculture
Attitude towards innovations; food habits; taboos; lack of tradition of animal husbandry.
4. Major economic constraints
4.1 Lack of credit
Paucity of credit due to assumed or real high risk; high interest rate; lack of collateral (particularly in respect of farms on leased land or farms operated by landless labourers/tenants); availability only of short-term credit, etc. Possible improvement measures: arranging institutional credit to potential small-scale aquaculturists not served by commercial banks; concessional rate of interest during initial stage; simplified procedure for fast service; tagging of recovery with harvesting; credit supervision by trained staff; financing of support services.
4.2 Marketing problems
Poor returns on account of weak bargaining power of small-scale aquaculturists; monopoly of middlemen in credit supply and marketing; inadequate marketing and service facilities and consequent wastage, unstable price and high cost; low demand for new and less preferred species, etc.
Competition with conventional fishery products; need to schedule marketing during off-season for fishing; consumer preferences in respect of aquaculture products.
Possible improvement measures: establishment of government supported marketing services or fishery cooperatives in strategic areas; advantages and disadvantages of cooperatives; improvement of market-related facilities and services; market development and promotion of less preferred species; development of marketing information on consumer preferences, prices trend, seasonal pattern of demand, demand forecast, etc. in local and/or international markets.
5. Appraisal of feasibility of aquaculture
(a) Resources feasibility;
(b) Environmental and bio-technical feasibility, and
(c) Economic feasibility - price and volume demand, competition with capture fisheries and other regions, profitability of investment, social benefits, cost analysis, etc.
6. Methods of investment evaluation in aquaculture
(a) Pay-back period method;
(b) Simple rate of return method, and
(c) Present value method - net present value, break-even estimates, internal rate of return and benefit-cost ratio.
7. Book-keeping
7.1 Purpose of book-keeping
7.2 Assets and liabilities accounts
(a) Assets:
(i) Fixed assets - properties, tools, equipment, etc.;
(ii) Stocks - fish, feeds and other materials in stock, and
(iii) Current assets - cash in hand, bank deposit, claims on customers, etc.
(b) Liabilities:
(i) Long-term liabilities - loans, mortgages, bonds, etc., and
(ii) Short-term liabilities - debts, salaries, interest, etc.
7.3 Cost-return account (in physical and value terms)
(a) Total revenue: sales in cash and credit; computed value of production consumed on farm and given away; adjustment for inventory change in fish stock; subsidies and governmental support.
(b) Total cost:
(i) Fixed cost - amortization, maintenance, interest, salaries of management personnel, rent, depreciation, etc.
(ii) Variable cost - seed, feed, fertilizer, fuel, electricity, wages of temporary labour (in cash and kind), marketing, etc.
(iii) Administration cost - travelling, telephone, insurance, advertisements, etc.
(c) Profit
(d) Taxes
(e) Net profit
7.4 Analysis of cost-return account
Profit per ha; rate of return on investment; rate of return on operating cost; yield (or value of output) per unit of major input; amount (or cost) of input per unit of output; amount of input per unit of land or water surf ace; amount of input per unit of protein output; comparisons of the above indicators with regard to different sizes of farms and different farming systems.
Practicals
Exercises in investment evaluation methods, book-keeping and cash-return analysis.
<section>l</section>
XIX. Aquaculture extension
1. Definition of extension
Its objectives, characteristics, philosophy and principles; its role in transfer of technology to farmers; extension as a part of integrated rural development programmes.
2. Extension as related to aquaculture
Objectives of aquaculture extension as part of the general programme of socio-economic uplift of farmers.
Promotion of aquaculture as an industry and attainment of improved production through:
(a) Transfer of technology - site survey, design of installations, farm construction, culture techniques, pond maintenance, disease diagnosis, quality control, etc.;
(b) Linkage with support services - ensuring supply of quality seed, feed, fertilizers, chemicals and drugs; fabrication and supply of farm requirements like monks, cages, rafts, cultches, etc.;
(c) Linkages with credit facilities-arranging credit and ensuring its proper utilization; short-term and long-term loans; financing agencies;
(d) Organization of marketing and distribution systems and cooperative trading facilities; product development, consumer education and demonstration marketing, and
(e) Training of farmers in aquaculture techniques.
3. Extension methods
(a) Results of demonstrations, demonstration farming, etc.;
(b) Communication of useful research results through bulletins, pamphlets, hand-outs, newspaper articles, etc., and
(c) Radio and television talks.
4. Extension tools
Transport, water analysis and field study kits; some common chemicals for control of infections and mortality of fish, film strips, slides, posters, projection equipment (for slides, movies, and film strips), demonstration farms, etc.
5. Role of cooperatives in extension programme
6. Organization, execution and evaluation of extension programmes
Nature and importance of extension programmes building; socio-economic survey to decide on the most suitable type of extension programme; formulation of objectives; procedures for developing sound extension programmes; roles and responsibilities of different categories of extension workers, rural leaders, government institutions, etc.; formulation and execution of work plan; evaluation in extension - purpose; types; internal evaluation techniques; analysis and interpretation.
7. Extension supervision and administration
Functions of extension workers at various levels; qualities required of good extension supervisor; inter-relations of extension supervisors with other extension and research personnel; administrative organization of extension service; principles of effective budgeting; promotion of adult education in rural areas as an essential adjunct to aquaculture extension.
8. Extension training
Training of technicians (field operators) and farmers; short- and long-term courses; specialized training of technicians to suit local needs; organization of periodic refresher training courses for extension personnel.
Practicals
Handling and operation of extension tools; preparation of extension aids (like lantern slides, posters, film strips, etc.); visits to private aquaculture farms for rendering technical assistance; participation in organized field days.
<section>m</section>
XX. Aquaculture planning
1. Major aspects of aquaculture planning
(a) Form and level of industry;
(b) Infrastructure;
(c) Investments.
2. Basic data required for planning
(a) Total requirements for domestic consumption and export;
(b) Sources of production;
(c) Extent of suitable cultivable area;
(d) Availability of water, fertilizers, feed and labour;
(e) Estimated possible production through capture and culture fisheries;
(f) Likely socio-economic benefits to rural sector (employment opportunities, nutritional improvement, land settlement, etc.);
(g) National priorities with regard to type of produce;
(h) Consumer preferences;
(i) Marketing channels;
(j) Storage, processing and transport facilities.
3. Production objectives
Decision on type and level of culture (pond culture, cage culture, raft culture, etc.; extensive or intensive culture; small-scale rural aquaculture or large-scale industrial aqua-culture) and nature of end products (table fish, seed fish, bait fish, sport fish, pearls, etc.) in relation to national objectives and economic realities; year-round supply to markets.
4. Planning of small-scale rural aquaculture
Provision of technical assistance and extension service for site survey, design and construction of installations; provision of support services for production, distribution and marketing - production and/or supply of seed, feed, fertilizers, chemicals and drugs; disease control; assessment of marketing requirements and demand potentials; special facilities for marketing of live fish and shellfish; preservation and storage facilities.
5. Planning of large-scale industrial aquaculture
Technological and ecological considerations in site selection; large capital outlay, centralized management and vertical integration; provision of adequate management and business skill; provision of adequate support services; development of auxiliary industries for specialized equipment and supplies.
6. Assessment of manpower requirements
(a) Managerial;
(b) Technical - technicians (field operators), aquaculturists, specialists, farm engineers, extension workers and processing personnel;
(c) Marketing personnel.
7. Training of personnel
8. Research support and extension service
9. Economic appraisal and planning
Project analysis - quantum of investment required for establishment of infrastructure and support services; economic viability in terms of returns on investment; pilot-scale units to study commercial feasibility.
Financing and credit - financing agencies and channels of credit supply; their integration with support services; role of cooperatives and cooperative banks in financing; joint ventures; subsidies; insurance cover.
10. Legal provisions for aquaculture promotion
Practicals
Preparation of an aquaculture plan for a selected area or the whole of the trainee's country, based on available information.
<section>n</section>
Annexure
COURSE SCHEDULE
No. of hours
I Term (15 weeks)
Theory
Practice
Total
Introduction to aquaculture
Selection of sites for aquaculture
Selection of species for aquaculture
Seed production
Design and construction of pond farms
4 - WEEK BREAK
II Term (15 weeks)
Nutrition and artificial feeding
Sanitation and fish health
Pond culture
Cage culture
Culture of molluscs
Culture of seaweeds
5 - WEEK BREAK
III Term (14 weeks)
Pen culture
Running water culture
Culture in recirculating systems
Culture in rice fields
Stocking of open waters (artificial recruitment and transplantation)
Post-harvest technology
Socio-economic aspects of aquaculture
Aquaculture extension
Aquaculture planning
Grand Total
