<title>11</title>
<section>11. Waste management</section>
Environmental impact assessment (EIA) of development aid projects
Initial environmental assessment.
Oslo, October 1992
Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation NORAD
P.O. Box 8034 Oslo Dep., 0030 Oslo. Telephone: 47 2 3144 00
Design: Anne Kvalheim and Petter Wang
Typesetting by: Akersposten/Ullern Avis, Oslo
Printed by: Reclamo, 1992
<section>Foreword</section>
The natural resource base in our world today is exposed to constantly increasing pressures. Environmental problems are on the increase in developing countries as well as in developed countries. In developing countries, ecological stress strikes large and vulnerable population groups, and hinders social and economic development in many areas.
In 1987 the World Commission on Environment and Development, in their report "Our Common Future", described the problems we are facing and the measures which must be taken to solve them.
Environmental problems in developing countries make demands on Norwegian development aid. Three Norwegian White Papers (Nos. 36 (1984-85) and 34 (1986-87) on major questions concerning Norwegian aid to developing countries, and No. 46 (1988-89) on Norway's follow-up of the recommendations of the World Commission, have stressed the importance of taking environmental issues into account in Norwegian-assisted development aid projects. In 1990 this was further articulated in the NORAD strategy paper "NORAD in the nineties". In the NORAD strategy document Part 11 "Strategies for bilateral aid" (1992) it is determined that all ongoing and planned development aid projects must be assessed with regard to environmental impacts.
This booklet has been compiled to help NORAD desk officers and planners to integrate environmental considerations into waste management projects at an early stage in the planning process. It is one of a series of booklets presenting guidelines for environmental impact assessment (EIA) of various types of development projects. Experience and ideas from corresponding material compiled by other countries (OECD, the World Bank) have been integrated in this EIA-system.
<section>Introduction</section>
An initial assessment has the objective of helping desk officers and planners to assess a project in relation to environmental effects. The assessment shall provide a survey of environmental effects likely to ensue if a project is implemented. Usually an initial assessment will be based on easily accessible information, former research, the local population's views, etc.
The initial assessment only identifies potential direct and indirect environmental impacts; estimates are not assumed to be substantiated by special accounts or registrations. That comes under a full assessment. An initial assessment ought to be mastered by personnel without specialist knowledge of that particular project type, or of environmental consequences in general. In the course of an initial assessment, the project desk officer may nevertheless find it necessary to consult environmental expertise.
The initial assessment should attempt to clarify both positive and negative environmental impacts. However, since the major positive effects are usually included in the main project account, the initial assessment will tend to lean towards potential negative impacts.
The EIA-system affords no easy solution to weighing positive and negative aspects against one another in a decision-making process. This is because there are seldom clear objective criteria or threshold values for which environmental effects are acceptable or not.
This booklet provides a survey of required information as well as questions that need to be answered in an initial assessment of projects and activities connected to waste management.
To offer a brief overview of the subject, Part I describes what these type of projects normally comprises, and what enviromnental impacts in particular can be expected. It stresses an account of the special problems often faced by waste management in developing countries and tropical areas.
Part II offers a more specific account of the kind of information that ought to be available as well as questions that should be answered in an initial assessment of waste management.
<section>Part I: General account</section>
<section>1 Characteristics of projects and activities connected with waste management</section>
<section>1.1 Introduction</section>
Waste, in this connection, is defined as all residual products of human activity, except waste water and gaseous emissions. The waste may consist of solid materials and substances, or liquids and gases stored in barrels or other containers. Which is regarded as worthless waste and which as reuseable, will vary according to the assessments made by individual persons or communities.
The waste problem is on the increase in developing countries. In many places it is critical, despite the fact that the amounts of waste are generally less in developing than in industrialized countries. Many towns are expanding rapidly, and ineffective waste management systems are frequent. In addition, increasing industrialization in many developing countries leads to large amounts of waste, e.g. various types of hazardous waste. Even in rural areas, where the amounts of waste are smaller, management is often practiced in ways that can potentially threaten health and environment. Proper waste management is crucial in order to avoid a series of negative environmental impacts and to prevent the spreading of diseases among humans. However, projects and measures aiming at improving waste management can also cause environmental harm if health and environmental aspects have not been well considered during the planning and operations.
Increasing awareness of the waste problem, both in industrialized and developing countries, has made the problem an issue in several declarations and international conventions and provisions. The "Baser convention" of 1989 and the "Bamako convention" of 1991 are two of the most central ones. Both have been signed by a series of developing countries. In addition to drawing up general principles of waste management, they forbid export of hazardous waste to countries which do not have sufficient administrative, legislative and technical competence to manage the waste safely. It also does not give permission to export of hazardous waste from developed countries to developing countries. Several regional declarations have also been signed by developing countries in recent years.
<section>1.2 Project categories</section>
Projects and activities connected to waste management can generally be categorized as follows:
o Development of a sensible and efficient system for storage, collection, possible transfer and transport of refuse.
o Creation of environmentally safe, energy-and resource-saving and practical methods of disposal, e.g. recycling, land-filling and other means of processing, including closing down and safeguarding dumps that pose a risk to health and environment.
o Technical, professional and financial improvement of institutions and authorities to ensure that waste management systems work over time.
Waste management measures can also be important sub-components of other project categories, e.g. industry, agriculture, fisheries, aquaculture and mining. Measures towards proper waste management should be part of the planning of such projects from the start.
Waste management measures may also include training, research and legislation.
Choice of technology and scale of projects and activities related to waste management may vary depending on type and amount of waste, as well as on local environmental, economic, technological, institutional and socio-cultural conditions. Experience shows that conditions in most developing countries require other kinds of solutions than those being practiced in industrialized countries.
<section>1.3 Waste categories and characteristics</section>
Generally speaking, waste is categorized partly according to source, partly according to means of disposal, and partly according to characteristics. Municipal refuse, for example, contains several categories which are collected and treated in the same way, whereas hazardous waste characteristically has especially dangerous properties irrespective of source. Municipal waste is commonly categorized as follows:
o Domestic garbage: food scraps, packaging etc. from daily housekeeping.
o Bulky domestic waste: refrigerators, furnitures etc.
o Street rubbish: from street sweeping.
o Garden and park waste.
o Building and demolition rubbish.
o Metal scrap: from cars, other vehicles etc.
o Latrine and septic waste.
o Waste from institutions: hospitals and health stations etc. which often contains infectious refuse.
o Waste from commercial activity: offices, hotels, restaurants, shops, markets etc.
o Industrial waste, which can be subdivided into:
- organic waste from fisheries, aquaculture farms, agriculture, foodstuff industries,
- mining waste,
- various branch-specific residuals,
- general garbage resulting from most industrial undertakings: from cantines,
workshops, warehouses etc.
o Sludge from wastewater treatment plants.
Waste may contain different amounts of several components. The composition will vary between countries and cultures, as well as seasonally. Typical components in municipal waste are:
o easily decomposable organic matter: food scraps, waste from fruit and vegetable markets, dead animals, septic excrements etc.
o combustible organic matter: cardboard, paper, textiles, bone etc.
o plastics,
o metals,
o glass,
o ashes,
o sand and gravel.
o Hazardous waste, which can be subdivided into:
- organic waste: waste oil, solvents, paint, lacquer, glue, distillation residue, pesticides, pathogenes etc.
- inorganic waste: various toxic metals and heavy metals, cyanides, acids, bases, asbestos etc.
Hazardous waste is characterized by a high potential for direct damage to health and welfare, or by causing serious pollution and environmental harm. It can be:
a) highly inflammable (e.g. solvents, oil products),
b) etching (e.g. acids, bases),
c) reactive, i.e. react spontaneously in contact with other materials and lead to generation of toxic gases, explosion, fire or heat generation (e.g. cyanides, acids, bases, alkaline matter),
d) toxic (e.g. pesticides, heavy metals),
e) infectious (matter containing pathogenes),
f) carcinogenic, or
g) ecotoxic, i.e. substances that accumulate in the ecosystems and/or poison these directly.
A complete survey of dangerous components and types og hazardous waste is provided in tables 1, 2 and 3 at the end of this booklet.
Hazardous waste can occur as residuals of a series of activities, e.g.: Agriculture, animal husbandry, forestry and industries related to these primary activities, e.g. dairies, breweries, textile and leather industries, wood, chemical-pulp and paper industries; Energy production based on oil or coal and related activities, e.g. mining and oil drilling; Metallurgical industries and production of electronic equipment, glass, ceramics/porcelain, asbestos and cement; Chemical industry and processing. Households and service industries are also sources of hazardous waste, e.g. Iead-containing batteries, paint and solvents, chemicals from photo laboratories, research laboratories, cleaning plants, hospitals etc. (cf. booklets for initial environmental assessment of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry, Forestry, Industry and Mining). Some types of hazardous waste can be potentially dangerous over time, whereas some become dangerous only in combination with other residual products,
naturally occurring substances, or when exposed to special conditions, e.g. heat. Occasionally, waste which is not originally hazardous can nevertheless become very dangerous if sufficient amounts of it are generated.
o Nuclear waste: Handling requires extraordinary solutions, being generally regulated by special directives. Accordingly, they will not be described in any detail in this initial assessment booklet.
The amounts of municipal waste are usually smaller in developing countries because of lower production and consumption, and extensive sorting and recycling of a series of waste components among poor population groups (cf. chapter 2). These conditions lead to a higher waste density because of the absence of paper, plastics, glass, packaging etc. In return, the share of easily decayable organic matter is greater.
Prior to the planning of waste management measures, the composition of the municipal waste should be thoroughly examined. This is of great importance with regard to choice of technology and system of waste management.
<section>1.4 Activities connected to waste management</section>
Waste management can include a series of activities. One should distinguish between traditional and/or existing practice (cf. chapter 2) and activities connected to projects that aim to improve and make waste management more efficient. Good waste management focus on a "cradle to grave" approach. This involves active surveying and monitoring of refuse all the way from generation to disposal. Such systems presuppose adequate legislation and strong organizational and institutional conditions. A brief description of the various activities which waste management generally includes is given below. The scope and practice concerning the various activities will vary between countries, cultures and project categories.
A) From generation to transport of waste
a) Storage
Storage of waste takes place at the spot where the waste is produced. Domestic refuse is normally stored continually in a container or sack until collected. The daily production is usually stored inside until it is carried outside for collection. There can be one unit per household or per several households, or local communal collection points where garbage is emptied in a bin or container. In some developing countries, old oil barrels, concrete tubes and other improvised enclosures may be used for storage, often without any systematized garbage collection taking place.
Industry and business often have their own systems with relatively large storage units. Some factories run large refuse heaps on the factory premises, without any form of regular collection. Containers used as storage units are common for a great many industries and outside large market places.
b) Collection
Collection generally takes place by loading waste from the storage containers on to a vehicle, e.g. hand cart, donkey cart, tractor with trailer, lorry or special garbage truck. The garbage is usually collected and emptied by the crew of the vehicle (the garbage collectors), but in some cases collectors make a sound signal on which household members come and empty their garbage into the vehicle.
Collection requires passable routes, and the choice of technology must be adapted to the existing quality of roads, streets and settlements. A simple cart can often be more useful than a modern garbage truck, and labour-intensive methods more efficient than modern, mechanized ones. The choice of technology should also be considered on the basis of available facilities for maintenance. In some places, tractors ordinarily used for agricultural purposes have proved useful for collection and transport of waste. Moreover, in agricultural areas where tractors are used, there is often a good infrastructure with garages and available spare parts.
Wherever there is a systematic collection, small-scale industries and businesses are usually included. Major manufacturing industries producing large amounts of waste usually run their own systems for collection and transport. Collection of sludge from waste water treatment plants also requires separate collection routines.
c) Waste transfer and transport
If the place of disposal is far away or if very small vehicles are used for collection, it can be appropriate to load the garbage on to a larger transport vehicle. Transport is thereby rationalized in that it takes fewer vehicles and crews. Waste transfer can take place by the collection car emptying the garbage into a container for collection by a larger container car, or by the garbage being loaded directly from the collection vehicle on to the transport vehicle. Light vehicles should be used for shorter distances, e.g. tractor with trailer. Transport takes place between collection, any transfer, and the place of disposal. Also in this case, choice of technology should be based on the passability and quality of roads and other infrastructure (cf. booklet 8: "Transport").
B) Waste disposal
This is a common term for how the waste is handled, whether some of it is recycled, treated in some way or another, or placed in a landfill.
a) Source sorting
The purpose of source sorting is to keep waste components separate from each other at the source, or where the waste arises, so that one or more of them can be reutilized or recycled. Usually, cardboard and paper are sorted, but food scraps, glass, metal, plastics, combustible and compostable matter can also be sorted. Such sorting requires that the waste producers are enabled to store waste components separately, and that special collection and transport systems for the various components exist. In developing countries, source sorting is still uncommon.
b) Central sorting
Central sorting takes place by sorting out valuable components from mixed waste. In some industrialized countries, mechanized sorting plants exist, but these have only been tried out to a small degree in developing countries, at least as far as mixed domestic waste is concerned. Manual sorting, however, is quite common, and large amounts of valuable materials are sorted out for reuse (cf. chapter 2). The ratio between the economic value of materials such as plastics, paper, glass, metals, textiles etc. and hourly payment for labour is generally much higher in developing countries than in industrialized countries, so that manual sorting can be cost efficient.
Attempts have also been made to establish recycling centres that pay for recyclable waste. For these to work, relatively high prices must be paid for pure and sorted materials.
c) Recycling
Source sorting and central sorting of domestic refuse are important links in the recycling of waste components. Industry and various businesses often produce large amounts of relatively homogeneous waste. Such waste can often be used as raw material for other industries and/or be utilized in other ways. For example, waste from fisheries, aquaculture, slaughter-houses etc. can be used as animal feed after e.g. heat treatment, sterilizing and/or grinding; sewage, sludge and agricultural waste can be used for fertilization of aquaculture plants and agriculture; wood waste from forestry and wood industries are useable as fuel; dust and slag from smelting works can be used for road construction; iron and other metals can be recycled from rehabilitation of buildings and plants; and chemical residuals and by-products from one factory can be used as raw material in another. In some industrialized countries, waste exchanges have been established, at which waste for sale and demands
for particular waste products can be announced.
d) Production of refuse derived fuel (RDF)
The purpose of producing RDF is to sort out a fraction containing the main part of the highly combustible components that can be found in waste, i.e. cardboard, paper, textiles and wood. These are dried, ground and briquetted. The advantage is that a product is made which is dry and storable, in addition to being compact and thus easily transportable. Such RDF can, if the separation is good, be burnt in various types of incinerators without special gas cleaning measures. In developing countries, this method has only been tried out to a slight degree so far.
e) Composting
Composting is a treatment method geared to a quick microbial decomposition of organic matter in the waste. This takes place by grinding, separation of some of the more heavily decomposable components, controlling of humidity and nutrients (usually by means of sewage sludge) and supply of air (aerobic decomposition). The entire process generally takes 1 year, and the compost product can be utilized in agriculture. In addition, carbon dioxide and water are produced, which escape to the atmosphere. Some machine equipment is commonly used for composting, but there are examples of successful comporting processes which are mainly carried out manually. Waste produced in many developing countries is often ideal for composting, and the method could preferably by practiced on a larger scale in areas where agriculture is important. Sewage sludge can also be applicated directly to fields for agricultural purpose, assumed that the content of heavy metals or other poisoning material is
not dangerously high.
f) Anaerobic decomposition
Anaerobic decomposition is basically different from aerobic decomposition (ref. e), even if the the decomposition is done by microorganisms. Air is shut off, and the process usually takes place in a reactor. Since the decomposition is anaerobic (without air), inflammable methane gas is generated in addition to carbon dioxide, which can be utilized for energy purposes. Anaerobic decomposition of waste has not been tried out to any great extent yet, while such treatment of farces on a small scale is a well-known technology in many developing countries. The generated gas is utilizable as energy for cooking in the households.
g) Incineration
Burning of rubbish takes place in special incinerators adapted to this heterogeneous fuel which often has a low calorific value as compared to conventional fuels. Proper incineration requires ample supplies of air, a certain resident time and a sufficient temperature. Some harmful waste gas components are nevertheless generated, and a great deal of dust follows the flue gas. Purification of the waste gas is therefore required. It keeps a temperature of 800°-1000 °C, and it is possible to recycle up to 80 per cent of the energy by heat-exchanging the gas with water. Hot water for distant heating, processing heat for industry or steam for electric generators can then be produced.
h) Deposit in landfill
There will always be a need for a landfill, regardless of the means of disposal chosen. None of the methods commented on above can take care of absolutely all of the waste, and all leave residuals which must be handled in an alternative way. A landfill may be anything from an uncontrolled rubbish heap (a dump) in a hollow to a well prepared area with a sealed bottom, a system for accumulation and handling of water leachate, compaction of the waste with a compactor, daily covering of the refuse, enclosures etc. Many landfills and dumps in developing countries have come into being by chance, without necessary preliminary investigations or land-use planning.
C) Management of hazardous waste
Processing procedures for hazardous waste will vary according to type of refuse, degree of toxicity etc. There should be strict requirements regarding storage, collection, transport, transfer and disposal. Hazardous waste should normally not be treated together with other types of waste, but certain types may be burnt together with other waste. In some countries, hazardous waste is deposited in a landfill together with domestic waste, in reference to a theory that the biological processes taking place in domestic waste also decompose hazardous waste. This has not been documented, and concerns, at best, only some very special matter. Organic hazardous waste can be burnt in specially constructed incinerators, whereas inorganic waste can be detoxified chemically, stabilized and/or encapsulated prior to a controlled depositing. The processing procedure will only be effective and proper if the strictest international requirements and directions are complied with. Special training
and protection of those engaged in handling of refuse are necessary. All hazardous waste must be stored in clearly marked barrels, containers etc. The marking must pay attention to any limitations concerning language and reading skills, and clearly caution anyone coming into contact with the waste (cf. chapter 3.6).
a) Storage
Hazardous waste commonly goes through different periods of storage before final disposal or destruction. The waste is often stored as it is being generated, and up to a certain amount before it is transported onwards to an intermediate storage station, or direct to the disposal plants. However short the period of storage, one should take great care to reduce the risk of leakage into the environment. For some types of hazardous waste there is still no safe method of processing or disposal. Such waste must be stored until new technology has been developed, or until decomposition over time has removed the risk of serious pollution. Storage facilities for such waste should be constructed in accordance with strict international directions and in stable localities.
Measures concerning waste processing should pay attention to the special conditions existing in the various developing countries. Transfer of technology is often an important element in development aid, and a well adapted choice of technology should be based on a consideration of various conditions, both locally and nationally. In order to achieve sustainable measures, it is often necessary to carry out investigations and research to form a basis for the planning of measures, and choice of technology and localization, accomplishable within the economic, technological, institutional, cultural and environmental framework conditions and opportunities in an individual country and in a particular locality. With regard to choice of technology, except for the handling of hazardous waste (cf. chapter 3.6), these conditions can lead to decisions which will not always meet standards that are common in technologically highly developed countries. However, experience from developing
countries has shown that relatively simple measures can bring considerable, and environmentally sound, improvements.
<section>2 The environment affected by the project</section>
The waste problem in developing countries is different, and often greater, than in highly developed countries. The flow of waste per capita is usually less, but so are the economic resources for dealing with the problem. Waste disposal often takes place by uncontrolled dumping on unsuitable spots, e.g. river banks, streets, canals, or small and large rubbish heaps. Generally speaking, the amount of waste increases in proportion to an improved purchasing power, industrial development, rationalization within trades and specializations. Such a development is taking place in several developing countries. The waste problem is great, and increasing, especially in cities. In addition, extensive migration to cities, and relatively great differences between poor and rich urban areas, create special conditions concerning the generation and handling of waste (cf. booklet 12: "Development of densely populated or urban areas"). Waste management systems controlled by municipal authorities
usually exist, but they tend to be insufficiently organized, ineffective, and seldom cover all parts of urban and densely populated areas. In addition, there is often an informal sector of private contractors who have established collection systems for rubbish.
<section>2.1 Informal collection systems</section>
In several big cities in developing countries, more than half of the population live in slum areas. Many settlers live in sheds built of old packaging and metal scraps, and many gain their livelihood by collecting waste from streets and landfills, for sorting and sale of objects and materials such as glass, metals, plastics, paper/cardboard and textiles. In some towns, a well-organized system for collection, sorting and reutilization has developed, whereby large amounts of materials are prepared for sale to e.g. manufacturing and small-scale industries. Such systems can be operated through a number of contractors and activities. On the ground level, poor people collect waste in barrels, boxes and baskets. In some towns, both women and men walk about the streets early in the morning before the municipal collection vehicles arrive in streets and at storage points; in other cases, collection from door to door is offered. The collected materials are sold to dealers who perform a
rough sorting before selling them on to other dealers, who perform a further sorting and cleaning before the materials are sold on to industry etc. The entire range of activities, some of them unhygienic, can provide work and income for hundreds of people. In addition, manufacturing and small-scale industries are offered raw materials at a low price, which can save the national economy relatively large sums of foreign exchange in connection with purchase of imported goods. There are also examples of private contractors, e.g. special ethnical and/or religious groups among the urban population, specializing in waste collection and dominating this activity over municipal or public measures. This informal, private collection tends to cover only the upper middle class and the more affluent urban areas, since this is where most of the recyclable waste materials can be found. It is not difficult to argue against such manual collection for health and environmental reasons, but it
may be hard to find good alternatives.
In extreme cases, people settle down by or on large landfills in order to live on what they find there. The health consequences are evident. Skin diseases, intestinal diseases, typhus, cholera, hepatitis etc. easily spread among people in such areas. In addition it is often children who look for waste at the landfill. Conflicts often arise between municipal waste collectors who take the most valuable materials themselves and people living on the yields of the landfill.
<section>2.2 Slum vs. affluent settlements</section>
Great differences in prosperity between various urban areas can lead to great differences concerning waste management. Affluent areas generally have paved roads and streets, which makes them more passable for the waste collecting vehicles, whereas slum areas with muddy and narrow streets can be virtually inaccessible. Moreover, households in the more affluent urban areas are able to pay for the collection of waste. Efficient and modern methods of storage and collection of waste can work well in the prosperous parts of the towns, whereas slum areas often require more labour-intensive approaches (cf. chapter 1.4). The composition of the waste also varies greatly between various urban areas. Slum waste consists almost entirely of organic matter, e.g. vegetable scraps and excrements from animals and humans. This kind of refuse is often just thrown into the street to rot or becomes feed for dogs, goats, pigs or cows. Such areas are characterized by bad smell and large amounts of
flies and rodents. In many towns, lack of collection causes blockages in the draining and sewage systems. Malaria has been spread in towns with blocked gutters, so that small water puddles are created in which malaria mosquitoes can breed. In some developing countries, the hygiene in private households can be very good, while being neglected in public squares, streets and places. Pollution also has a negative aesthetic and visual effect on the urban environment. In the countryside and in villages, waste largely consists of organic matter. In larger villages and around market places, problems that are equivalent to those in slum areas in the big cities tend to arise.
<section>2.3 Socio-cultural conditions</section>
Introduction of an efficient and modern collection system presupposes changes in household habits. This may be difficult to achieve. A poor family living in a limited space has no room for a dustbin. Besides, it is likely to be used for another purpose if it is given by someone. Among some population groups, religious taboos can also prevent storage of garbage in the house or backyard. Among other groups, e.g. Muslims, the backyard is a prohibited area to others, e.g. waste collectors. Female secularization and the holiness of the home can completely prohibit the intrusion of strangers. Religion and socio-cultural conditions may, in various connections, play an important part in the way waste is handled. Castes and taboos involve that some population groups will not touch garbage, so that work connected with it must be carried out by others. Sale of recycled material can also be problematic if the receiver knows it has been in contact with waste. Use of domestic waste as
fodder will be limited in areas where pigs are regarded as unclean and unedible, as pigs are the most suitable domestic animals for such use of food waste. In some cultures, one must not come into contact with faeces, which creates problems with regard to processing methods involving handling of sludge in addition to garbage, cf. composting.
<section>2.4 Institutional constraints</section>
Unsatisfactory institutional solutions concerning the management of municipal waste can often be found. The most common problem is decentralization of responsibility for the various waste management activities. There are examples of collection, transport and disposal being managed by three different departments, and maintenance of equipment by a fourth. If one of the responsible departments for some reason fails to follow up its responsibility, this will affect other parts in the waste management system. Such conditions also lead to that hazardous waste management is performed in ways that involve a risk to both health and environment. Lack of systems for the handling of such waste causes it to be either treated together with other refuse, stored under unsafe conditions, or buried or dumped in open waters.
<section>2.5 Climate, soil, water and air</section>
Climatic conditions have great importance for the handling of waste. A hot climate in most developing countries makes decay of organic matter start quickly. Refuse should consequently be collected at short intervals if smell and large amounts of flies and rodents are to be avoided. Wherever there are rain seasons, roads without tarmac get muddy and difficult to use for collection and transport of waste. A tropical climate often makes the soil poor in humus, and therefore exposed to erosion if put under stress by deforestation and agriculture. This may have indirect relevance for the disposal of waste due to changes in land use (cf. chapter 3.4) and the need for composting (cf. chapter 3).
There are examples of considerable pollution of soil, surface water and ground water sources in developing countries as a consequence of improper waste management, especially in connection with uncontrolled landfills. The air in big cities in developing countries is often badly polluted because of coal burning and the use of other organic fuels, old industry with inadequate processes and minimal purification of fumes. Waste management should not contribute to this, which means that e.g. incinerators should have flue gas cleaning equipment in accordance with the standards of the industrialized countries.
<section>3 Possible environmental impacts</section>
Most waste management projects aim at improving the environmental conditons. Nevertheless, a series of potential environmental impacts should be considered, as well as prospective mitigative measures that can reduce negative impacts of waste handling on health and environment.
This survey considers both direct and indirect environmental impacts. It can often be difficult to distinguish clearly between these two types of impacts. The causes of direct impacts can be linked directly to certain characteristics of the waste management. Indirect impacts can result from other types of activities associated with the project, or if the project in some way affects socio-cultural and other social conditions in the enterprise area.
This survey also presents recommendations for mitigative measures that can reduce prospective negative environmental impacts.
<section>3.1 Pollution of water and soil</section>
Especially depositing of waste in landfills and dumps increases the risk of polluting water resources and soil. Waste deposited in landfills will be exposed to rain, surface water seeping into it, and occasionally ground water coming through into the landfill. The water will flow through the waste and wash away water-soluble components as well as various intermediate products from the biological decomposition which is taking place. This leachate is generally characterized by a high content of organic matter and iron, and lower concentrations of heavy metals. If hazardous waste and contagious waste have been deposited in the landfill, this may also be washed away with the leachate.
Decomposition in a landfill happens slowly. It can take 50-100 years before everything has been converted into stable masses, during which polluted leachate water will constantly be produced. The leachate may pollute both ground water and surface water if it is not collected for purification or safe disposal. A self-purifying effect may be obtained if it is allowed to infiltrate the ground, but this presupposes huge deposits of porous soil medium and certain distances to ground water which is being utilized or may be utilized in the future. The degree to which the soil will filter and bind dangerous leachate matter depends on porosity, ion exchange capacity and its ability to retain dissolved substances. Not all substances can be retained by earth. Anions, such as chloride and nitrates, for example, pass through soil without filtration. Soil which contains clay and organic matter will dilute substances more easily than does soil which mainly consists of sand, silt and
gravel.
By discharge to surface recipients, self-purification is obtainable under favourable conditions, but it will most often lead to eutrophication, deoxygenation and extermination of natural flora and fish (cf. booklet 4: "Fisheries"). In order to avoid pollution of surface water, one should keep a sufficient horizontal distance between the landfill and the water resources.
Leachate water can also occur in connection with composting and handling of sewage sludge in open areas, polluting ground water and other water systems (cf. booklet 7: "Water supply"). Compost can pollute soil if toxic chemicals, e.g. heavy metals, have been components in the compost waste. The amount of such compost being supplied to soil must on no account exceed sustainable concentrations for the plants. Some chemicals are retained in the soil texture and accumulate up to toxic levels after repeated supplies of compost. Plants may absorb this poison and spread it on to humans and animals. The possibility for polluted leachate water should also be assessed if sludge from water treatment plants are used to cover the top of landfills, or in any other way is disposed in the landfill.
In some countries, slag from incinerators are allowed to be used in roadbeds. However, slag of this kind should only be employed if it is guaranteed that leachate water will not pollute water and soil and so do harm to vulnerable environments.
Chemicals are often used in connection with processing of hazardous waste. Chemical processing of inorganic waste involves water-based reactions, producing waste water which may contain environmentally harmful components. Such waste water must be handled and disposed of with great care. At the final disposal, it should be borne in mind that the stabilized waste is to be deposited for thousands of years without being dissolved by water which may seep in, or spread as a result of future erosion or disintegration.
<section>3.2 Pollution of air</section>
Air pollution as a result of waste management especially happens in connection with various incineration processes. Incineration of waste contributes to the creation of acid gases such as hydrogen chloride, sulphur oxides, nitric oxides as well as harmful components, so-called micro pollutants such as PAH (polyaromatic hydro carbons) and various halogenated compounds (e.g. dioxins). Such micro pollution can be reduced under favourable conditions of operations and proper management of the incineration process. Moreover, the waste gas tends to contain heavy metals, e.g. vaporous mercury and cadmium, lead and zinc bound to the dust. Cleansing is therefore necessary. The acid gases may, in high concentrations, lead to health problems, cause scorch damage to vegetation and corrode buildings and minerals. The acidification of water sources through precipitation and the ensuing damages may poison and kill small fauna and fish. Important growth nutrients may be washed out of the
soil and may lead to reduced growth. The solubility of certain posionous minerals, e.g. aluminium and cadmium, will increase and may damage roots thereby reducing intake of nutrients. Cf. chapters 3.3 and 3.5 as regards the consequences of dissemination of heavy metals through emissions form incinerators.
Incineration flue gas cleaning creates new residual products which must be disposed of safely. Both filter dust and residuals from the cleaning of acid gases and mercury are potential sources of pollution. Such residual products, therefore, ought to be put in special depots with a properly sealed bottom and a system for collection and processing of leachate water (cf. chapter 3.1). The nonflammable slag coming out at the bottom of the incinerator, also contains heavy metals, but in small concentrations and in a chemically stable form.
Anaerobic (without air) decomposition takes place in landfills. So-called landfill gas is thereby generated, the main products being methane and carbon dioxide (CO2). Globally, anaerobic decomposition of waste contributes more to the greenhouse effect through the creation of methane than carbon dioxide. Methane has a greenhouse effect potential 21 times higher than carbon dioxide on the basis of volume. Transition from small, shallow, aerobic dumps to large landfills will increase this contribution, if the gas is not collected for burning. Landfill gas may ooze forth to tanks etc., displacing oxygen, and so cause suffocation among labourers and others present at the dump. Methane, moreover, is explosive and entails a risk of explosion if it oozes into houses and buildings. The problem with explosive and/or toxic gases can be reduced if systems for control of gas generation in the landfill are provided, house and building construction in the neighbourhood limited, or gas
indicators installed in close vicinity to the landfill.
Landfills sometimes catch fire, either because of careless use of fire, special chemical reactions that lead to spontaneous ignition, or because the landfill operators put fire to waste in order to reduce its volume. Such landfill fires can be difficult to extinguish, and since the burning conditions are rarely optimal, large amounts of harmful micro pollutants are generated. A series of organic gases in low concentrations can also be generated in landfills. Many of them are toxic and injurious to health (cf. chapter 3.5).
All accumulation of organic waste will generate smell. If bad smell is to be avoided, storage, collection, transfer and transport of refuse should take place continually so that it is not stored over long periods of time. Waste processing works for composting, anaerobic decomposition and production of refuse derived fuel also tend to emit smell to the surroundings. Several of the gases being produced in landfills have a very strong smell which can cause discomfort far away from the landfill. Bad smell and a potential health risk can be reduced if the gas is pumped out of the landfill for energy utilization, and if every new supply of refuse is covered over with earth. Discomfort due to smell from compost works can be reduced if aerobic conditions are maintained during the process.
Collection, transfer and transport of waste, as well as work processes at landfills, often create dust problems. During collection, transfer and transport, the spreading of dust can be reduced if closed systems are used. One can reduce dust problems at landfills by making a buffer zone round the landfill, asphalting arrival roads, and spreading water over the waste to bind dust.
<section>3.3 Impacts on flora, fauna and vulnerable ecosystems</section>
Since waste always contains organic matter, a landfill will attract insects, birds and animals, e.g. scavengers such as vultures, hyenas and jackals feeding on the waste. Insects and some animals, e.g. rats, breed in the rubbish and can represent a health problem (cf. chapter 3.5). The food in the landfill can also contribute to the growth of unnaturally large populations of some species, which will in turn contribute to the displacement of other species, and so imbalance the local ecosystem. Moreover, species being displaced may be species constituting a part of the nutritional base for the local population.
Large landfills with associated roads can create barriers that disturb feeding and breeding patterns of fauna, and in other ways occupy vital habitats of flora and fauna. Landfills should in no way be localized near mangrove swamps or other especially vulnerable or conservation-worthy ecosystems. Noisy activities can have negative impacts on fauna, and gases from landfills and incinerators may damage surrounding vegetation. Pollution of watercourses and canals can cause damage to vegetation, fish and fauna.
During the construction phase of preparing a landfill area, or building a major waste processing plant, an increased temporary demand for water and energy may arise. If fuel from nearby woods is used, vulnerable vegetation can be damaged. A considerably increased use of water may affect the local water balance, and great care should be shown in dry areas (cf. booklet 7: "Water supply").
Dumping of hazardous waste in sea and lakes can have serious consequences for flora and fauna (cf. chapter 3.6). Toxicants may also enter into food chains and ultimately affect the health of humans.
<section>3.4 Land use conflicts, and impacts on natural, cultural and urban landscapes</section>
Land use conflicts may arise if the localization of landfills and other large waste processing plants is not well planned. Attention must be paid to existing land use, e.g. agriculture, so that the latter is not displaced to ecologically less favourable and more vulnerable areas (cf. chapter 3.7). On the other hand, a terminated landfill can provide new agricultural land. Traffic to the plant should be diverted outside habitation areas, and any risk of transport wearing down the existing road network should be taken into consideration.
Landscapes are especially affected visually by landfills. Millions of cubic meters of waste may be supplied, filling up hollows or making up new hills. Large incinerator plants with e.g. tall chimneys may also break the natural contours of a landscape. The visual character of a natural and cultural landscape may alter in a way that greatly changes the local population's appreciation of it, and making it less attractive for recreation and tourism. Historic remains, buildings and other landscape elements that are important to the local population can also be affected. In order to reduce landscape impacts, one ought to make values of landscape part of the planning process with respect to mitigative and reconstructive measures. Localization and design of storage units, e.g. containers, in towns and villages, should be based on aesthetic considerations in regard for the surrounding environment. If collection systems do not function properly, the capacity of the collection units
will soon be overtaxed. Garbage will then spread around containers and in streets and visually degrade the environment.
In the operation of landfills, particularly when waste is emptied, light waste components may blow away and pollute the surroundings. Such air-borne waste can be avoided or reduced if the landfill is constructed so that emptying takes place against a waste front, or by means of wind screens or the planting of protective vegetation.
<section>3.5 Health problems and injury</section>
People who live near a large waste processing plant may be exposed to a health risk from water, soil and air pollution (cf. chapters 3.1 and 3.2). Major landfills also pose a health risk to people who are attracted to the landfill in search of food or other reutilizable materials. Moreover, waste management may also represent a health risk to those employed at it.
Landfill gas can lead to suffocation among workers and others present at a landfill. There is also a health risk attached to several of the toxic, carcinogenic and/or irritating organic gases which are generated. Landfill fires create large amounts of micro pollutants that may be health-damaging. There are also examples of smouldering fires spreading downwards in the landfill. Only smoke can then be seen, no fire, and the surface heat may not be uncomfortably high. After a while, hollow spaces occur in the dump which collapses into a crater. Such a situation is risky for the workers, and it has happened that people looking for recyclable materials have actually been buried in such glowing waste craters.
If the waste processing is mechanical, workers do not, under normal operations, come into direct contact with the waste. Should operation problems occur, however, e.g. congestion, workers will have to handle the waste manually, as with manual sorting systems. They may then be exposed to sharp and pointed objects, infectious matter, dust which can cause respiratory diseases and hazardous waste. Accordingly, it is important that the flows of waste are directed to a proper disposal, so that the waste to be processed by means of these methods does not contain hazardous matter and infectious hospital refuse. Furthermore, workers should be provided with protective equipment, and there must be effective ventilation systems on the premises to prevent dust problems. Back injury and injury from blows may easily occur during collection and transfer of waste if the containers are unmanageable, overfilled or too heavy. Lids should be used for protecting waste against rain water, which
increases the weight considerably. Noise from waste processing plants can represent a health risk to the refuse workers, and, if the plants are large, also to people living in nearby areas.
All accumulation of organic waste generates smell, and insects, sometimes rats, will breed and live in the waste. Consequently, there should be frequent collections and possibly measures to prevent the flourishing of insects, e.g. frequent cleaning and periodical insect inspection. Containers should therefore be kept closed with a lid. For the same reason, waste should not be kept long at transfer stations. Plants for comporting, anaerobic decomposition and refuse derived fuel production may also emit smell to the surroundings, and can cause discomfort, though it does not represent a health risk.
Processing plants for hazardous waste can expose workers to direct contact with health-damaging refuse, and they may breathe in dangerous fumes and gases. Much of the waste may be inflammable, explosive, caustic etc. (cf. chapter 3.6). The work environment should therefore have safety arrangements, mechanical handling facilities and protective equipment. Workers at all types of waste processing plants should be offered regular medical checks.
<section>3.6 Other special conditions concerning management of hazardous waste</section>
The risk of fire, explosion and generation of toxic gases, fumes, fluids and dust is greater in connection with management of hazardous waste than other types of waste. Storage, collection, transport, disposal and storage of hazardous waste must therefore adhere to strict directions and safety requirements with regard to health and environment (cf. chapters 1.4, 3.1, 3.3 and 3.5). In order to reduce negative impacts on health and environment, one should develop special systems for storage, collection and transport, with e.g. specially secured containers, vehicles and clothing for the workers. Accidents have occurred during transport of hazardous waste, and dangerous toxicants have escaped to the environment. In order to reduce the scope of damages due to road accidents and other transport accidents, the choice of transport routes, both on land and at sea, ought to be considered according to criteria for settlement and vulnerable or conservation-worthy natural species and
ecosystems along the routes.
Accidents involving damage to health and environment can easily occur during storage of hazardous waste, if special precautions are not taken. Directions as regards this have been drawn up by e.g. UNEP. Waste plants should be localized at a safe distance from settlements and vulnerable or conservation-worthy natural species. In some cases, closed-down mines may function as storage space, but this presupposes that geological conditions are stable. Inflammable, explosive, caustic and toxic matter should be stored in a cool place, and in a dry place if the matter generates inflammable and explosive gases in contact with water and steam. Thick walls, good ventilation, safeguarding against sparks from electric installations and proper emergency exits are also necessary safety measures. Toxic gases should be frozen in fluid form instead of being stored under pressure. Hazardous waste should not be piled vertically, because of the fire and explosion risk involved by falls from
relatively small heights.
In order to limit the risk of environmental damage in the future, one should seek to reduce the generation of hazardous waste to a minimum. This can be done by further research and use of substitute ingredients in production processes where dangerous matter is involved, and where dangerous matter and waste are produced. In addition, one should make an effort to increase the recycling of hazardous waste. International cooperation is crucial, and technology for management of hazardous waste should be transferred to developing countries.
<section>3.7 Impacts on local communities, traditional ways of life and utilization of natural resources</section>
Some waste management measures may create changes in traditional ways of life and utilization of natural resources. Generally speaking, this can occur in two ways: a) the impacts a project may have on the local ecosystem may require that the local, traditional utilization of resources must be rearranged; b) the direct impacts of a project on the local socio-cultural and socio-economic conditions may indirectly create long-term environmental impacts through changed resource management and/or geographical transfer of problems.
Waste treatment plants such as landfills and incinerator works can cause pollution that damages local fisheries and agriculture so that the yield of these activities is reduced. The establishment of major new plants may also involve that existing industries and activities will have to move to other areas (cf. chapter 3.4). Furthermore, a large landfill can attract a lot of people and lead to uncontrolled settlement by groups who want to try to make a living out of waste sorting at the landfill. Such settlement can create conflicts between groups of newcomers and groups who already live in the area.
Many people in developing countries make a living of waste collection and sorting, and may have done so for several years (cf. chapter 2). These people's chances of income and survival must be taken into consideration in connection with changes in waste management systems that will affect them in some way or another. If one attempts to remove slum settlements near large landfills, one risks moving them to another landfill or to uncertain living conditions in the cities. Environmental degradation and less recycling can be the consequence if no other form of waste management is substituted.
Development of new waste management systems, and investments in proper waste handling within other project types (e.g. fisheries, aquaculture, agriculture, industry etc.), which pay no attention to the taboos of some communities with regard to waste handling, may have problems getting accepted among the population. Nor is it uncommon that new and more efficient waste management systems discriminate sections of urban populations. Highly mechanized and labour-intensive systems often fail to cater for slum areas because of poor access, inability to pay for waste collection and some prejudices concerning the slum populations' assumed lack of interest in hygiene.
In order to achieve a successful waste management project, one should base it on local participation, training opportunities and maintenance arrangements. As a basis for planning, it may be necessary to make preliminary studies of social and cultural issues in relation to waste management.
<section>3.8 Impacts of new activities</section>
Waste management measures can initiate new industry, especially by recycling, transport activities and development of densely populated areas. Such development can indirectly lead to environmental impacts which should be assessed. The scope of impacts will, among other things, depend on the size of the project, localization and development of infrastructure in association with the project.
An overview of potential environmental impacts of such activities can be found by consulting the booklet "Checklist for initial screening" and/or the booklet for initial environmental assessment of the activity or project category in question.
<section>4 Relevant literature</section>
Batstone, R., Smith, J.E., Wilson, D. (Eds.): "The Safe Disposal of Hazardous Waste". The World Bank Technical Paper, No. 93 (3 volumes), Washington D.C., 1989.
Cointreau, Sandra: "Environmental Management of Urban Solid Wastes in Developing Countries: a Project Guide". The World Bank Urban Development Technical Paper, No. 5, Washington, D.C., 1982.
Holmes, J.R. (Ed.): "Managing Solid Waste in Developing Countries". John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, Great Britain, 1984.
IIED: "Environmental Problems in Third World Cities". Environment and Urbanization. Vol. 1 No. 1, 1989.
UNEP: "Hazardous Waste Management". Industry and Environment. Vol. 11, No. 1,1988.
UNEP: "Environmental Guidelines for Handling Treatment and Disposal of Hazardous Wastes" No. 18, Environmental Management Guidelines UNEP, Nairobi, 1990.
UNEP: "Storage of Hazardous Materials: a Technical Guide for Safe Warehousing of Hazardous Materials". Technical Report Series No. 3, 1990.
Vaernes, G. (Ed.): Avfallshandbak. A handbook on handling/disposal of waste. Norsk Renholdsverk-Forening, 1991. (Can be ordered from 0810 Renholdsverk). (In Norwegian).
World Rank. "Environmental Assessment Sourcebook, Vol. II, Sectoral Guidelines". World Bank Technical Paper, No. 140, Wahington D.C., 1991.
<section>Part II: Documentation requirements for initial assessment of waste management</section>
<section>1 Project description</section>
As a basis for initial assessment, a description of the project must be available. In most cases it will be relevant to present several alternative technical solutions and localities. Activities in both the construction phase and the operational phase must be included. This descriptor will to a certain extent be based on the regular technical and economic description of the project, possibly after consultations with project planners and other relevant institutions in the country in question. The following questions aim to elicit information that is relevant with regard to environmental impacts. Relatively detailed information may be required as regards production processes, use of inputs, localization etc. The information resulting from the initial assessment can be included in the regular project document being presented for approval. In the case of more comprehensive projects, the information may be collected in an appendix to this document. The following specifies
essential background information for an initial assessment:
a. The need for the project. Give a brief description of how the need for the project has arisen. What are the purposes of the project? Who are the target group(s) among the population? What types of waste will be processed? Is the measure aimed at one or more links in a more comprehensive waste management system? Is it planned that the project will also lead to activities in other sectors, e.g. industry?
b. Alternatives considered. Give a brief presentation of the most important technology and localization alternatives which have been considered in connection with the project. If possible, give a brief account of any differences in infrastructure requirements etc.
c. Description of the project and potential main alternatives. Give a relatively comprehensive description of the alternative(s) that are viewed as relevant. The description should include e.g. choice of technology, mapped localization of any waste management plants and landfills, transport requirements, labour requirements and effects on existing or planned activities in the area. The information should cover both the constructional and operational phases.
d. Conditions for project implementation. Give an account of the public and private physical initiatives (infrastructure etc.) and any other external prerequisites for the implementation of the project, e.g. participation of the local population, local institutional and administrative conditions, including their environmental competence.
<section>2 Description of the environment</section>
Give a brief description of the natural and man-made environment in which the project is to be localized. The information should normally be included in the project documents, but may also have to be supplemented through collection of information and consultations with relevant institutions, professional units, local populations, or short surveys in the project area. Where appropriate, the information should also be presented in thematical maps and illustrations. Sources as well as the reliability of the presented information should be indicated briefly. The description should contain an account of:
Natural environmental conditions:
o Geology and soil conditions.
o Hydrological and hydro-geological conditions.
o Topography.
o Climate.
o Vegetation and fauna, with emphasis on: especially vulnerable ecosystems, and vulnerable and conservation-worthy animal and plant species.
o Unique and conservation-worthy natural landscapes.
Man-made environmental conditions:
o Socio-economic and socio-cultural conditions.
o Demographic conditions,
- size of affected populations groups, and
- any ethnic belonging and variations.
o Health situation,
- with special emphasis on environmentally related diseases.
o Settlement pattern and means of production,
- specified for ethnic group, class or caste, and
- division of labour organized on the basis of gender and age within the population
groups in question.
o Existing land use and utilization of natural resources,
- also including more extensive utilization of nature areas.
o Unique and conservation-worthy cultural landscapes or objects and buildings of historic, archeological, architectonic, cultural, aesthetic or scientific value.
o Existing environmental problems and environmental stress,
- e.g. pollution of air, water and soil.
o Other existing or planned activities that may hold future consequences for waste management.
<section>3 Checklist</section>
The aspects included in the following checklist must be commented on. In case the problem is irrelevant, this must be substantiated. If the listed effects can be expected, their extent or degree should be estimated. Compare with Part I of this booklet if some questions should be unclear. One should be aware that questionaire checklists like these are not always 100% adequate with regard to all the environmental questions which can be relevant to ask. It may therefore be useful to compare the use of the checklist to the use of other analytic tools for project assessment, like e.g. logical framwork analysis, gender analysis, assessment of socio-cultural and socio-economic conditions, as well as assessment of choice of technology and existing institutional conditions. This approach may also be necessary to secure an integrated approach to the assessment of the project.
It is necessary to specify which groups of the population will be affected by the different types of direct and indirect environmental impacts. A rough division can be as follows:
o The project's target group. This is the group of the population which one expects will benefit directly from the project. This group may, however, also be subject to certain negative environmental impacts.
o The remaining local population. This group will not benefit from the project in any primary way, but the project may still have both positive and negative consequences for them.
o Resettled population groups. These are groups of the population who either settle in the area or move away from it as a result of the project or the development initiated by it.
Within these three groups it may also be relevant to specify if the environmental impacts from the project can be related to specific parts of the population, such as low-income groups, indigenous groups etc., combined with a further specification of gender and age within these groups.
<section>Will the project</section>
1. Lead to pollution of water, soil and air?
o Will surface water, ground water, streams or other water sources flow into the waste when establishing a landfill and produce much leachate water?
o Will leachate water from a planned landfill or compost plant pollute soil, ground water or other water sources?
o Does the waste to be deposited in a landfill contain infectious or hazardous matter which can lead to spreading of especially dangerous pollutants?
o Will waste water from plants for chemical processing of inorganic hazardous waste pollute soil and/or water sources?
o Will slags or dust from incinerators be disposed of in such a way that soil and water sources are polluted le.". used in road beds)?
o Will incinerator plants for waste and hazardous waste lead to discharges of harmful components into air?
o Is it likely that so much landfill gas (methane) is generated in the landfill that it will contribute considerably to the global discharge of greenhouse gases?
o Will smell, dust and smoke from waste plants cause discomfort in nearby housing areas?
2 Lead to health damage and spreading of diseases?
o Will pollution of water, soil and air from a waste plant take on such dimensions that it represents a health risk to people in the area?
o Have safety measures been introduced against landfill gas (methane) and other dangerous gases that are easily generated at a landfill, causing suffocation or in other ways injuring workers and any others present at the landfill?
o Is the planned landfill likely to contain refuse entailing a great risk of explosions and fires in the landfill?
o Have the workers been provided with protective equipment to be used at collection, transport and processing of waste?
o Have arrangements been made for regular medical checks of waste management workers?
o Are special diseases spread via insects in the area? Will special measures be introduced to ensure that the insect plague does not increase as a result of a waste management project, causing diseases to spread
o Is hazardous waste treatment plants sufficiently secured against gas leakage, explosions, fires etc.?
3. Affect areas with valuable or conservation-worthy flora and fauna, and vulnerable ecosystems?
o Will a landfill attract insects, birds and wild animals to such a degree that it represents a plague, and to such an extent that some valuable and useful animal species in the area are displaced?
o Will a landfill with associated roads create barriers against the feeding and breeding patterns of fauna, or in other ways occupy important habitats for fauna and flora?
o Will a landfill be localized near mangrove areas or other specially vulnerable ecosystems?
o Will noise and pollution of air, water and soil from waste management plants harm fauna and flora, or local fish resources?
4. Involve management of hazardous waste?
o Does the management of hazardous waste follow the strictest international rules and directions?
o Will transport of hazardous waste on land and at sea pass through housing areas, agricultural areas or areas containing vulnerable or conservation-worthy ecosystems, plant and animal species?
o Is there a risk that hazardous waste will be handled and processed together with ordinary municipal refuse?
o Will long-term storage of hazardous waste take place in stable and secured localities?
o Is there a risk that nuclear waste, or waste that are contaminated by radionuclides, will be a part of the hazardous waste material?
5. Affect valuable natural, cultural and urban landscapes?
o Will a landfill or other major waste disposal plant alter the visual character of a landscape so as to drastically change the local population's appreciation of it and make it less attractive for recreation and tourism?
o Will historic remains, buildings, burial sites or other landscape elements that are important to the local population be affected by the project?
o Is sufficient aesthetic attention paid to the designing and localizing of storage units, e.g. containers in towns and densely populated areas?
o Is there a risk that light waste components may blow away during operation of a landfill or during emptying of refuse, so that air-borne waste litters the surroundings?
6. Create land use conflicts or change the local population's way of living and utilization of natural resources?
o Will the project affect areas being used for transport and traffic?
o Will the project affect areas being used for agriculture, forestry or animal husbandry?
o Will the project affect population groups who have long traditions, and make a living of, waste collection and sorting?
o Will the project alter the traditional division of labour between men and women?
e Will a landfill cause a great influx of settlers, slum settlements and potential conflicts between newcomers and population groups who already live in the area?
o Will new forms of waste management involve that less refuse is recycled than previously, or that the local population's share of recycling jobs is reduced?
o Will transport of refuse to a new landfill or waste plant create conflicts with other transport, or overtax existing roads?
o Will new waste management systems be able to service the entire population, or is there a risk of discrimination against poorer groups?
7. Affect the utilization of other natural resources and lands than those directly affected by the project?
o Will the project displace other activities into new areas so that the land and natural resources of the latter are over-exploited?
o Will the transfer of other activities into other sites, or new areas, create conflicts with other population groups?
o Will the project construction and any new activities require access to water and fuel in areas where these resources are [united?
o Will the project activities indirectly cause uncontrolled exploitation of other natural resources which have not been utilized before, or which have only been utilized to a slight degree?
. Will the project lead to the establishment of other activities, e.g. industry, transport etc.? To what extent will these new activities affect the environment? Cf. "Check-lists for initial screening" or the booklets for intitial assessment of these categories.
<section>Tables on hazardous waste according to the Basel convention (1989) and the Bamako convention (1991)</section>
Table 1:
Generic sources for hazardous waste:
(Y0 All wastes containing or contaminated by radionuclides)
Y1 Clinical wastes from medical care in hospitals, medical centres and clinics.
Y2 Wastes from the production and preparation of pharmacoutical products.
Y3 Waste pharmaceuticals, drugs and medicines.
Y4 Wastes from the production, formulation and use of biocides and phytopharmaceuticals.
Y5 Wastes from the manufacture, formulation and use of wood preserving chemicals.
Y6 Wastes from the manufacture, formulation and use of organic solvents.
Y7 Wastes from heat treatment and tempering operations containing cyanides.
Y8 Waste mineral oils unfit for their originally intended use.
Y9 Waste oils/water, hydrocarbons/water mixtures, emulsions.
Y10 Waste substances and articles containing or contaminated with polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and/or polychlorinated terphenyls (PCTs) and/or polybrominated biphenyls (PBBs).
Y11 Waste carry residues arising from refining, distillation and any pyrolitic treatment.
Y12 Wastes from production, formulation and use of inks, dyes, pigments, paints, lacquers, varnish.
Y13 Wastes from production, formulation and use of resins, latex, plasticizers, glues/adhesives.
Y14 Waste chemical substances arising from research and development or teaching activities which are note identified and/or are new and whose effects on man and/or the environment are not known.
Y15 Wastes of an explosive nature.
Y16 Wastes from production, formulation and use of photographic chemicals and processing materials.
Y17 Wastes resulting from surface treatment of metals and plastics.
Y18 Residues arising from industrial waste disposal operations.
Table 2:
Constituents of wastes which render them hazardous:
Y19 Metal carbonyls.
Y20 Beryllium; beryllium compounds.
Y21 Hexavalent chromium compounds.
Y22 Copper compounds.
Y23 Zinc compounds.
Y24 Arsenic; arsenic compounds.
Y25 Selenium; selenium compounds.
Y26 Cadmium; cadmium compounds.
Y27 Antimony; antimony compounds.
Y28 Tellerium; tellerium compounds.
Y29 Mercury; mercury compounds.
Y30 Thallium; thallium compounds.
Y31 Lead; lead compounds.
Y32 Inorganic fluorine compounds excluding calcium fluoride.
Y33 Inorganic cyanides.
Y34 Acidic solutions or acids in solid form.
Y35 Basic solutions or bases in solid form.
Y36 Asbestos (dust and fibres).
Y37 Organic phosphorous compounds.
Y38 Organic cyanides.
Y39 Phenols; phenol compounds including chlorophenols.
Y40 Ethers.
Y41 Halogenated organic solvents.
Y42 Organic solvents excluding halogenated sol vents.
Y43 Any congenor of polychlorinated dibenzofuran.
Y44 Organohalogen compounds other than substances referred to in this table (e.g. Y39,
Y41, Y42,Y43, Y44)
Table 3:
List of hazardous characteristics:
H1 Explosive:
An explosive substance or waste is a solid or liquid substance or waste (or mixture of substances and wastes) which is in itself capable by chemical reaction of producting gas at such a temperature and pressure and at such a speed as to cause damage to the surroundings.
H3 Flammable liquids:
The word "flammable" has the same meaning as "inflammable". Flammable liquids are liquids, or mixtures of liquids, or liquids containing solids in solution or suspension (for example paints, varnishes, lacquers, etc., but not including substances or wastes otherwise classified on account of their dangerous characteristics) which give off a flammable vapour at temperatures of not more than 60,5 °C, closed-cup test, or not more than 65,6 °C open-cup test.
H4.1 Flammable solids:
Solids, or waste solids, other than those classed as explosives, which under conditions encountered in transport are readily combustible, or may cause or contribute to fire through friction.
H4.2 Substances or wastes liable to spontaneous combustion:
Substances or wastes which are liable to spontaneous heating under normal conditions encountered in transport, or to heating up on contact with airm and being then liable to catch fire.
H4.3 Substances of wastes which, in contact with water emit flammable gases:
Substances or wastes which, by interaction with water, are liable to become spontaneous by flammable or to give off flammable gases in dangerous quantities.
H5.1 Oxidizing:
Substances or wastes which, while in theme-selves not necessary combustible, may, generally by yielding oxygen cause, or contribute to, the combustion of other materials.
H5.2 Organic peroxides:
Organic substances or wastes which contain the bivalent-O-O-structure are thermally unstable substances which may undergo exothermic self-accelerating decomposition.
H6.1 Poisonous (Acute):
Substances or wastes liable either to cause death or serious injury or to harm human health if swallowed or inhaled or by skin contact.
H6.2 Infection substances:
Substances or wastes containing viable micro organisms or their toxins which are known or suspected to cause disease in animals or humans.
H8 Corrosives:
Substances or wastes which, by chemical action, will cause severe damage when in contact with living tissue, or, in the case of leakage, will materially damage, or even destroy, other goods or the means of transport; they may also cause other hazards.
H10 Liberation of toxic gases in contact with air or water:
Substances or wastes which, by interaction with air or water are liable to give off toxic gases in dangerous quantities.
H11 Toxic (Delayed or chronic):
Substances or wastes which, if they are inhaled or ingested or if they penetrate the skin, may involve delayed or chronic effects, including carginogenicity.
H12 Ecotoxic:
Substances or wastes which if released present immediate or delayed adverse impacts to the environment by means of bioaccumulation and/or toxic effects upon biotic systems.
H13 Capable, by any means, after disposal, of yielding another material, e.g., leachate, which possesses any of the characteristics listed above.
Comment:
Potential hazards as regards certain waste products have still not been fully ascertained. Test procedures or methods for a quantification of the hazard degree do not exist. Further research is required to develop methods to define the potential hazards these waste products hold for humans and/or the environment. Standard test procedures have been developed as regards homogenous products. Many countries have developed individual test procedures that may be utilized with regard to products listed in Table 1, in order to ascertain whether these products contain some of the characeristics listed in Table 3.
