<title>ADCP/REP/82/17 - Aid for Aquaculture Development in the Third World</title>
<section>1</section>
ABSTRACT
The report summarizes the discussions and conclusions of the FAO/NORAD Round Table on Aid for Aquaculture Development in the Third World held in cooperation with the Svanøy Foundation in Svanøy, Norway, 2-6 August 1982. The Round Table reviewed the present state of aquaculture and recognized that production has risen by about 42 percent in the last five years, when landings from conventional fisheries have shown only much smaller increases. There is now an increasing reliance on aquaculture as a means of achieving fishery production targets and for the generation of part-or full-time employment in rural areas. However, to achieve the potentials of aquaculture, third world countries require massive aid in the form of investment, research support, manpower development, technology transfer input production and distribution and organization of extension services. Though Scandinavian countries have provided extensive aid to developing countries for development of conventional
fisheries, their assistance in the field of aquaculture has been limited due largely to limitations of expertise in tropical aquaculture. The Round Table concluded that aquaculture deserves high priority in Nordic countries' aid programmes as development of this sector is likely to benefit the poorer sections of populations and contribute substantially to rural development. Recommendations were made on ways and means of improving competence in tropical aquaculture in Scandinavian countries and the nature of assistance to be offered to third world countries.
<section>2</section>
1. Introduction
The FAO/NORAD Round Table Discussion on Aid for Aquaculture Development in the Third World was held in Svanøy, Norway under the auspices of the Svanøy Foundation. The objectives of the Round Table were to:
(a) review the policies, strategies and potentials in relation to aquaculture development in Third World countries;
(b) identify nature and magnitude of aid needed by them;
(c) review experience in aid utilization and
(d) formulate the elements of a recommended policy for the provision of appropriate aid for aquaculture development, including ways and means of effective implementation of investment and technical assistance projects.
The list of participants and the agenda of the meeting are given in Annexures I and II respectively. Mr. Nils Vogt, Assistant Director-General of NORAD, welcomed the participants and commended the initiative taken by the Svanøy Foundation to organize the Round Table and expressed the hope that the discussions will lead to concrete actions for the benefit of developing countries.
Dr. T.V.R. Pillay, FAO, reminded the meeting that the first Round Table organized by the Foundation was on Planning of Aquaculture Development and that the Introductory Guide to Aquaculture Planning prepared on the basis of discussions at the meeting has been widely used as the basic document for a series of Planning Workshops in Asia, Africa and Latin America and recently as a text book on the subject for instruction in aquaculture planning in training institutions. He expressed the hope that the discussions in the present Round Table will make similar significant contributions to aquaculture in Third World countries.
A summary of the discussions, conclusions and recommendations of the Round Table are given in the following sections.
<section>3</section>
2. State of Aquaculture in the Third World Countries
The Round Table discussed the current state of aquaculture based on a review of the production statistics, technological advances, research approaches, training, extension and future outlook (Annexure III).
For a number of reasons, which include resource limitations, fishing costs and the new laws of the sea, increasing attention is now being given by almost all developing countries to aquaculture development. In fact, in some countries aquaculture is now considered to be the only means of increasing fish production as even the maintenance of present levels of production from capture fisheries may not be possible, if adequate management measures are not taken. There is hardly any country that does not have some type of aquaculture activity at present. Many of them are allocating increasing proportions of their budgets to aquaculture development. The world-wide increase of around 42 percent in aquaculture production in the last five-year period seems to indicate that the projected five-fold increase in aquaculture production by the end of this century is not unattainable. However, experience so far has shown that aquaculture programmes have generally a relatively long gestation
period. In most cases appropriate technologies and required skills have to be developed. The initial capital investments can be heavy and the time lag between initiation of a project and the attainment of production stage can be technologies is only beginning to be implemented. There is a rapidly increasing demand for aquaculturists with hands-on experience, but they continue to be in short supply. Despite these problems aquaculture has attained the status of a growth industry in all regions of the Third World. It has also achieved recognition as of special significance in integrated rural development, which is of high priority in many developing countries.
A close examination of current aquaculture production shows that more than 84 percent of it comes from Asia where aquaculture has a long tradition. While there is a potential for further expansion of area under culture in this region too, adoption of more intensive farming methods holds out greater possibilities and potentials in Asia. Africa and Latin America have very high potentials for the establishment of aquaculture as large or small-scale industries, when the basic requirements are met. Experience in some of the Central American countries and in parts of Africa clearly shows the social and economic benefits that can be derived through appropriate development programmes.
National policies relating to aquaculture have recently been influenced by the state of the fishery industries as a whole. On a global basis, there has been gradual reduction in the rate of increase in capture fishery production, affecting particularly the food fish production. Many countries have to resort to increased imports and due to shortages and other factors, prices have risen to such an extent that fish, and particularly well known species, are beyond the reach of low income groups. Governments are therefore forced to look for alternate means of fish production such as aquaculture.
The state of small-scale fisheries and particularly the income and standard of living of the fishermen have been matters of major concern on a national level in many countries. It is well known that the adoption of aquaculture as a part-time occupation has contributed very substantially to the income of farmers. Integration of aquaculture with agriculture and/or animal husbandry is becoming a major rural development activity in certain countries. Based on this example, it is believed that aquaculture can be an appropriate part-time occupation for small-scale fishermen families, with appreciable potential for involvement of women and the overall increase of family incomes and standards of living.
Interest in investment in aquaculture is now increasing. It is estimated that at least a 10 to 15 times increase in investment is needed in the next decade to achieve the production targets. Public sector investments in developing countries have largely been directed to food production for domestic consumption and rural development. Private investments of any great magnitude, on the other hand, have largely concentrated on high-valued products for export. Economic viability is the main consideration in private investment and demonstration of this is therefore of vital importance in attracting adequate investment into this sector. There are many factors that affect internal rates of return in aquaculture and their comparability with those of other agro-industries. The need for pilot operations to determine economic viability, where it has not been tested, is therefore self-evident. In some countries pilot projects have been initiated in the public sector with external
assistance. Greater involvement of the private sector in such activities can greatly facilitate future investments.
The strategy that has been generally accepted for aquaculture development in Third World countries is the one that was recommended by the FAO Technical Conference on Aquaculture in Kyoto, Japan, in 1976. The major elements of this strategy consist of:
(i) the adoption of a small number of selected farming systems that have the greatest potential for increased production in the near future;
(ii) wider application of known technologies for achieving a sizeable increase in production and the promotion of greater investment for this purpose;
(iii) organization of appropriate assistance for the formulation of sound investment projects based on feasibility studies or pilot operations; and
(iv) provision of support services in the form of applied research to facilitate technology transfer and improvement of techniques, training of core personnel and exchange of computerized information.
The UNDP/FAO Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme has taken a major role in implementing this strategy. Besides providing the assistance of multidisciplinary teams for feasibility studies and project formulation, the Programme has established a network of regional lead centres in Asia, and one regional centre each in Africa and Latin America, for research, training and information exchange. These centres will eventually be linked to strengthened national centres for the testing of technologies developed at the regional centres and for the training of technicians and extension workers, forming a global net-work. A computerized Aquaculture Information System (AQUIS) has been developed and is now being implemented in Asia. Proposals for the establishment of a regional centre for the Caribbean region are now under consideration. Arrangements have also been completed for the Fish Culture Research Institute in Szarvas, Hungary, to function as an inter-regional centre
for research on common problems of interest to all the regions.
The regional centres have been established with initial funding from the host governments and the United Nations Development Programme, with supplementary assistance from other multilateral and bilateral agencies. Funding assistance is now being sought to strengthen these centres and to strengthen the national centres to be linked to them, in order to ensure the continued operation of the networks on a permanent basis for the benefit of aquaculture development in the Third World countries.
<section>4</section>
3. Aid Requirements for Aquaculture Development
The projected increases in aquaculture production in Third World countries are contingent on the availability of substantial increases in investment, research support, manpower development, technology transfer, input production and distribution, and extension services. Obviously, most countries would need external assistance for the provision of these requirements in a reasonably short period of time, as outlined in Annexure IV.
As mentioned earlier, the investment requirements of aquaculture are relatively large. Even though in the immediate future, many of the countries may be in a position to use labour-intensive and low level technologies, experience shows that the need for more intensive methods of farming and mechanized operations often develop much sooner than expected. If this is taken into account, the possibility and need for cooperation between developing and industrially advanced countries in the field of aquaculture will become evident. The favourable climatic conditions in most developing countries stand out as a major advantage for cooperative ventures between them, either in the public or private sector, as appropriate. Most of the target countries rely on the private sector for commercial aquaculture. Therefore, joint ventures on mutually advantageous terms for large-scale aquaculture or even the production of aquaculture inputs, may serve to speed up development. Government
assistance in both donor and recipient countries would be needed to facilitate such cooperative efforts. It would appear that non-governmental organizations and private sector institutions will have significant roles in such arrangements.
The need for implementation of pilot projects to test the technical and economic viability of farming systems and to generate data required for investment decisions, has already been referred to. Technical and financial assistance for such projects as well as for large-scale aquaculture undertaking in the private or public sector deserve high priority. Investment guidance centres could play an important role in facilitating the provision of such assistance.
A close examination of development experience in most countries will show the crucial role of production and distribution of inputs in aquaculture. Of the inputs, probably the most important are "seed" and "feed". Although the methods often used in small-scale production of both these types of inputs may be different from those widely adopted in developed countries, when mass production is needed for farming on a large scale (either in small or large units) the need for adoption of more sophisticated techniques becomes apparent. Many countries have started the establishment of modern hatchery and nursery facilities for seed production. Efforts are also being made to identify suitable locally available feed ingredients and to formulate and prepare nutritionally adequate feeds. The advantages of rearing strains and hybrids of species with favourable culture characteristics are now well recognized and research efforts are being directed towards this important field. These
activities can greatly benefit from external aid. Although experience in donor countries may not strictly relate to the species cultured in developing countries, the expertise in relevant disciplines available in donor countries, when combined with culture experience in recipient countries, could produce results of great value and mutual interest.
Although pond farming continues to be the main type of aquaculture in developing countries there is now an increasing trend towards introduction and expansion of cage and pen culture. While the development of suitable feeds is a pre-requisite for most types of cage farming, the relatively lower investment costs and possibilities of intensive production make such culture an attractive proposition in most countries. Despite the fact that cage farming is traditional in some parts of Asia, there have been many modern developments in this field in industrially advanced countries such as Norway and Japan. Transfer of cage culture technologies and technical assistance in this field can contribute substantially to aquaculture development in Third World countries.
Another major field in which aid is urgently needed is aquaculture engineering. If engineering expertise available in developed countries could be combined with aquaculture experience in developing countries, the design, construction and management requirements of aquaculture installations can be adequately met.
Diagnosis and control of diseases is well developed in culture of cold-water species and certain warm-water species in developed countries. Although diseases have not yet been a major problem in aquaculture in the less intensive systems of farming adopted in Third World countries, it is bound to become serious as intensive culture practices become prevalent. Aid from developed countries in this field can contribute substantially to sound development of aquaculture.
Multidisciplinary training of personnel with adequate emphasis on practical work is widely recognized as of the utmost importance and urgency in development of aquaculture at present. It is also recognized that such training should be organized in the countries or regions where the personnel are required to work, based largely on species and culture systems that they are expected to work with. The development of regional and national institutions for this purpose should receive high priority as these are essential for developing national capabilities in science and technology. Support for the continued operation of regional training programmes already initiated in Regional Aquaculture Centres in Asia, Africa and Latin America and the proposed centre in the Caribbean region should be ensured. On a national basis facilities for the training of technicians and extension personnel should be established. In fact, this should form part of most types of aid offered in the field of
aquaculture.
The importance of applied research for the improvement of existing aquaculture technologies and the development of new ones has been well recognized. However, the multidisciplinary systems-oriented research needed for this purpose requires considerable investments for the development of facilities and expertise. Aid-giving agencies can play a major role in the development of research institutions. The regional aquaculture centres and the national institutions linked to them form the most logical mechanisms for this purpose and with necessary strengthening and assured support for continued operation, they can very effectively fill the research needs in this field. It will be of mutual benefit for these institutions to establish close linkages with research institutions in developed countries, for exchange of experience and expertise. The need for further development of the Aquaculture Information System (AQUIS) and the participation of developed country institutions in this
System, cannot be over-emphasized.
In view of the already available experience in aquaculture in some of the developing countries, the relevance of Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries (TCDC) in this sector has often been emphasized. However, it has been found that effective TCDC generally needs appropriate funding support and in its absence fails to produce the desired results. On the other hand, external aid combined with TCDC can be an efficient instrument for the transfer of appropriate technologies and mobilization of resources in rural areas for speedy development.
<section>5</section>
4. Aid of Scandinavian Countries for Aquaculture Development
The representatives of aid agencies from Scandinavian countries participating in the Round Table provided the following information on aid for aquaculture by their agencies:
DENMARK
Denmark has a rather extensive cultivation of rainbow trout. Some expertise is also to be found in other fields related to aquaculture, e.g. fish nutrition and diseases. In aquaculture, DANIDA is assisting developing countries, but has so far only given substantial assistance to one country, viz. Bangladesh. This aid has been concentrated on two projects, which are:
(a) Aquaculture Experiment Station, Mymensingh
(b) Fish culture component in the Noakhali Integrated Rural Development Project.
NORWAY
While capture fisheries all through Norwegian history have been among the main economic activities in the country, aquaculture is a fairly new phenomenon. In the 19th century hatching of salmon was started in order to stock the rivers, but the present production of fish (trout and salmon) for consumption dates from the fifties. The start was made in fresh water, but from the sixties it has mainly been carried on in marine waters. There is a production of some 7 500 tons from some 300 cage farms. There is also a limited production of molluscs.
Research and training has traditionally been concentrated on subjects of interest for capture fisheries, but in the later years more emphasis has been put on aquaculture.
Considering Norway's lack of experience in tropical aquaculture it is only natural that no requests have been addressed to Norway from the developing countries for assistance in aquaculture, while Norwegian (capture) fisheries projects are to be found in most of the countries receiving aid from Norway through its developing agency NORAD. It would also seem that no Norwegian business enterprise has taken any interest in going into joint ventures or other forms of profit-oriented aquacultural activities in the developing countries.
This being the situation one has up to now not felt the need in NORAD to debate seriously whether assistance for aquaculture should be part of its programmes for the developing countries and no specific projects have been studied, although the subject has been touched upon in connection with some integrated rural development projects.
It would appear that the time is now ripe to take this matter up for a thorough study with a view to formulating a policy, and if a positive attitude is decided upon, to give an indication to recipient countries that requests for assistance in this sector would be favourably considered. Before any decision is taken it would seem appropriate to enter into thorough-going consultations with the other Nordic countries.
SWEDEN
Sweden has good experience in cultivation of salmonids (mainly Atlantic salmon and rainbow trout), eels, fresh water crayfish and marine mussels (Mytilus edulis). There is also some experience in cultivation of other species, e.g., for stocking of lakes and for research purposes. Some people have experience of aquaculture in tropical countries. There is some expertise in fish diseases and fish genetics. Technically Sweden can contribute to constructing and equipping aquaculture sites, hatcheries, etc. and some private firms specialize in producing fish feed.
Swedish assistance to developing countries in the field of fisheries has mainly developed during the seventies. In 1974 the National Fishery Board became institutional consultant to SIDA and a special secretariat for assistance was set up.
The assistance has been both bilateral and multilateral and to some extent concentrated on the development of small-scale fisheries in a limited number of countries. The first real support for aquaculture was given at the turn of the seventies to the Bay of Bengal Programme, administered by FAO.
In connection with discussions on the state of world fisheries and the importance of aquaculture for the future food production, SIDA is now contemplating support to aquaculture programmes/projects on a wider scale.
There is already a close cooperation regarding assistance to developing countries between the Nordic countries. A Committee for assistance questions related to fisheries, reporting to the Nordic Council of Ministers, has recently been set up and it is suggested that a discussion on Nordic cooperation in the field of aquaculture be taken up both by this Committee and between the professional assistance agencies. Contact could also be made with relevant credit institutes and private enterprises interested in development questions.
In all the three countries there are institutions charged with promoting cooperation by providing cheap loans, etc., between companies in the home countries and counterparts in the developing countries.
Among programmes/projects which could be supported by the Nordic countries are:
(a) Training and information of various kinds and for various purposes
(b) Development of integrated small-scale aquaculture in rural communities
(c) Construction of hatcheries, especially for rural areas
(d) Finding of new, cheap feed sources for cultivated fish and shell-fish (incl. using of sewage and other waste material)
(e) Ecological, social and economical planning of aquaculture projects
(f) Promotion of suitable marketing techniques
(g) Research on genetical and disease problems.
<section>6</section>
5. Conclusions and Recommendations
The discussions at the Round Table clearly showed that there has been an increasing awareness of the importance of aquaculture both in the developing and developed world since the first Round Table was held under the auspices of the Svanøy Foundation in 1974.
Based on a review of the state and potentials of this sector to contribute significantly to solving the food problem in Third World countries, it was concluded that there is an urgent need for expanded aid for these countries to achieve their targets of production. As development of this sector is likely to benefit the poorer sections of populations and contribute substantially to rural development, it deserves high priority consideration.
Aquaculture development requires concerted efforts of the public and private sectors. It would therefore be very appropriate for governmental as well as private organizations in donor countries to be involved in aid programmes. The Round Table recommends that Nordic countries adopt aid programmes in aquaculture, including participation in activities such as research, training and information, as well as in investments and pilot projects. The developing countries are urged to take appropriate actions for obtaining the necessary aid.
The Round Table is of the view that lack of experience in tropical aquaculture should not be a major constraint to the involvement of Nordic countries in aid for aquaculture development in the Third World. Aquaculture research and development requires multidisciplinary expertise. Nordic countries have expertise in a number of disciplines involved and experience in cold-water aquaculture. If the available specialists in different fields are given opportunities to work in bilateral and multilateral programmes/projects as members of technical assistance or research teams with personnel with experience of tropical aquaculture, not only aquaculture programmes/projects can be successfully implemented, but capabilities in both the donor, as well as recipient countries can be enhanced. It is also recommended that an active programme for training of warm-water aquaculturists be initiated in Nordic countries, e.g. through the wider utilization of FAO's associate expert scheme and the
opportunities offered by the ADCP regional aquaculture centres for on the job training of associate scientists in aquaculture research.
Lack of experienced specialists in donor countries can be met by utilizing the services of nationals from other countries.
The network of ADCP regional aquaculture centres and the national centres linked to them is an important mechanism for provision of essential support services to aquaculture development and should be maintained on a continued basis. The Round Table recommends that the Nordic aid agencies favourably consider participation in their financing and operation. The Aquaculture Information System initiated in the regional aquaculture centres would be of considerable benefit to the aquaculture industry and to science, both in developing and developed countries. It is therefore recommended that support to this system and participation in it should be considered by aid agencies and relevant institutions in Nordic countries.
<section>7</section>
6. Acknowledgements
The Round Table expresses its sincere appreciation to NORAD, FAO and the Svanøy Foundation, for providing such a unique opportunity for representatives of donor agencies and recipient countries to meet and discuss in an informal atmosphere the problems of a new and emerging industry like aquaculture. It is hoped that by the time the next Round Table in aquaculture is held in Svanøy, an effective cooperative programme in aquaculture would have developed with the active participation of Nordic countries.
<section>8</section>
ANNEXURE I
List of Participants
Dr. M. Youssouf ALI, Additional Secretary - in - charge, Fisheries and Livestock Division, Ministry of Agriculture, Bangladesh Secretariat, Dacca-2
Mr. G.K. LIBABA, Director of Fisheries, Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism, Tancort House, P.O. Box 2462, Dar es-Salaam, Tanzania
Dr. Vijai D. SINGH, Deputy Commissioner, Fisheries Division, Ministry of Agriculture, Krishi Bhavan, New Delhi, India
Mr. B. HANSEN, Consultant, DANIDA, Asiatisk Plads 2, Copenhagen, Denmark
Dr. Bernt I. DYBERN, Director, Institute of Marine Research, Box 5, 450 00 Lysekil, Sweden
Mr. N. VOGT, Assistant Director General, NORAD, Victoria Terasse 7, Oslo 2, Norway
Dr. T.V.R. PILLAY, Programme Leader, Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme, Fisheries Department, FAO, Rome
<section>9</section>
ANNEXURE II
AGENDA
1. Opening of the Round Table
2. Review of the state of aquaculture development in the Third World, with special reference to development policies, strategies and potentials
3. Aid requirement of Third World countries and experience in obtaining and utilizing aid
4. General review of current aid projects in aquaculture
5. Nordic aid and aquaculture development
6. Proposals for the provision of appropriate aid and follow-up action
7. Preparation and adoption of a report on the discussions
<section>a</section>
ANNEXURE III
STATE OF AQUACULTURE, 1981^1
1 Based on a paper presented by Dr. T.V.R. Pillay, Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme, FAO, at the World Conference on Aquaculture, held in Venice, Italy, 21-25 September 1981
1. Introduction
In order to facilitate discussions on trends in aquaculture development and aid requirements in the future, this paper attempts a general overview of the developments in the sector since the FAO Technical Conference on Aquaculture in Kyoto in 1976 and outlines the present state of the industry. Aquaculture appears to have reached a real take-off stage and there is now a greater need for wider recognition of the real needs of the industry, the appropriatness of available technologies, appreciation of investment requirements and realistic time frames for developmental activities. A proper understanding of these can contribute very substantially to a sound development of aquaculture.
2. State of the industry
The fact that there has been much writing, many meetings, a proliferation of aid projects, and some poorly planned investments, should not lead us to the conclusion that a mountain of effort has gone into this sector producing nothing more than a mouse. Despite its traditional nature and socio-cultural importance, aquaculture has, till recently, been only a marginal activity in a relatively large number of countries. This continues to be the case even now, although the number of countries involved is now somewhat larger. It may not be justifiable to interpret the presence of a so-called fish culture station or an experimental or demonstration farm in a country or locality as evidence of major efforts or investment. There is no doubt that an increasing number of countries, including some of the leading fishing nations, are now devoting greater attention to aquaculture. In fact, there is now hardly any country that does not have some form of aquaculture activity.
2.1 Production
One of the ways of judging the state of the industry may be by an assessment of the output in terms of production. Although some efforts are now being made to establish a system for the collection of aquaculture statistics, we have, unfortunately, still to depend on rough estimates. It may be recalled that FAO made an estimate of world production through aquaculture in 1975 for the Kyoto Conference. An effort was made to update those estimates for this Conference, and to get more detailed data. But for a few exceptions, most countries did not have enough details and we had to be content with data only for broad categories. However, the available figures (Table I) show that the total world production through aquaculture in 1980 was over 8.7 million tons, of which 37.1 percent are finfish, 36.7 percent molluscs, 5.4 percent seaweeds and 0.8 percent crustaceans. This is over 42 percent more than 1975. The increases are mainly in production of molluscs, crustaceans and seaweeds.
The data for finfish show some decrease, but this is accounted for by adjustments in fish production reported from China. A good percentage of total Chinese aquaculture production, which is still the highest, is now ascribed to coastal aquaculture which consists mainly of molluscs and seaweeds. It is still not very clear whether fish culture production from inland waters is as low as now reported. While the increased production of shrimps and prawns world-wide is undoubtedly due to the availability of export markets, the increases in the production of molluscs and seaweeds are probably due to the low input simple technologies that are readily adapted. Oyster production reported from China has also contributed substantially to the over-all increased estimates of mollusc production.
Table I
Aquaculture production by region arid commodity groups - 1980 (im metric tons)
Country
Total
Finfish
Molluscs
Crustaceans
Seaweeds
AFRICA
Central African Rep.
Egypt
Gabon
Ghana
Ivory Coast
Lesotho
Malawi
Morocco
Rwanda
South Africa
Tunisia
Zaire
TOTAL
ASIA AND OCEANIA
Australia
Bangladesh
China
Cyprus
Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Israel
Japan
Korea, Rep.
Malaysia
Nepal
New Zealand
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Taiwan
Thailand
Turkey
TOTAL
EUROPE
Austria
Bulgaria
Czechoslovakia
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany, D.R.
Germany, F.R.
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Romania
Spain
Switzerland
Sweden
United Kingdom
USSR
Yugoslavia
TOTAL
LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN
Argentina
Bolivia
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Jamaica
Mexico
Panama
Peru
Venezuela
TOTAL
NORTH AMERICA
Canada
USA
TOTAL
GRAND TOTAL
Percentage of regional production as of global total:
Africa
Asia
Europe
Latin America
An examination of the regional distribution of aquaculture production shows that Asia contributes over 84 percent, Europe over 13 percent, and North America over 1.6 percent. Production in Africa and Latin America continues to be comparatively small.
As is only to be expected, increases in production vary very considerably between countries. However, the main point of interest is that production has increased, and substantially at that, in the last four years in most countries.
It may be of interest to compare the average rate of increase of aquaculture output with rates of increase in capture fishery landings. Compared to the year 1975, the reported world fish catch in 1979 increased by around 7.4 percent. Compared to the year 1976, the increase was only about 2.4 percent. There has been a progressive reduction in the rate of increase. In 1979 it was marginal, around 1 percent, and in 1980 there was a fall of about 300 000 tons. The landings of food fish have remained stationary, or shown some decrease. This situation should be seen in the light of the increasing demand for fish and fishery products. It is true that the total aquaculture production is still not too large, only about 12 percent of capture fishery production, although its proportionate values, both in money and as human food, may be higher. But the main point is that the available production data fully support the claim that aquaculture is a growth industry in most countries of the
world. Means of achieving further increases are clearly identified and demonstrated.
2.2 Investments
The magnitude of investments going into aquaculture could be a useful measure of the state of the industry. Unfortunately, there is at present no means of assessing or monitoring this adequately, especially in the private sector. A recent partial assessment of investments in the public sector from international financing agencies in developing countries, shows it to be about US$ 438 million for a period of 3 to 5 years.
Public sector investments in developing countries have largely been directed to food production for domestic consumption and rural development. Greater attention is focused on small-scale aquafarms integrated with crop and livestock farms, which fit in well with the rural setting. Integration of aquaculture with fishing, to increase income and standard of living of small-scale fishermen, is actively pursued in some countries.
Private investments, which generally aim at high returns, naturally concentrate on high-valued products, especially for export. While there does not appear to be a great scarcity of capital and potentially exportable species for culture, a number of problems continue to discourage investors. The more important of them appear to be the serious shortage of technicians with hands-on practical experience and the lack of properly organized pilot operations that can provide information on technical and economic viability. The seriousness of the lack of expertise and management skill will be obvious to those who have seen some of the poorly designed and operated aquaculture installations in different countries. With increasing investments, the interest of consulting firms in aquaculture has very greatly increased. However, they too face the problem of finding and retaining on a continued basis, the right type of personnel. The lack of legislative support or the indiscriminate
application to aquaculture of existing legislation framed for other industries, also continues to be a problem of importance. The competition and conflicts in the use of coastal areas are on the increase, especially in industrially advanced countries.
Investments in large-scale aquaculture are very seriously affected by the absence of organized production and distribution of inputs, such as seed, feed and fertilizer. While large-scale ventures incorporate seed production as a part of their operations, local manufacture of feeds using local ingredients, has not become well established in Third World countries. The procurement of adequate quantities of fertilizers becomes a serious problem in these countries. Both in the case of feeds and fertilizers, aquaculture has to compete with other established users, who, mostly because of tradition, are believed to have the prior claim.
Economic viability is probably the main consideration in private investment and demonstration of this is, therefore, of vital importance. Like any other industry, in aquaculture too there are highly profitable, less profitable and unprofitable ventures. However, sound aquaculture using appropriate technologies, despite biological and other risks, has shown favourable returns. To quote one example, a recent comparative study made in the Philippines (by the Development Academy of the Philippines, the Philippines School of Economics and the University of the Philippines Population Institute) showed that pond fish culture (mainly of milkfish) is much more profitable than fishing. The average return on investment in fish culture was 68 percent, as compared to 11 percent for large scale commercial fishing and 21 percent for small-scale coastal fishing.
The fact that aquaculture is highly profitable in one country or situation does not necessarily mean that it will be so elsewhere. There are many factors that affect internal rates of return in aquaculture and their comparability with those of other agro-industries. They differ from country to country. The need for pilot operations, as mentioned earlier, is therefore self-evident. The time that a private investor will take to establish a profitable venture, after initial pilot studies, can serve as a major disincentive. The Kyoto Conference called for such pilot studies to be carried out in the public sector. Indeed, several pilot projects have been initiated in developing countries with multilateral assistance. But experience has shown that it takes an unduly long time to establish a sizeable pilot project in the public sector with external assistance.
The emergence of a system of insurance for aquaculture enterprises is a plus factor to the industry. For obvious reasons, the service appears to have been utilized only in western countries and Japan. Even in these countries, not all farm stocks are insured; a recent study in Norway showed that only 31 percent of the farms had any form of insurance. However, one can expect it to spread also in the developing world as the industry progresses. The slow progress of agricultural insurance in Third World countries, shows the problems and attitudes to be overcome, but one can be optimistic about the future as the industry gets well established.
2.3 Markets
Marketing of aquaculture products has not been a major problem in the past, but with increasing output it has begun to be a constraint, at least in regard to exports. Small-scale fresh water aquaculture in developing countries is often undertaken in the neighbourhood of consuming centres. Because of the ability to control the supplies according to demand, marketing still does not pose great problems in such ventures. In fact, there is a definite trend towards linking farms with specialty restaurants. However, many of the aquafoods that have shown significant increases in production in the last four years are those with export potential or primarily meant for export.
While cultured shrimps and prawns are readily absorbed by established export markets, mollusc farming is greatly constrained by import restrictions. This applies also to some of the high-valued finfish like the salmons and trouts.
3. Technologies
It is difficult to identify any major technological advances in aquaculture in the last four years after the Kyoto Conference. Much of what was reported on the state of aquaculture technology then, would appear to hold even today. Some advances have been made in certain techniques, but no new technologies appear to have become established. However, one could say that cage culture has become more widespread and as a technology more accepted. Although its success depends to a large extent on the availability of artificial feeds, this type of farming in most cases seems to reduce initial investments and begins to provide incomes to the farmers in a much shorter period It certainly has greater exposure to risks of disease and environmental hazards, but has many compensatory advantages, such as short start-up period, the possibility of starting on a small scale and expanding later if early results permit. The progress of cage culture of rainbow trout and salmons in Europe and
North America, groupers and seabass in Southeast Asia, and of seabass (Dicentrarchus labrax) and seabream (Sparus auratus) in the Mediterranean region, serve as good examples.
The technology for the use of thermal effluents has been under investigation for some years now in Europe and North America. Though oysters, lobsters, shrimps and a number of freshwater and marine fishes have been cultured in heated water, commercial-scale operations seem to have developed only for carps and eel. Short term and annual changes in temperature of effluents and other water quality problems have been major constraints to the expansion of thermal aquaculture.
Although no spectacular technological developments appear to have taken place in the last four years, progress has been made in a number of constituent techniques. It is now possible to breed most species of fish and shrimps used for culture, although mass rearing of larvae and production of stocking material have not yet been perfected in all cases. The production of Artemia cysts, which has been a bottleneck to shrimp hatchery operation, is no more a major problem.
Efforts have been made to formulate and prepare fish feeds using locally available ingredients. Substitution of fish meal with plant proteins and increasing use of agricultural and industrial wastes is very much in evidence.
3.1 Appropriate technologies
General experience in development in recent years has focused attention on appropriateness of technologies, not only in aquaculture but also in other fields. From a global point of view, it may not be incorrect to say that no technology is universally applicable, just as there is no universal fish for culture. This underlines the importance of appropriateness of technology. Experience in shrimp culture in North America would illustrate this point. The Japanese success in shrimp culture fired the enthusiasm of many and aroused expectations of quick success and profits. As should have been foreseen, the Japanese technology could not be applied as such, and the disappointments that ensued led to much scepticism about the industry as a whole. It is now recognized that an appropriate shrimp culture technology for North America is in the process of development and nearing a stage for pilot scale production. While this is the state of shrimp culture in North America, in other parts
of the world shrimp farming is expanding, particularly in Asia and South and Central America. Besides tropical climate, that enables quick growth and high production, the appropriateness of available technology appears to explain the contrasting situation. Most of them depend largely on wild seed. Extensive areas, including rice fields, are used to raise at least two crops every year, with very little, or no feeding. Hatchery-raised juveniles of selected species are gradually being used to increase production, but the industry has not to wait for the perfection of hatchery techniques to produce marketable shrimps and evaluate the profitability of enterprises. One can see the gradual progression of extensive to semi-intensive and then to intensive systems of culture, which is acceptable and appropriate to conditions in the developing world. Obviously such an evolution is not suitable for industrially advanced countries.
3.2 Technology transfer
The strategy for worldwide development of aquaculture adopted by the Kyoto Conference, considered transfer of known technologies as a major means of increased production in the near future. The Conference did also recognize the need to adapt the technologies to local conditions, thereby underlining the concept of appropriate technologies. Regional and inter-regional cooperation provides the basic mechanism for technology transfer and, within this, technical cooperation among developing countries (TCDC as known in UN circles) will have a significant role to play in transfer of appropriate technologies. The Conference Panel on Strategies for Aquaculture Development in the Third World may be dealing with this subject in greater detail. Transfer of technology within geographic, political and agroclimatic areas generally poses fewer problems. But often technology transfer between such areas may require considerable adaptation through applied research and experimentation.
Differences in socio-economic and political milieu in which technologies have to be applied may necessitate major modifications for effective use.
4. State of aquaculture research
In the review of the state of aquaculture at the Kyoto Conference, a reference was made to the increasing interest in aquaculture research, and the involvement of many institutions in studies in disciplines related to aquaculture. That Conference suggested a different approach and underlined the need for systems-oriented multidisciplinary research for the development or improvement of aquafarming systems. Research agencies and managers seem to accept this concept now, but progress in its implementation is generally slow.
There have been discussions for almost a decade now on international aquaculture research, along the lines of international research on agricultural crops, supported by the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) in developing countries. The group of donors of major international agricultural research institutes has, however, found it difficult, so far, to decide on supporting aquaculture research for a variety of reasons, which include some of the inherent problems of the science itself, as well as the framework within which the consortium of donors operate.
While most of agriculture or animal husbandry is based on a smaller number of cultivated plants or domesticated animals, aquaculture employs a large number of species of fish, shellfish and plants. It would be extremely difficult, if not impossible, to investigate all the major problems of aquaculture of all the species in a centralized institution. This is not to say that some problems of a basic nature cannot be investigated in a central research institution, but the farming systems research concerned with species and culture procedures suited for different agroclimatic conditions cannot be centralized. On the other hand, it is also impractical to set up adequately equipped and properly manned research institutes in every country The concept of a coordinated network of centres was, therefore, adopted for promoting aquaculture research in the Third World. A network of six regional centres for multidisciplinary systems-oriented research, linked to a number of national
centres for field testing of research results, has been established by FAO, in cooperation with host governments and with the funding assistance of the United Nations Development Programme. These centres will concentrate on applied research directed to solving problems related to the large-scale application of a small number of selected farming systems. The Network is also establishing a computerized information system and data bank to assist aquaculture research and development.
5. Training and extension
As mentioned earlier, the most serious constraint to rapid aquaculture development at present appears to be the scarcity of trained and experienced practical aquaculturists. While this is a worldwide problem, it is more so in developing countries, where facilities for the type of broad-based multidisciplinary training have been lacking. The two types of core personnel that need institutionalized training have been identified as technicians/extension workers and senior aquaculturists. To meet the needs of developing countries for personnel trained in culture systems relevant to their development programmes, multidisciplinary training programmes for senior staff on a regional basis have been organized by FAO in cooperation with selected institutions in Asia, Africa and Latin America. Training of technicians and extension personnel is being assisted in a number of countries on a national basis.
As increases in aquaculture production in the near future are expected to be achieved through transfer of technologies, the establishment of effective extension services is of special significance. The importance of this is being increasingly realized and a number of countries have taken action to establish nuclei of effective extension services.
6. Outlook
6.1 Expansion of aquaculture
If one may indulge in some prognostication at this stage, it will be interesting to consider the outlook for aquaculture. It appears most likely that interest in aquaculture will continue and even intensify as the fishery landings, particularly of food fish, fail to keep pace with demand. This may unfortunately result in increased conflict with capture fishery interests. Experience tells us that establishment of viable aquaculture takes much longer than even aquaculturists envisaged. As already pointed out, short-term increases in production have occurred in aquaculture systems using open or existing water areas and not through establishment of, say, large pond farms. Although when established these could usually remain productive almost indefinitely, they need larger initial investments and longer time to construct.
There has been considerable discussion on large-scale versus small-scale aquaculture. The benefits of both are recognized, but there is little doubt that greater emphasis will continue to be placed on small-scale aquaculture as part of integrated rural development.
While one should support this policy, it should also be ensured that the essentials for the success of small-scale developments, such as production and distribution of inputs, credit and extension services are provided.
The increased flow of investment into aquaculture is generally a matter of satisfaction to those concerned with aquaculture development. But at the same time it causes some concern, when large-scale operations are planned without proper pilot studies and with very little hopes of mobilizing appropriately trained personnel. If these large-scale investments fail, as they may, because of these basic deficiencies, the bad name that aquaculture had acquired in some areas, due to similar reasons, may become more widespread and hinder future developments. After all, news of failures get around more quickly-success often gets little public attention.
It appears most likely that on a global basis the development of large-scale aquaculture in the immediate future will be, to a great extent, for products that are of a relatively high value or are exportable. Value is, of course, determined by a number of factors, and species that were considered of high value have become relatively inexpensive as, for example, trout in Italy, and the reverse, as for example, carps in India. Such changes in price structure can be expected to attract investment for large-scale enterprises to produce mainly for domestic markets.
6.2 Projections of production
A number of projections of future aquaculture production have been made in the past. At the Kyoto Conference there were forecasts of a doubling of production in ten years, or a five to tenfold increase in three decades, provided there is an accelerated transfer of technologies, massive financial investments, suitable legislation, intensive research, manpower training and development of institutions, and other essential infrastructures. Although a beginning has been made in meeting some of these conditions, one cannot say that very much progress has been made. However, the available data indicate an increase of over 42 percent in world production through aquaculture in a five-year period. When the fact that many production projects are getting established and new ones are being started, is taken into account, the projected doubling of production in the ten-year period, as envisaged, can be considered attainable. It is not easy to comment on the projections for the next three
decades, but it can safely be assumed that if the present rate of increase can be maintained, substantial outputs can be expected.
REFERENCES
FAO 1976, Report of the FAO Technical Conference on Aquaculture, Kyoto, Japan, 26 May-2 June 1976. FAO Fish.Rep., 188:93 p.
FAO 1980, The State of Food and Agriculture 1980, FAO Council Doc. CL 78/78 - Supl. 1:18 p.
FAO 1981, The State of Food and Agriculture 1981, FAO Conference Doc. C 81/2-38 p.
FAO/EIFAC 1980, Report of the Symposium on new developments in the utilization of heated effluents and of recirculation systems for intensive aquaculture, Stavanger, 29-30 May 1980. EIFAC Tech.Pap.,(39): 37 p.
FAO/UNDP 1978, Aid for Aquaculture Development. Report of the FAO/UNDP Ad hoc Consultation on Aid for Aquaculture Development, La Toja Portevedra, Spain, 20-23 June 1978: 30 p.
FAO/UNDP 1978, Outline of an Applied Research and Experimental Development Programme for the Latin American Regional Centre for Aquaculture. ADCP/REP/78/5: 26 p.
FAO/UNDP 1979, Aquaculture Information. Report of the Meeting of an Aquaculture Information Group held in Rome, Italy, 25-28 April 1979. ADCP/REP/78/9: 13 p.
FAO/UNDP 1980, Outline Research Programme for the African Regional Aquaculture Centre, ADCP/REP/80/12: 21 p.
FAO/UNDP 1980, Outline Research Programme for the Asian Regional Aquaculture Centres, ADCP/REP/80/14: 43 p.
FAO/UNDP 1981, Aquaculture Aid Profiles, ADCP/AP/81/4: 114 p.
Gerhardsen, G.M. and A. Bringsvor, 1981Fish Farming in Norway-Problems and Prospects. Papers on Fisheries Economics, The Norwegian School of Economics and Business Administration, Bergen, 22:27 p.
McVey, J.P., 1980Current Development in the Penaeid Shrimp Culture Industry, Aquacult.Mag. 6(5):20-25
Persoone, G. et al. 1980 (Ed.), The Brine Shrimp-Artemia, Vols. I to III, Universa Press, Welteren:1456 p.
Pillay, T.V.R., 1977 Planning of Aquaculture Development-An Introductory Guide. Fishing News Books Ltd., Farnham, England:71 p.
Pillay 1979, The State of Aquaculture 1976 In Advances in Aquaculture (Edited by T.V.R. Pillay and Wm. A. Dill) 1-10
Pillay 1979, Research and Extension Services for Aquaculture Development. Idem:84-89
Pillay, T.V.R. and U.N. Wijkstrom, 1980 Aquaculture and Small-scale Fisheries Development. Proc. IPFC, 19(3): 9 p.
PREPF 1980, Philippines, Probing our Futures-The Philippines 2000 AD NEDA/APO Production Unit, Manila. 222 p.
Sundararaj, B.I., 1980 Reproductive Physiology of Teleost Fishes - A review of present knowledge and needs for future research. ADCP/REP/81/16, 82 p.
T.A.C., 1973 Report of the T.A.C. Working Group on Aquaculture, Technical Advisory Committee of the Consultative Group on International Agriculture Research, Rome, FAO, 28 p.
<section>b</section>
ANNEXURE IV
Aid Requirements for Aquaculture Development
1. INTRODUCTION
Various projections of future production increases world-wide have been made, ranging from 5 to 10 times by the end of the century. Even based on the lowest estimate, the projected production is expected to be in the neighbourhood of 30 million tons, all or most of which would be used for human consumption. As is obvious, the attainment of the projected production increases will depend on a variety of factors, and the percentage increases will vary between regions and countries.
The increased production is expected to be achieved through: (a) wider application of known technologies, including the expansion of areas under culture, (b) improvement of existing technologies to enable more intensive farming, and to a lesser extent, (c) the development and utilization of new technologies. Based on experience in areas where expansion of aquaculture has occurred in recent years, it is generally considered feasible to achieve the overall production targets, if the necessary financial investment, expertise, inputs and support services are available. The provision of these pre-requisites is therefore of crucial importance and most developing countries require external assistance to fulfil their targets.
2. SOME PROBLEMS OF AQUACULTURE IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Before discussing the nature and magnitude of assistance required, it may be useful to consider some of the relevant characteristics of aquaculture. Aquaculture is generally described as a labour-intensive and high-risk bio-industry. A significant feature of aquaculture is that it can be organized as small or large-scale enterprises, adopting the level of intensification desired by the operators. The rates of production obtained would largely depend on the technology, inputs and management skill and can vary between a few hundred kg/ha to a few tons/ha per annum. The construction of farms and installations can be carried out by manual labour and most of the daily operations can also be done manually, providing employment to a significant number of skilled and unskilled personnel. If required, many of these operations can also be mechanized to varying degrees. Despite the need for generating employment, labour is becoming increasingly expensive in many developing countries.
The fact that it often takes two to three dry seasons to complete construction, and often a further period will elapse before the farm becomes fully productive makes manual construction often more expensive. The trend, therefore, is moving towards the use of mechanical equipment, together with manual labour as far as possible.
The level of intensification to be adopted will be determined by a variety of factors, including input and labour costs and overall profitability of operations. Most developing countries would be able to undertake aquaculture on a highly profitable basis, using low-level technology and less intensive techniques. It is, however, to be expected that with the overall economic growth of these countries the need would arise for more and more intensive techniques to be adopted for obtaining higher production per unit area, in order to maintain the economic viability of the operations.
Aquaculture in developing countries would normally utilize only limited equipment. However, with increasing mechanization and introduction of intensive production systems, the equipment component of aquaculture projects, and more importantly of auxiliary industries like feed manufacture, is becoming more prominent. Major inputs like feed will, however, normally be produced locally utilizing local ingredients to make the operation economically feasible.
As mentioned earlier, aquaculture can be organized as a large-scale industry or as small-scale rural enterprises. Large-scale production enterprises are more attractive to financial investors. When culture is for exportable products, there are opportunities even for joint ventures with foreign investors. However, in the majority of developing countries the emphasis has been on the development of small-scale farming, as it lends itself very well to integration into a rural economy and can have an important role in overall rural development. The success of such a pattern of development would depend, to a large extent, on the support services provided, such as extension services, production and distribution of inputs and marketing facilities. Normally these services have to be provided by the State and at present they are only rudimentary in most countries.
Despite the attention devoted to aquaculture in meetings and publications, it should be recognized that it remains a rather unfamiliar field for administrators, financiers and funding agencies. Though the subject seems appealing to most people, there is generally a demonstrated reluctance to risk support in the absence of compelling pressures. Probably as a consequence of this, demands are often made as a pre-requisite for aid that aquaculture should fulfil criteria that other, even long-established and well-supported food production enterprises are unable to meet. To add to this, in many countries, it is difficult to determine where aquaculture belongs; either it is claimed or disowned by agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry and, of course, the fishing industry. More often it does not really belong legally to any of these sectors. The existing credit schemes, grants, subsidies or other support services do not apply to aquaculture and therefore aquaculturists do not know
where to turn for assistance.
On the technological side, there are a number of proven systems that can be applied to large-scale production, but they need considerable adaptation for this purpose and have to be improved for maximizing production and profitability. Though a practice of considerably long history, aquaculture as a science is very new and has not so far benefited from the multidisciplinary systems-oriented research it very badly needs. An increasing number of scientific workers are involved in research on one or other aspect of aquaculture, but there is a serious scarcity of experienced practical aquaculturists who could carry out production management or extension work.
3. AID REQUIREMENTS
3.1 Investments
Different estimates of investments required to achieve the projected increases in aquaculture production have been made. If it is taken as around US$ 7 000 million, a 10 to 15 times increase in investments may be required in the next decade. There is no doubt that there is considerable interest, particularly in the private sector for investment in aquaculture, although this is largely restricted to exportable products, insofar as developing countries are concerned. A major bottleneck appears to be the lack of expertise in identifying sound investment opportunities and formulation of viable projects. In areas where appropriate basic data on technical and economic viability are lacking, there is an urgent need for pilot operations to generate such data, and enhanced aid is needed for this purpose.
For various reasons, the bulk of external aid has so far been channelled through governments and used for public sector activities. There is now mounting interest in the private sector and it is becoming apparent that for rapid development in the sector, arrangements for direct aid or joint ventures are essential.
There is also a growing need for non-governmental and non commercial organizations to undertake support activities, including objective policy analyses, developmental studies and promotional activities, necessary for rapid development of aquaculture.
3.2 Training
In almost every discussion on development of aquaculture, both in the industrially-advanced countries as well as in developing countries, the scarcity of well-trained practising aquaculturists has been emphasized as a major constraint. Although there is, as mentioned earlier, an increasing number of scientists working on one or the other aspect of aquaculture science, the number of aquaculturists who have the training and experience to plan and manage aquaculture enterprises is small indeed.
Different categories of personnel may be needed for aquaculture development, but the core personnel required can be identified as general aquaculturists, field technicians and extension workers, the distinction between them being in the basic educational background and the orientation of training. The aquaculturist who has a fairly high educational background needs an all-round multidisciplinary, theoretical and practical training to enable him to apply known technology, and when problems arise in the field, as they do, innovate appropriate solutions. The technician, who is the equivalent of a foreman in a factory, needs training which may be restricted to selected aquaculture systems, with greater stress on practical work. An extension worker is basically a good technician with the personal qualities required to work with farmers and with specialized training in extension techniques.
The number of senior aquaculturists required is relatively small. In view of the physical facilities and multidisciplinary expertise needed for appropriate training of such personnel, it would be more economical and efficient to organize training of higher-level aquaculturists on a regional basis under conditions generally similar to those in their home countries. Technicians and extension workers will have to be trained in their own countries or, when necessary, on a sub-regional basis, in their local language, with adequate emphasis on the culture systems and techniques that are likely to be utilized in their future work.
Scientific personnel for basic and applied research, as well as specialist services such as diagnosis and treatment of diseases, can be drawn from universities and other centres of higher learning. Although they may not have an all-round aquaculture education, it should be possible to organize on the job training of selected personnel in research methods under the guidance of experienced scientists, supplemented by special courses, where necessary.
Training of senior aquaculturists will have, at least initially, to be organized in conjunction with regional research, in order to share available facilities and expertise. This may not be the best arrangement on a long-term basis, as combination of responsibilities of research and training of the type required in aquaculture may eventually prove impractical. However, under the present circumstances, as an interim measure, this procedure may have to be followed.
The farmers or field operatives are generally self-taught individuals who "learn by doing", with the help of extension personnel when possible. It is estimated that by the year 1985 about 1.7 million additional farmers will be involved in aquaculture. They could greatly benefit from short-term courses in specific techniques, especially when improvements or innovations have to be introduced.
National centres will have to organize training of technicians arid extension workers, based on the nature of the production activities they will be involved in. The development of adequate facilities for the type of training required and the personnel for training are of special importance in this regard.
External aid is required to establish or strengthen existing national centres as appropriate and for the establishment of regional centres with the necessary equipment and personnel to meet the training requirements
3.3 Research
Due to a variety of reasons there has been an upsurge of interest in aquaculture research, and many existing institutions have on-going research related to aquaculture problems. While most of such research could eventually be of value, effective aquaculture research has to be oriented toward developing feasible husbandry practices.
The projected increases in aquaculture production in the developing world are expected to be obtained by the application of known technologies and so adaptive research, to enable transfer of technologies or the improvement of the techniques involved will have the highest priority. Such research must be of a multidisciplinary nature and systems-oriented, as problems are very closely inter-related. As pointed out by the TAC Subcommittee on Aquaculture (TAC, 1974) aquaculture has strong feed-back components, as, for example, improvement in seed supply requires new food or feed production techniques. Seed and feed production may involve study of nutrition and physiology; management of seed production and rearing would need knowledge of environmental requirements-disease control, etc. The production system as a whole therefore, has to be considered and the gaps in our knowledge of the systems have to be filled and problems in their application solved through team effort.
The nature of facilities and expertise required for undertaking the multidisciplinary research render it extremely difficult, at least for the present, to organize it on a national basis. However, centralizing such research in one international centre would be counter-productive (as pointed out by TAC (1974)) because of the differences in species cultured and the need to study the various aspects in the set of environmental conditions in which the particular species occurs and those in which it has to be reared. However, geographic regions which have, or plan to adopt, the same culture systems and have very similar climatic and socio-economic conditions, can be identified. Problems facing the application of selected systems in those regions can be investigated more economically and efficiently in a regional institution. The results of such work will have to be tested in national centres and any major problems encountered referred back to the regional institution for further
studies and solutions. The national centres will need to be strengthened for this purpose and for undertaking research on problems of a purely local nature. Close linkages will have to be established between the regional and national centres so as to form effective networks of research centres, which, as pointed out earlier, could also organize the training of core personnel for aquaculture development.
ADCP has established regional Centres in Asia, Africa and Latin America for multidisciplinary research and regional training. A new Centre for the Caribbean is under consideration and the Fish Culture Research Institute in Hungary is planned to be developed into an inter-regional Centre for long-term applied research. Further aid is required to develop activities in these Centres fully, and to establish linkages for a truly interregional network. As the research is to be carried out by interdisciplinary teams it should be possible to utilize the services of specialists in relevant disciplines rather than aquaculture scientists per se, if the overall guidance of such personnel can be assured. Also aquaculture research calls for contributions from allied sciences such as animal genetics, irrigation and agricultural engineering, soil sciences, animal nutrition and feed technology, etc. Thus, technical assistance from countries even not too advanced in aquaculture research could
very well be utilized for regional research activities in developing regions.
3.4 Information
As indicated earlier, a free flow of information is of primary importance in the development of aquaculture, particularly since the major increases in production in the near future are to be achieved through transfer of technology. Information flow is obviously needed for research, training and extension, which form the major supporting services to be established. Although the types of information required for each of these activities differ rather considerably, a unified comprehensive information gathering, processing and dissemination system would be necessary to meet the needs of aquaculture development.
ADCP has designed an information system, AQUIS, mainly for the collection, computerized storage and dissemination of data for planning and development purposes. The system will be implemented through regional networks of aquaculture Centres. It is now being introduced in four of the Centres in Asia. The close cooperation of relevant agencies, both in developing, as well as developed countries, is necessary to make the system work. As compatible hardware required for participation in the system is expensive, many of the input centres will need external assistance for its procurement, maintenance and data exchange between Centres.
