<title>Wood fuel surveys</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
This publication has been prepared as part of FAO's Forestry for Local Community Development Programme. It has been made possible by a contribution from the Swedish International Development Authority (SIDA) to FAO to support this Programme.
The publication is intended for persons confronted with the task of trying to deal with the growing fuelwood shortages which threaten so much of the developing world. It is designed to help develop the information needed in order to understand the reasons for a shortage and to identify and plan successful interventions that can improve the situation.
Fuelwood supply and usage are usually embedded in a complex system within which most of the factors that affect the ability to intervene with forestry solutions are of a non-forestry nature. They are primarily human factors, connected with the ways in which people organize their lives and use their land and other resources.
Simply measuring wood fuel use and the tree resource, while a necessary part of the whole, will by itself give very little indication of what can and should be done. It has become clear in recent years that in order to provide an adequate information base for planning effective fuelwood-related projects it is necessary to draw as well upon the techniques and experience of other disciplines used in the study of rural, and urban, problems and development.
Recently the gravity of the rural energy problem in developing countries has attracted the attention of researchers from a number of disciplines, and has led to various important innovative studies the results of which are already greatly expanding our understanding of the fuelwood situation. FAO therefore invited a number of people engaged in such work to write about various aspects of surveying rural energy situations dominated by wood fuel supply and use. This publication contains the papers thus prepared.
The publication is consequently designed primarily to make available to those in the forestry profession relevant experience from other disciplines. It does not deal with the forestry components of studies of fuelwood situations as knowledge of this is assumed in the audience to which it is directed. Nor, as the editors explain in their introduction, is it a manual. Rather, it attempts to provide guidance to those responsible for planning fuelwood-related projects in identifying the nature of the situation they are confronted with and the appropriate approach to assembling information for planning.
The authors of the five papers are: David Brokensha, Professor of Anthropology and Director of the Social Process Research Institute at the University of California, Santa Barbara, writing with Alfonso Peter Castro, also from the Department of Anthropology; Russell deLucia, President of Meta Systems Inc. in Cambridge, Massachusetts; William B. Morgan, Professor of Geography at King's College in London; and Amulya K.N. Reddy, Professor, Department of Inorganic and Physical Chemistry, and Convener, Centre for the Application of Science and Technology to Rural Areas (ASTRA) at the Indian Institute of Science in Bangalore. In addition, Howard S. Geller, American Council for an Energy Efficient Economy in Washington, writing with Gautam S. Dutt from the Center for Energy and Environmental Studies at Princeton University, contributed the sixth paper on measurement issues which appears as an annex. The publication was edited for FAO by David Brokensha and Alfonso Peter Castro.
FAO is most grateful to the many other people who contributed to the work in one way or another. In particular it wishes to record its appreciation to Deanna Donovan, James Douglas, David French and Keith Openshaw for their contributions to the annex materials, and to C. Anthony Pryor for advice and assistance in the early stages of the exercise and for hosting a review meeting of the authors at the Center for Integrative Development in New York midway through the preparation of the publication.
J.E.M. Arnold, Chief
Policy and Planning Service
Forestry Department
<section>2</section>
Notes on contributors
Russell J. deLucia is President of Meta Systems Inc., in Cambridge, Massachusetts. He has worked on renewable energy surveys, and other issues related to rural and renewable energy planning, in Bangladesh, Costa Rica, Peru, Philippines and Thailand. He has written widely on the subject and is the author, with H. D. Jacoby and others, of the recent book "Energy Planning for Developing Countries: a study for Bangladesh".
Amulya Kumar N. Reddy is Professor in the Department of Inorganic and Physical Chemistry, and Convenor of the Centre for the Application of Science and Technology to Rural Areas (ASTRA), at the Indian Institute of Science, in addition he is Secretary, Karnataka State Council for Science and Technology. At the time of preparing this paper he was also Senior Visiting Research Scientist at the Center for Energy and Environmental Studies, Princenton University. He has very wide experience with energy studies in developing countries, ranging from policy issues to the very intensive, detailed studies of individual villages that he and his colleagues at ASTRA have carried out in South India.
William B. Morgan is Professor of Geography at King's College, University of London. He is the author, with Roland Moss, of the book "Fuelwood and Rural Energy Production and Supply in the Humid Tropics". He has had extensive experience with wood fuel studies in western Africa, especially in Nigeria where he has been serving as consultant to the University of Ife/United Nations University Rural Energy Systems Project covering three urban areas and their rural hinterlands in the southwest of the country.
David Brokensha is Professor of Anthropology, and Director of the Social Process Research Institute, at the University of California, Santa Barbara. He has studied wood fuel problems in Kenya and Tanzania, and was one of the principal contributors to the USAID review study "The Socio-economic Context of Fuelwood Use in Small Rural Communities".
Alfonso Peter Castro is an advanced graduate student at the Department of Anthropology at the University of California, Santa Barbara, and was also a contributor to "The Socio-economic Context of Fuelwood Use in Small Rural Communities". He is familiar with the fuelwood situation in Central America, and is now engaged in field work in central Kenya.
Howard S. Geller at the time of writing this paper was with the American Council for an Energy Efficient Economy in Washington, D.C. Earlier he spent fourteen months evaluating the performance of fuelwood cookstoves as a Fulbright scholar at the Indian Institute of Science in Bangalore, India.
Gautam S. Dutt is a member of the research staff at the Center for Energy and Environmental Studies at Princeton University. He has been investigating energy technologies for rural areas of developing countries, including field analyses of cookstoves in India in 1978 and Upper Volta in 1980.
<section>3</section>
Introduction
The whole world is experiencing, in different degrees, an energy crisis, as available supplies of energy dwindle and alternate sources cannot rapidly be built up. In developing countries there are two major and inter-related aspects. First, increases in the price of imported petroleum products has put great strains on the balance of payments, with many countries spending more than half their foreign exchange on fossil fuel. Second, there is the problem of wood fuels and other traditional biomass forms of energy (crop residues, dung), upon which three-quarters of the population of developing countries depend for energy for cooking and heating.
In some countries the problem is already of alarming proportions, and overall perhaps 100 million people already have to live with a shortage of fuel for cooking and other basic purposes. Probably a further 1000 million are living in situations where fuel supplies are being maintained only by destruction of the woody vegetation, so that the incidence of shortages is growing rapidly.
As fuelwood shortages grow, people have to walk progressively further to collect it, so adding further hardship to their lives. Crop residues which could be used as livestock feed and dung which could be used as a soil conditioner have to be diverted to fuel use. Trees of immediate economic value such as fruit trees have to be sacrificed to the need for fuel. Progressively more scarce cash income has to go on buying fuel, at the expense of purchases of other essentials. Eventually, fuel shortages can become so acute as to force reductions in the amount of cooked food that is available.
The consequences are to increase individual poverty and suffering, and to hasten environmental deterioration as trees are out down. This "other energy crisis" is an important part of the problems affecting so many of the countries which are experiencing rapid population growth combined with decreasing agricultural production. These problems were emphasized at the 1981 United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy held in Nairobi. But even after all the publicity there are still difficulties in finding effective measures to deal with the problem of shortage of wood fuels.
One reason for this is that relevant information is often lacking, or it is not clear what sorts of basic facts need be known, and how these facts can be collected, and used effectively in planning. This is because fuelwood shortages are usually part of complex local human and resource systems which need to be properly understood if we are to be able to help. The failure of so many past wood fuel projects stems from incomplete and insufficient understanding.
We hope that this publication will help, by indicating what needs to be known and how the data can be collected. It is intended for people responsible for planning, policy and management in ministries of forestry, natural resources, energy or rural development, and also for officials working with donor agencies that are engaged in forestry projects.
The focus on forestry related solutions is because for the foreseeable future wood is bound to continue to be the principal source of energy in most of those areas now dependent on it. But maintaining or expanding fuelwood supplies can be only a partial solution. Throughout, therefore, we stress the need to look not only at all aspects of the problem, but also at all the possible actions which could contribute to an overall solution to domestic energy needs.
We have not written a manual which Sets Out precisely what to do. We rather seek to help people to define specific situations, to appreciate the dimensions of the fuelwood problem, to recognise what sorts of information are needed to indicate appropriate methodologies for gaining that information and to suggest further reading. Throughout this volume we stress the need to be "situation-specific", because of the variety of different situations. There is, first, a range of environmental factors (vegetation, soils, climate) which sets limits on what can be done. Then there is also a variety of: local societies and how they are organized; traditional uses of fuel; alternate fuels; governmental resources and other aspects, which combine to define what is feasible. Finally, information-gathering might relate to a single village survey, or it may encompass a national energy survey. Given the extreme variation, we have not attempted to write definitive guidelines, but instead we
indicate the scope of the problem and general ways of tackling it.
Our focus is on aspects that are often neglected in forestry projects, and forestry surveys - on social relationships and the complex social, economic and ecological interrelationships; commercialization of fuels; fuel use in urban areas and rural-urban links; on the need to integrate fuelwood projects with other development programmes; on methods of fact-finding. While emphasizing these aspects, we deliberately avoid coverage of areas which are well known to readers (such as species selection and other technical aspects of forestry) or which are well documented (e.g. statistical aspects of survey design; descriptions of alternative energy technology).
This book consists of five main papers, written by different persons, from different backgrounds (see "Notes on Contributors"). Each paper covers a distinct topic, but all topics are inter-related. Mid-way through their preparation all five authors met to discuss each draft paper before finalisation so that each would be aware of the contributions of the others. The papers are followed by annexes that deal with specific problems of fuel surveys (citing actual surveys), with technical problems of measurement and with alternative energy technologies.
In the first paper, Russell deLucia provides a general overview, in which he emphasizes the need to look at rural energy not in isolation but as part of a complex system which can be analysed as a system. As deLucia states, many developing countries are unlikely to make an easy transition from traditional to commercial fuels, which heightens the importance of having detailed knowledge about wood fuels. His paper covers most salient aspects, including energy inefficiency of many existing practices, and the dynamic nature of most situations in which we find fuelwood shortage problems. A major point he makes is that surveys should never be seen as simply fact-finding exercises, but should be related to the task of identifying specific actions that attempt to improve the situation. In deciding on actions, it is necessary to integrate social and technical analyses, as one without the other will not lead to effective approaches. He concludes by considering the need for different
types of survey at different levels, and he amplifies this approach in an annex.
In the second paper, Amulya Reddy shifts the focus from the general to the particular, providing a detailed and rich description and analysis of interactions within a village energy system. Although this village is based on the uniquely detailed and exhaustive examination that he and his colleagues have carried out in India, Reddy indicates how the analysis can be applied in other situations. Reddy is concerned with perceptions of the villagers, as well as of specialists from outside. He stresses the perceived advantages, and costs, for local people, of multi-purpose trees, and shows that other uses of trees for fodder or construction) must always be taken into account, together with the other uses of crop residues and dung used for fuel. A strong emphasis is placed on the inter-relationship of social, agricultural and forest ecosystems.
Next, William Morgan examines some particular problems related to commercialization of wood fuels, with emphasis on urban areas although the rural sector is also analysed. Drawing on his wide experience in West Africa, where he was a leading participant in what is probably the most extensive fuel survey ever undertaken, Morgan makes a comprehensive study of the nature of urban, industrial and commercial fuels. He presents the main features of dealer networks, and also considers problems of substitution (other fuels) and of innovation.
In the fourth paper, David Brokensha and Alfonso Peter Castro are concerned with specific problems of methods and organization of fuel-related social surveys, with emphasis on rural areas. They insist on several basic requirements, explaining that a fuel survey can only be properly interpreted if certain salient facts about the local community are understood; they emphasize the importance of indigenous knowledge, and of local participation both in surveys and in consequent actions. They stress flexibility, saying that there is no one approach suitable for all situations. And they provide advice and suggestions of survey methods, and of managing a survey and interpreting survey results.
The fifth paper brings together advice from the different contributors on field techniques for gathering specific categories of information related to fuelwood supply and use. In the opening sections David Brokensha and Alfonso Peter Castro review the various categories of information that might need to be obtained using social survey methods. This is followed by a section in which Amulya Reddy discusses needs for information on land use and land capability within the rural village. In the last section, William Morgan outlines special survey needs for commercial wood fuel systems.
The first annex, on survey design and implementation, opens with a discussion by Russell deLucia of different categories of survey, of the strengths and weaknesses of each, and of the circumstances in which they could prove appropriate. This is illustrated in the second annex by descriptions of a number of actual surveys, and is followed by summaries, contributed by a number of authors, of a number of other surveys at different levels - national, regional, sectoral and village - and using different approaches. Each summary explains the scope, scale and objectives of the survey, how it was organized, the methodology and resources used, and the output from the survey.
The third annex, by Howard Geller and Gautam Dutt, deals with measuring the efficiency with which fuel is used. It starts from the fact that the agnitude of fuelwood use in developing countries is very largely a function of the inefficiency of traditional cooking mechanisms. In planning interventions, it Can therefore be very important to know the present level of efficiency, and how needs would change with the introduction of more efficient devices and practices. The annex describes methods for measuring stove performance, and procedures for conducting tests and interpreting test results. It is supplemented by a short note, by Keith Openshaw, on measurement of wood and charcoal.
The final annex contains additional background material by Russell deLucia relating to rural energy use and technology. It deals with changing energy use in agriculture and industry, and the principal features of biogas, solar, wind and other sources of small-scale renewable energy related to such uses, and their potential as viable alternatives to wood fuels.
<section>4</section>
1. Defining the scope of wood fuel systems
Russell deLucia
1. Introduction
2. Basic characteristics of wood fuel systems
3. Important system perspectives
4. Dynamic features of wood fuel systems
5. Information gathering
6. Wood fuel survey design
1. Introduction
This paper presents some ideas that my colleagues and I have found useful in thinking about energy issues for developing countries. In particular, it discusses factors which have influenced our thinking regarding the scope of wood fuel surveys and associated efforts. The chapter draws heavily on both earlier and ongoing^1 work. It reflects ideas developed over the last few years with a number of colleagues interested in these issues,^2 but the author is solely responsible for their interpretation in the present paper.
^1 Including other work of the author (deLucia, 1980 and 1981; deLucia and Tabors, 1980), corporate work (Meta Systems Inc., 1978 to 1980) in which the author participated, and recent work of a colleague (J.H. Arnold, 1980).
^2 I am indebted to a number of my colleagues - John Briscoe, Douglas Smith, Ramesh Bhatia, Mike Lesser, Richard Tabors, and John Arnold. In addition, there are a number of individuals elsewhere whose work or writing have particularly influenced the thinking that is reflected in this paper. They are too numerous to mention them all here, but Mike Arnold at FAO, M. Nurul Islam at the Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology, Dacca, and David Brokensha at the University of California deserve particular mention.
Wood fuel surveys can be, and have been, undertaken for a variety of purposes. The most important purpose for carrying out a survey is to prepare for action; that is, to gather information needed to improve the rural energy situation, in order to facilitate the process of development. This paper is concerned with surveys designed to serve this developmental purpose.
Within such a framework surveys may need to be undertaken for a spectrum of purposes, ranging from the estimation of the magnitude of fuel use, and/or the spatial variation in this use, to the planning of a specific project (or projects). Different surveys are likely to be needed to serve the process of planning at the macro, sector or project level, and they can differ widely.
The planner at the national level, concerned mainly with the share of fuelwood in the country's forest product balance, or of wood fuels in its energy balance, requires only broad aggregate estimates. To establish forestry or energy end use balances for a particular sector more detail would be needed - to differentiate use by household, commercial, industrial and transport sectors. Still more detail is needed if the aim is to differentiate among different types of fuel.
Estimates of traditional fuel^3 use, even those requiring information on end use, sector, fuel, and spatial variation, can be based on surveys of demand characteristics. Project evaluation of energy investments that depend on fuelwood requires a different sort of survey from consumption surveys. In many oases investment planning requires understanding of supply resources, the existing and potential demands, and the nature of the systems in which these supplies and demands are balanced.
^3 There is no universally accepted term for this class of fuels - i.e. fuelwood, charcoal, crop residues, animal dung. The frequently used term 'non-commercial fuels' is inaccurate since for some fuels - firewood, charcoal - there is usually a commercial cash market. Even where there may not be a cash market, there is frequently some form of 'in kind' exchange for the-commodity. The term 'traditional' fuels is used here to distinguish these from conventional fuels and energy sources which are fossil, hydro, or nuclear based. Thus the traditional fuels are part of the broad class of energy supplies based on renovable resources.
Rural energy systems, both those that are largely dependent on traditional fuels and technologies and those that are undergoing technological modernization, are characterized by interrelations that are important to understand for policy and project formulation. In subsistence situations traditional fuels are part of complex systems in which the important interrelations are social and institutional as well as physical. The use of now energy technologies affects (i) technologies that form different parts of the fuel cycle, (ii) the resources that these technologies utilize, and (iii) other possible uses of the same resources.
A basic premise of this paper, and of the rest of the publication, is that surveys will not be effective in providing the information that will allow the identification and planning of successful interventions in fuelwood shortage situations, unless they reflect the relevant interrelationships within the surrounding systems, and are correctly designed to elicit the appropriate level of detail. These points are stressed here because most past work on fuelwood, not, surprisingly, has not fully met these criteria. The perceptions of what is needed have taken shape only in the past few years. Most earlier work was consequently too narrowly conceived, failing to provide sufficient, or sufficiently precise, information on the factors determining fuelwood supply and use and the basis for understanding the relevant interrelationships.
The present paper is intended to provide an overview of the components of the process of defining and executing a wood fuel survey, the more important of which are discussed in greater detail in later papers, and to set these in broader perspective. The next section of the paper discusses various characteristics of traditional fuel and energy systems that can influence the scope and methodology of a fuelwood survey. A subsequent section discusses system perspectives that markedly influence surveys. This is followed by a treatment of difficulties in estimating both the supply and demand sides of traditional fuel systems, including questions regarding the use of statistical and other source material, which concludes with discussing the different types of survey appropriate to different levels of need-for information; also, some general principles are stated regarding recommended approaches in deciding what to do.
2. Basic characteristics of wood fuel systems
2.1 Ubiquitous use of fuelwood
2.2 Non-commercial nature
2.3 Availability and access
2.4 Seasonal variation
2.5 Efficiency in end use
2.6 Changes with income and price
The following sections touch on some characteristics of traditional fuel systems that appear in many situations and which need to be considered in identifying the information needs and methodologies. Much of this discussion leads to a viewpoint, presented explicitly later in this paper, that traditional fuel systems are part of complex physical and social systems, and that potential changes must reflect these complexities.
2.1 Ubiquitous use of fuelwood
Recent FAO estimates suggest that in 1980 approximately three-fourths of the population of the developing world - 2 000 million people - depended on traditional fuels for their domestic energy requirements, and that by the year 2000 this number could grow to 3 000 million (FAO, 1981). Traditional fuels, a large portion of the overall energy consumption in most developing countries, are used extensively and often exclusively in meeting the household needs of people in both rural and urban areas. They are also used to a varying extent in the commercial, agricultural and industrial sectors, including some large-scale industrial uses.
Traditional fuels represent as much as 90 percent of the total energy use in countries such its Nepal, Tanzania and Mali. Most developing countries lie in a range from 30 to 80 percent or more overall reliance on traditional fuels, and the importance of traditional fuels may well be increasing.
The transition from traditional to commercial fuels, common to the history of industrial development in the developed world, will in all likelihood not occur in many developing countries in the foreseeable future. Traditional fuel use will probably remain large in absolute quantity, even if most resource bases are deteriorating due to population growth and depletion of local forest resources. None of the alternative sources of energy, discussed later in the paper and in Annex IV, could be developed and put in place at acceptable cost in quantities likely to remove the dependence of the bulk of this enormous, and growing, number of people upon traditional fuels.
The use of traditional fuels in the domestic sector is not simply a rural phenomenon. Urban households rely on traditional fuels, often charcoal. Many of the more serious scarcity and environmental degradation problems occur in areas surrounding major urban areas. While the use of commercial fuels for cooking, water heating, and space heating is more common in the urban areas where incomes are higher and these fuels are more readily and cheaply available, traditional fuel use is extensive.
Domestic uses of firewood, charcoal and agricultural residues are for cooking, heating water and space heating. The last is relatively unimportant in the lowland humid tropics, but can be substantial at high elevations and during chilly seasons elsewhere.
Table 1-1 shows the estimated range of average per capita use of fuelwood in a number of broad regions in the developing world. The differences mainly reflect different climatic situations, and fuel availability and economic conditions which are discussed in the subsequent sections. Use in particular locations can vary considerably both within and outside these ranges.
Table 1-1 Fuelwood use in selected regions
m^3/cap/yr
Africa
Arid and sub-arid areas
Savanna areas
1.0 to 1.5
High forest areas
1.2 to 1.7
Mountainous areas
1.4 to 1.9
Asia
Indo-Gangetic plains
0.2 to 0.7
Lowland areas in S.E. Asia
0.3 to 0.9
High forest areas
0.9 to 1.3
Mountainous areas
1.3 to 1.8
Latin America
Andean plateau
0.95 to 1.6
Arid areas
0.6 to 0.9
Semi-arid areas
0.7 to 1.2
Other areas
0.5 to 1.2
Source: Map of the Fuelwood Situation in Developing Countries Explanatory Note. Food and Agriculture Organization, Rome, 1981.
Variations in consumption levels also reflect variable use of wood fuels in rural industries and agriculture. Though seldom approaching the scale of domestic use, these can be considerable an is shown, for example, by the results of the survey in Nepal by Donovan reported on in Annex II.
2.2 Non-commercial nature
The traditional fuels of firewood, charcoal, agricultural residues (rice, straw) and dung are, in most parts of the world, largely non-commercial in the nature of their paths from point of supply to ultimate use (charcoal is the one general exception). Most traditional fuels are gathered by the users, and women are the major users and gatherers in much of the world. Cash markets usually do exist, mainly for part of fuelwood supply and much of charcoal (the more concentrated fuels). Occasionally cash markets develop for dung and for crop residues, mainly for urban consumers, but also for some rural households and institutions (shops, schools, bars). Although cash or formal markets may not play an important role for many traditional fuels, such as rice or Millet straw, there are frequently complex service or exchange relations in rural societies in which traditional fuels are just one component.
This non-commercial nature of traditional fuels is one of the reasons why these energy supplies are not generally accounted for in forestry and energy statistics. Energy to the statistician has usually included only those energy forms marketed on a large scale through some centralized market system (coal, oil, electricity) - the supplies referred to as commercial energies. This has been a major factor in the widespread failure to recognize the size of the share of fuelwood in national energy and forestry balances. Although perceptions of the statisticians are rapidly changing in this respect, the statistics are at present woefully inadequate.
2.3 Availability and access
Because of its non-commercial nature firewood use is heavily affected by its physical availability to the user, which varies markedly from country to country, within a country, and even among groups within a specific village. There are a number of reasons for this.
Collection for own use requires that there be local supplies. These have often been heavily depleted by deforestation. Even when forest stands are close, government or other ownership and use regulations may prevent firewood use. Ownership or-use characteristics may also limit the access of available non-forest woodland along roads, between crop areas, or within homesteads.
In many countries major portions of forest areas are controlled by government departments and access and use for firewood offtake and/or charcoal production is limited, or prohibited, even if enforcement is limited. In other cases, while ownership may be at least nominally with central governments, control is with local public authorities. These local bodies are often influenced by larger landowners and other richer or powerful people, and so are unrepresentative of the whole populations, and likely to distribute production unevenly.
Access problems also exist for the poor or landless with respect to agricultural residues such as dung. However, here the problem is not just a matter of ownership, since animals that graze in forests and uncultivated lands produce dung which is less available than dung from animals kept in stalls. In many situations availability and access can vary significantly within a given village, according to kinship, class or patron-client relationships. Access is often strongly related to ownership of energy producing resources (forest or homestead lands, animals or crop land) with the small landowners and landless being at a distinct disadvantage. The distributional aspects can also be a function of location, particularly in hilly areas where a village can occupy an area encompassing significant differences in elevation, and resources (forest or good crop land) vary with elevation.
Availability may also be affected by alternative uses, and alternative fuels. For example, some countries mandate that residues be burned in the field to control disease (e.g., cotton in Sudan), and in other countries field burning is a traditional practice. In central Java, rice husks are sold an a fuel but on the nearby island of Lombok these husks are available free to anyone who will take them. The difference is a function of the high population density and lack of fuel resources in central Java.
Access to residues belonging to the rich may not be available to the poor so that, even in such a fuel-poor country as Bangladesh, rich farmers burn rice straw in the field. This phenomenon accompanies the transition from subsistence to market economices in rural areas.
2.4 Seasonal variation
Traditional fuel use may vary significantly in both amount and relative composition of different fuels from season to season. Both demand and supply factors influence these changes, At the household or farm level, demand factors include increases in consumption for cooking during festival periods, space heating requirements during colder months in some areas, crop drying and other food processing needs in the post harvest season.
On the supply side an important factor is the changing availability, quantity and quality of fuel sources. Rice or millet straw, for example, is likely to be abundantly available after the harvest but scarce later in the year. Fuelwood is likely to be scarcer in the wet season when it is harder to gather and carry, and when there are competing demands for labour for activities such as land preparation and harvesting, in many situations there is a dramatic change in relative composition, for example with millet straw being the dominant fuel in some and fuelwood in others. To arrive at an accurate assessment of total fuelwood needs in the year, it is therefore often necessary to monitor use through the different seasons.
2.5 Efficiency in end use
Energy requirements for cooking probably do not vary significantly within a region, and change by only an estimated ± 30 percent with changes in diet, cooking techniques and stove designs.
However, the difficulties of understanding and quantifying the use of traditional fuels in rural areas in developing countries is compounded by lack of information on the efficiencies of operation of many of the principal and use devices, which can vary widely with both design and method of use. The energy efficiency of traditional stoves is frequently 10 percent or less, compared to a cooking efficiency of 30 percent or greater in a western stove. This inefficiency is common to grain drying and space heating as well.
One reason traditional fuels loom high in gross energy budgets in developing countries is because such fuels are burned at much lower efficiencies than commercial fuels. Energy budgets presented in terms of net or end use show a much greater importance of commercial fuels than do gross energy comparisons. Because of this, energy planners in India in the 1960s chose to use 'coal replacement' values that consider differing efficiencies of use rather than the more widely used 'coal equivalents' (National Council of Applied Economic Research, 1965). However, for many types of cooking, measurements of conversion efficiencies are nonexistent, so that meaningful comparisons on any 'replacement' basis are not possible.
Although actual measurements of conversion efficiencies are few, they have increasingly been incorporated into resource studies. They are particularly important, because one major option for intervention in a shortage situation can often be to reduce or curb growth in future demand through adoption of a more efficient stove or other conversion process. Any such impact on demand will feed back into lower future supply needs, a potential development which need to be recognised in looking at the possibilities for interventions on the supply side. The issues arising in measurement of conversion efficiency are discussed in detail by Geller and Dutt in Annex III.
2.6 Changes with income and price
How traditional fuel use varies with household income is a complicated question, interrelated with other critical factors such as price and availability of both traditional and conventional commercial fuels.
In the literature on energy use in developing countries, a notion of 'stages of development' of fuel sources is often mentioned. This suggests that, as people's income increases, they move from reliance on traditional fuels to reliance on conventional commercial fuels. While a comparison of, say, the United States and India, or a comparison of Dacca with a village in Bangladesh, lends credence to such a 'theory', differences other than income may account for consumption patterns. For example, in explaining differences within Bangladesh, it appears that the absence of access to traditional, noncommercial fuels is what accounts for some people entering the commercial, fuel system, rather than an increase in purchasing power. Frequently, it may be the poorest groups who therefore purchase their fuel requirements, because they have no access to traditional sources.
In many countries fuels used by the domestic sector (kerosene and LPG) are heavily subsidized. When local prices reflect increases in international oil prices, this can induce switches to use of traditional fuels, for the conventional fuels are limited largely to higher income groups and industrial/commercial users. Many urban families of the professional classes in Manila, for example, are reported to be returning to at least partial use of traditional fuels, because of recent increases in the price of LPG.
3. Important system perspectives
3.1 Wood fuels as part of complex systems
3.2 The fuel cycle of traditional fuels
3.3 Energy requirements, supply conversion and end use systems
3.1 Wood fuels as part of complex systems
In a typical village energy balance some agricultural produce is sold to the outside and some chemical fertilizer and other inputs are brought into the village, it is not a closed system. In many areas kerosene is imported for lighting (and sometimes cooking), and in more developed situations petroleum fuel may be used for pumping or mechanical tilling. The energy flows exhibit many interconnections. Any resource adjustments - e.g., fewer livestock, forest clearing for agriculture, or higher crop yields - imply altered energy availabilities and needs.
Consequently, for many traditional energy sources, sectoral planning and analysis must account for complex competing uses. For example, trees provide many useful products. They give shade and shelter and yield fruits and seeds of food or economic value. The leaves and twigs are used as animal fodder or firewood. The trees themselves may be harvested as firewood or used as building material. Residues from the tree may be spread on the fields as fertilizer. Thus the potential for fuel from a tree has more than one value, depending on alternative uses. The complex relationship also concerns labour inputs. In addition to the important role of women in traditional fuel gathering, there can be complexities of adult vs. child labour availabilities. For example, in Indonesia and Thailand children collect dead tree matter but adults must out branches from trees in fuel scarce seasons so as not to kill the tree.
This complex relationship holds for most of the traditional fuel sources. To answer the question of fuel potential it is necessary to take into account the alternative demands on the material for uses other than fuel. Many residues have competing uses in societies such as China and Bangladesh; rice straw for animal feed, compost and fuel, jute sticks for construction material and fuel; and cow dung for fertilizer and fuel. There is often a delicate resource balance within a household or village that limits residue availabilities for fuel.
For many crops, in addition to multiple products, there are alternative, competing, energy-related uses. This situation is well illustrated by the most important crop in many areas of Bangladesh - deep water amon paddy. This crop is broadcast before the monsoon, grows in four to nine feet of water and is harvested after the monsoon waters recede; The complexity of different purposes served by the cultivation of amon paddy in illustrated below where the possible end uses of' each product are in competition with one another (Briscoe, August 1979).
Amon Paddy Products
Use
Human food
Fodder
Fuel
Fertilizer
Construction
Leaves
Grain
Husk
Straw-nara*
Straw-kher**
(Legend: +++ predominant use; ++ used commonly but not frequently; + used but uncommonly)
* Nara is the tough straw which remains in the field after the paddy is harvested.
** Kher is the more tender straw which is carried from the field with the harvested paddy and which remains after the threshing of the grain.
In many agrarian ecosystems, particularly those in much of Asia, the concept of 'crop wastes' is entirely inappropriate, since almost every product of cultivation is utilized in some way, so there are no slack or unutilized resources.
This resource complexity and utilization makes the process of understanding the energy system contingent on an appreciation of the agricultural and livestock systems. The high degree of interconnection between different sectors, such as the introduction of high yielding varieties (HYVs), has important consequences for the energy and livestock sectors. Appropriate planning in any particular sector, including the energy sector, cannot proceed on the basis of a set of fixed assumptions about the other sectors of the economy. As has been pointed out by many observers (e.g., Brokensha and Riley, 1978) similar complexities occur with fuelwood, use where many tree varieties are used with specific preferences for particular uses. Local people show a highly developed knowledge of trees and their uses.
Among serious resource complexities are the multiple pressures on forest land. Deforestation comes about due to permanent clearing of forest land, for agriculture as well as fuelwood gathering or other overuse of the forest resources. The pressures on the land for food and other crop production, and grazing use, constitute one of the principal constraints to reintroducing, and expanding, tree cover.
As mentioned above, another resource complexity arises from the multiple, competing, uses of the wood resources. In the survey in Malawi reported on in Annex II, it was found that people in the fuelwood, a priority which strongly influences their attitudes towards replanting trees. Too few studies have examined in micro detail the multiple food, fodder and fibre needs, and other pressures on the resource base.
When studies include such issues and other resources complexities, they not only reinforce this view of traditional fuels being part of complex resources and social systems, but also suggest that solutions are not easy and that alternatives must be evaluated in the light of these complexities.^1 Part of the complexity is the differential access to resources and the failure of aggregate measures (at the village level) to reflect problems or options particular to class/group or locations.
^1 e.g., the studies by Bajracharya, Briscoe, Brokensha and Riley, and the Fleurets summarized in Annex II, and the work that Reddy bases his paper on.
As has been mentioned earlier, there are important differences in consumption patterns, problems and options available to different households and groups within the same village. It is important to understand the social, economic or other characteristics that determine these differences, whether it be size and type of land holdings or other social/economic characteristics such as access to resources, or the source of cash income (particularly off-farm income) which is so important in many areas.
Differential access to energy and other resources, varying energy needs and multiple demands on natural resources suggest that it is useful to examine village energy systems in a manner which considers resource flows. This approach allows an evaluation of the impacts of possible intervention which may markedly change the pattern of resource flow such as happens when dung and other residues are redirected from existing uses to feedstock for biogas production.
An example of this change in resource flows is presented in Fig. 1-1 which outlines the effects of the introduction of biogas plants. In this case, biogas diverts the use of manure from direct use as fertilizer and fuel and requires capital and labour from the household. On the other hand, the biogas units provide fuel for the household, fertilizer, and possibly pumping energy for the cropland. In addition, biogas decreases the demand for fuelwood and also, in the case of use in pumping, increases crop production, thereby either raising cash income or reducing food purchases. An important impact not shown in the figure is the potential differential impact across socio-economic classes or groups if dung previously utilized by poorer families is no longer available because the animal owner now uses it for biogas production.
This example was provided in order to indicate how a detailed analysis of the resource flows in a village should be part of any examination of energy related technology intervention. In order to understand these issues, resource flows, and class or group differences, it is necessary to have the following types of information: village demographic, forest/homestead treeland, agricultural land, and livestock resource by class (or group, if location^1 or other social economic characteristic such as off-farm income is important); village cropping patterns and agricultural production by class/group; village feed balances - for households (human) and animals by class/group; as well as information on seasonal variation. Capturing the characterization of class or other special differences is very important in intervention design and is further discussed below. In the next paper Reddy presents an example of a detailed approach to examining the energy and other resource flows in a
village.
^1 In hilly or mountainous regions, resource availability by group or class for people in a single village may differ dramatically in locations at different elevations (Bajracharya, 1980; Brush, 1977).
Survey work can be much more economical, practical and directed, if prior investigations can be carried out to get an idea of the various complexities that should be considered. These complexities make the estimation of fuel supplies and associated food/resource demands difficult, and when coupled with other characteristics of the problem, argue for a multi-faceted approach to the problem.
3.2 The fuel cycle of traditional fuels
All fuels have a cycle of stages of activities that start with the exploration or identification of the resource and continue to the ultimate use of the fuel for one or more energy and uses such as heating, cooking or running motors. While the fuel cycle for conventional fossil fuels has stages such as exploration not explicitly found in that of traditional fuels, renewable sources such as forests must be identified and in some cases assessed for their potential. Both fossil and traditional fuels share such steps in the cycle as mining or harvesting, refining (if defined as a chemical transformation, charcoal making, a thermochemical process, is a refining process), storage, transport, marketing (in the case where the traditional fuels are also commercial fuels) and end use.
Figure 1-1 Altered resource flows due to biogas plant
In both conventional and traditional fuel cycles, the transport and storage steps may take place more than once, separated by either space or time. In conventional fuels there may be more than one marketing stage. This can also be the case for commercial traditional fuels such as fuelwood and charcoal. Since these are renewable-based fuels, there is also an activity or stage not found in fossil fuel, cycles, namely a managed or unmanaged regenerate activity.
Figure 1-2 shows the fuel cycle for fuelwood and charcoal. When the activities are connected, this indicates a possible transport stage in the cycle. Storage and marketing activities are shown only once between other major activities where they might occur, but in some cases there may be repeated distinct marketing and storage stages associated with different dealers. Also, the figure indicates marketing coming before storage, though these activities are often reversed.
These stages of activities all have implications for information requirements for programmes that would lead to an intervention in one or more stages of the cycle. The lean commercial the system the more the cycle will be localised (except for distant supplies). What, are come information needs in relation to this cycle, particularly where the system is commercial? For each of the activities or stages, from reforestation or natural regeneration through to end use, and including multiple storage, transport and marketing steps, It is important to know how the activity in performed and what, the costs are. It is also important to know the performance characteristics of particular activities, i.e., does the wood or charcoal deteriorate when stored? What is the conversion efficiency in charcoal making? The problem of inefficiency of and use is very important in traditional fuel systems., inefficiency In charcoal making in also important. When activities are performed in more than
one manner, i.e., transport by trucks of different size, or by rail, or charcoal making in earth pits as well as steel kilns it is important to know the costs and performance characteristics of each different approach.
Information on the costs and performances of the various stages of the fuel cycle in Important for coat effective programmes. The best way to Improve the systems W differ in various circumstances. In some cases technological change that increases the conversion efficiency of charcoal making may be best. In others, increasing the productivity of forest supplies may be appropriate, and in other cases improving the efficiency of the end use device such as stoves, or increasing the competition in the market, may be the most satisfactory. Selection can only be made based on an understanding of the economics of the whole fuel cycle. In rural subsistence fuelwood supply/use systems, the fuel cycle is localised and condensed. In commercial wood fuel systems, for example to supply urban markets, they are likely to be both complex and extended. In a later paper Morgan describes the main features of such systems, and discusses the particular information needs associated with then.
3.3 Energy requirements, supply conversion and end use systems
The energy requirements of a rural village for domestic, agricultural and industrial activities are heat light, shaft power and other mechanical powers The delivery of these requirements may have associated fuel cycles based on different sources, an has been noted above, in the cape of many rural energy systems the spatial dimensions of the cycle are compressed except for imported supplies such as kerosene, but for all other sources there will be moot or all of the stages. In the cycles introduced earlier. Improvements in rural energy systems my take place in one or more stages of the cycle, improvements in the delivery of energy to the rural areas include energy source modification or augmentation, Improvement in end use device, and development of conversion technologies (Figure 1-3).
Energy source modification or augmentation involves the development or use of a new source of energy or the modification of present sources. For example, in many rural areas in developing countries, wind power, small-scale hydro and solar power systems represent a potential new energy source. An augmented source would be the planting of village woodlots of fast-growing tree species which, when coupled with technologies as gasifiers, offers new ways to meat end use needs (see Annex IV).
Figure 1-2. Schematic of fuel cycles for fuelwood/charcoal
Figure 1-3. Relationship between village energy and energy technologies
Many energy conversion technologies are currently in use or under development. Examples range from biogas converters, under intensive development in many areas of the developing world, to high-technology options such an photovoltaics. Because of the high cost of some conversion technologies, improvements in end-use devices must focus on efficient use of the converted energy. For example, with the introduction of the new conversion technology of photovoltaics, energy can be generated from sunlight, but the high coat of that energy means that end-use devices such an pumps mast be designed for high efficiency.
Many traditional fuel system interventions are feasible in a wide variety of circumstances. Two different sets of interelated stages in fuel cycles based on traditional sources are shown schematically with the a shading in Figure 1-3. On of theme is the source (biomass), conversion (gasifier, engine), and end use device (pump) system to most the effective energy requirement of shaft power for the energy need of pumping or drainage. Another in the system of source (biomass) and use device (improved stove) to meet the effective requirement of heat for cooking. Theme systems could both have competing systems to moot the effective energy requirements based on other sources (fossil, hydro, etc.) and utilizing various conversion and/or end use devices. Any comprehensive examination of investments to improve the rural energy, systems should consider a wide variety of such changes.
It is not the purpose of this publication to describe and discuss the different technologies that the planner dealing with fuelwood related rural energy situations might need to consider. This information is readily available in existing literature. However, Annex IV provides a brief review of the principal relevant technologies biogas, small-scale hydro-power and others. Included in the annex in a table which classifies the technologies by sources, conversion and village energy and use.
The table highlights those sources with potential for application in rural areas. These potentials lie mainly in industrial, agricultural production and processing and service applications. An has been noted earlier, the possibility of application within the household is limited because of cost, scale of operation, complexity and related factors.
4. Dynamic features of wood fuel systems
4.1 Impacts of increasing wood fuel shortages
4.2 Energy for future development
4.3 Increasing industrial and agricultural demands for wood fuels
4.4 Integrating technical, economic and social analysis
4.1 Impacts of increasing wood fuel shortages
The process of change at the village and household level in likely to mean that future energy needs will be different in a number of respects from present usage. It will not suffice, therefore, for surveys to record only the present. An attempt must also be made to identify the factors of change influencing energy needs and use, so that interventions reflect what is likely to materialize in the years ahead.
The growing shortage of wood fuels, and often of available supplies of other traditional fuels, is itself one of the main factors bringing about change in needs, Shortages in the first instance are likely to induce a spontaneous improvement in efficiency of use within the framework of present practices and technologies. More care is taken with, for example, a three-stone fire to economies on use, to put the fire out when not in use to manipulate the firewood pieces economic that they produce effective heat most efficiently, etc. In short, in situations with presently limited supplies, to most the same cooking needs in the future, lees fuelwood per household may be needed than in used at present if there are improvements in efficiency.
As shortages deepen, more fundamental changes are likely to occur. Fuelwood supplies may have to come from the excessive pruning, or oven destruction, of trees of economic value - fruit trees, trees like Acacia senegal which produce gum arabic, or trees maintained along stream banks to protect water supplies. Other materials of economic value, such as an animal dung and crop residues, also got diverted to fuel use. Though adequate supplies of fuel may be maintained in these way, it could well be that planning for the future will need to make provision for more fuelwood than in used at present in order to allow people to reverse these negative developments.
4.2 Energy for future development
Rural change is likely to affect more them just the level of future subsistence energy needs. This is the dominant requirement in initial stages of development but energy in required to most more than these needs, The energy crisis is but one facet of changing population and natural resource balance in the developing world. It is a crisis of development and resource distribution, and of the inefficiency and insufficiency of energy use. Inefficiency creates larger fuel demands and a greater human effort expended in fuel gathering. Insufficiency causes the not amount of useful energy consumed in agricultural and craftwork production to be low. In order to increase food, fibre, and fuel production end to increase jobs, more energy in the forms of fertiliser, water lifting, seed and crop drying, and mechanical power in required.
The level of economic development, and access to fossil fuels determine to a large extent the choice of technologies. Although it is conventional to assume that development means more chemical fertilizer, tractors, and diesel and electrical motor pumps, it in rational to complement these commercial energy inputs with animal manure and plant residues and to use biomass-fueled heat engines, various solar, wind, water, biogas, and animal powered water lifting, and more efficient agricultural implements.
It in possible to suggest a certain progression, and Figure 1-4 suggests graphically how energy demands change over time as development proceeds in rural areas, The figure differentiates between household and non-household activities. In the household most activities (cooking, space heating) are found throughout the process of modernization, but the technologies and end use devices change. Some household activities such as cooling appear, or change, an modernization occurs. Nonhousehold activities, the technologies employed, and the concomitant energy needs, change dramatically in the course of technological modernization, Figure 1-4 portrays some of the possible activity and technology changes associated with modernization. The transitions are indications of the type of changes that may occur, as technological modernization nay have different transitions in various circumstances.
Different technologies, associated with the indicative activity changes for nonhousehold activities, are shown at the bottom of the figure. The evolution of technological modernization increases energy demands. As development proceeds, technologies progress from smithies and forges -to rice and flour mills, to small motors for machinery repair and lathes, to sawmills, to more complex drilling presses, to metal cutting machines, and to refrigeration, motorcycles, etc. Fuelwood and other biomass based alternatives can provide much of the energy for theme requirements. If development in to proceed, energy use mast increase, which may mesa increased demand for fuelwood and other traditional fuels. To meet these requirements there are viable (technical, economic, and financial) alternatives, many of them based on firewood, charcoal and other traditional fuels, which can be used for development in the rural and parts of the urban industrial sector.
4.3 Increasing industrial and agricultural demands for wood fuels
In addition to urban and rural commercial and industrial establishments currently utilizing wood fuels, many urban industries which now use conventional commercial fuels could switch to wood and charcoal if the relative prices of the former continue to increase. The principal candidate industries are those which already use firewood and charcoal to produce some of their process hosts. These include iron and steelmaking, lime and cement reducing, metal smelting, brick and ceramic firing, cash crop drying and refining and glass blowing. In come countries urban industrial use of fuelwood (and charcoal) is a major factor and the potential for increased use in the urban industrial actor appears quite large. Even more important in many situations is the potential for mall scale rural industry and agriculture. These rural and urban traditional fuel needs are often within the scope of fuelwood survey efforts.
Figure 1-4 Changes in energy demands with development/technological modernization
Annex IV presents some limited additional discussion of energy requirements of industry and agriculture that can be met through woodfuel and other traditional sources. The Annex also briefly discusses some issues of technology improvements, including the important issue of improvements in stove technology.
Traditional fuels and energy system characteristics have important implications for information needs. This information is necessary in order to understand the existing and potential future demands for fuelwood so that broad policy and specific projects can be formulated to meet the energy requirements for both subsistence and development. The formulation of such policies and specific projects should integrate the social, economic and technical factors as discussed below.
4.4 Integrating technical, economic and social analysis
Analysis of the available information must be done in the context of both the existing situation and of what might evolve as a result of expected agricultural or rural developments. However, there is a need to be realistic in considering how complicated this may make the analysis.
Possible interventions must be evaluated keeping in mind what may cause them to fail. Broadly speaking, failure occurs when an intervention programme does not achieve its objectives. Many current interventions avoid failure by setting as objectives information, R+D, field testing, etc., but it is important to consider more serious objectives-increases in production, equity, diffusion of technology. It is useful to reflect on why there have been failures and successes in different, situations - why the Guatemalan design of the Lorena stove did not catch on in Indonesia; why community forestry has worked in Korea and is beginning to work in Gujarat; where social forestry has failed and why; why was it not forseen that the biogas facility could be maldistributive in many Indian settings; why biogas has worked in China.
The reasons for failure may stem from one of many social, physical, economic, institutional or environmental factors. People may not adopt a now stove became it in too expensive, or because it fails to conform to culturally defined cooking requirements. Attempts at conserving forest stands may fail because the rural poor who have few alternative sources of livelihood out the trees for income, or because high urban demand leads local entrepreneurs to poach these reserves. Maldistributive impacts include failures due to market, social structure, cultural and ecological interrelations, and technological/specification failure to provide sustaining input.
Maldistributive failures can perhaps be avoided, or at least minimized, if the effects of an intervention are analysed in a systematic examination of before and after resource flows. If the design of certain biogas programmes had uncovered the change in resource flows disrupting dung availability to the landless poor, perhaps they would not have received state support. Technological design or specification failure may be avoided with better information, on design, e.g., matching the intervention better to the and use: if the primary cocking is quick, with high temperature, the solution is not a high thermal mass stove.
If the present and future energy demands are well understood, presumably the correct technical, social, and economic intervention aim be selected. It is then a matter of whether it in economically and/or fiscally sustainable. Sustaining inputs such as spares for mind or micro hydro machines, floating tops for biogas digestors or seedlings for a woodlot programme can be incorporated into design. Bat where are the other factors, the necessary local social/institutional structures? If the intervention requires group action, is there the necessary homogeneity of interest within the group, the past experiences of cooperation necessary to build on? If the technological solution requires a particular expertise, in there an institutional capability to develop this expertise? Thorough evaluation can reduce future failures. This evaluation should integrate social, economic and technical information and should focus on the village, household and/or user level. The approach can build on
information regarding village systems that include not only conventional technical/economic information, but also information encompassing the interrelated resource flows and the complex social economic systems in which these flows occur. Throughout any energy studies, local peoples perceptions and knowledge must be taken into account. Local participation in information gathering and learning is important.
Viewing the rural energy issues from the perspective of improving the system has obvious implications for information requirements for both the characterization of the end use demand and the evaluation of possible supply or demand interventions. This means knowing about all demands, not just demand for fuel for cooking and also about social and institutional structures, and about a series of intervention pathways that are the equivalent of alternative fuel cycles from source to end use. Some information my be available from existing sources, some will ooze from survey efforts, The importance of estimation problem and the importance of using other information resources are explored in the following section.
5. Information gathering
5.1 Sources of information
5.2 Supply estimates for traditional fuels
5.3 Measuring fuelwood consumption
5.1 Sources of information
Both in defining the nature of the rural energy problem and potentials, and defining and designing possible actions, there is much potentially useful information. The more activities are aimed at supporting specific project actions, the more expansive are the dimensions of the useful social and organizational information. An assessment of possible action will generally require estimation of both demand and supply sides of traditional fuel systems. And in many oases, such as defining the magnitude of traditional fuel demands on a regional or national basis, it in useful to incorporate some efforts on the supply side as a complement to primarily demand/consumption oriented surveys.^1
^1 For a discussion of the use of supply estimates to verify and balance consumption estimates, see deLucia and Tabors (1980). Part of this discussion in this section draws heavily from this work. The complementary of demand and supply analysis is also discussed by Douglas (1981a).
For both supply and demand side estimates, there are often existing sources of information. These should always be fully utilized, preferably before study design. Such existing sources frequently exist for both supply related issues - agricultural censuses, forestry surveys, animal population studies - and for the consumption/demand side household expenditure surveys and other outputs of national statistical services (e.g. industrial censuses), as well as earlier energy demand survey.
Some previous efforts my provide information on both supply and demand aspects of the system, This is often the case for agricultural censuses that include a focus on small farmers, special land utilization studies, social science studies, and agricultural or forest project studies. The investigators involved in such studies can also be a source of both general information and guidance. In addition, they may provide possible raw data and information that is not reported in published documents which did not have an energy focus, but which could be useful if reinterpreted with such focus, in a later papery Brokensha and Castro discuss these and other sources of information in more detail.
The importance of such sources in to be emphasized, particularly when attempting to construct an estimate of the quantitative nature of rural energy systems. The author and his colleagues have repeatedly found such divers sources useful: for example, detailed agricultural studies can provide the basis for estimation of residues availability if production information in utilized with other Information about residues per unit of production; anthropological studies can be reinterpreted for estimates of energy supplies and requirements by classy using complementary information from studios of agricultural production and processing.
5.2 Supply estimates for traditional fuels
Because of their diffuse nature, it is difficult and costly to obtain accurate estimates of resources and supplies of fuelwood and other traditional fuels. Statistics on forest area, not to mention production, often differ with the source. In India, forest area statistics differ with the reporting agency. Not only do definitions of forest differ, but purposes for which the statistics are collected also vary.
Fuelwood production statistics are often highly unreliable because so little comes from recorded production. Estimates of standing wood volume are often of only limited value in estimating potential fuelwood production because volume and yield estimates are generally geared to larger roundwood sizes which are relevant for timber uses. The twigs, leaves and small branches which are also used for fuel are seldom measured or estimated. Information on the ratio of total biomass (including leaves, twigs and small branches) to measured stemwood which varies with species, maturity, etc., in limited. This presents a problem in estimating fuelwood supplies and can result in an underestimate of fuelwood potential. The problem is further complicated by the fact that in many situations much fuelwood is obtained not by felling trees, but by removing leaves, twigs and small branches which are then renewed through farther tree growth. The total lifetime contribution of a tree to fuelwood
supplies can therefore be much greater than its volume if felled. Estimates in the Bangladesh survey summarised in Annex IV suggest that there it could be many times as great (Douglas, 1981a). However, this aspect of tree production, which is obviously critical to estimation of fuelwood supply potential, has received very little attention to date, and so very little useable information is available.
Consequently, earlier studies, by underestimating supply potential, often overestimate the severity of the fuelwood, problems Another serious difficulty for statistical analyses in that most fuelwood comes from trees in open country, around houses and common areas, along roads, or in other areas not technically defined as forests. Statistics on crown cover outside official forest areas are also frequently not available. Recent work in Bangladesh indicates some approaches and associated estimation problem to both of these issues - the estimation of total tree biomass and the "nonforest" tree resources (Douglas, 1981a; Hammermaster, 1981).
Much of the difficulty associated with estimates of dung and agricultural residue fuel supplies arisen because the supplies themselves derive from another, generally biological, system. Thus, the estimation of cow dung available for use in biogas converters in the residual of that amount produced by the animal, loss that amount not collected, lose that amount used for other purposes. In estimating supplies of dung, the measure of production from my given animal may require careful analysis of diet, time of year, and availability of fodder crops or grazing land. Reliable data an number of livestock are often lacking. Benchmarks for crop and livestock data are often earlier agricultural censuses.
The production of dung per animal has been estimated by a number of authors but in not generally consistent even within one source, let alone among sources,^1 Large country-to-country differences in dung production exist because of differences in breeds, diets, and herd management practices. Use of U.S., or other developed country, data for estimation of production of animals in the developing nations invariably leads to overestimation.
^1 In the (Indian) National Council of Applied Economic Research Study (1965), cow dung a quoted an 2,092 kcal/kg and 2,444 kcal/kg. The literature contains a wide range of estimates, from the low estimates of the Indian studies to an estimated 3,500 to 3,900 kcal/kg of dry dung in a study of Peruvian dung use (Winterhalder et al. 1974).
The estimation of crop residuals offers much the same challenge. Data on crop residue production, although often better than livestock data, are still unreliable. The amounts of residues left following harvest and/or crop processing are not know and the use of these residues varies significantly. Residues estimates must account for varietal differences, cultural practices and processing techniques. Within South Asia, each variety of rice produces different quantities of grain to stalk. The ratio of the high-yielding varieties (HYV) of grain to stalk is roughly 1:1, that of traditional grain varieties to stalk, 1:3, and that of the floating grains to stalk, 1:4. These ratios become increasingly important in both the analysis of existing production of residuals and likely future supplies of crop residuals as improved rice varieties are introduced.
In many situations, such legitimate differences in residue availability need to be considered, and care must be exercised before using coefficients based on another situation in which the varieties, and/or yields, are quite different. It is also important to note that these coefficients may change over time as traditional varieties of rice and wheat are replaced with HYVs. This will decrease residue production per kg of grain.
Many estimates of crop residuals, dung and firewood supplies are presented independent of any statement of the moisture content. It is not enough to know that there are a specific number of kcal/kg in cow dung or a particular fuelwood species without knowing the moisture content at measurement. Heating values determined in the laboratory would ordinarily be given for dry material, but the actual moisture content of fuel in a specific situation is seldom known. Futhermore, for many fuels of no commercial value, heating values have not been determined, and analysts are forced to use values for "similar" materials. Future analyses should try to maintain internal consistency in the analysis of moisture content and should report the moisture content of all materials used, especially inter-country analysis of one specific traditional fuels.
Measurement of moisture content and heat value is further complicated by how the data will be used. If what is needed in simply a figure per production unit (per animal, square metro, plant mass, etc.), then dry weight energy value is sufficient. But if data on fuel use is desired, then information on average moisture content at time of use, or potential use, should be collected. Methods of doing so are described by Geller and Dutt in Annex III.
5.3 Measuring fuelwood consumption
In addition to the difficulties for measurement posed by its diffused use, the seasonal variations in this use, and the fact that mat of it does not pass through any organized distribution system subject to record keeping, fuelwood presents a number of measurement problems stemming from its physical nature.
The small, irregular pieces in which fuelwood is usually used are difficult to measure, so that accurate estimates of volume are not easy to obtain. Often a variety of measures such as head load, cart load and, store are used, which themselves vary in size and contents Weight in a more accurate measure but the energy content of a piece of wood will vary with density, itself often a function of species, and with moisture content. As is discussed in more detail in Annex III, the only, measure which is appropriate for determining energy requirements is the weight of fuel consumed corrected for moisture content. The Annex note also deals with measurement of conversion of wood into charcoal which also varies widely.
A further not of issues arises in eliciting accurate information from the users about fuelwood consumption. In many circumstances fuelwood cutting and gathering in done illegally, often under the cover of darkness. This illegality has significant implications with respect to the willingness of those so employed to respond truthfully to enquiries about these activities and other associated efforts. This in but one of a number of factors which can intrude in field enquiries. There are numerous possible errors in consumption measurement and instrument procedures that must be considered in fuelwood surveys. These are discussed in a later paper by Brokensha and Castro, together with means of avoiding such distortions.
6. Wood fuel survey design
6.1 Categories of survey
6.2 Deciding what to do
6.1 Categories of survey
A basic promise of this paper is that wood fuel surveys and studies must be effectively geared to produce the information actually needed, As the information needs can vary widely - from data on aggregate magnitudes at the national level to detailed information at the project level - there is no single survey design or approach which will meet all needs.
Annex I, which in illustrated from experience from a number of surveys which were designed to meet a variety of different information needs, presents a classification of survey types, explaining their strengths and weaknesses in meeting particular information needs. The classification is structured around a few broad categories of past surveys.
Much of past work has been at the national level, to determine overall magnitudes of wood fuel use and its distribution. National, or regional, assessments are likely to need matching information on use of other fuels, and possibly also of wood fuel supply.
The restricted range of such national level information has usually been obtained from low intensity sample survey, using simple data gathering methods (questionnaires and enumerators). Gathering of wood fuel information has often been combined with the gathering of other data - normally forest product, energy or agricultural data.
At the other end of the spectrum have been the studies at the level of the village, group of villages or district. These have been directed at eliciting a broad range of information in order to illuminate the relationships and factors which explain the situation in which wood fuel supply and use is embedded. The bulk of this work has been research oriented, as distinct from project oriented, and has focussed on understanding the present situation rather than on possibilities for changes The tools used have been largely those of sociologists and other social scientists; recently, environmental engineers and systems analysts have made significant contributions.
There are many variations in between. An work has shifted in the last few years towards planning for intervention and change, approaches have began to emerge which draw from both types. Except on a very broad basis, it in not very useful to suggest rules for the appropriateness of survey types. The subsequent discussion suggests that for the purposes of preparing an investment plan, an eclectic approach which utilizes various methodologies, drawing heavily on existing information, is appropriate. But it is possible to make a few broad assertions about the appropriateness of some survey types for specific purposes.
If there is very little or no information about the magnitude and variation of current traditional fuel consumption, then this is a classic situation for a low intensity (small percentage of population) random ample household survey. In most cases, some stratification and even multi-stage techniques in survey design are appropriate. It will be necessary even at this level of information gathering to take account of seasonal change, something neglected in most work, and the various distortions in measurement and estimation which can lead to major inaccuracies in the magnitudes.
In the light of the caveats and difficulties in such approaches discussed in Annex 1, surveys are in most cases more useful if this approach is complemented by some efforts to examine the supply side. The supply analysis should verify that estimated consumption figures are feasible and generally in line with supply provision/offtake estimates, Supply analysis requires knowledge of supply split between lifetime yield from the trees and their ultimate felled volume, another badly neglected issue in most past work.
The next steps in developing an understanding of traditional fuel system will likely necessitate the use of both social science survey types - in depth if there is not an existing body of work, and more limited if there exists much on which to build, and the undertaking of some detailed analysis (based on both survey data and available studies) of resource supplies and current use. One area often overlooked in fuel studies is the importance of information on the complete fuel cycles.
In considering both commercial and non-commercial components of traditional fuel systems, the mix of survey and other approaches will be very dependent on the objectives of the effort and the relative emphasis will be situation specific. In the following section a few general principles are suggested.
6.2 Deciding what to do
Any decision on survey type and methodology is interrelated with the question of survey purposes. But the survey approach is also often markedly influenced by availability of resources - time, personnel and money. The process of determining the scale and resources of a survey may be more open if the survey purpose and design is part of larger energy and/or rural development effort in which decisions regarding the survey are made early and survey resources are a smaller part of the overall budget. Large sample surveys, even if only a small percentage of the population is sampled, require considerable time and effort for the preparation of the survey training of enumerators, field testing, revision, implementation and analysis. As has been stressed earlier, to capture seasonal variation, multiple samples of the same household my be required (this assumes household is sampling unit) to note at least wet and dry season variation.
Even in primarily consumption oriented surveys, sample size in dependent on the area and population to be studied - i.e., local, regional, national - and whether attempts are to be made to have statistical validity based on sample size. If resources are not available, and/or there is considerable existing work to build on, more limited approaches may be considered.
There can be no general answer regarding which approach to utilize. The best approaches are specific to the problem being addressed. The information necessary to make an overall estimate of the level of demand for traditional fuels is different from that needed to assess possible energy technology options in a particular area. But while it is not useful to make recommendations on the specifies to be followed in all situations, a few general principles are apparent:
- Review and make use of existing work elsewhere to suggest hypotheses that can be verified by the survey work.
- Review and make use of work elsewhere on the interrelations between fuelwood and the rest of the agro-economic environment that should be considered.
- Undertake pro-survey groundwork, reviewing other relevant efforts (social science surveys, anthropological and sociological research studies, household expenditure surveys, forest and forest product surveys, agricultural surveys, surveys of industries, earlier energy studies, etc.) to construct estimates, of national, regional, village or household traditional fuel balances, paying particular attention to questions of regional and seasonal variation and class distribution issues.
- If project analysis is part of the focus, make a tentative identification of candidate technologies; review available cost and performance information; review resource assessment information.
- Design the survey effort reflecting what has been learned in the above steps and design the survey to focus on critical information first; consider undertaking some 'quick and dirty' field surveys to farther assist the final survey design.
If the scope is very comprehensive, that is it encompasses both demand and supply questions and is geared to produce a rural oriented energy investment programme, there are none clear requirements that should be met. Development of a detailed rural-oriented investment plan requires an analysis of traditional fuels and renewable-based technologies, geared to rural applications. Such an analysis must be based on an integration of economics physical, technical, and social information, some of which, particularly the economic and social factors, are region or even village specific. Information each as that developed in national demand surveys at the macro level is sufficient to identify the magnitude of the problem, but in too aggregated for the requirements of a detailed investment plan.
The development of a rural wood fuel investment plan requires information of various types.
(a) A limited number of detailed village-specific studies to provide a better understanding of the complexities of village/rural energy systems including the economic and social parameters and constraints of these systems.
(b) Regional survey-based information to determine variations in the demand patterns, resource potential, and economic and social structure of the rural systems.
(c) Technical and economic information (including performance evaluation) regarding the possible old and new technologies and other alternatives that might be considered.
The overall body of work from Bangladesh which is summarized and discussed in Annex II gives some idea how work at the different levels can provide complementary inputs in moving towards the necessary information base for action.
While the discussion above suggests "the pieces" that would be part of a comprehensive effort aimed at understanding the traditional fuels systems, assessing resources and formulating investment plans, in few instances will all theme efforts be part of a single programme effort. Rather, the more likely, and perhaps feasible, approach will be to undertake parts of the effort, either as specific wood fuel focussed studies and surveys, or by integrating more energy related efforts into the ongoing work of both forest services and energy focussed agencies and other groups such as national statistical services, etc. As a body of knowledge develops, the need for large special effort surveys could be loosened and ultimately wood fuel related issues (both demand and supply) would be routinely factored into the planning apparatus.
Planning in this area is in its infancy in comparison with other sectors such as plantation forestry, Agriculture or water supply. One cannot expect a particular survey and associated efforts to be the definitive work in any area, but rather to contribute to an ongoing process. Towards this and the consciousness of the need for the types of information, briefly introduced in this paper, and discussed elsewhere in this publication, must be communicated not just to personnel explicity engaged in questions of fuelwood and rural energy, but also to those with complementary responsibilities in the many areas - forestry, agriculture, rural development, etc. - which intersect with the issues of rural energy.
<section>5</section>
2. Rural fuelwood: Significant relationships
Amulya Kumar N. Reddy
1. Introduction
2. The ecosystem approach
3. Agricultural ecosystems
4. Fuelwood projects and development
5. Land and fuelwood
6. Water and fuelwood
7. Nutrients and fuelwood
8. Inanimate energy and fuelwood
9. Animal energy and fuelwood
10. Fodder and fuelwood
11. Cooking and fuelwood
12. Trees and fuelwood
13. Other uses of wood
14. Wood and buildings
15. Wood exports and imports
16. Human beings and fuelwood
17. Fuelwood in an agricultural ecosystem
1. Introduction
Solar energy collected by plants and stored, in the form of biomass, particularly as wood, is a major source of energy in developing countries, as it war in the pre-industrial past of developed countries. But wood, is a renewable sources only when the rate at which it is depleted is less than the rate at which it is regenerated. This is certainly not the case in most developing countries where wood is a rapidly dwindling resources due to the multiplicity of its uses and the escalation in the magnitude of its consumption resulting from the burgeoning populations.
Attention has therefore been focussed on programmes for the regeneration of wood resources, but very few of those have been successful. The reasons for the failure of these programmes are many, but one important reason is the fact that wood is involved in a number of relationships and there is insufficient appreciation of either the nature or extent of these relationships.
The aim of this paper, therefore, is to develop a scheme which permits the display and description of (a) the relationships involving the use of wood and (b) the potentialities of wood as a resources in the economy.
2. The ecosystem approach
One of the most useful ways in which the inter-relationships involving wood can be portrayed is through the ecosystem approach in which the term ecosystem is used to designate any area of nature that includes living organism and non-living substances interacting to produce an exchange of materials between the living and non-living parts.
The advantage of the ecosystem approach in that it clearly reveals the entities involved in the functioning of the ecosystem, their interactions, the flows of materials, nutrients and energy, and above all, the environmental constraints on economic activities as well au the impact of these activities upon, the environment. If the depletion and regeneration of wood resources is being considered in a particular geographical region, then that region becomes the "area of nature" defining the spatial aspect of the ecosystem. Further, if the society of human beings in that area is differentiated from other living organisms and assigned special attention, then a human ecosystem has been defined.
There are several types of human ecosystems, but it is the agricultural ecosystem in developing countries which is particularly relevant to this paper because it involves wood resources to a significant extent. In additional, there are the two types of forest ecosystems: one type which involves people living in forests and the other type in which forests are linked to wood-based industry, but these will not be discussed further because they are lops relevant to fuelwood projects than agricultural ecosystems.
3. Agricultural ecosystems
The essential characteristic of an agricultural ecosystem is that it includes a human settlement engaged in the production of food. One widely prevalent version of such a settlement is a village. Unfortunately, there have been few investigations of village agricultural ecosystems, but a recent study of Ungra in South India (Ravindranath et al 1981, Reddy 1981) provides a useful basis for the present paper which aims at the development of a methodology rather than a universal analysis.
The study provided quantitative information inter alia on the pattern of land-use (Table 2-1) and cropping (Table 2-2), the above-ground plant biomass productivities (Table 2-3), the disaggregation of the above-ground plant biomass into components such as grain, straw, etc. (Table 2-4), the model of utilization of these components (Figure 2-1), the fodder consumption by live-stock (Table 2-5) and the sources of fuel (Table 2-6).^1 From this information, it is possible (Ravindranath et al 1981) to represent the operation of the Ungra village agricultural ecosystem by means of the usual type of diagram with the symbols used, by Odum (Odum, 1971).
^1 The tables and Figure 2-1 appear at the end of the paper.
Such an ecosystem diagram helps to reveal clearly the complex inter-relationships between human beings, livestock, land, energy and water, and water, and between food, fuel, fodder and fertilizer. But the inclusion of the Ungra ecosystem diagram in the present paper would divert attention to a great deal of information directly relevant to a discussion of wood resources. In addition, it would the detailed description of a specific village with all its peculiar features, for instance the absence of fuel exports. Nevertheless, the understanding derived from the Ungra ecosystem is useful in evolving a simplified generalized diagram which can then be used to discuss the role of wood in typical village agricultural ecosystems. The procedure will consist of considering all the ecosystem components and activities land, water, nutrients, inanimate and animal, energy, fodder, cooking, trees, building, etc.) one by one and discussing the interactions between fuelwood and each of these
components or activities. This understanding of pair-wise interactions will, then be integrated into an ecosystem diagram which displays all the complex and varied inter-relationships involving fuelwood. What follows therefore is the step-by-step development of suck a diagram and a description of the ecosystem relationships involving wood.
It must be stressed, however, that the ensuing analysis is derived from an understanding of the Ungra ecosystem. Hence, it refers mainly to India, but it can be applied after suitable modifications to other parts of the world.
4. Fuelwood projects and development
The goal of fuelwood projects is to advance development, which is viewed as a process of satisfying the basic needs of human beings, particularly the needs of the neediest, in a self-reliant, ecologically sound manner. Hence it is vital to consider wood resources in their relationship to basic needs. Taking the basic needs as food, clothing and shelter, the following points are obvious.
(i) Land must be allocated for food and other crops.
(ii) In addition to land, the growing of crops requires water, nutrients and energy.
(iii) Traditional agriculture is based on human energy, but in India, and much of Asia, the energy for many critical agricultural operations such as ploughing comes from draught animals.
(iv) Apart from the grain from crops, human beings also consume milk and meat; which means that livestock-rearing is an integral part of meeting food requirements.
(v) Draught animals and other livestock require fodder, and this fodder comes from crop residues and/or grazing in pasture land; hence, pasture lands and fodder production are crucial.
(vi) Most food is cooked, and the energy required for cooking is obtained primarily from fuelwood, but agricultural residues and cattle dung are also used.
(vii) Fuelwood comes predominantly from trees which grow in special woodlots and/or along the sides of fields or roads. Forests may also become a fuelwood sources if they are close enough to the villages.
(viii) The wood from such trees is used not only as fuel for cooking, but also as fuel in many industries and as a sources of lumber.
(ix) One of the important categories of industries which depends upon fuelwood is that involving the production of bricks and tiles for building to satisfy the basic need for shelter. Another fuelwood-using industry is pottery which provides utensils for cooking.
(x) Fuelwood, lumber and fuelwood-based products such as bricks are often exported to or imported from other agricultural ecosystems and towns and cities.
(xi) Apart from providing fuel, trees fulfil many other functions - they give shade, shelter, edible nuts, oilseeds, medicines, and provide for many other needs.
There are a number of relationships, synergisms and conflicts involved in the situation which merit elaboration because they have a major influence on the outcome of fuelwood projects.
Figure 2-2: Land and fuelwood
Figure 2-3: Water and fuelwood
5. Land and fuelwood
In an agricultural ecosystem, there are several demands upon the available land it has to be used for housing and other parts of the human settlement, some in submerged by natural and artificial water bodies, but the bulk of the land is devoted to crops and pastures (Figure 2-2).
The traditional land-utilization practice (which embodies a great deal of wisdom) is to have woodlots only on non-arable land. Since this practice does not lead to any reduction in the land set apart for crops and pastures, it prevents the development of any conflict between food and fodder, on the one hand and fuel on the other. In case non-arable land is unavailable, the growth of trees has to be restricted to the borders of fields, water-bodies or roads. If however, the fuelwood output of these "border trees" is inadequate to meet the requirements of the ecosystem, then attempts to allocate land for separate woodlots will result in a reduction of the area available for cropland and pastureland, and therefore in a conflict between the need for fuelwood and the requirement of food and fodder.
Several possible ways of resolving the conflict between woodlots and land, for crops and pastures can be considered.
(i) The fuelwood requirements can be eliminated by the adoption of alternative fuel(s) or reduced by improving the efficiency with which fuelwood is used.
(ii) The area set apart for pastureland can be reduced through the cultivation of high-productivity fodder species.
(iii) Pastureland can be put to multiple use by combining the growth of fodder species and fuelwood trees in two-tier forests where the lower tier is devoted to fodder and the upper tier to fuelwood.
(iv) The land devoted to non-food crops can be reduced and the corresponding land used for woodlots.
In the absence of such deliberate measures, what generally happens is that land which is under tree cover is cleared for cultivation. This removal of tree cover leads to soil erosion - and, in extreme cases, to desertification - and therefore to a deterioration in the quality of cropland. Thus, as is well known, deforestation to promote food production may frustrate the very capacity to produce foods The result is the same when the deforestation is carried out to secure fuelwood, i.e., the satisfaction of the need for fuelwood can lead to a diminution in the quality of land.
6. Water and fuelwood (figure 2-3)
Crop production is generally water-limited. This water limitation may be due to the seasonality and insufficiency of rainfall and/or the restricted availability of ground-water and/or the inadequacy of energy to transfer the water from where it in available to where it is required.
If ground-water resources are limited, then an increase in the supply of water can be achieved by importing water through irrigation projects or by harvesting rain-water, i.e. by collecting rain-water from micro-catchments and storing it in tanks and ponds. The import of water depends upon decisions and actions taken outside the ecosystem, but water-harvesting within the ecosystem implies an increase in the area occupied by water-bodies. This increase may take place at the expense of land useful for woodlots - thus there is a possibility of conflict between water-harvesting and woodlots, analogous to the conflicts on a large scale between dame and forests. If, however, ground water is available, then energy must to utilized to lift the water. This energy must either be imported from sources outside the ecosystem with all the attendant transmission/transport costs of electricity/oil or be made available from within the ecosystem through the supply of animate energy (for
example, animal power) or biomass-derived fuels, or the harnessing of wind energy. If these local sources of energy are used for water-lifting, then there can be conflict between the energy needs of water-lifting and those of other tasks.
If fuelwood projects are based on irrigation, the above-mentioned conflicts between water-harvesting and woodlots and between the energy requirements of water-lifting and other energy needs are aggravated. In such situations, the resolution of these conflicts can be achieved by ensuring that the irrigation of fuelwood trees satisfies the following conditions:
Figure 2-5: Inanimate energy and fuelwood
Figure 2-4: Nutrients and fuelwood
(i) The extra volume of harvested rain-water required for woodlot irrigation should be obtained without increasing the area of water-bodies, i.e., the depth of these water-bodies should be increased, or if the area of these water-bodies increases when the volume of harvested water is increased to permit woodlot irrigation, the extra water should be used to obtain, apart from greater fuelwood production, a simultaneous increase of crop and/or fodder yields so that these increased yields compensate for any loss of cropland and/or pastureland.
(ii) If fuelwood trees are irrigated with ground-water, then the energy for the water-lifting should be derived by energy conservation measures, i.e., by an increased use of the same draught animals and/or more efficient use of the inanimate energy already being utilized in the ecosystem so that the delivered energy for other tasks is not reduced, or by an increased supply of energy in the form of fuelwood.
There can also be the following synergism between water-harvesting and woodlots. Woodlots tend to reduce water run-off and increase the recharge of stored/ground water. They generally make the water balance more favourable, particularly with the use of tree species which draw deep water.
7. Nutrients and fuelwood (figure 2-4)
The supply of nutrients to land use for growing crops and/or fodder and/or trees, or at least the replenishment of nutrients removed from this land, is essential for, sustainable agriculture and/or silviculture. In traditional village agricultural ecosystems, only organic sources are used: (i) farmyard manure obtained by composting animal waste, (ii) green manure from leguminous crops and/or from leaves which are the nitrogen - and the phosphorus - rich parts of plants, and (iii) household wastes. A dependence on farmyard manure implies the existence of livestock in the ecosystem which in turn creates a demand for fodder and therefore for land if the fodder comes from pasture land. Thus in an ecoystem depending upon farmyard manure, there can be a conflict between nutrients and land. If, however, the dependence is on green manure which can also be consumed by livestock as fodder, then there is the possibility of a conflict between nutrients and fodder. Under these
circumstances, the introduction of fuelwood projects requiring the use of organic nutrients is likely to aggravate the situation and lead to a conflict between organic nutrients and fuelwood trees. The main mechanism for resolving these conflicts is to import the nutrients which may be required for fuelwood projects. On the other hand, there is a synergism &rising from the "nutrient pump effect" in which deep-rooted trees bring up nutrients.
8. Inanimate energy and fuelwood (figure 2-5)
The only sources of inanimate energy available within traditional village agricultural ecosystems are fuelwood, agricultural wastes and cattle-dung-cakes. All these sources are used in varying proportions an fuels to provide heat energy.
Since the combustion of dung-cakes leads to the vaporization of nitrogen and phosphorus, there can be a conflict between fuel and fertilizer, and since the burning of many agricultural residues deprives cattle of sustenance, there in a possibility of conflicts between fuel and fodder. The only traditional source of inanimate energy which does not directly reduce fertilizer and fodder use is fuelwood, a ligneous material.
But, the problem with the traditional fuelwood technologies used in the agriculture of developing countries is that they cannot provide mechanical energy for the operation of stationary and/or mobile equipment.^1 Therefore, the requirements of stationary and/or mobile power must be met with human energy and/or animal energy and/or electricity/oil generally imported from outside the ecosystem. Dependence on animal energy increases fodder requirements but at the same time reduces electricity/oil imports. But, the power output of draught animals in limited to about 0.5 HP, which means that tasks requiring greater power inputs will necessarily require the substitution of animal energy with, imported electricity/oil.
^1 In the early stages of the industrialization of the developed countries, wood-fired steam/stirling engines were often used.
Figure 2-6 Animal energy and fuelwood
All this means that if fuelwood trees are going to be irrigated with current technologies of lifting groundwater, then there will be an increase in the requirements of animal energy and/or imported electricity/oil leading respectively to increased fodder requirements and/or decreased self-sufficiency of the ecosystem.
One of the possible ways out of this dilemma is to drive waterpumps with engines running with wood-based fuels such as producer gas (mainly a mixture of carbon monoxide and hydrogen) or methanol (obtained by the conversion of producer gas). Another alternative is to operate diesel-engine-driven pumpsets with biogas (a mixture of methane and carbon dioxide) obtained by the aerobic fermentation of animal wastes and/or other non-ligneous cellulosic materials.
9. Animal energy and fuelwood (figure 2-6)
Draught animals are the main source of power for stationary and mobile operations when the power requirements exceed the output of human beings. In particular, draught animals supply the power for: (i) agricultural operations such an ploughing, harrowing, water-lifting, and threshing, (ii) transport with animal-drawn vehicles, and (iii) many industrial operations such an crushing, grinding, etc. The only way of replacing animal power is with engines in mobile equipment and with engines and/or motors in stationary equipment. While this mechanization has permitted an increase in power beyond the limits of animals, it has created a demand for oil and/or electricity which invariably have to be imported from outside the ecosystem. In addition, whereas a single draught animal or pair of such animals can accomplish all the agricultural, transport and industrial functions mentioned above, it is usual to have separate items of specialized equipment for each -task or class of tasks.
Thus, the replacement of animal power usually requires an array of equipment.
As oil-fuelled and electrical equipment take over the functions of animals, the load factor on animals goes down. Nevertheless, until all the mechanical functions of animals are taken over by machines, draught animals must be maintained to carry out the remaining functions. In these circumstances, the traditional approach is to give the draught animals just enough fodder to enable them to carry out the residual tasks, bat despite this, the input cannot go below maintenance levels. At these dietary levels, the draught animals deliver far less power than what they are capable of with proper feeding. Thus, the partial, as opposed to complete, substitution of animal power by machines may increase the productivity of certain operations, but it does not eliminate the need, for maintenance fodder for draught animals and with such a maintenance diet their power output and productivity are significantly reduced.
Animal energy, therefore, promotes the self-sufficiency of the ecosystem with respect to mechanical power but probably achieves this goal at the expense of productivity; and machines driven with inanimate energy may facilitate greater productivity but lead to greater dependence on the external environment (of the ecosystem) for oil, and/or electricity.
This dilemma of animal power vs mechanization can be resolved in several ways. In situations where the use of animal power is continued, its efficiency can be improved by better design and/or conditions. For example, the productivity of ploughing with draught animals can be enhanced by increasing the soil moisture - thin in a synergism between animal energy and water. Another important approach is to identify those situations whore the replacement of animal power with machines it; justified and to drive these machines with wood-based fuels (producer gas and/or methanol) produced from fuelwood. This would be tantamount to fuelwood replacing animal energy.
Figure 2-7 Fodder and fuelwood
From the transport point of view, however, animal-driven vehicles can provide low-cost transportation for fuelwood. In fact, it appears that, within specific distance regimes - for example about 0.4 kms. to 3.0 kms. in a particular study made in South India (Jagadish, 1979) - animal-drawn vehicles are more economical than either trucks or tractors for fuelwood transport. This implies that animal energy can assist the distribution aspect of the fuelwood system.
10. Fodder and fuelwood (figure 2-7)
The food requirements of the human beings in the ecosystem include, in addition to grain, many non-grain components such as milk, meat, vegetables, etc. The grain components have to be produced by agriculture which requires draught power if it in based, as it invariably in, on tillage. An already mentioned, the draught power in traditional agricultural ecosystems comes from draught animals or human beings. The non-grain components of food include dairy products such as milk, butter, cheese and eggs as well as meat. This means that agricultural ecosystems must support, in addition to draught animals, other non-draught categories of livestock such as cows, buffaloes, goats, sheep, pigs and chickens. In other words livestock are reared to meet the requirements of both energy and food. Through its ability to provide alternative fuels for engines, fuelwood production can diminish the energy contribution demanded of livestock, but the food contribution still remains, necessitating
the rearing of livestock.
Livestock rearing, however, generates a demand for fodder. If arboreal forage is not considered part of the fodder system, there are two traditional sources of fodder, agricultural residues and pastureland. The contribution of these two fodder sources to the total fodder requirement varies very widely from ecosystem to ecosystem ranging from one extreme where all the fodder requirements are met by grazing in pastureland to the opposite extreme where fodder is supplied to stable-bound livestock.
In situations where agricultural residues contribute significantly to the total fodder requirements by virtue of their digestibility, it in important that crop varieties are selected both for their grain and straw output. This seems to have been the case with the traditional crop varieties, but the modern dwarf varieties of the green revolution achieve high yields of grain at the expense of the stalk portion which in often used for livestock. This implies a greater demand for fodder from pastureland, and this demand way lead to a reduction in the area available for fuelwood production. Thus, high-yielding varieties may load to a conflict between food and fodder requirements, which In turn may result in a conflict between fodder and fuel. (Incidentally, ouch direct conflicts are avoided in the agricultural systems of the developed countries because they have virtually eliminated their requirements of draught animal power - and the associated fodder requirements - through
inputs of inanimate energy in the form of fossil fuel, and because they import significant quantities of livestock feed from the developing countries.)
Even with traditional crop varieties which produce fodder along with grain, there is strong demand in village agricultural ecosystems for pastureland. In fact, the netting apart of land, for livestock grazing was a common feature of these ecosystems in the not too distant past, but increasingly pastureland has been converted into cropland due to pressures of population and land distribution and, as a result, the prospects of using arable land for woodlots have become bleak.
One approach to the resolution of the conflict between food and fodder on the one hand and fuel on the other is to restrict woodlots only to non-arable land. Even when this in done, fuelwood trees suffer from very high "infant mortality" because they become victims of grazing livestock during their seedling and sapling stages of growth. In other words, the conflict between fodder and fuel can have a destructive impact on woodlots on non-arable land during the early stages of growth of fuelwood trees when they are extremely vulnerable to grazing. In this context, the rational approach is to plan simultaneously for both fodder and fuel requirements through a two-tier forest and first to ensure fodder production on a renewable basin before attempting to protect fuelwood seedlings/saplings from grazing.
Figure 2-8 Cooking and fuelwood
11. Cooking and fuelwood (figure 2-8)
Cooking is done almost exclusively with fuelwood (either directly or after conversion into charcoal), agricultural wastes and dung-cakes. As-already pointed out, the combustion of agricultural wastes leads to the lose of fodder unless the waste is not edible by livestock (e.g. sugarcane bagasse) and the burning of dung-cakes results in the lose of nutrients. In fact, it appears that villagers use dung-cakes as cooking fuel only when fuelwood is not available or not conveniently accessible. (There are, however, regions where dung-cakes are used in order to have a very slow-burning fuel, e.g., to thicken milk). Thus, the general preference for fuelwood has a rational basis because it does not involve direct conflicts with fodder and fertilizer requirements.
There are many aspects of the ecological implications of the use of fuelwood for cooking. If the fuelwood for cooking in the ecosystem is obtained predominantly in the form of fallen twigs and branches, i.e. without tree felling, - and this is the case in many regions (Astra 1981) - then the fuelwood resources are being used in a renewable manner. Thus, cooking in the ecosystem with internally available fuelwood resources may not be as responsible for deforestation as is sometimes made out. Butt as soon as the fuelwood has to be transported from or to distances which are far from the ecosystem (which is what happens in the case of fuelwood imports or exports), the preference is for a denser form of fuel, in other words for logo or for charcoal made from such logs. Hence, one of the justifications for planning and establishing fuelwood projects is to increase the supply of fuelwood and avert the catastrophe of not being able to cock the food even if food production can keep
pace with population.
At the same time, however, attention is being focussed on the fuelwood utilization question. Studies of the performance of wood stoves are coming up with efficiency values of under 10%, and typically 5%, which means that 90-95% of the heat energy available in fuelwood is being wasted (Geller 1981, De Lepeleire et al., 1981). The initial hopes that the efficiency of the wood stoves of technologically simple peoples can be radically improved are diminishing. It now appears that, barring a breakthrough, one cannot expect more than a doubling or trebling of the efficiency of firewood stoves, and that the ideal stove may well be one in which the wood is converted in situ into producer gas which then becomes the cooking fuel. None of the so-called "improved stoves" approach this ideal and many, in fact, lead to enhanced firewood consumption when subjected to rigorous testing procedures.
All this provides a rational technical basis for villagers to reject the "improved stoves". In addition, it is a moot point whether the poorer strata will ever consider wood-burning stoves (even costlier and improved ones!) as an elevation in their standard of life when they are aware of the fact that the more affluent sections of their society always prefer cleaner and more convenient cooking fuels to wood. The poor know that there is a hierarcy of cooking fuels and they view changes from fuelwood to charcoal to kerosene to electricity/gas as steps in the improvement of the quality of their life. There is in fact a technical basis for these preferences.
Gaseous cooking fuels offer a tremendous advantage - the rate of gas flow, and therefore the rate of combustion and the rate of release of heat energy to the cooking vessel, can be very rapidly altered and easily controlled. This is extremely important because there are cooking operations such as boiling which require a high power output from the stove, and others such as simmering which need a low power output (Dutt 1978). In addition to the control over the gas flow rate, which facilitates easy and quick variations of the power output, a gaseous cooking fuel permits manipulation of the air to fuel ratio and therefore ensures the completeness of the combustion process. The net result of these advantages is that stoves using gaseous cooking fuels can achieve efficiencies which can be five to ten times the efficiency of traditional firewood stoves.
In view of this conflict between cooking efficiencies and fuelwood, the option of conserving fuelwood by using gaseous fuels instead of wood for cooking seems much more attractive than improving the performance of woodstoves. The two gaseous fuels which can be generated from the internal resources of agricultural ecosystems are producer gas obtained by the partial combustion of wood and biogas obtained by the anaerobic fermentation of livestock wastes.
Figure 2-9 Trees and fuelwood
Figure 2-10 Other uses of wood
Figure 2-11 Wood and buildings
12. Trees and fuelwood (figure 2-9)
Fuelwood is obtained mainly from trees, but Many shrub species also serve as a source. Since there is a great pressure on land for agriculture, the growth of fuelwood trees is generally restricted to separate areas, or woodlots. But due to the conflict between food, fodder and fuel requirements, it is becoming increasingly difficult to find land, even of the non-arable variety, for woodlots.
Very often, therefore, the only trees are those that can be integrated with agricultural use of the land with little or no competition with food and fodder; for example, trees that can be grown on the borders of fields, water-bodies, roads, etc. In a sense, these "border trees" do not occupy land which is required for food and fodder, particularly if they are straight and tall and do not deprive the ground crops of too much light. It is important that they are not profligate with their requirements of water - otherwise, the conflict between fuel and water will be aggravated. Fuelwood trees must also not be too demanding with regard to soil nutrients, and should preferably be nitrogen-fixers so that they enrich the soil. It is an advantage if they also contribute by products of economic value, such as fodder or fruit. In other words, there can be conflicts between particular fuelwood species and the requirements of food, water and fertilizer.
Fortunately there are species which satisfy these conditions. Leucaena leucocephala, for example, casts a light shade, needs little water, is leguminous and if; a source of fodder.
13. Other uses of wood (figure 2-10)
The wood resources of the agricultural ecosystem are used to meet the requirements of several end uses. Of these, cooking is the most important, but it is essential to reckon with other end uses. In the household sector, for instance, fuelwood is also consumed for water heating and space heating. In addition, fuelwood is used in all the traditional industries which require heat energy. It is only very recently that these small scale industrial uses of wood fuel in rural areas have started to be investigated (e.g. Donovan 1980). In particular, attention is being focussed on brick-burning, tile-making, pottery, processing of tobacco, tea, cardamon, etc., black-smithy, soap-making, etc. Wood is also used as a structural material in buildings and animal-drawn vehicles. The scarcity of wood resources implies the possibility of conflicts between wood as a cooking fuel and wood for other end ages.
14. Wood and buildings (figure 2-11)
Significant quantities of wood are used in the building sector. Wood, is utilized both directly as a structural material in the form of lumber and indirectly as a fuel for the production of fired bricks and tiles. In both these applications, twigs and branches are usually not used, and logo which can only come from felled trees are required. Brick-burning in particular generates considerable demand for wood especially when it in achieved with batch production - in a specific region in South India, approximately 0.4 tonnes of fuelwood is used to burn a 1000 bricks (Jagadish 1979a). It in becoming clear that, in many parts of the Third World, the depletion of fuelwood resources will inhibit the success of building programmes based on burnt bricks and tiles. This implies a conflict between fuelwood and shelter,
There appear to be many ways in which this conflict can be resolved - for instance, one promising approach is to use unburnt, but machine-compacted and water-proofed, mud blocks instead of burnt bricks, and alternative roofing materials, preferably based on agricultural residues, in place of tiles. An interesting synergism between roofing materials and wooden structural roof supports can be exploited - the lighter the roofing, the less the volume (and therefore weight) of lumber required to support the roof.
Figure 2-12: Wood exports and imports
Figure 2-13: Human beings and fuelwood
15. Wood exports and imports (figure 2-12)
The dependence on fuelwood for cooking is not a rural phenomenon only; in most developing countries, the use of fuelwood and charcoal in urban areas is significant. In India, for instance, about 20% of the total population lives in towns and cities and approximately 65% of the urban households use firewood as a cooking fuel - this corresponds to about 30 million tonnes (Government of India, 1979)
Most towns and cities, however, do not have woodlots as part of their ecosystem, which means that they import their firewood and/or charcoal from the rural areas. Further, to facilitate the transport of this firewood, it has to be in the denser form of logo, which means that tree-felling is almost a necessary part of supplying fuelwood to urban conglomerations. Thus, both the magnitude of firewood exports to towns and cities as well as the type of fuelwood exported, logo, constitute a significant drain on the wood resources of village agricultural ecosystems; they are perhaps far more responsible for the deforestation in such ecosystems than the internal use of wood as a cooking fuel. There is a conflict, therefore, between fuelwood exports and the fuel requirements of agricultural ecosystems. Of course, exports from an ecosystem also bring income into it, but the point is that an export orientation changes the behaviour of the ecosystem, sometimes for the worse.
This conflict is aggravated by a common urban preference for charcoal. This preference arises mainly because charcoal has a higher calorific value per unit volume, and it neither catches fire nor deteriorates as easily as wood. First, charcoal produced from twigs and thin branches crumbles and powders easily during storage and transport. Hence charcoal production requires logs from felled trees. Second, high-quality charcoal requires wood from the trees with dense wood which are the best for timber uses Third, in the interest of transport economies, the charcoal required by towns and cities is produced where wood resources are available and in a decentralized manner, often on a household scale. Since the conversion efficiency in such miniscule charcoal-production units is only about 25% (0.25 kgs. charcoal/kg. wood) and the efficiency of' charcoal stoves is only 1.8 times greater than woodstoves, the overall consumption of wood resources is greater when fuelwood is converted
into charcoal cooking fuel than when it is used directly. Hence, there is a conflict between charcoal and fuelwood.
Wood exports from agricultural ecosystems take place not only to supply the cooking fuel requirements, but also the raw materials needs of lumber mills located in towns and cities. In this case, too, wood is required in the form of large logs and trunks which can be obtained only by cutting down trees. Thus the export of lumber-wood from agricultural ecosystems also has a negative impact on their wood resources.
The various unwelcome consequences of wood exports can be diminished by two important strategies. With regard to urban fuel requirements, programmes can be initiated (1) to utilize the biogas obtained by the treatment of urban sewage, (2) to convert town and city garbage into combustible fuels, and (3) to establish green belts around towns and cities and generate producer gas from the fuelwood obtained from the trees in these belts. Such programmes can involve piped supply of sewage, garbage and producer gases.
16. Human beings and fuelwood (figure 2-13)
Of course, human beings are the most important, part of the agricultural ecosystem and the focus of the development process. Human beings and, wood resources are related in five obvious ways.
First, there is theoretically a maximum to the population which can be supported by the food produced from a given area of land, but this so-called "carrying capacity" depends in part upon the agricultural technologies which are deployed, there being the possibility of adaptive strategies. Green revolution agricultural technologies have increased the carrying capacity many-fold, but this increase has been achieved by increased inputs such as water, fertilizer or inanimate energy. When technologies of enhancing the carrying capacity are not used (for reasons ouch as the lack of capital, water, fertilizer, energy or skills), the only way of augmenting food production after the population approaches the carrying capacity is to increase the area under crop cultivation, for example by clearing forests. This leads to an indirect conflict between people and land which is suitable for woodlots.
Figure 2-14 Fuelwood in an agricultural ecosystem
Second, an increasing human population loads, in the absence or non-implementation of alternative cooking fuels, to an increasing fuelwood demand at the rate of about 600 tonnes per year for every 1000 additional persons. Thus there is a direct conflict between human beings and fuelwood resources.
Third, a growth in human population loads to increased demand for all the other non-cooking-fuel uses of wood - i.e. for other domestic uses and for industrial uses of fuelwood and lumber.
Fourth, it has been recently argued that domestic chores such as gathering fuelwood, fetching drinking water and grazing livestock encourage people to have large families because children contribute a significant fraction of the human energy necessary to accomplish these tasks which are so vital to a family's survival. As a result, the greater the distance from which fuelwood has to be gathered, and the more the hardship and time required for the task of gathering fuel, the more important it is for a family to have children. Hence there can be a conflict between fuelwood collection and population control.
Finally, children have to be removed from school in order to perform the tack of gathering fuelwood, and this creates a conflict between the use of fuelwood and the education of rural children.
17. Fuelwood in an agricultural ecosystem
The above presentation has focused on a number of pairs of interactions, each pair consisting of fuelwood and one other ecosystem component or activity. But the pairs are all inter-related, not only through fuelwood, but because there are separate linkages between the ecosystem components and activities. For example, the land-fuelwood and humans-fuelwood pairs are linked through the fact that human energy plays a major role in utilizing land for growing food. This means that the separate diagrams (Figures 2-2 - 2-13) portraying each pair interaction must be assembled and integrated into a single diagram which will display, not only the pair-wise interactions, but also the inter-relationships between pairs. The result of such a procedure is shown in Figure 2-14 which reveals the complex, inter-relationships involving fuelwood. The diagram shows that the planning of a fuelwood project requires an understanding of all these linkages. What often happens, however, is that many
fuelwood projects ignore crucial interactions and adopt a naive fuelwood-for-cooking approach.
There is a further complication. Human beings have been treated thus far as a single category, as is customary in ecosystem studies. In stratified, societies, however, several phenomena in human ecosystems become comprehensible only when human society is disaggregated into the relevant economic categories, particularly those categories which describe the inequalities in the ownership and control over assets. Thus, discussions of fuelwood must take into account the fact that in most developing countries all families do not have the same extent, of dependence on fuelwood or the same degree and type of access to this fuel.
The rich and powerful sections of rural society own a disproportionately greater fraction of the land, they derive the greatest benefits from water-bodies and ground-water, they have much better access to trees even when they do not own them, they can hire labour to obtain fuelwood, they use liquid and gaseous fuels to a greater extent, and so on. In contrast, the poorest sections, invariably consisting of the landless groups, have the greatest problems with regard to fuelwood. Almost always, they have to get their fuel supplies at zero private direct cost by gathering fuelwood from wherever they are allowed to collect it, and this effort consumes a considerable amount of time, apart from involving them in a client-patron relationship. Such groups are usually the least likely to get a proportionate share in the produce of fuelwood projects, and as a result, they are chary about making contributions of voluntary or communal labour to fuelwood projects.
Even if the labour for fuelwood projects is paid for, its seasonality must be taken into account. There can be a conflict between the need for labour on woodlots and the requirements for labour on the farms. When there is such a conflict, the marginal and small farmers who are the ones most likely to work on woodlots (i.e., apart from landless labourers) may prefer to work on their own farms in the hope of much greater returns from their land.
Families below or around the poverty line usually make illicit use of resources. For instance, they seek to supplement their incomes by raising livestock - goats, sheep and cattle - many categories of which have to be taken out for grazing wherever grass and leaves are available. The saplings of fuelwood trees are usually a prime target in these grazing expeditions. Thus, the high "infant mortality" of fuelwood species is predominantly due to the survival value of livestock grazing to the poorest sections of rural society.
Another important impact of inequalities in land ownership on fuelwood is a result of a mechanism that is often adopted for satisfying the land hunger of the landless. An egalitarian approach would consist of redistributing land by imposing ceilings and distributing the excess land of those with large holdings; instead, the large land-owners are often left untouched by the so-called "land reform" and pastureland or land under tree cover is given to the landless. Such measures reduce the fuelwood availability as well as the land which could be used for woodlots - hence, there can be a conflict between land distribution and fuelwood.
It appears therefore that whereas the fuelwood situation per se can be remedied if equity considerations are ignored, it is much more difficult to accomplish fuelwood projects with equity. The problem is further complicated by three other factors:
(i) Women, rather than men, have a much clearer perception of the fuelwood crisis, because the burden of gathering firewood falls primarily on women and children;
(ii) fuelwood is often ranked lower than other needs such as food, employment or water in the villager's perception of priorities;
(iii) fuelwood in many regions is traditionally viewed as a common good and the persistence of this attitude can interfere with the implementation of projects which require a different approach.
Table 2-1 Land-use pattern
Hectares
Cultivated (22)*
Crop land
Fallow (1)
Grass land (3)
Marsh land (1)
Plantation (coconut, fuel) (2)
Water-bodies (2)
Settlement (houses, road, etc.) (4)
* Number in brackets refers to number of items aggregated.
Table 2-2 Cropping pattern - AY 1979-80
Kharif
Summer
June/Jul-Nov./Dec.
Area (ha)
Area (ha)
1. (a) Paddy (local)
(b) Paddy (KYV)
2. Ragi
3. Sorghum
4. Sugarcane
5. Horsegram
6. Coconut
7. Others (20)
Total
Table 2-3 Above-ground plant biomass productivity
Entity
Productivity
(tonnes/ha)
Ratios
Production
(tonnes)
1. Crops
1(a) Paddy (local)
1(b) Paddy (HYV)
1.2 Ragi
1.3 Sorghum
1.4 Sugarcane
1.5 Horsegram
1.6 Coconut
1.7 Others
2. Grass land
3. Fallow land
4. March
5. Shrub
Total average
Table 2-4 Disaggregation of above-ground plant biomass
Table 2-5 Fodder consumption by livestock
Total
Bullocks
Cows
Calves
Buffalo
Goat(s) and Sheep
Paddy straw
Sorghum grain
Sorghum straw
Grass + Fallow
Fodder from crops 621 (60.8%)
Fodder from grass = 400 (39.2%)
Land + Fallow land + = 400 (39.2%)
Marsh land = 400 (39.2%)
Table 2-6 Fuel sources
From Ecosystem
Tonnes/yr.
Coconut
Other crops
Trees (Twigs)
Trees (Felled)
Shrubs
Imports from outside Ecosystem
FW (Bought)
Fit (Gathered)
Total
Figure 2-1 Utilization of Paddy Biomass
<section>6</section>
3. Urban demand: Studying the commercial organization of wood fuel supplies
W.B. Morgan
1. Introduction
2. Towns and development
3. Rural fuel production for commercial demand
4. Rural fuel distribution: The dealer system
5. Substitution and innovation
1. Introduction
Fuelwood studies have given rather less attention to the effect of urban demand on fuelwood production and supply than to most other aspects. The tendency to regard fuelwood as mainly the concern of rural producers and consumers discouraged the study of the commercial organization of the fuelwood industry, and of the role of fuelwood in the development process. Whilst it is highly probable that most fuelwood use lies outside the monetary economy, nevertheless there is growing, even substantial, evidence of the use of fuelwood in towns (including charcoal) for both domestic and industrial purposes (Arnold, 1978). There is evidence too of the purchase of fuelwood by a small proportion of rural consumers, particularly those who are not farmers or who have higher incomes.
The larger towns and cities are supplied with so-called "modern" fuels and power, particularly electricity, oil derivatives such as kerosene and petrol, gas (usually bottled), coal and coke. Electricity is derived from a number of sources, chiefly coal and water power, but increasing attention is being paid to the possibility of nuclear power and even geothermal energy. The essential features of "modern" fuels and power are that their supply is centralised and mostly in large units in contrast with a dispersed resource such as fuelwood whose production is almost entirely from small units. The urban concentration of population offers scale economies in the supply and marketing of energy which give a considerable advantage for users of "modern" forms of energy. It should, however, be noted that such scale economies can also affect the commercial fuelwood industry despite its more dispersed basis. This geographical difference in the supply structure between town and country is
of fundamental importance for rural energy production in so fax as it is required to satisfy urban needs, for concentration of demand and therefore of the distribution system frequently results in concentration of production. This concentration is further encouraged by the factor of transport costs which can provide a marked constraint in the case of fuelwood. This constraint is less for charcoal but limits of about 250 km for Nairobi and rather more than 300 km for Dakar and Khartoum have been noted. Bangkok, with its enormous demand for charcoal for domestic use and its dominance as a city in Thailand, provides a remarkable example of a severely worked wood fuel hinterland. In Brazil, charcoal exploitation is located with reference mainly to industrial demands, particularly for smelting and metal-working.
Wherever towns exist and require fuelwood or charcoal there is always the probability of too rapid a rate of cutting associated with loss of forest or woodland and environmental deterioration, even in areas apparently rich in wood resources. Where urban expansion is extremely rapid, and particularly where it occurs in environments of very limited wood resources such as the African Sahel, such lose and deterioration can be serious, even alarming. It is therefore possible that in many cases the concentration of wood fuel production in rural areas supplying towns is a much more serious environmental and social cost problem than the problem of wood fuel production for rural consumption. If true it may mean that projects to provide more energy in rural areas will be insufficient to reduce environmental damage or solve the problem of rural energy shortage generally. The assumption that rapid urban growth would be accompanied by an increased consumption of centrally supplied fuel
and power and a falling proportion of fuels of rural origin has in many cases proved untrue. Generally the towns have proved much less impressive in their "spread" effects of the supply of resources, wealth and technology out of their rural complementary regions, than in their "backwash" effects which tend to drain the rural regions of labour, resources and even capital.
Much of the development effort has concentrated on the towns and within the urban hierarchy, particularly on the largest cities. Often the very largest cities are growing faster than smaller cities and towns, so that the main contrasts in investment and growth are, as it were, within the hierarchy, and there exists in effect a class of "rural towns", dependent mainly on local resources and local exchange. Urban primacy has frequently been cited as a major feature of many developing countries and city size distributions have been related to economic development. In 1975 the percentages of urban population in the largest city were particularly high in Burundi and Lesotho (100), Mozambique (83), Guinea 77 Thailand (69), Jamaica (67), Panama and Costa Rica (65), Senegal (64) and Angola 62. Of the 92 lower and middle income countries listed by the World Bank, 34 in 1975 reported over 40% of urban population in a single city (World Bank, 1979: 164-165). Such primacy has been
associated not so much with the spread of wealth to large numbers of urban people, as with the emergence of vast urban slums and informal settlements, mainly of occupier built houses, usually lacking in adequate provision of public utilities and services. These are often the districts which have received increasing numbers of rural immigrants, although in some cities the worst slums are in districts of old houses and the informal settlements represent an improvement. Sometimes such districts form a kind of transit camp between rural and urban status. They can be places where rural styles of life persist and where poverty strengthens the demand for fuelwood and charcoal rather than electricity. The most important cheap centrally supplied fuel is normally kerosene, affected in many cases by rising oil prices. Its competitiveness has frequently depended on price control policies or government subsidies. The rapidity of modern urban growth, cited as 4% per annum for developing
countries as a whole for 1950-60 and 1970-80 (World, Bank, 1979: 72) reinforces this tendency for the persistence of rural life styles in urban locations. In effect it is a continuing transfer of a poor rural population to the towns, concentrating it as a purchaser of fuel and power, but unable for some time to improve its income status and change its lifestyle. This rapidity of growth is one of the most important problems of economic development and social change in developing countries. It cannot be doubted that it is of considerable importance in energy production and supply, and that its significance will increase as cities grow larger and as urban proportions of population increase. By the year 2000 it has been estimated that, if present trends persist, there will be 40 Third World cities each of over 5 million population, compared with 12 in the industralized countries (World Bank, 1979: 72).
The complementary rural regions which serve the towns are not small and localized. In many countries they take in most or all of the rural areas. Their bounds are often difficult to define as the urban-rural relationship involves so many different activities and movements for goods and people, and there is frequently a gradient of influence so that urban effects persist at a very low level, even at considerable distances. Within these regions the movements of fuelwood and charcoal frequently involve a variety of transport means and an elaborate organization of dealers, wood cutters and charcoal manufacturers. In some cases this organization is peculiar to the fuelwood and charcoal industry. In others it is part of a larger trading organization, involving the movement of agricultural produce and the supply of consumer goods from the town. This organization links producers and consumers, Its efficiency affects both and, moreover, being in contact with both, it is an important
source of information for the research worker. The fact that the number of dealers is very much smaller than the number of producers or consumers, 'but that their information level is generally much higher than both, makes the dealer network a valuable focus for research, particularly where research resources are small and only a few people can be interviewed. That dealers are an important aspect of the development process, whereby rural producers are drawn increasingly into the exchange system, gives their information a particular interest for those who are concerned with development trends.
A commercial fuelwood industry creates not only a distinctive spatial character for fuelwood production in relation to the concentrated markets it largely serves, but also changes the character of fuelwood exploitation. It is more selective of tree species, whether for charcoal production or the urban fuelwood consumer, and it is also more wasteful of the wood resource (Morgan, 1981). It employs paid labour, sometimes specializing in cutting or processing skills, and it has to deal with problems of storage and seasonality in production and supply, in some cases regularly varying the area and location of exploitation. It also diverts wood fuel from subsistence use as poor people in areas of short supply sell their wood or charcoal to higher income groups in the towns. It is the commercial urban supply that creates the most rapid increase in demand for fuelwood, due to urban growth, market expansion a-ad the rapidly rising cost of alternative fuels. It is this sector which
also has the most varied fuel demands, even in terms of wood fuels as such, where special preferences for given species as fuelwood or for conversion into charcoal are established, or where the needs for fuel in liquid or gas forms are encouraging research into the possibilities for cheap conversion of wood by pyrolysis or other means in order to improve its potential for substitution in place of other forms of energy.
Whereas subsistence fuelwood production is largely farm based plus localized gathering, a commercial industry can be farm based and can also exploit forest and wood, plantation properties on a considerable scale. In some cases cities produce their own "rural gatherers" in very large numbers, usually operating within a short distance of the built-up area. Where fuelwood is purchased, rather than obtained from the use of family labour not otherwise occupied on the farm, there is an interest in saving fuel in order to reduce costs. It is, therefore, in the commercial sector of fuelwood consumption that there is liable to be most interest in resource conservation by the use of more efficient stoves, whether for heating or cooking. Hence the peculiar importance of commercial fuelwood in any attempt to conserve wood resources and reduction of wood demand by greater efficiency in use. The commercial fuelwood industry helps to create a stove industry, whether through conservation or
through the needs of processed fuels like charcoal. It also requires capital for some aspects of the exploitation process and therefore attracts the interest of entrepreneurs who have already been successful in other business enterprises.
Many of the charcoal burners and the small dealers, whether rural or urban, are drawn from the poorest sections of the population. In West Africa, women in particular have been found to act as retailers or as purchasers from farmers supplying very small quantities of wood at a time. There are, however, also the larger dealers capable of organizing the trading system, the producers and transport on a large scale. Trading structures are likely to exhibit considerable variations and need to be understood wherever rural energy development is to be subject to planning policy or technological innovation.
Very large numbers of poor people have become traders in wood fuel, either full or part-time, particularly in wood fuel for domestic purposes. Others are employed as labourers and charcoal burners or in the transport of wood fuels, so that in many countries wood fuel production and distribution is a major employer and a most important source of income. Such work is particularly valuable whenever the growing reason for farm crops is short and there is little alternative off-season employment. It is valuable also for the landless and especially for women who have few opportunities of earning an income of their own. Sometimes, however, the labourers and petty traders in fuelwood are despised as engaging in a poor person's industry, whilst charcoal burners in some countries are despised for being in a dirty activity, Wherever, a shortage of wood fuels develops as demand rises and supply fails to respond or is even reduced, rising prices encourage a greater interest in the trade,
attracting richer and more powerful traders who may seek to control the market. Government-supported schemes to develop large scale wood plantations and centralized state controlled distribution systems ignore the existence of the great mass of petty traders and labourers and may even contribute to making large numbers of poor people poorer.
Research into commercial organization and urban demand shares many of the techniques and methodology developed in social science as a whole and discussed elsewhere in this publication. It also has its own special characteristics and Problems due in part to the existence of the small group of wealthier traders, usually highly organized, and having a strong financial interest in the fuelwood and charcoal industry. In addition the urban environment for research has a very different character from the rural environment, usually with a wider ranging class and income structure and special difficulties in sampling and ensuring an adequate response to energy surveys. In certain cities it can be an extremely hostile environment in which to attempt a social survey. The choice of satisfactory locations for research has to meet the demands of a number of very practical social and political considerations.
2. Towns and development
2.1 Urbanization
2.2 Urban functions
2.3 Incomes and employment
2.1 Urbanization
2.1.1 Geographical distribution
2.1.2 Urbanization and development
Urbanization refers to the transformation of an area from a rural character with small settlements and mainly extensive economic activities, such as agriculture and forestry, to an urban character, that is having high densities of population associated with centralized economic activities, more especially administration, commerce, services and manufacture. Urbanization includes urban growth. Its chief indicator is normally taken to be the proportion of population living in urban areas. It has become a world-wide phenomenon associated with economic and social transformation from the industrial and power revolution in Europe in the early 19th century to the spread of industrial growth, agricultural change and commerce throughout the world, more especially in developing countries since the early 1950s.
2.1.1 Geographical distribution
About 30% of the total population of the developing countries is urban, compared with 40%o for the world as a whole. The estimate for the ear 2000 is 46% for the former compared with a world figure of 52% (World Bank, 1979: 72). There are marked regional differences. In Latin America over 60% of the population already live in urban areas and show in many cases primate distributions, i.e. extraordinary levels of concentration into single huge cities. Only Brazil, Colombia and Ecuador fail to exhibit primacy, and Brazil and Ecuador are each dominated by two cities. In tropical Africa and southern Asia only a fifth of the population is urban, although by the year 2000 the proportions are expected to grow to nearly 40% in Africa and about 35% in southern Asia. In tropical Africa there are few cities of any great size although primacy is a common feature - Nigeria is an outstanding exceptions in southern Asia there are some of the world's largest cities, but the urban population
is low in such huge population totals, India alone has nearly a third of the developing countries' population, excluding the centrally planned economies. Excluding Hong Kong and Singapore primacy on the Latin American scale is only characteristic of South Korea and Thailand.
2.1.2 Urbanization and development
Urbanization may be regarded as one of the most important features of economic development and social change. It is more especially associated with the growth of manufacturing industry, the development of administrative functions, education and services of all kinds, and with the centralization of most economic and social activity. The towns are, in consequence, the leading consumers of fossil fuel energy, electricity and imported energy. They also consume large quantities of energy from renewable sources in rural areas. As the problems and costs of using imported energy increases, so the importance of the rural hinterlands in the supply of energy grows. In some cases urban demand for rural energy has tended to outstrip rural supply so that the latter has become a constraint in development.
Opinion has become divided between on the one hand recognition of the need for industrial growth and the kinds of services that can most easily be supplied in urban concentrations, and on the other hand realization of widening income, social and political gaps between town and country, accompanied by urban diseconomies of overcrowding, water shortage, air pollution and traffic congestion, together with social evils associated chiefly with slums. The assocation of urbanization and "modernization" has been regarded as an association with foreign influence and values. The 1975 evacuation of Phnom Penh in the Khmer Republic was an attempt to destroy a "colonial" regional system in order to create a society less subject to foreign influences. Urbanization has assumed a variety of forms in the Third World and differences in the views of research workers in part reflect differences in regional experience.
Urban growth brings with it not only a concentration of energy demand, but a considerable increase in the kinds of energy required. The demands of modern industry, urban residence, transport and service functions must be served by forms of power generation and fuel supply which have been developed elsewhere to satisfy these needs, in particular by electricity and gas for industry, and gasoline and diesel oil for transport. So few attempts have been made to develop alternative forms of energy for these purposes, that in many countries, the price of urban growth is a huge dependence on imported energy and therefore on the development of export industries, or the export of raw materials to earn the foreign exchange required. Without the development of local energy resources urbanization has encouraged dependence on international trade and export productivity for energy supply, i.e. dependence on energy imports. The technology which can convert rural renewable energy materials
into forms suitable for urban consumption, which can substitute for imported energy, has hardly been developed at an economic level, although sugar or manioc based alcohol is being produced in some countries (e.g. Brazil) and attempts are being made by pyrolysis to produce gas or liquid fuels from wood. In consequence the main role in urban development of wood fuel from the rural hinterland, and even occasionally of agricultural residues, is to supply the needs of people who cannot afford "modern" fuels or who lack the capital for the equipment needed to use it. They have become an essential part of the informal sector of urban economic activity, satisfying the needs of mall entrepreneurs and a low income domestic sector. Rural renewable energy in the urban, market has so far acted less as a substitute for other forms of energy, with the exception to some extent of kerosene, and more as a supplier of an additional distinctive demand.
2.2 Urban functions
2.2.1 Administration
2.2.2 Commerce and services
2.2.3 Industry
2.2.4 Residence
2.2.5 Urban-rural relationships
Fuel and power studies must take into account not only the city as a set of energy consumers, but the city as a political, social and economic unit. Cities have other needs besides energy, and in developing countries have limited resources in relation to development policy. They also have a set of functions which help to determine that policy and their economic growth, and which give them their distinctive character.
2.2.1 Administration
Most administrative functions reside in cities and are especially concentrated in the very largest cities, It is this which reinforces the industrial bias in investment which often encourages very large demands for commercial energy, even in poor countries. The social system may cocoon the government official from rural contacts and from awareness of rural problems. Urban pressure groups can exert considerable influence on government, although there are exceptions where a pro-rural elite exists in government or where there is a powerful rural mass movement. In some countries the urban bias in decision-making is reinforced by the existence of extensive government investment in manufacture and commerce or in wholly nationalized undertakings alongside a largely private agricultural sector. Within the city public local administration is often extremely fragmented. In capital cities it is frequently divided between national and local government in ways which make the creation of
an integrated planning policy difficult.
2.2.2 Commerce and services
Commercial activity and service functions are not only important for the function of the city itself, but give it important links to the surrounding rural area. The city is a market for rural goods, including fuel, and an importer of fuel and power from other regions or other countries. Amongst other exchanges it deals with the movement of consumer and capital goods to its complementary rural region and the return flow of primary and processed materials. It is a source of investment capital, a centre for the supply and repair of farm tools and the supply of fertilizers and seeds. It is a local transport nexus. It is in part the product of commercial agricultural production and in part a stimulus to agricultural development through the influence Of its markets and services, It is a market for rural fuel through the demand of its poor people and the activities of part of its service population. At the same time it affects fuelwood production by the influence it exerts on
agricultural methods and organization.
2.2.3 Industry
Most industrial development in developing countries is associated with major cities, particularly with ports and capital cities. Outside the larger urban contras it is difficult to find qualified management or particular skills. Only the larger centres have an adequate power and fuel bass, water supply, transport and commercial facilities for the larger firms. Much modern industry is the product of overseas investment, or of overseas management and technology. Parent companies often prefer location near to a suitable port and airport and may find difficulty with communication outside the capital city. The major cities attract office development and frequently provide trading or industrial estates with adequate services and even factory "shells". Much of the large scale industry is basic, i.e. exporting to other regions or overseas. A large part of the non-basic industry, supplying mainly local needs, is informal, small-scale, unregistered or unlicensed, using premises built
for other purposes or functioning in the open. It frequently uses charcoal or fuelwood and is highly productive, although measures of its productivity are usually poor or non-existent.
2.2.4 Residence
Above all cities are places where people live, many of them too poor to make more than a limited use of the electricity with which their homes may be provided, or preferring the reliability of a stove using fuelwood or charcoal to the unreliability of commercial fuel and power supplies from distant sources. There are good indications in urban energy studies of a relationship between income group or social status and fuel and power preference, In many cities social groups in part exhibit distinct geographical distribution, that is the cities have sectors or zones dominated in whole or large part by particular groups, They also frequently have mixed sectors and broad zones of overlap in between. Where social survey work has already been completed it is possible to organize stratified sampling in a way which can take advantage of this geographical distribution. Some indications of social or income distribution may be obtained from maps or aerial photographs, since there are
also associations with buildings density, size and type, and even in some cases with road plans. A core or inner ring of older buildings, often affected by multi-occupance and including some recent development may be expected. Cities mostly grow outwards, and unless there has been a great deal of urban renewal or unless extensive old outer suburbs have been absorbed by the expansion, there should be some progression outwards from older to newer housing with, in some cases, some association with age-groups and family size. Extensive peripheral informal or so-called squatter settlements associated with houses built by their occupants and of very varying character may be expected in most cities in developing countries. Such settlements may also appear on sites long overdue for redevelopment and close to the urban centre. Many informal settlements house middle income groups with larger houses of fair quality, often preferred to the ready-made tenement slums otherwise available.
2.2.5 Urban-rural relationships
The classification of settlement and society into urban and rural seems valid enough geographically, expecially in many developing countries where the built-up area limits are sharp, and valid socially when one considers differences in life-styles, occupations, incomes and access to political power. There are, however, problems in making the distinction in that cities are foci of social life for both urban and rural communities and centres for the provision of rural services. Many people move regularly between town and country for both social and economic activities and many families have members living in both environments. It would be false to assume that "modernization" belongs only to the city or that limited and apparently unsophisticated forms of energy use are necessarily traditional. The supposed homogeneity of either urban or rural society is not borne out by most detailed research. Both societies tend to be heterogeneous and both exhibit modern and traditional
elements, Frequently migration to the city has been the product not of urban development causing attraction, but of rural social and economic change causing push.
The geographical concept of urban field, hinterland or complementary region defined as an area of flow of goods, information, services and people between it and a central place, has proved useful In studies of the relation of town and country. The urban field is not necessarily the exclusive zone of a particular central place, although low order goods moving short distances, such as fuelwood and kerosene for domestic consumption, tend to reach customers from their nearest supply centre.
Alongside the concept of urbanization we have the notion of "ruralization" or rural influences on urban environments. These are, however, "influences"' rather than "transformations". Ruralization is not the reverse process to urbanization, but rather its complement. The effect of rapid immigration in populating parts of the city with recently arrived rural people has been cited. Connections with rural locations as "home", are often strongly maintained, together with membership of rural based societies. Many cities have considerable populations of farmers, often only part-timers, but in many cases earning as much or more from their farming as from their more urban occupations. In the peripheral suburbs access to rural areas is easy and in consequence movements of people between town and country are frequent. Where wood is regarded as a common good or there is great pressure for fuelwood, a peripheral urban population can strip the immediately surrounding ("peri-urban") rural
area of most of its fuelwood resource. Where urban demands are heavy and resources are poor the decline in fuelwood supply leads to high prices and high rates of expenditure. As much as 25% of income is spent on fuelwood amongst the poorer families in the West African Sahel and the Andean Plateau.
2.3 Incomes and employment
Income disparities between rural and urban areas in developing countries are commonly of the order of 1.5 to 3 times and in some cases may rise as high as 9 times. Urban costs of living are frequently higher and may include extra costs such as commuting, higher housing costs, water supply and sanitation, but some of these extra costs are for benefits. There are also extra rural costs for health, secondary education, journeys to market, doctors and places of entertainment. Higher income and standards of living make the urban areas attractive to rural migrants, even with long periods of unemployment or under-employment before the desired urban job is obtained. Lack of job opportunities, low earning capacity in farm work ("real rural incomes" are lower than most rural income estimates suggest, since these include the incomes of rural traders, money-lenders and the professional class) and a limited social environment combined with poor living conditions are strong push factors.
These income differences are important factors in differences in fuel and power preference, and not just difference in access to fuels or differences in attitudes to modern technology and convenience. Frequently, surveys indicate that rural people would much prefer to cook with electricity, gas or kerosene rather than fuelwood, but either lack the income necessary or are simply unable to gain access to the preferred fuel. Poverty tends to worsen as technological modernization increases social and economic disparities. Income inequalities are maintained by a structure of production and a political power system that is oriented towards the sectors of the economy most susceptible to technological modernization. Hence the importance of an intermediate technology to reduce some of the disparity, despite doubts about its role as a poor man's alternative.
It might be supposed that the effect of rising incomes in towns would be the substitution of centrally supplied "modern" fuels for wood and charcoal. Such centrally supplied fuels are more varied and in relation to the demands of higher income groups may exhibit higher income elasticities. Fernandez (1980) has suggested higher income elasticities for "commercial" than "non-commercial" fuels in urban areas, whilst in rural areas income elasticities for both were thought to be similar. However, Cecelski & Dunkerley (1980) warn that quantification of these relationships has been based on inadequate data and that more studies are needed before current results can be confirmed. They conclude that "we cannot really be sure of the relative rates of growth of 'commercial' and 'traditional' energy consumption within total household use in the future".
The labour resource is an important factor in fuelwood exploitation and charcoal production, and local employment levels in other occupations are therefore a factor in fuelwood and charcoal supply. Unemployment and under-employment levels in developing country cities have been claimed to be high, although frequently the data regarding employment levels are doubtful and too little attention is paid to employment in informal industry and services. Often the urban unemployed must spend their time seeking work in the city and are unwilling to return to rural areas where there are so few adequately paid jobs. Near the city, villages tend to lose their young people to urban occupations in large numbers, so that labour for the development of fuelwood industries is often more available at some distance from the city. In some cases this may be a factor in planning the exploitation of forest resources. There is some evidence of return movements of labour from urban to rural areas, not
just for social occasions, more especially where urban unemployment has reached extremely high levels. Some urban unemployed take short-term rural jobs in order to support the cost of their search for work.
3. Rural fuel production for commercial demand
3.1 Fuelwood
3.2 Charcoal
3.3 Additional rural energy resources
3.4 Labour
3.5 Land
3.6 Transport costs
The organization of rural fuel production to satisfy commercial demand has some similarity to the commercial organization of agricultural production. Producers are scattered at varying densities over a considerable area and their goods have to find their way to a centralized market. As with agriculture there is a considerable subsistence sector and the relationship of commerce and subsistence is for many farmers an important element in production. In some regions there are few specialist wood fuel producers, but in others, more especially those where wood fuel has acquired a commercial value, wood fuel production and distribution is a major industry with many full-time employees and entrepreneurs. Wood resources come variously from forest estates, woodlots, plantations, areas of woodland or forest held in common, and farmland, including farm fallows, crop land and pasture, and areas of tree crop production. For most farmers wood cutting and gathering are secondary activities
often left to the women and children. Often the wood fuel produced on their farms is simply the by-product of clearing land for cultivation. There are farmers, however, who derive a large part of their earnings from it. In India some social groups, such as the gypsies, live almost entirely on earnings from fuelwood gathering and production, whilst small dealers and producers in areas like Gujarat have increased their bargaining power by organizing themselves into co-operatives. Ay (1980) noted in southern Nigeria that whereas in the past only the poorest people sold fuelwood, today there are farmers who make a good living from it and who use powered saws to increase their output. Full-time entrepreneurs may contract with farmers or estate holders to out wood on their land, using hired labour, or to convert such wood into charcoal. Split logs and charcoal are usually produced either by a hired labour force or by small independent entrepreneurs. It may be guessed that well
over ninety percent of fuel produced in rural areas consists of wood and charcoal, apart from areas with a high level of dependence on dung or crop residues. This paper will be concerned mainly with wood and charcoal dependent areas and with the factors concerned in the commercial production of their fuel.
3.1 Fuelwood
Fuelwood is usually sold either as roundwood, mainly for domestic use in stoves or open fires, or as split logs, chiefly for commercial and industrial purposes, Twigs and very thin material are not usually sold, but may be used as a cheap or free fuel in rural areas. There are some exceptions, e.g. Kenya, where their sticks are bundled for sale, Wood may also be sold for fuel as wood chips or processed into a variety of other energy forms, including gas and liquid. The timber industry is an important source of fuelwood from material otherwise wasted, not only at source, but in processing centres where wood is cut into planks or other shapes. Most species will burn, but vary considerably In their qualities as fuelwood or for ease in cutting and handling. Different species may have different prices. Drying out and avoidance of rot are also important features. In survey work there are distinct problems in measuring quantities of fuelwood sold or consumed, as it is normally
handled by the bundle or the larger stere and these have some variation in size and considerable variation in the amount of wood contained, even between bundles of similar volume, It is important to bear in mind that tropical forests and woodlands characteristically contain a very great variety of species, with considerable variation in density, burning properties and shape. This variety can also occur in the fallow trees and useful trees of tropical farms. Much of the woodland supply, particularly to the towns, comes from farmland, including both wooded areas within croplands and old fruit, fibre and oil producing trees. It is estimated that in Sri Lanka, for example, over half the wood fuel comes from coconut and rubber plantations.
For most fuelwood production very little capital is required. An axe or a machete are the only tools needed and where large trees must be cut they may be killed by ring girdling or burning at the base and left to dry out. Dead trees which await cutting may be seen as a widespread feature in tropical Africa and represent a form of fuelwood capital. They may be counted for survey purposes on large scale aerial photographs, but there are dangers in attempting to use information of this kind. We do not know from aerial photographs whether the dead trees are intended for use as fuelwood and many trees are hidden under the living canopy. Moreover, we would also need to know the seasonal pattern of tree killing and cutting before we could interpret photographs taken on a particular day of the year. In recent years capital expenditures have been increased as more trees have been purchased for split logs and as more sophisticated tools have been used, including chain saws and
chemicals for killing.
For many farmers fuelwood is still regarded as a free good. No price has to be paid and the tools used are those already in use on the farm. There are, however, rural landless people who possess no wood resources of their own and are dependent for wood fuel on what they are allowed to gather or out on farms, where they work as labourers or can obtain from a village communal resource. Where wood shortages occur such people have great difficulty in obtaining fuel for cooking. Pew of them can afford to buy it, so they rarely affect the commercial supply except as a source of hired labour. For them increased wood production by the development of plantations, involving costs and commercialization, would not provide a solution for their fuel problems, except in so far as it reduced the demand in the commercial market for any village wood to which they had access.
Fuelwood production is attractive to the pet-by entrepreneur who has very little capital, and to the farmer who wishes to become a part-time trader and to expand his earning capacity beyond the production possibilities offered by his farm. It may also be attractive to those entrepreneurs, including women, who have no farms. However, there can be little doubt that urban-based traders, better provided with capital, have realised the possibilities, more especially in the "industrial" trade in split logs which needs regular supply and a large scale spatial organization.
It should not be forgotten also that national governments usually through a forestry department, and local authorities from urban to village levels, have frequently invested capital in fuelwood production, chiefly in the form of plantations. Urban growth was understood as a factor in the creation of fuelwood shortage early in the century, and fuelwood plantations were developed in Africa and southern Asia.
3.2 Charcoal
Charcoal is the most important commercial fuel derived from wood. Smoke free, capable of controlled use in a small and cheap stove, and also capable of producing greater heat than wood, it is suitable for a wide variety of industrial and domestic uses and especially for use In an urban environment. It can also be used as a reducing agent in metallurgy and as an absorbent in filters. In most developing countries it is the chief form in which wood fuel is used in towns, but in a few countries, such as Nigeria and Zimbabwe, fuelwood is preferred to charcoal, and cooking on open fires is widespread, even in the towns. Charcoal is also easily stored, takes up less space than wood for a given production of heat and does not deteriorate, It is more easily handled in transport and distribution and is less easily ignited so that it is safer to use than wood. It can, however, produce fumes, even asphyxia in poorly ventilated rooms, and is also generally regarded as a dirty fuel with
large quantities of dust. In many countries charcoal is replacing fuelwood for both domestic and minor industrial purposes, particularly in the towns. In part this is a product not just of its greater convenience as a fuel, but of commercial advantage, which in many cities makes charcoal somewhat cheaper than fuelwood for equivalent heat production. In subsistence fuel consumption there is very little tendency to change and most of the advantages lie with fuelwood as an apparently "free" good. In commercial consumption costs of handling and distribution are as important factors in total cost as the costs of production. In southeast Asia and Cast Africa charcoal has become the chief fuel of the urban poor whilst fuelwood has remained dominant in rural areas. Distance to wood resource has acted differently between fuelwood and charcoal so that the more distant the resource and the greater the transport cost, the greater advantage of conversion to charcoal (see Digernes 1977
and 1980).
In most countries charcoal burning is still done in simple earth or pit kilns by small entrepreneurs, often operating individually or in very small groups and employing little if any capital. Their methods are labour-intensive, can use large pieces of wood and are little affected by wood moisture content. The quality and quantity of charcoal produced is variable and by-products are lost, so that over-all efficiency is low. In Tanzania and Kenya very small kilns are operated by individual burners, but in Senegal large earth kilns are used by burners' co-operatives, each employing 10-15 workers, and operating under a system of licences (Foley & van Buren, 1980). In some countries, such as Thailand, brick kilns are used on a small-scale, "cottage industry", basis to supply urban demand (de Backer & Openshaw, 1972). Brick, concrete or metal kilns give better control and a cleaner product, but require some capital investment. Like earth and pit kilns they make possible a
widespread, fairly mobile and small scale operator industry. Much higher levels of efficiency are possible with continous production kilns or retorts from which all gas and liquid by-products are recovered, and which achieve high yields with quality control. They are capital-intensive, but use much less labour for a given output. Size and moisture content of wood need strict control and external energy sources are also required. Continous production kilns and retorts need large quantities of wood and are fixed, that is the wood has to be brought to theme Unless cheap transport is available, intensive local wood production is required, usually in the form of wood fuel plantations.
There are preferred species for charcoal production and a great deal of waste is often incurred in preparations Many tropical forests and woodlands have a great variety of species so that the density of wood production suitable for processing may be much less than it appears. Hence the advantage of particular environmental conditions which favour the concentration of a preferred species, as for example the estuarine concentration of mangroves which produce very suitable wood for charcoal manufacture. Plantations of one species clearly have a considerable advantage.
3.3 Additional rural energy resources
Crop production and livestock rearing provide a wide range of waste materials capable of burning. Dried cattle dung is used in southern Asia and a few regions in tropical Africa, mainly in the villages, but occasionally as a commercial fuel even in towns. Sorghum stalks are sold for cooking fuel in west Africa and a great variety of crop residues are used In the villages, including rice stems and hulls, groundnut hulls, twigs, leaves and the remains of fruit and nut picking and preparations Oil seed wastes are commonly used as fire-lighters. Most of this material is used on a subsistence basis, but in such use it frequently releases an equivalent quantity of fuelwood for sale. Thus rural poverty encourages the "export" of the higher quality fuels.
There are a number of other sources of fuel and power in rural areas including methane from animal dung and vegetable waste, alcohol from crop plants or biomass plant production systems, direct use of solar energy, wind, falling water, peat, minerals and the use of human and animal power. Some of these may become extremely important as substitutes for wood fuels or for other major sources of energy as new discoveries in technology change the preferences in and the balance of fuel use. However, at present their commercial use and commercial potential are limited.
3.4 Labour
Wherever wood is out for commercial purposes the chief cost is labour. In many commercial operations hired labour gangs are used, as in the cutting of wood fuel for industrial purposes in Brazil or in west Africa. Even where small operators cut on their own account, they must out for the cash they can earn as a return on the labour they expend, as compared with the earnings they could achieve in some other activity.
In the case of roundwood for domestic use, much of it is cut on farms by spare-time labour, including the labour not only of men but of women and children, normally regarded as free, i.e. no wage is involved and the labour has already to be supported with the produce of the farm. In some cases fuelwood cutting and sale may provide a woman's perquisite, a small source of spare time cash.
Labour is most available during the dry season when wood dries well and is usually easiest to out. With seasonal variation in both cutting suitability and labour availability there is seasonal variation in productivity and prices, of which the commercial wood fuel research worker must be aware. Wet season prices can be very high and encourage the exploitation of poor quality or distant resources. Charcoal production is more specialized than fuelwood cutting and preparation and may be expected to attract some more permanent or at least longer term labour force. Even so difficulties in the rainy season are considerable and lead again to seasonality in production. A point of some importance is that although the drier savanna woodlands generally have a poorer wood resource in terms of productivity per hectare, they do have a long dry season offering long-term labour employment in wood fuel production. The attraction of working in the industry to poor farm labourers with no
alternative employment in the dry season should be considerable.
With a concentrated urban demand for fuelwood and charcoal, and supposed high levels of urban unemployment and under-employment, it might be thought that urban labour was easily available for cutting and processing near the town. One may suspect that in some instances this is not the case, despite high levels of urban unemployment, as fuelwood cutting is a rural occupation and labour looking for work in the town may prefer not to return to rural areas. At Ife in southern Nigeria immigrant Hausa from northern Nigeria are employed in tree cutting gangs, instead of local labour, and have to be transported to the work site. Moreover, where the unemployed are seeking urban jobs they may prefer to be on hand to take whatever may be offered as it is offered. They may even have some part-time informal occupation on a regular basis. These constraints would not, of course, prevent those living in the peripheral suburbs from visiting neighbouring rural locations to out some wood on
their own account. In some locations rural areas near to towns may be expected to exhibit high rates of emigration and to be occupied mainly by older people. Where this proves to be the case such areas will be affected by labour shortage and may need immigrant labour for wood fuel exploitation. In other locations, however, long distance migration is an important factor in the urban labour supply, competing with local rural migrants for jobs, and reducing urban dependence on the surrounding hinterland.
3.5 Land
Land as a factor includes both location and environment., Where wood is planted or managed in an agro-forestry system we may need to consider the cost of land or its implied coat as a factor. In some cases, particularly in Tropical Africa, the existence of use-right or usufructuary systems of land tenure may mean that land cannot be bought and sold as such and the question of land costs does not arises However, even in these cases some changes of tenure are taking place and, some trees, particularly valuable timber, fruit and fibre trees, may be owned even where they occur on land subject to common rights. However, private tenure is widespread, particularly in Latin America and Southern Asia, and is reported to be expanding in Africa with consequent reduction in access in fuelwood (Brokensha & Riley, 1978). Ownership may take the form of owner-occupation where farming families may gather fuelwood on their own property, or on estates where various forms of renting or leasing
farms may operate which may not always include an automatic right for farmers to take wood. Sometimes a distinction is made between wood fuel for the farming family and wood fuel for commercial purposes, the rights to which may be leased to specialized wood cutting or charcoal making firms. Much of the forested land is owned or controlled by governments, and various degrees of management are exercised through forest or agriculture departments or ministries. Evidence of deforestation and fear of timber and fuelwood shortage has encouraged some governments at either national or regional level to increase their control of forest lands, including both ownership and increased supervision of private forest management. In some cases government has acquired land for state controlled wood fuel plantations. However, not all cases of such intervention have proved effective and In several instances there has been a successful private response to fuelwood shortage by cultivating wood as
a cash-crop, as in Ethiopia or India, or developing multi-purpose wood plantations as in Kenya where black wattle has been grown for both tannin and wood fuel, or Nigeria, where teak has been grown for wood fuel and timber.
3.6 Transport costs
It may be expected that location in relation to the urban market will be an important production factor, since one of the major costs in the supply of wood fuels is transport, although admittedly varying considerably from one location to another. Generally we may expect transport costs to have an effect on the location of commercial fuelwood production since fuelwood is a relatively low-value bulk goods Loading and unloading is often a very expensive element, but except in so far as labour costs may vary with location, in general terms it should not necessarily be a location differentiating factor.
Ferguson (1973) calculated the distance limits for fuelwood and pole production around the towns for northern Nigeria. Although his results are not universally applicable, they do give an idea of the kinds of cost which may be expected and their variation in relation to road quality and production systems. He was able to show, for example, that the combination in plantation systems of fuelwood with pole and timber production generally lowers fuelwood production costs and makes conveyance possible over greater distances than when fuelwood is produced alone. In practice transport costs also vary considerably between operatives and may be affected by local regulations and subsidies. Much wood in Nigeria, and elsewhere, is known to move as a "make-weight" or "fill-up" load on lorries, and travel as a driver's perquisite, which he may sell on his own account at destination, that is lorries carrying food, commercial crops or even passengers, may carry wood as an additional load in
any remaining empty space.
In effect the transport cost of such wood may be nil, Wood and charcoal may also be carried by farmers or their family labour as head loads, bicycle loads or animal loads. Again such conveyance may be a spare time occupation, almost impossible to cost for the purpose of a fuelwood research project. Charcoal is usually much cheaper to transport than wood and is frequently carried for considerable distances - often in excess of 300 km. where urban demand is high and especially in the rainy season, where local wood may be too moist or when labour may abandon wood cutting for farming.
The analysis of transport systems in order to understand their effectiveness for moving wood fuel usually involves dealing with a considerable complexity in freight rates, alternative systems, combinations of transport modes and trade-offs between the different kinds of good carried and the prospect of return loads, Specialist wood or charcoal producers, hiring their own transport to move fuel to urban markets, may find very little prospect of a return loads. In Nigeria, however, the movement of fuelwood and food crops on donkeys to the city of Kano finds a return load in the urban night-soil which is used to fertilize the surrounding farms. Where a number of private lorry owners exist, they will frequently offer competing freight rates, subject to local and seasonal adjustment which make general freight rates for broad estimation extremely difficult to calculate. Often operating costs depend in part on government regulations designed to limit private transport operations
for political purposes, to control it for safety reasons, or to protect a competing government owned system. Railway freight rates in any one country frequently exhibit bewildering variety between goods carried, by locations or for varying distances. Over long distances railways are generally cheaper than lorries for the movement of bulk goods. Where wood fuel resources and their markets are both close to railway it can prove an efficient and cheap means of moving wood over considerable distances. River or lagoon transport can be even cheaper. Lagos, the capital of Nigeria, is at the centre of a system of lagoons offering cheap water-borne access to mangroves cut for charcoal. Charcoal also moves overseas quite cheaply, particularly to markets close to port. Kenya, for many years has exported charcoal to the countries of the Arabian peninsula, but has had to ban the trade because of the fear of overcutting. However, movement by railway or by water frequently suffers from the
disadvantage of a limited network, requiring additional modes of transport to reach markets situated at some distance from the system. Where several modes of transport are combined, costs are high, due to the expense of loading and unloading, and in such instances direct movement from resource to market by road has a competitive advantage even over long distances.
Transport can act as a spatially differentiating factor in the production of wood fuels and their supply to urban markets, other factors being equal. A simple model can be made to illustrate the general effect (see Figure 3-1). This model can be made a closer approximation to reality by increasing its complexity through the admission of other factors such as the availability of capital and labour, management, information, social relationships and population distribution and movement. The model suggests a zonation of the different forms of wood fuel production (Morgan, 1981). Next to the town, here assumed to be the chief centre in the region of commercial wood fuel consumption, there is a peri-urban zone varying in width for the locations for which data are available, between 2 and 5 km. This zone is heavily cut, even degraded around some cities as people from the town have regular access to it on foot or by cycles It has lowest transport costs and is often a location for
wood fuel plantations, but in many cases it is difficult to protect these from damage or illicit cutting. For distances extending up to 15-60 km from the town there is a zone of near farmland (width 10-58 km), Here woodland or forest usually occurs in patches in areas unsuited for farming. In accessible locations charcoal burning and wood cutting create considerable pressures on wood resources. Commercial production concentrates on roundwood and split logs., Beyond is the main area of farmland extending up to 80-300 km from the town width 20-285 km). Here again woodland occurs in patches, but many of these are more extensive. Transport costs are higher and commercial roundwood production is often small or non-existent. Instead charcoal and split logs are the main commercial products. Beyond 80-300 km from the town are the forest reserves and main timber exploitations where fuelwood is a useful by-product and large scale charcoal production is possible.
4. Rural fuel distribution: The dealer system
4.1 The urban dealer network
4.2 The rural dealer network
Very little research has been done on fuelwood and charcoal dealer systems as such, although many publications refer to commercial aspects, transport and trade. In part this may arise from a tendency for research workers to focus on consumption as the key indicator of energy availability problems and as the focal point of substitution between one form of energy and another. In part it may also have arisen from a more ecological interest in production with an assumption that most production is oriented to subsistence supply and therefore of little economic interest. In part also it may be based on the assumption that general dealer and market studies will uncover all that we need to know about dealing in wood fuels. Although fuelwood and charcoal are sold in some markets and are also handled by dealers handling other goods, there is increasing evidence of a distinctive group of fuelwood and charcoal dealers, some of whom appear to have invested money in transport and
production, and there is also evidence of considerable sales outside the periodic markets. In some cases, particularly In the case of fuelwood and charcoal for industrial purposes, there is direct delivery from production source to consumer. Domestic roundwood supplies may be fetched by consumers from farms or roadside sales points by cycle, car or pack-animal or may even be head-loaded, or, more commonly, may be supplied from a local retail fuel store. Where fuelwood is sold to urban consumers on any large scale it may be expected that such stores will occur at frequent intervals, as they do in the cities of southwestern Nigeria, for most urban customers prefer to carry wood loads for only short distances.
More study is needed of wood fuel dealer systems for they may well affect supply and oven fuel preferences., They often provide an occupation for poor women, at both the town and country ends of the network, and they are an important means by which information is ex changed between producers and consumers.
Many dealers may specialize in fuelwood and charcoal, but may also handle other fuels such as kerosene, and supply In addition such goods as hurricane lamps, fire-lighters, matches and electric batteries. Small metal mood stoves are usually brought directly from their makers.
In most countries the supply of wood fuel and the operations of the network of dealers are much affected by government controls of trade and transport, by regulations of trade in general and of the handling of wood fuels in particular, by systems of price control including regularly posted prices, by the activities of ministries of energy, fuel and power, forests and agriculture, and even by direct intervention in the distribution system, In extreme oases sales of certain fuels have been banned, as, for example, in the Republic of Korea where the government prohibited the sale of fuelwood to the towns. Substitutability of the various forms of fuel and power depends in part on their prices, and these are affected not only by price controls aver the whole range of energy supply, not just wood fuels, but by subsidies given to encourage the use of a particular fuel rather than another - for example, kerosene has been subsidized to encourage its use in place of wood where
deforestation is thought to be threatened. Thus government policy affects energy costs and preferences and can affect the livelihood of vast numbers of people In the wood fuels trade. Many of these are specialized dealers so that some new regulation affecting fuel supply and perhaps reducing income cannot be countered by increased dealing in other commodities. However, some dealers buy and sell other goods and are able to change the pattern of their operations in relation to their estimate of the changing profitability of the goods which they handle.
Figure 3-1 Suggested zonation of farmland and fuelwood production around towns of over 100.000 population in the humid savannas and rainforest.
Taken from a diagram in W.B. Morgan and We Moss, fuelwood and rural energy production and supply in the humid tropics, United Nations University, Tokyo, and Tycooly International, Dublin, 1981.
Dealers have information about production, consumption, fuel preferences, prices and movement and are sometimes willing to supply information to research surveyors, often depending on the extent to which their activities are affected by government regulation. The kinds of fuel they sell and the quantities currently available are often on display at their stalls. It is possible to identify and even rank order preferred species. Repeated in different regions this exercise can provide a regional comparison of resources. Since dealers are small in number compared with either producers or consumers they provide a small group of people, fairly easy to identify and find. They are normally in most accessible locations and usually have a great deal of knowledge not only about fuel supply and production, but about one another and the operation of the dealer systems Their customers and the people from whom they obtain their supplies are frequently regular and well known to them.
Where funds for research on the wood fuel industry are very limited and few research workers can be found to conduct social survey work, concentration on dealers may frequently be found to pay handsome dividends in the amount of information obtained for the effort expended. However, it should not be thought that research based on dealers alone can provide a reliable over-view of the entire production, supply and consumption system for wood fuels. Research workers should always attempt to sample all aspects of the system wherever possible.
4.1 The urban dealer network
Little information is available on urban dealer networks. The most detailed study in probably Omotara's (1974) account of the dealer system in Ife, southern Nigeria, where there is a small hierarchy of sellers of fuelwood and charcoal in which the chief element is a large number of women dealers selling fuel locally from small stalls and who appear to be well organized in a regular system of supply. Major dealers or wholesalers supplied the women with wood and charcoal owned lorries and arranged for direct delivery to bakeries, cooked meat sellers, schools and retail outlets. Wood supply was particularly sensitive to transport costs and there can be little doubt that rising fuel costs must encourage contraction in the area of supply with more intensive cutting. Charcoal had only limited use for cooking and heating and was sold mainly to heat irons for pressing clothes, or for industrial purposes such as metal working. Some immigrant labour was used to out wood, otherwise the
dealers Interviewed were local people. By contrast, in Abidjan, Monnier (1972) found that the sale of fuelwood at both wholesale and retail levels was in the hands of immigrants from Mali.
Undoubtedly in Africa and in southern Asia much of the fuel trade of rural origin is in the hands of petty dealers with very little capital and who may deal in other goods as opportunities permit. They will no doubt suffer from problems of liquidity, although the demands of other members of their families may discourage the holding of much cash., Often fuelwood dealing is an unlicensed trade easy to enter, the first step on a trading ladder, and in consequence despised by the bigger dealers. Attitudes undoubtedly vary from region to region, Charcoal production and dealing may require licensing, and where they do, some unlicensed activity, difficult to discover and estimate, may be expected. Not all retail dealers require stalls. Digernes (1980) refers in Bara, Sudan, to an extensive fuelwood business operated by women and children, whilst the charcoal trade was managed by men. Both commodities were sold from door-to-door. There is no market place for fuel in Bara. Ouedraogo
& Vennetier (1977) refer to the considerable fuelwood traffic of Ouagadougou, much of it carried in donkey-drawn carts which move along the streets in search of customers. Hehr (1967) reports door-to-door charcoal sales in Guatemala, some with regular customers.
Survey work amongst urban dealers has some advantages over research in rural areas. At least the dealers are more concentrated in space and, where they sell from stalls, are easily accessible. In some cases itinerant traders operate from door-to-door. These may sometimes be more difficult to contact and may object to the delay in their activities imposed by having to answer questions, although some researchers have reported no difficulties in interviewing them. There will also be an element of uncertainty with regard to the trading population, unless surveyors are stationed at key points in the city for very long periods in order to ensure meeting all the dealers involved. The complexity of many dealer systems could also create problems in that the sale of fuels from rural areas may not be solely in the hands of specialized dealers in ail established network. Other dealers may sell fuel, and part-time traders may exist, including farmers selling some fuelwood for extra cash.
4.2 The rural dealer network
In the rural areas petty dealers in fuelwood are common in the villages., Some deal in other goods or handle consumer goods from the city for sale in rural areas. Many, however, are very poor people who buy a little mood from local farmers or who hire a few labourers to cut for them and then arrange for its transport to a roadside site, where it can be picked up by lorry or sold to passing customers. In southern Nigeria and Kenya a great deal of wood is sold directly to a car-owning affluent class. Distance to roadside has to be paid for or cost a great deal of effort. In consequence not much commercial fuelwood is obtained from places poorly served by road transport, except where the pressures of demand on a poor resource base and, in consequence, prices are very high. Accessibility is a very important factor in the geographical distribution of the dealer network. Ay (1980) noted that location near a main road was an important element in the fuelwood business in Nigeria.
Both split logs and roundwood may be sold by petty dealers and even charcoal produced by farmers in small quantities from clearing trees to create farmlands However, much of the split log and charcoal business is by direct sale to urban industrial or other large-scale consumers. In consequence it is often handled by major dealers seeking larger and more concentrated resources for production, justifying the hire of lorries especially for the purpose. Activity on this scale often occurs at some distance from the city and is not necessarily spread round the city but may be concentrated on main roads. It can be strongly sectorized (Sale, 1981) in areas where contracts for cutting have been made and where the dealers have adequate information about the nature and abundance of the resource they seek. Large scale production systems for commercial purposes, concentrated into particular regions, appear in a number of countries. They have been noted, for example, in Uganda in the
supply of charcoal to Kampala and Entebbe, and in Thailand in the charcoal trade to Bangkok.
The transport factor clearly has a very important role in the dealer system, although it should not be assumed that transport costs operate in some uniform way to create a regular friction of distance and a definite boundary to supply. Fairly clear boundaries may occur where there is a "watershed" effect, that is where the supply areas of two cities meet. There is a tendency for petty dealers to sell to the nearest city and not to engage in trading competition with one another. The product, as between one dealer and another, is fairly uniform (dealers handle similar varieties of wood species in a given area) and often, despite the informal nature of the system, there is a broad correspondence in prices at a given distance. However, the most expensive transport costs may be head-loading or bicycle-loading to the road, or loading and unloading lorries. Freight rates may differ between lorry owners and be "stepped" so that the cost per ton/mile decreases with distance in a
series of fixed steps. Direct delivery of industrial fuelwood by lorries owned by an entrepreneur, who also has control over cutting and preparation, clearly has some cost-reducing advantages.
Even charcoal manufacture may face high local transport costs, not just to market, but of wood to kiln and from kiln to lorry pick-up point, as Ay (1980) has shown. As favoured hardwood species become more scarce local cutting has to move further into the woodland and away from the kilns. Eventually the producers themselves must follow since charcoal is less costly to move than wood, and then charcoal must be headloaded to the collecting point.
Wood and charcoal may also be carried by pack-animals or on carts drawn by animals. In such cases very small transport "operators" may exist in large numbers, often farmers acting as part-time wood carriers and dealers. Where movements of petty carriers are widespread, as around Kano in northern Nigeria and Ouagadougou, survey work faces a heavy task in achieving an adequate check on fuel movements
5. Substitution and innovation
5.1 Substitution
5.2 Innovation and change
5.3 Improving efficiency in energy production and use
The towns are the chief consumers of fuel and power and particularly of oil derived fuels and hydro- and thermal electricity, Huge quantities of energy are needed not only for industrial purposes, but for transport, including the network linking town and country side, and for the cooling of offices and hotels. The more developed the production, administrative and information systems, the more commercial energy has been used as a substitute for labour, and the more dependent, in many cases, the urban system has become on imported oil. In the surrounding rural area the use of commercial energy, although usually less than the use of local fuelwood, is nevertheless of vital importance for the developing sector of the rural economy, including the transport of rural fuel and farm produce to urban consumers, the return movement of consumer goods, rural lighting (usually kerosene or electricity) and rural power uses. Attempts to reduce the bill for imported oil must concentrate
mainly on urban uses which offer the main scope for substitution.
The area of urban-based and rural-based interchange of fuel and power supplies provides a zone of energy competition and substitution. Both rural and urban fuel and power resources are of considerable variety. The urban have a wider range of uses, generally require more elaborate and expensive equipment, are centrally organized close to their main market, and to reach rural consumers have to overcome the friction of distance and the costs of supplying very small markets. The rural have dispersed production and local consumption, but move inwards to a large market, again being affected by the friction of distance, but requiring only cheap or virtually no equipment.
5.1 Substitution
In most developing countries fuelwood and charcoal have an over-riding importance as the fuels of poor people, of informal industry and as stand-by fuels. Nevertheless there has been a great deal of commercial competition by other fuels for these uses and substitution has taken place. The substitution of fuelwood for these other fuels is also taking place as relative prices and availability change, that is substitution is acting both ways at different times and in different places. The cost of oil imports has made heavy demands on foreign exchange in most countries and in consequence urban areas appear to have increased their requirement for rural fuels. In India kerosene prices almost doubled between 1973 and 1975 and there was some reduction in kerosene sales after some popularity in 1970-73. McGranahan et al, (1980), for example, reported a three-fold increase in kerosene prices in et al., the period 1974-77 compared with a doubling of charcoal prices, so that for many
urban consumers charcoal became a preferred fuel. Such a change is not always easy to effect, however, as it involves a change in equipment. Kerosene stoves are expensive items for poor people, and they are understandably reluctant to cease using something on which they, have spent a high proportion of the little capital they possess.
In considering substitution we are therefore concerned both with the increased use of fuelwood and charcoal as alternatives to more expensive imported fuels, and with the possibility of finding substitutes for wood fuels wherever wood resources appear threatened by unduly heavy demands. In examining these possibilities we have also to bear in mind altering conditions of supply. The period 1980-81 for example has seen the world oil supply shift from shortage to glut. We have also to consider encouraging increased production, particularly of wood, and applying conservation techniques, including the development of more efficient stoves.
Substitutions for wood, which in general have been more widely reported, include increased kerosene and butane use in South Korea, where the sale of wood in towns was banned, and the subsidised use of kerosene and soft coke in India, where domestic stoves have been developed for their use,
Animal dung has also acted as a substitute for wood where local wood resources have become scarce. Kerosene has provided the cheapest and most common substitute for wood, although much less popular in recent years due to rising prices. A major difficulty in effecting the change has been the need to purchase stoves, thus involving a capital cost. Often such stoves have been too small for the needs of large families and unsuitable for the use of traditional cooking utensils. They are also generally less effective than open wood fires for stewing or simmering food, a popular method of cooking in many countries. An urban tendency to nuclear household units may be an important factor where kerosene preference occurs. A campaign to substitute kerosene for charcoal in Mauritania was mostly unsuccessful (Arnold 1978, Floor 1977), whilst in Senegal a campaign to substitute butane had only limited success (Arnold 1978, UNEP 1976). Gas, chiefly bottled butane or liquid petroleum gas
(LPG) has substituted for wood in richer households where a gas stove can be afforded. In some countries there are problems of distribution, so that gas users continue to keep wood fuels as a stand-by.
Coal, as suggested above, seems a useful substitute for oil at port sites and recommendations for its increased use in the event of a severe wood fuel shortage have been made, for example, in Dakar and Dar-es-Salaam, by Foley & van Buren (1980), The authors recognise that in domestic use the substitution of coal for charcoal in the two cities is not immediately feasible because of the lack of mutable stoves and ventilation. Coal is also still a more expensive fuel. There is a much better case for using coal as a substitute for oil in large-scale industrial applications. From these it could be extended to small-scale applications such as bakeries and forges. However, in the event of a shortage of wood fuels the authors claim that no fuel other than coal is likely to be available in these port locations in sufficient quantity and at a price which would make possible substitution for charcoal. In India, one of the more important Third World coal producers, the use of coal,
including soft coke for domestic purposes, has been encouraged in order to reduce the oil bill. The use of coal on the railways is an important element in such a policy and may encourage the development of railways rather than motorways. Coal is predicted to have a longer life than oil fuels and long term policies are likely to emphasize its advantages for a number of purposes. Electricity seems to have been less successful as a substitute for wood even in areas where rural electrification has taken place. Many homes use electricity for lighting but continue to use wood fuels for the more expensive cooking and heating. Some countries, however, have ambitious rural electrification programmes. Thailand's electricity authority, for example, plans to bring electricity to 90% of the rural population by 1995.
Schemes to substitute wood for other fuels, chiefly oil derived fuels such as kerosene, seem more in demand, as oil import bills have risen to over 25% of export earnings in several of the poorest countries. Even if oil prices currently fall, they will have to drop considerably before many countries can afford to drop plans for oil substitution. Moreover, on present evidence the oil glut may not last long and a general situation of supply being short of demand seems likely over the next 30-40 years. A great deal of current research is therefore concerned with determining future Wood fuel demands, possibilities for substitution and increased production.
It is mainly in the towns and amongst the urban poor that most such substitution must be effected, although the use of kerosene cookers in the rural areas has been declining as prices have risen and as wood is so cheaply or even freely available locally. It would seem probable that a rising urban demand, chiefly for charcoal, will increase the demand pressures on the productivity of the rural hinterland and on the distribution system supplying rural energy to urban consumers. Attempts to improve wood and charcoal stoves should find a larger and readier market, whilst more people should be able to find work as dealers and wood cutters. The possibilities for such change, however, depend considerably not just on the operation of the energy market, but on government pricing policy. In most countries the prices of several or even all forms of energy are affected by subsidies, price controls or both, and therefore government itself in many cases is already determining, or at least
affecting, energy preferences (see above).
5.2 Innovation and change
The town may be regarded as a zone of considerable energy innovation potential since it usually contains a more educated population, and tends to drain the rural areas of their younger and better educated people. In many cases urban people have the higher incomes needed for the often high initial costs of innovation. Surveys should include not only the possibilities for wood and charcoal stoves, but the possibilities for energy savings in a wide variety of fuel uses, including transport, industry, and energy uses in offices, hotels and shops. The problems of handling charcoal or of carrying home a fuel as bulky as wood could well encourage innovations intended to reduce fuel consumption. Moreover, urban wood and charcoal burning may cause air pollution and be regarded as a hazard or at least a nuisance. The town has a considerable concentration of energy use and also has its energy users in close proximity to one another, with advantages both for research and for the
diffusion of innovations. Moreover it is frequently the social focus for the surrounding rural area, that is some of its citizens can act as leaders in innovation adoption over a wide region.
In discussing the supply of rural fuel, particularly that part of it which enters the commercial sector and is sold in the towns, research workers should be aware that the use of such fuel is only one, possibly minor, element in the economic and social life of a community, an economic and social life which may be in process of change. In many cases the interest in wood fuels research arises from the study of development and from the objective of trying to maximize any advantages gained, whilst reducing or even eliminating the disadvantages, in other cases interest may arise from an appreciation that the local economy is stagnating and unable to satisfy people's aspirations. In others again the situation may be more complex, involving both changing and stagnant elements, and perhaps increasing disparity of income between social or geographical groups. However small it may appear as an element of economic or social change, the energy supply is nevertheless a fundamental part
of the development process, both affecting it and being affected by it. It should therefore occupy an important place in development planning.
Rural energy research, therefore, cannot be divorced from development planning and policy. It is the latter which should decide objectives and determine the research framework and orientation, A great deal of planning is concerned with "improvement". In a sense we should always be concerned with improvement, but sometimes concern with no more than improvement arises from constraints in development planning such as shortage of input resources, lack of an over-all development objective, inability to conduct study outside a particular field of interest or inability to integrate the various facets of research into one programme. The "transformation" of economy and society should also concern the research worker. It is much more difficult to plan for transformation and may seem beyond the ability of most research workers. However, as already argued it is somewhat pointless to attempt improvements in the production, supply and use of rural energy resources without examining all
related aspects of energy supply and use, and their implications for economic activity and social life. A very small energy innovation, such as the introduction of a new stove for example, may have implications for alternative fuel use, housing design, cooking, meal times and the daily rhythm of social activities and work which may involve transformation whether we want it to do so or not. In the rural energy context we cannot afford to concentrate on improving rural energy production or on reducing fuelwood consumption without examining, not just the consequences for other aspects of rural life, but the implications for urban energy supply and the return flow of centrally-supplied energy to rural areas.
5.3 Improving efficiency in energy production and use
Reduction of waste in wood and charcoal production systems should always be borne in mind as an effective contribution to solving a problem of wood shortage, although often at some cost in time and labour use, i.e. it needs time to persuade people to change their existing use techniques and preference, whilst a number of extension workers or advisers will be required and will need to be trained. In energy survey work casual advice on this subject by field assistants may do more harm than good, and may even undermine the credibility of the survey. An awareness of the nature of the problems involved and the potential for savings, with due regard to the need for obtaining results before offering advice, must form part of the training of the survey team.
The substitution of wood stoves for open fires and improvement in the design of wood stoves are possible means of achieving savings in wood use. Open fires do have a very low level of efficiency in using wood fuel, but not every design of wood stove can offer improvement, and efficiency varies considerably between designs. It is useful in studying fuel consumption, not only to discover the kinds of stove already in use and the extent to which they have proved popular, but to establish the preferences in use and the design criteria for new kinds of stove. The integration of social survey work and engineering design in such innovation possibilities is an important objective in study. Amongst the major considerations are cooking preferences, adaptability of stove design for different purposes and locations, the kinds of cooking utensil preferred and the relationship of the design to production methods.
Considerable wood savings may also be achieved by using more efficient kilns for charcoal production and such a development may be envisaged wherever wood shortages occur. The basic problem is that the least efficient kilns are also the most flexible in use and the cheapest, as was discussed above. Lowest costs of all are achieved by simply heaping earth or producing charcoal in pits., Improvements such as introducing metal or brick kilns may involve the import of materials from other regions, and in use may require new skills and involve changes in employment. In a survey of production systems these are all important aspects to be considered in a development programme.
<section>7</section>
4. Methods of fact finding
David Broshenka and Alfonso Peter Castro
1. General considerations
2. Data collection
3. Selecting research sites and study participants
4. Field workers and study logistics
5. Conclusion
1. General considerations
1.1 Topics on which to gather information
1.2 Suggestions
We present here some guidelines for carrying out social surveys in connection with wood fuel projects., Our aim is to indicate what techniques are available, what sort of information should be gathered. We generalize, because generalizations can be made, but we remind readers that there is much variety in communities, and each specific situation requires its own approach, and its own modification of general surveys. Moreover, the amount of manpower, financial and organizational resources available to fuelwood investigators inevitably varies and further constrains generalizations about how surveys "ought to be" carried outs.
Surveys can be conducted in many ways, from a small-scale, quickly organized examination of one specific local situation, to a year-round national survey on a large scale. In this paper we are primarily concerned with more restricted surveys, not with elaborate national surveys. Surveys vary not only in scale, but also in location, objectives and methods, We indicate which of these is appropriate for specific needs. No single source - written, oral interview, observation, questionnaire - should be regarded as sufficient in revealing all aspects of fuelwood use. A combination of methodological approaches and procedures is recommended in conducting any investigation of the sociological context of fuelwood uses The aim is to build up many sources, so as to cross-check for reliability.
An ideal survey would permit generous allocations of time, and people who were experienced in social surveys. The ideal period would be at least a complete year, which would permit the important seasonal differences (how is wood gathered in the rainy season?) to be noted. But we recognize that most readers will not have the resources to do an ideal survey. In many cases the survey will be done in response to an urgent request or order from a government ministry or an international agency. "The district administrator at X says that the people have a big problem getting firewood - go and find out what exactly the position is. We need a report by next month." Here a quick simple survey is all that is possible, but we believe that it is possible to get good and relevant information even in such difficult circumstances, and we suggest ways of doing this.
Sometimes officials will have the responsibility to resist pressure to do a survey in too short a time, where it would be impossible to collect the required information. Rapid surveys can be valuable, but they have their limits of usefulness and accuracy.
These suggestions are intended for people like forestry, agricultural and other government officials who are called on to make a survey of wood fuels and other fuels. We need to emphasize the importance of other fuels, for in some parts of the world, at least at some seasons, fuels like crop residues or animal dung may be the main source of cooking fuels A good fuelwood survey is really a social survey, because it deals not only with wood, but with how a particular society manager its resources, with factors such as control of, and access to, trees; division and organization of labour; patterns of using fuels. These reflect the basic values of that society, showing who is important and privileged, and therefore does not suffer when fuel is scarce or conversely, it will also show which social groups and individuals, such as the poor, women, elderly, and handicapped, suffer the greatest hardships from fuel scarcity. A proper fuelwood survey should always involve a two-way
process: on the one hand is the resource - wood and other fuel sources - and on the other hand are the rules (and technology) that society uses for managing that resource.
We stress the need to be flexible, to use common sense and courtesy, and to respect the views, values and rights of the people themselves. They should not be viewed as a passive entity waiting to be developed, but rather as a people who have their own perceptions and their own technical knowledge, and who have much to contribute.
1.1 Topics on which to gather information
This is intended to indicate the more important topics for investigation. Exactly which areas are explored, and in what depth, depends on specific circumstances of location, other information available, and precise needs of the survey, as well as on funds, time and staff available. Much information can be gathered, at least in broad outline, fairly easily and rapidly. In all surveys there is need of a balance between obtaining too much and too little information. For fuel projects, the aim should be to be able to decide on appropriate questions that will provide useful answers and to present enough basic information so as to make the actual fuel data meaningful. Information about collection of firewood, or manufacture of charcoal, or cooking patterns, does not make much sense unless it is related to the social background, to the specific people and place being studied. Information should always be gathered with fuel in mind, and it is important to resist collecting
interesting facts on every aspect of life, then not knowing what to do with the results. No single check-list adequately covers all informational needs. Rather, what follows suggests the range of information that may be relevant, depending on the objectives and limits of each survey. First the objectives must be established, then the next step is to work out principles of selection - what needs to be included? What sort of questions must be asked?
Demography. "How many people live in this area?", is clearly a major factor in determining the demand for fuel. Other questions concern the density (how many people per square kilometer?) and the age and sex distribution. How many elderly or sick people who may be handicapped in getting fuelwood? What are the rates for births and deaths (if known) and how do these compare to national figures? What are the rates and patterns of migration (is it seasonal or permanent? are the people moving in from other areas?). These comparisons are important, as we need to know how "typical" any particular area is.
Environment. What is the physical area that we are dealing with? Is this clearly marked or should-it be arbitrarily defined? What resources (especially land, soils, vegetation) are available? What is known about climate, water, slopes, drainage? This information provides some sense of adequacy of reserves (actual and potential) of fuel.
Historical. There are two good reasons for knowing at least the general outline of local history recognizing the significance of important places and major persons. First, the present can only be understood in relation to the past, even in such an apparently ordinary study such as fuel. Second, local people regard their history as important, so it is both expedient and courteous to know something about significant events. Patterns of fuel use should not be considered as being historically static, since incidents and changes such as population movements, the expansion of farming, the building of roads, wars, or the growth of commercial timber operations may have had important impacts on fuel usage.
Community. We are studying a community of people, the most important part of which is the relatively stable set of relationships between the people - relationships between men and women, old and young, neighbours, kinsmen, in-laws, landlords and tenants, rich and poor, and so on. The relationships involve both conflict and cooperation, and are expressed in specific activities, one of which is a set of activities that concerns fuel. So fuel activities will both help to clarify the social structure of a community, and also be more intelligible when the social structure is understood.
The community will usually focus on a central place, a village or a hamlet, and there will generally be clear patterns of settlement and land use, which relate, of course, to the environment.
Domestic. It should be possible to make a rough typology of "households", a term which although sometimes vague, is better than "family" or "farm". Household may usually be defined as a group of people that shares a common kitchen (or cooking place) and that recognizes one household head. Households can be distinguished by size, and numbers of members affects both demand for, and supply of, fuelwood. Households also differ in income, which is usually difficult to measure as Many people are unable or unwilling to give precise figures of income. So we look for 'proxy indicators' that will give a good idea of income and wealth. These may include land (ownership and use), livestock permanent trees, type and size of compound and houses (materials, roof, furniture), and selected personal and household possessions like jewelry, watches, bicycles, radios, clothing - it is easy to establish a simple index for a particular area, then select a sample of households (see below) and use a
Guttman scale to show the wealth graduations (see field manuals recommended in subsequent sections of the paper for description of Guttman scale).
The purpose of this is to establish the range and extent of inequality and variation between households, and to relate this to patterns of fuel use, and fuel sale (especially for export).
Social and Economic. This category seeks further information on differentation - how is access to land defined and who controls/owns the land? How many are landless or nearlandless, how many rent land? These are crucial questions in considering access to fuelwood. Who owns trees, if this is separate from land ownership? What are the main production systems, for agriculture (subsistence and cash-crops) and livestock? What are the general patterns for technology, markets, credit and indebtedness, commerce, communications, occupations, division of labour by age and sex? What are the main social, ethnic, and religious divisions, and how do these relate to economic status? While it is not necessary to obtain detailed precise information on all these topics, they are all significant for fuelwood. For example, the presence of an established, regular and thriving market, connected to the outside by all-weather roads, will facilitate fuelwood sales.
Services. What services are provided by government or private agencies in the fields of education, health, agricultural extension, forestry, community development and commerce? Where are offices located? How often do officials visit? How do the services compare with those available to other communities? This sort of information would be important especially if the survey calls for recommendations such as tree-planting.
Political-Administrative. What are the formal and informal channels of authority? What are the links to the regional (and national) centers of power? What is the extent of-local participation in making decisions? What laws, regulations, and local informal, sanctions affect fuelwood - e.g. who is allowed to out which trees?
This list is not comprehensive, and needs to be modified for particular circumstances. It would be easy to decide, for example, how much information was necessary on education, apart from basic essentials such all details on schools (location, grades or standards, male and female pupils, teachers) and literacy. In some areas residential schools may be major buyers and consumers of fuelwood, or teachers may be the main buyers of charcoal; in other areas, a high proportion of children in school may mean fewer children available for help in fuel collection. The aim should always be to relate the enquiries to the specific goal, fuels Thus, it might be important to ascertain how a fuel shortage affected diet and health. In arranging a social science survey, one needs to be constantly critical - "Am I asking the right questions? What have I neglected? How can I get information quickly on this subject?"
Fortunately, fuel in many areas is still a relatively open topics Unless an individual is engaged in illicit activity like theft of fuelwood, cutting trees in a forest reserve, or selling charcoal without a licence, he or she is likely to be cooperative and responsive, as most people already perceive fuel as a problem, and they welcome any prospect of alleviation. Even individuals who are technically involved in illegal aspects of fuel use have often provided valuable information to investigators. This depends, to a large extent, upon who the investigator is. That is to say, an "independent" researcher may at times have an easier time gathering information on some subjects than a forestry service officer, although this generalization is by no means always correct.
In all cases an attempt should be made to compare the community studied with others in the same locality, region or nation. In come countries (India, Kenya) much good information is available for comparative purposes. For most countries, however, there is little detailed information about fuelwood availability and use. Thus, it is advisable that when conducting a survey, some specific areas be selected for surveying.
Certain basic information on the community must be gathered, but it will seldom be necessary to collect detailed information on, for example, ritual, magical beliefs, or details of marriage. However, it will be desirable to know whether ceremonies affect fuelwood use, as does the Hindu practice of cremation, which creates a great demand for wood. It will be necessary, regarding marriage, to know how divorce affects a woman's chores and her access to firewood. Does a divorced women who lives alone, or with her children, face greater difficulties in ensuring an adequate fuelwood supply? The point is to determine which sorts of information are relevant, and to strike a balance between knowing enough about a community to have a good general picture, on one hand, and on the other hand, forever collecting trivial items because they may come in handy.
1.2 Suggestions
Most guides to anthropological fieldwork are not particularly relevant for our present purposes, because they apply to situations where much detailed and precise information must be collected, and long periods of fieldwork are involved. For many fuelwood surveys, there will not be time for elaborate and detailed investigations, and it will be impractical to become bogged down in fine questions of statistical significance and methodology, although surveys must aim for accuracy.
"Rapid rural appraisal", uses relatively simple techniques, and according to Robert Chambers "Simple is optimal" (Chambers, 1978). Here are some simple suggestions:
1. Walk, observe, listen and ask questions.
2. Remember that a quick visual survey can accomplish much.
3. Be flexible, use common sense and realise that no single approach is universally appropriate.
4. Always be aware of the range and variation of behaviour and attitudes as well as of the cluster in the middles. Try to discover norms or averages.
5. Involve the local people in the survey.
6. In interviews and conversations, develop your own style that is congenial to your personality, rather than attempting to use an imagined superior models
7. Don't ask more than you need: avoid collection of unnecessary surplus data.
8. Look at other, comparative communities.
We provide more details below of how to implement these suggestions.
2. Data collection
2.1 Written sources
2.2 Key informants and informal informational networks
2.3 Observations
2.4 Interviews
2.5 Group interviews
2.6 Questionnaires
In this section we present an overview of the procedures used in collecting field data, to introduce the reader to basic methods that will be useful in conducting a fuel survey. Those readers interested in more in-depth treatments, can consult some of the standard books on field methods. (See, for example, Yang, 1955; Mbithi, 1974; Kearl, 1976; Connell and Lipton, 1977. There is also a good discussion of methodology in case studies such as Lewis, 1951; Hill, 1972).
The following section is divided into six parts. The first describes various written sources containing information on rural communities. Second, the advantages and disadvantages of using key informants are discussed. Part three considers the importance of observations, with participant and nonparticipant observation, an well as time allocation studies, being reviewed. In part four, interviews are examined. Questionnaires and how to frame questions are dealt with in part five. The final part is concerned with methodological pitfalls and biases and with their resolution. Usually information is gathered in several ways, one being used to supplement the others. For example, in collecting information on fuel used for cooking methods include measurement (of fuel used), interviews (what people say they do), observation (trying to decide what they actually do using ears, eyes, and nose!). No method is superior, all are necessary.
2.1 Written sources
Information on particular rural communities or regions may be available from a variety of official, historical, anthropological, or other sources. First, reports from the central government, such as the census bureau, department of agriculture or the ministry responsible for forestry, or technical ministeries of roads, public works or water, may contain community level data. The quality, quantity, and frequency of publication of the data vary considerably nationally.
Local governments and local branches of national agencies may be able to provide useful information. For example, local tax rate records were instrumental in selecting stratified random samples for a fuelwood consumption survey in the Sudan (Digernes, 1977:51). Local forestry offices may have records on the sale of trees, or estimates of illegal cuttings. Agricultural officers are often a good source of information, as are officers such as Kenya's District Development officers.
The social science literature is another important source of written information. Farm management studies, ethnographic reports, and sociological surveys can supply valuable background facts on a particular community, region, ethnic group, or other socio-cultural grouping. Unpublished limited circulation reports can be very useful, These studies should be treated in the same way as any "fallible" historical source. At best, they provide a baseline against which present conditions can be compared and contrasted and are a good source of hypotheses to guide and direct the survey. In terms of specific data on fuel use, however, the social science literature generally contains little detailed information., Most major cultures of the world are represented by at least one outstanding ethnography which provides a reasonably up-to-date social and ecological account. A good example is provided by the Ethnographic Survey of Africa, which covers all major ethnic groups, and which
provides excellent basic information, and bibliographies, on social, economic, domestic, and ritual life. These volumes, in English and French, are published by the International African Institute.
Other written sources may shed light on a community, its history, and patterns of fuel and resource use. Scientific accounts of local resources, local histories, church records, travellers' accounts, and records of plantations or mines are important sources. Once again, caution must be employed when using such sources as some records might be out-of-date and incomplete.
Available written records help to provide the historical background to the particular unit of study and populations Moreover, they can help to establish the social, cultural, political, economic, and ecological context of fuelwood and other energy uses in the community. As Oscar Lewis' account (1951) of Mexican villagers has shown, local patterns of forest use change throughout time, and an -understanding of these changes and their implications requires an understanding of the local milieu and its relationship with larger socio-economic and political forces.
Local universities, technical colleges and research institutes may be good sources for unpublished research. Inquiries should be directed not only at the social sciences, but also at natural sciences. A botanist, zoologist, ecologist or geologist, for example, who had worked systematically in an area, could be an excellent source for certain sorts of information.
2.2 Key informants and informal informational networks
A key informant is a person who is knowledgable, who has contacts and who is willing to talk. Sometimes key informants are self-selected, in that the local "Big Men" (as they are called in many parts of the world) are often the first to present themselves to a field investigator. The key informant is often a prominent, articulate person (usually a man) of some consequence, such as a village headman, merchant, landlord, large farmer or headmaster of the local school. Important key informants may also include people who are not members of the community but who have valuable experience and insights, such &a an agricultural or administrative officer, or a social scientist who has done research in the area. In a fuel survey, it might be advisable to choose a specialist such as a charcoal-maker or a woodcutter to supplement the views of the leaders.
Two disadvantages of using key informants are the problems of bias and representation. In selecting - or, as sometimes happens, being selected by - a key informant, it is well to remember that no one individual can ever represent all perceptions, all viewpoints, of his/her community. People always differ according to sex and age, and usually other differences are the result of wealth, status, occupation, or particular sorts of knowledge and insights. Sometimes an outside researcher will be adopted by an apparently well-informed and friendly person who later turns out to be marginal to that community. He may be marginal because of his unorthodox views, or because he has spent many years outside the community, or because of his personal history; this means that he will not be a good source of typical ideas and attitudes of that society, although he may help in analyzing behavior, from his unusual 'outsider' viewpoint. In general, key informants should not be relied on for
information without other means of data collection that will check their accuracy. In spite of the disadvantages, key informants can be useful in fuel surveys. Where there are cost and time constraints, use of key informants may be a useful and rapid method for collecting data. Indeed, the only effective way of getting certain kinds of information quickly may be to find one well-informed and talkative person. At the preliminary stage of research, key informants can help the investigator to become familiar with the area, can explain local aspects of the particular topic of investigation, and can also help to develop preliminary hypotheses to guide the study. These hypotheses can be used in developing pilot questions, to be tested on other people. It is essential to develop a network of informants, extending out, perhaps, from the original key informant. One advantage of making extensive enquiries is that one builds up a network of people to see. "Oh, you must talk to Father
Damiano, he lived in X for many years. "Haven't you seen Señor Rodriques yet? He used to sell goods in that village every week. "What about Kofi? You know he was the driver of the 'Sea Never Dry' lorry, and he really knows those places." Eventually, then the network starts closing - i.e., no new names are presented - one can feel reasonably confident that major sources have been contacted.
Key informants are unusual people, and thus do not necessarily provide typical or valid sociological information. But they do help the outsider to appreciate the following points: there is no such thing as a simple question; everything is related to everything else; answers depend on questions; there are usually apparently endless levels of complexity. Given this state of complexity, the exact nature of questions asked, and who is asked, are clearly of great importance. Even such apparently simple, straightforward questions as: "Where do you collect firewood?" "Who owns this forest?" "Do you pay fees to out wood?" "Do you sell charcoal at the market on Fridays?" "Who takes meals regularly in your household?" - may prove to be extremely complicated, and answerable only in situation-specific terms. This means simply that each question must be related to specific set of circumstances, or a particular person, because if these are changed, the nature of the question will be
changed. It is essential to search for the right question, the one that will be meaningful to respondents and that will produce the information and explanation desired. A good key informant can be especially helpful in aiding the fieldworker to ask appropriate questions in the clearest and most productive manner.
2.3 Observations
2.3.1 Participant observation
2.3.2 Nonparticipant observation
2.3.3 Benefits and problems with participant and nonparticipant observations
2.3.4 Time allocation studies
The foundation of data collection in social research is observation. In field research we use several different modes of observation, three forms of which are discussed below: participant observation, nonparticipant observation, and time allocation studies.
2.3.1 Participant observation
Participant observation has been a major research strategy of anthropologists, involving a combination of informal interviewing data being collected in a relatively unstructured and flexible manner. The investigator usually decides beforehand what particular sorts of activities are to be observed and recorded, and even the form of the record. Fieldwork generally occurs over a prolonged period, during which time the researcher builds up sufficient rapport with the study population. To some extent, participant observation allows the observer to become an "insider". That is, the investigator directly participates in the study population's activities, perhaps accompanying and helping household members gather fuelwood., This permits an understanding of the study population and their activities from their own perspective. At the same time, the difference between what people say and what they do can be checked.
We stress the advantage of knowing some vernacular terms because knowledge of the local language is important in participant observations. Short terms in the field, coupled with pressures of other obligations, seldom allow for mastery of new language. Yet, depending on interest and commitment, and to a lesser extent on linguistic ability, it is not difficult to acquire a basic vocabulary, say twenty to a few hundred words, of vernacular terms. In the fuel domain, for example, one should know, and use, even when with an interpreter, local words for firewood, charcoal, crop residue, cow-dung, tree, stove, man, woman, child, axe - and so on. A knowledge, and correct pronunciation, of major localities, personalities and main species of trees helps greatly in persuading indigenous people that the enquirer is interested in understanding theme It is a courtesy to them, and an acknowledgment of the value of their culture, it eases social intercourse and it helps an outsider to
appreciate local perceptions.
2.3.2 Nonparticipant observation
In nonparticipant observation, the observer remains separate from his study population's activities, and attempts to be unobtrusive. It may be possible to structure the observation, at least to the extent of deciding to focus on a particular activity such as wood-collecting, cooking, tree-planting, or fuelwood sales. There may be a conscious structuring of observation in the sense of developing hypotheses to be tested, or following up unclear relationships. But the observer must be careful not to impose preconceived notions, and must remain flexible, and open to new interpretations. Although the observer attempts to be unobtrusive, we do not recommend any attempts to deceive. For both ethical and practical reasons, honesty really is the best policy in fieldwork, and the people who are being observed have a right to know the scope and purpose of the study.
2.3.3 Benefits and problems with participant and nonparticipant observations
Participant and nonparticipant observations share several benefits and problems, both being useful fact-finding methods when qualitative data is sought. This is especially true when the investigator wants to describe a cycle of events. One example is the description of cutting of trees, construction of hornos (earth ovens), transporting, and the street sales involved in charcoal production and distribution. To describe such a cycle of events, it is beat to combine interviews and observations.
Both observation techniques are also useful where no records of previous studies exist. These techniques are important in studying selected members of the community, such as the aged or the handicapped, who might not be selected in a random or even stratified sample. The techniques, especially participant observation, allow the investigator to develop empathy for the study population through listening and participating. Among the problems are constraints of cost and times.
In particular, participant observation requires a good rapport between the observer and the observed. This may take a long time to develop. With studies of fuelwood, such as descriptions of production techniques or marketing, this may be less of a problem than with more sensitive issues such as village politics or wealth differences, though the usage of fuel may be part and parcel of these more sensitive issues.
The difference between participant and non-participant observation may parallel that between a resident and a non-resident observer. That is, participant observation can seldom be achieved without the sort of acceptance and rapport that comes from being at least a temporary resident of the community. Therefore, in deciding on the objectives of the survey, this is a question to be considered - does the survey need the sort of detailed information that can only be gained by a resident observer, or will the costs (in time, and money) outweigh the benefits? If so, can use be made of local assistants, and how?
No observation is "unstructured", in a strict sense. That is, the observer's preconceptions, biases and "knowledge" all colour what is observed. Anyone who has made observations in another culture - or even in an unfamiliar sub-culture in one's own society - can recall, with embarrassment, the sense of "seeing and not seeing", because of lack of understanding of the society. It is surprising how one can consciously and effectively enlarge the vision, so that what was once a blur of vague shapes soon fits into meaningful categories, For example, many first-time visitors to African savanna country remark on the apparent sameness of the social and physical landscape, and exclaim "How dull this is!" But those of us who have spent some time in the savanna, and who have opened our eyes, see it as a marvellously changing scene, where human activities are fitted, in complex ways, to natural resources, at least until disturbed by population pressure and technological innovation. The
discovery of "the hidden savanna" - as has been experienced by many fieldworkers who have walked and listened and truly observed - is an exciting experience, reminding us how blind most of us are until we open our eyes. Fieldwork means constant questioning and seeking new perceptions. And this is especially important in studying a complex topic such as rural energy patterns.
In observation, then, one should have a clear idea of the main goal of the enquiry, which is to gather information on fuel for instance; but it is also important to be responsive to new stimuli, to be flexible and to follow new paths. Here is a delicate dilemma: how far should one stray along new paths that might eventually lead to new illuminations, and to what extent should one follow a systematic schedule? Ultimately, the observer will be guided by a sense of what is appropriate to the specific situation and by his own hypotheses.
2.3.4 Time allocation studies
An important aspect of any fuelwood survey concerns the amount of time spent in tasks such as collecting wood, preparing charcoal, cooking and other energy-related activities. It may be difficult to get precise information, because local people perceive and evaluate "time" in a different way from the investigator, so there may be a cultural misunderstanding in questioning them; there are important daily and seasonal variations in time spent, and there is also variation in proportion of time spent by different households, as well as by individuals within the same households. How can one determine a meaningful "average" for time spent on fuel activities?
One way (which has been found successful when investigators have enough time) is to make random spot observations on what community members are doing at particular times, The investigator (and preferably come research associates) note basic details (when? where? what? how? with whom? how long?) of what particular people are doing, over a long enough period to generalize. The random spot checking technique has several benefits. It eliminates the problem of representativeness of the data. Variability between sex, age, and, depending on the criteria used in selecting the sample, wealth differences, is indicated, The position and proportion of energy-related tasks within the daily work rhythm can be ascertained. The latter is particularly important where intervention in the local energy system is being considered. Finally, the survey can be combined with other investigation in the community of such topics as nutrition, employment, or farm management studies.
The biggest problem with the random spot checking technique is that of data over-collection, recalling one of our initial warnings on avoiding collection of surplus data. Considerable time is often spent in non-energy-related tasks. For example, in Erasmus' study (Erasmus 1955: 324-328) only about 3 percent of the observations made of men were related directly to energy tasks such as collecting or chopping wood or food preparation, although such tasks took up at least 28 percent of the women's time (including ironing). In some areas, where household members venture far to gather wood, direct verification of their labour time may be impractical, and other tasks performed on the fuelwood trip may go unrecorded. Nonetheless, random spot checks should be employed, where possible, in studying fuelwood-related labour time allocation.
2.4 Interviews
Interviews are an integral part of social research. We shall postpone discussion of the selection of interviewees (see the section on Sampling), with one important exception. Fuelwood collection, cooking, and other energy-related tasks are usually gender-defined. In most cases, such as in cooking, women perform the work and are the ones directly consuming the fuelwood. Moreover, women may have a greater knowledge of consumption patterns than the men. Thus, women should be involved in most aspects of fuelwood and household energy-use surveys. At the same time, strong sexual stratification and customs may restrict access of interviewers, particularly males, to women. The importance of sexual stratification should not be underestimated in surveys. In Muslim areas, it will be essential for a woman to interview female household members, and even in non-Muslim regions a woman interviewer often has better success in getting the women to talk about their fuel tasks.
Where should the interview be conducted? In many cases the best place will be in the respondent's house or compound, although for information on commercial activities, an interview at the office or factory may help to get greater accuracy. Sometimes there is no choice, and the interview has to be held in a public place, or on a farm, or walking to do a chore.
In an interview, it is usual to have at least a set of questions to ask, and in most circumstances we recommend an open-ended type of interview, which allows the conversation to be directed to some extent by the respondent. Closed-form questionnaires, consisting of entirely preselected questions, are seldom the best approach, unless the interviewer already has extensive, accurate and up-to-date knowledge of the community in general and the energy system also. In general, a format that allows flexibility is best. Having a schedule (a set of pre-arranged questions to ask) gives interviews some structure and comparability. Having at least come open-ended questions on a questionarie allows for flexibility and the inclusion of respondent perceptions.
Questionnaires and a completely open-ended interview do not exclude each other, because questionnaires should never be used alone. They should be combined with relatively unstructured case-studies of specially selected households or villages (even a few will be helpful). These case studies can serve (a) to develop preliminary hypotheses which help to focus and define the limits of the survey, (b) to check on any initial tabulation and analysis of results and (c) to follow up, and find explanations for, any puzzling or unclear relationships or associations.
In both interviews and questionnaires, questions must be carefully phrased so that they can be understood by the local people. Questions should follow in a logical order so as to obtain the maximum amount of information, and to remind people of aspects on which they might comment. Questions ought to fit with indigenous knowledge systems, and with local perceptions. One way of ensuring this fit is by pre-testing the questions, using key informants and others who can be critical. This should remove ambiguities and also sharpen the focus of the questions.
It will often be impossible to conduct an interview in private with one person, as friends, neighbours and passers-by are likely to listen and even join in the conversation. Rather than resenting this as an interruption, a skilful interviewer can bring in the other people and create an informal group interview, although in a strict random sample the extra volunteered information should be excluded, so as not to skew the sample.
How does an audience affect the interview? Some people may become boastful, or try to present their actions in a favourable way; others may be suspicious and silent lost they give away valuable information. Obviously it depends on the specific culture and situation, but an audience can often be used to good advantage.
Field investigators should not be surprised or discouraged if they initially encounter an unwillingness among local people to be interviewed. "Why don't you see the other people first? They are much better off than I and have better things to talk about", may be a typical response to a question. Besides a general distrust of outsiders, people may be reluctant to speak about their landholdings or other assets. Such caution in dealing with outsiders is obviously a justifiable mechanism of self-protection. Some people may give answers designed to please, rather than reflecting a true state of affairs, also as a self-protective device. Some cultures promote more suspicion than others, and within cultures some individuals are likely to be more anxious than others, about giving away potentially incriminating information. Other reasons for reluctance to answer questions can be that people simply are not accustomed to being interviewed, or people may be reluctant to be interviewed
because they already had been saturated with surveys and no effort had been made by previous researchers to convey the results or significance of the surveys back to the people.
Even where people are not suffering from survey fatigue they may be reluctant to be questioned because they view the interview as an imposition from outside forces. That is, the interview is something in which they had little choice of participation, and something from which they will receive few, if any, tangible benefits. In many cases their perceptions are entirely correct. Interviewing people in itself need not imply "local participation". Efforts should go in the planning and fact-finding stages towards identifying and incorporating the desires, needs, and aspirations of community members and social groups. And, importantly, local individuals and groups must be involved in analyzing the collected information and in suggesting policy alternatives.
Many instances exist where people may be reluctant to talk, especially where government regulations have curtailed free cutting and a black market in fuelwood exists. In Nepal, where fuelwood is in critically short supply, people are reluctant to answer questions on forest utilization (Donovan, 1979). Given the frequent reference to illicit cutting or wood theft in areas as diverse as the Sudan, Kenya, India, the Philippines, Mexico and Guatemala, the interviewer should recognize the problem of dealing with sensitive matters. The interviewer and investigator should ensure the confidentiality of the respondents.
Frequency of interviews depends upon the research design and the various time/cost constraints often only one interview will be possible. Memory recall of respondents depends upon the frequency, regularity, and significance of events. Twice weekly visits have been recommended, since daily visits may seem like pestering, and gaps of more than three or four days lead to increased recall errors. Seasonal differences should be accounted for.
2.5 Group interviews
A short-cut method of rapidly gathering data is to interview groups rather than individuals. This method presents problems of representativeness, since any group chosen is unlikely to represent a true cross-section of the local population, though attempts should be made to include individuals of different socio-economic status. The knowledge and experience of several individuals may serve as checks on information given by each others.
There is nothing specialized about a group interview. In fact, any one who interviews, i.e. asks questions, is likely to find that an impromptu group interview situation develops. As many individual interviews are conducted in public places, and also because of differing conceptions of public and private space, other community members often stop, from curiosity, suspicion, desire to help, or officiousness, when they see a stranger talking to one of their groups Instead of resenting what westerners (or western-educated people) may see as an interruption, it is often advantageous to accept and use the situation. This is especially so with fuel, where an individual alone is unlikely to divulge "secret" information that could not be publicly disclosed, so that the presence of many people should not be an obstacle to obtaining good information. But if the interviewer is a forestry official, his police duties may have alienated him from the villagers, who would then be cautious in
answering questions. The response will in large part be determined by existing cultural and historical factors. For example, in parts of India, women (who have been hidden behind a partition) have been known to interrupt an interview and contradict the man being interviewed, thus constituting an unusual form of group interview.
A group of people can be highly informative, in modifying, supplementing or even contradicting individual statements. A group of Indian, Nigerian or Colombian peasants (men and/or women) might engage in a conspiracy to deceive an outsider over enquiries about fuelwood, but, because of their perceptions of the fuelwood crisis are at least as likely to impress the visitor with their problems, perhaps even exaggerating the situation. However, one thoughtful individual will often say "No we do not walk ten kilometers to collect wood, it is only as far as from here to x," ensuring a degree of reliability. Properly handled, group interviews can provide a useful check on reliability. There are limitations as some individuals will be reluctant to speak on certain topics, or they may wait for a senior or more powerful person to speak, then be unwilling to make any open contradiction, even when privately disagreeing. This happens in all communities, and provides a careful observer
with a chance to observe patterns of hierarchy and influence.
There are no universal rules for proper handling of a group interview, except to say that it requires courtesy, and common sense, combined with two other qualities - a firm sense of what information is required, plus an appreciation of how flexibly the conversation can be guided. One does not wish autocratically to out off at once a speaker who wanders from the main topic, but who may be providing useful information, nor can one afford to let the conversation be dominated by the village bore, who may drive away more sensible villagers.
In this, as in other field situations, it is important not to raise false hopes, but to make clear what specific changes are possible or likely, and what cannot be done. One interviewer reported the result of a group interview of unemployed Nigerians in Lagos; the men turned on the interviewer with hostility and said in effect, "If you cannot offer us jobs, don't waste our time with stupid questions". Group interviews in urban situations however, offer many advantages, as they are easy to set up because of the population density.
2.6 Questionnaires
Questionnaires are a popular method of data collection. The advantages of using a questionnaire are well-known: data can be collected quickly on specific items; these data can be easily transferred into forms allowing quantified and computerized analyses; and data collection tasks can be delegated to less expensive field staff. Questionnaires also compel the adoption of some "organized structure" upon data collection, but will be most effective when used by someone who can support and test the questionnaire findings with personal observations and insights and knowledge.
Using questionnaires is one means of recording data, but it is not the only means and it is not adequate to not cover all the information required. As we said earlier, no one method of information gathering is adequate for all purposes - all should be supplemented and checked.
However, several problems can arise when using a questionnaire. This is especially true where a questionnaire is the primary means of collecting information. A questionnaire can impose a rigid, preconceived idea of reality which may be inappropriate for the particular situation. If field enumerators are not supervised properly, errors in recording data can occur. Problems arise from respondents concealing, misreporting, or misunderstanding questions. Recall errors often happen, especially with regard to seasonal activities. The design and preparation of a questionnaire are extremely important, as they will influence the type of information collected, in somewhat the same way as the mesh-size of a fish-net determines the fish that are caught. Careful thought, then, must be given to the selection and phrasing of particular questions. Sometimes it is good to start with a general question, "what do you think about X?" followed by increasingly specific questions. First, one must
have enough basic knowledge of the community to know which questions would be meaningful, and how, exactly, they should be framed so as to minimize the possibility of creating ambiguity, embarrassment or resentments The purpose of questions is to discover what people know, not what they do not know. Thus, the second stage should be a brief pre-testing, which allows for refining and clarifying the questions so that they really do elicit, in precise form, the information required.
Third is the administration of the questionnaire, which - as noted elsewhere requires constant supervision (see below), for even at this stage ambiguities are likely to occur. One perceptive interviewer may point out that Question 14 could be interpreted in two ways, for example, and a quick resolution of the problem could be communicated quickly to other interviewers to ensure consistency and accuracy. Fourth, there is the analysis of the results, to see what sort of picture emerges. And finally, there is a consideration of whether any supplementary questions are desirable. Throughout all stages, constant close supervision and cross-checking are necessary, combined with repeat interviews, supplementary observations, and, most important, regular discussion with interviewers. This both provides a check on the accuracy of the answers, and also encourages the interviewers to be conscientious.
Although the questionnaire ought to cover all questions needed, it should not be too elaborate nor too long; an hour is usually the maximum time period for any one questionnaire to be administered. Most rural people, especially women, have many demands on their time - collecting firewood and water, cooking, washing, cleaning, looking after children - and cannot spend too much time in answering questions. Whether to use a closed form (with itemized answers) or an open-ended form questionnaire depends on the researcher's own needs and requirements. If the closed form is used, a space for comments by the respondent and the interviewer should be included. In framing questions, there are several simple alternatives such as: yes/no; checking a scale (of incidence, or preference, or quantity) of 0-5. Some questions invite discursive answers, as in the open-ended questionnaire; while others ask for a straightforward factual answer - "how many times each day are cooked meals
prepared?". Depending on the nature of the survey, a simple rapid survey might be the best.
Where computer facilities are available, it is advisable to frame and to code questionnaires so that computer analysis is possible. When a large number of sample households are involved, such as in a national or other macro-level survey, the use of computers is almost essential. By computer, we refer not only to macro-computers but also micro-computers, and even some calculators that can be programmed for regression analysis may be appropriate. But the use of computers is by no means indispensable in all surveys, particularly in more micro-level analyses, at least in the initial stages, Manual analysis often can be done quickly and cheaply so that a preliminary idea of results is obtained in a few days, instead of waiting at the mercy of the computer for months. When computers are used, it is recommended and probably necessary that a member of the computer staff be part of the research team.
In a perceptive article (Chambers, 1979; see also Chambers et al., 1979; Chambers, 1980) Robert Chambers has described many methodological shortcomings associated with field research and project evaluations. These shortcomings are important to note because they bias data collection and lead to an inaccurate analysis.
Field research tends to be conducted during the dry season. In part this is because accessibility to many rural areas is easier during this season. Academic summer vacations also coincide with this period of relative prosperity, after the crops have been harvested, In contrast, the wet season, before the harvest, is generally a harsh time in rural areas. Sickness and hunger prevail, particularly among the poorer households. The wet season is also the worst period for fuel collection, with wet wood, slippery paths, more illness, less time for collection and inadequate drying and storage facilities. Thus, research often has a seasonal bias, with conditions appearing more prosperous than they are over the balance of the year.
Researchers tend to visit the field for short periods, and seldom stray from the roads. In this respect, the Land Rover or Toyota Land Cruiser have been mixed blessings for development planning and research: while they do provide greater mobility, they offer the impression of "roughing it in the bush," when in fact what can be visited on rural roads is hardly representative of rural society. This is especially important if one is concerned, as are most development agencies, with seeing that benefits accrue to poor people, sometimes referred to as "'the lower 40 percent". For these people often live in remote localities, inaccessible except on foot. Few poor old widows live on a roadside; the people most ill, children and elderly especially, are more likely to be suffering inside some decrepit house rather than walking or sitting outside in any visible way.
To summarize, there are a number of biases typically found in field research that cause the worst rural poverty to go unperceived. Dry season, spatial, elite, male and project and adopter biases operate so as to hide the poorest sectors of the population, especially at the times they are the poorest. What emerges is an inaccurate portrayal of rural society and rural property.
What can be done to overcome such biases? We have mentioned several promising approaches, and here we summarize:
1. Go to the field well prepared, aware of what has been written, and of work being done by social scientists, especially local people.
2. Cooperate with officials, but obtain unofficial views, too.
3. Travel alone or in small groups, not as part of a large official party.
4. Tell the people you meet about yourself, your aims. Share information.
5. Spend longer in the field, preferably overnight, when it is easier to talk, and when peripheral people may appear.
6. Walk, Listen. Be silent when silence is appropriate.
7. Concentrate on one topic (fuelwood), but be aware of related topics.
8. Never rely on questionnaires alone. Always supplement with direct observation and participant observation.
9. Find out when the stress periods - of seasonal hunger and shortages - occur.
We have not attempted to provide a thorough examination of all methods, and their associated problems. Instead, we have been highly selective and, we hope, realistic, in recognizing that most readers will not be able to arrange elaborate prolonged investigations. So our emphasis is on what can be done quickly and on how to make the best use of limited resources. Although the resources available, the study population and the informational needs will differ for each fuel survey, we recommend that a combination of methodologies be used. This is to ensure against the biases and limitations that are inherent in any manner of data collection, so that a reasonably accurate description can emerge.
3. Selecting research sites and study participants
3.1 Defining "community"
3.2 The representativeness of a community
3.3 Choice of community
3.4 Households as the basic unit of study
3.5 Other socio-cultural and economic units of study
3.6 Sampling
3.7 Sample size
This section is concerned with how to select a population to study. We first deal with the concept of community - how it is defined, the question of representativeness, and procedures for selecting a research site. Next, we examine the basic unit of study in most fuelwood surveys - the household, while also mentioning other possible study units. This section ends with a discussion of sampling procedures and their applicability to fuelwood surveys.
We have assumed that there will be some choice of which community to study, but we recognize that sometimes the researcher will be directed to do a study of a particular problem. However, governments and development agencies are unlikely to pinpoint a particular community or village, they will rather choose a wider area, so there may still be some degree of choice.
3.1 Defining "community"
The terms "community" and "village" connote socio-cultural, residential, and administrative units with supposedly clearly demarcated boundaries, although in actuality these boundaries are seldom clearly defined. Instead, subsumed under these terms is a complex array of historical, spatial, social, economic, political and other relationships.
When you travel by road, you see, of course, only those people whose homes can be reached by road or jeep track, and you do not see hidden pockets of poverty that are often scattered about at some distance from road or track. In looking at rural fuel situations, it is vital to include the peripheries, and not to concentrate only on members of the core elite who are likely to be the first people one meets.
The ideal way to obtain a comprehensive picture of rural energy use would be to spend at least a full year in a community. This would allow the investigator to notice important seasonal changes and how these affect patterns of labour allocation, social relations, and energy usage. A long residence is also likely to lead to good rapport with the community, and consequently to a better understanding of their ways and an ability to ask the "right" questions. Unfortunately, many surveys and their researchers will have little opportunity or resources to conduct such detailed investigations. There are intermediate steps, though, in terms of research design and manner of field research.
On large-scale projects, such as a national energy survey, case studies of selected communities, chosen according to appropriate environmental, economic, socio-cultural and other variables, could be used to supplement and to round out the data gathered by questionnaires and less intensive methods. Specific consideration should be given in all projects to include data collection during the wet season, the pre-harvest period, and times of peak agricultural labor demand.
For the field researcher, a recommended method is the "walk and listen" approach, which can be adopted even on one-day field visits. Leave the vehicle, arranging to meet it later, and walk a few hours away from the road, checking (by observing, and questioning an interpreter may be needed) on what one "knows". For example, conventional wisdom may have it that people prefer certain species of trees for charcoal; that women go in groups to gather firewood; that certain trees are never out, because of a ritual prohibition that women do not climb trees; that men never carry firewood; that land-owners do not permit non-kinsmen to collect wood. All such statements may be true, or true in certain circumstances, or subject to considerable reservations, or simply false. It is important to distinguish between past norms of behaviour and past values, and present practice. There may well be some confusion in the minds of local people about this. There is no substitute for walking and
listening to check on such universal generalisations, even, or particularly, when these are confidently made by community members. In all societies there is a difference between what people actually do, and what they say they do. People tend, if asked about social behavior, to present an idealized picture of what ought to happen. For example, in Ghana we were told that when a man died, his property was inherited by his father's younger brother's son: an investigation of actual cases of inheritance showed that only a minority followed the ideal pattern in practice.
The "walk and listen" approach is not without potential problems of bias. As mentioned in the key informant section, the rural elite tend to be the people who come forward, while the poor do not speak up. The researcher's own sense of politeness may inhibit him from probing into the lives of the poor. Unless one has some immediate benefit to offer, questioning the poorest people often appears to be an unwarranted and immoral intrusion. Another problem is that of male bias, since researchers tend to be males and their contact with women, especially poor rural women (who constitute a "deprived class within a class"), is generally limited.
A final type of bias centers around projects and innovations. Researchers tend to go or to be taken into a place where "something is happening", where a project or innovation seems to be having a favourable or the desired impact. The short-visiting researcher may tend to meet only those individuals who are the users or adopters of innovations, such as new stoves. This 'project' and adopter bias leads researchers to neglect those areas, communities and people who have not benefitted but who might have been affected in an indirect (or even direct) fashion by the project. For example, meeting with a landowner who had his cotton land converted to an eucalyptus plantation might reveal little about how this affected his labour force.
The terms also refer to a certain pattern or style of living typified by personalistic relationships, social solidarity, and a local orientation. Impersonality, factionalism, and a shrewd understanding of how to manipulate outside social forces have been found to typify rural life.
The delineation of the community or village as a unit of study depends on several local factors, including residential patterns, administrative divisions, land-use systems, and local people's perceptions. Formal administrative boundaries by themselves can be misleading indicators of community boundaries. For example, "census villages" in India do not always correspond with residential clusters: "it is not uncommon for two adjoining houses to belong to two different revenue villages".
3.2 The representativeness of a community
A major concern about any survey is how applicable the findings of one area or community are to other areas and communities. To a large extent, the representativeness of a community depends on how comparable its internal composition is with other communities. Five key characteristics of a community should be identified in order to serve as a basis for inter-community comparison:
a. Population - including the total number of people and sex and age distributions. At a broad level this will indicate the aggregate local demand level for fuelwood and other fuel resources.
b. People/land ratio - with information on tenure relationships, types of agriculture, land quality and use patterns, land distribution, and ecological zones. Household access to trees and other fuel resources, as well as the condition of these resources, will be among the important variables considered here.
c. Urban contact - the nearness to urban centres, linkages with roads, the amount of farm, fuel, and village output sold outside the community, and the amount of employment community members find outside. A crucial variable to be considered is the amount of wood and other fuel sources imported into or exported from the community.
d. Resource distribution - how wealth and productive resources are distributed; thus, the extent to which the community is economically and socially stratified. Once again, household access to fuel resources (whether direct access to trees or its ability to purchase fuelwood) would be considered.
e. Occupational structure - the relative importance of agriculture, seasonal wage labor, tenancy, nonfarm income and so on. Of particular importance for fuelwood surveys is the scale of fuelwood sales and degree of wage labor involved in fuelwood enterprises within the community.
These headings correspond in some degree to our "Topics on which to gather information", presented at the beginning of this chapter. But these are selective, and chosen to be relatively easy to identify and to aid an effective selection of villages. Identification of these variables allows the investigator to see how typical the community is in comparison to other communities. The question of typicality or representativeness is meaningful if a good national survey exists, to allow for comparison. The variables will also help in eliminating a village that clearly is unrepresentative - e.g. by being located close to a sugar-mill.
In choosing a community to study, it might be desirable to consider the degree to which local people recognize that there is a fuel problem. Where there are clear perceptions of a crisis, that warrants serious attention, the response to the survey is likely to be good.
When available, village-level census data (if reliable, and up-to-date) lots the investigator check beforehand how representative a community is in these variables.
3.3 Choice of community
Studies of rural communities rarely mention why and how the particular community was chosen for study. When reasons are given, most choices are "purposive." For example, Frederick Conway explains why he selected a particular site in Haiti:
Fonds Parisien, east of Croix-des-Bouquest in the Plains du Cul du Sac, was chosen as the field site because it had been an important center of charcoal production and remains a center of charcoal exchange, because deforestation as a result of fuelwood collection is advanced there, and because the contractor had established rapport through previous research in the area. The last factor was essential in obtaining reliable information in a brief period of time (Conway, 1979:4).
Conway's quotation also demonstrates one of the advantages of having the investigator restudy a community. Scarlett Epstein has given an account of how she was able to gather remarkable amounts of information in a five-week visit to two south Indian villages that she knew well from an earlier study (Epstein 1978:128).
Often, convenience and practical considerations are the most important factors behind the selection of a community. Communities may be chosen on account of their accessibility, or their congenial political and social climate. Reasons for deciding on one community over another may reflect the investigator rather than the community, as the former may prefer (though seldom is this admitted) a place that has "friendly" inhabitants, or good access to medical facilities, or absence of mosquitoes, or a pleasing view., Representativeness is also important: in his survey of energy use in rural Southern Africa, Marc Best purposely chose three villages which represented different "biophysical environments" (Best 1979:5). One of the villages was selected because of its "remoteness" and its "traditionalness" (that is, Best considered the village to be not "strongly affected by modernization", although it, like the other two, was "purposely affected by the migrant labour system"). This
purposive selection process has often resulted in bias, since communities with good transportation, communications facilities, and other amenities are generally more developed. According to Connell and Lipton (1979:99):
The relatively "developed" state of accessible villages is likely to give both those undertaking village surveys and those reading them an unduly optimistic view of rural conditions.
Meanwhile, the worst poverty goes undetected or unobserved.
Some researchers have recommended using area sampling to select a community. This involves randomly selecting a community from a large number of possible communities, each possessing an equal chance of being selected (see the discussion of sampling in the next sections.) Factors such as location, environmental setting, farming type, and population can be taken into account. But area sampling presents several problems, and is not feasible unless a large sample in used, together with extensive knowledge of many villages. Maps, aerial photography, and rapid surveys of a number of villages can help overcome the lack of a sampling frame, combined with an interval sampling technique. Sometimes accurate maps are unobtainable, and aerial photographs, if enlarged, can be effectively used as maps. Infra-red photography can be useful in high lighting the vegetation. In some parts of the world, good aerial photographic coverage exists, and is available; in others, either little aerial
photography has been done, or it is not accessible, perhaps "for reasons of national security".
Overall, in selecting a community, the research should take into account the key variables mentioned (Population; people/land; urban contact; resource distribution; and occupational structure). Each variable must be regarded for its relevance to fuelwood, as indicated above. "Key" is used in specific relation to fuel problems, not in a general senses. The community, and adjoining communities, should be visited and looked at carefully before research begins. Factors such as local historical and ecological variables, and location which would limit the applicability of inferences made from the community to other areas, should be considered. Above all, the reasons for selecting a particular community should be explicitly stated.
3.4 Households as the basic unit of study
Most surveys take the household as their basic unit of study. In some cases a household consists of a nuclear family - a man and woman with their children. However, it sometimes includes the extended family - the grouping together of several nuclear households; for example, a man with several wives and their children and/or his or his wives' parents. There also may be "fragmented" households, such as an elderly or young or divorced person who lives alone.
In general, a household may be considered as a grouping of people who share the same cooking facilities. Even with such a broad definition of household, problems can arise. One common problem is that households are constantly changing in composition, and some members may be away for various time periods, from two days to two years or more. This is especially so when migrant labour is common. At the same time there may be several visiting guests and relatives who increase demand for fuel. In many parts of the Middle East, and also in other regions, belief in the influence of an Evil Eye makes people reluctant to disclose exact numbers of children to strangers. In reckoning per-capita fuel consumption of a household, one obviously needs to know which members are physically present.
Household size and composition influences how production is organized and what are relative consumption levels. In most households family labour is the most abundant resource, so that the number of household members available for doing work is crucial. Family size and the availability of energy resources are often correlated. This is important for fuelwood; as the available forest stock diminishes and as the time required for collecting fuel increases, so does the value increase of children as gatherers. Information about household members' occupations helps in determining household size. This would appear particularly necessary where seasonal wage labour migrations are prevalent.
3.5 Other socio-cultural and economic units of study
Besides the household, fuelwood surveys may concentrate on other socio-cultural and economic units, John Briscoe (1979) for example, is concerned with analyzing his studied households in terms of their socio-economic class. Several indices, such as landholding size, sources and amount of income, house size and composition, ownership of consumer goods, and so on, can be used in assigning households a relative wealth position. Local people are often able to identify and to rank, with a keen precision, relative household wealth positions (See Castro et al., 1981, for a discussion of indicators of inequality).
Other possible social groupings include ethnic groups, caste divisions, religious groups, charcoal producers, kinship groupings (such as lineages) and neighbourhood groups.
Relevant economic units include various shops, restaurants, industries, businesses, and public institutions that consume fuelwood, Donovan (1979 and 1980), for example, has studied small-scale industries in Nepal that consume fuelwood. Digernes (1977) surveyed the shops, schools, and similar units which consume fuelwood in Bara, Sudan. Surveys may also consider the contractors, dealers, and other entrepreneurs who are involved in the production and marketing of fuelwood.
3.6 Sampling
Researchers are rarely able to examine every possible unit of study in a given population. It is necessary to choose a sub-set or sample of the population for investigation. Thus, the issue for researchers is to decide what kind of sampling procedures to use. The manner of sample selection is critical because it defines how representative of the population the chosen group will be and therefore the extent to which findings from the study can be applied to the population as a whole.
Sampling methods are generally divided into two major types: non-probability and probability sampling (Kearl, 1976:27). A non-probability sample means that the individual units of study are selected either purposely (on the basis of some judgemental criteria) or accidentally (on the basis of whomever is met or whatever is seen). Thus, a non-probability sample is "unique", but not necessarily unrepresentative of the population. That is, in a non-probability sample every unit of a population does not have an equal chance of being selected. However, a sample can be purposively selected so that it contains the general characteristics of a population (this will be discussed below in greater detail).
A probability sample is based on the principle that every unit of a population has an equal chance of being selected for study. This ensures, theoretically, that the chosen units of study are representative of the population. Probability sampling involves a random or systematic manner of selection, for example selection based on a table of random numbers, or based on every nth unit, such as every tenth household.
Selecting the appropriate sampling procedure depends upon the particular situation, and in all situations each manner of selection will have its own advantages and inherent limitations. Although we will describe each sampling method as an exclusive type, in practice they are often combined. Thus, a village may be selected purposively, on the basis of environmental, economic and other variables, while the sample selected in the village may be done randomly.
Non-probability sampling allows for considerable flexibility in selection, an important consideration when the study universe is undefined or unclear, or when there is a problem obtaining consent from those selected. But non-probability sampling has several drawbacks. Any group may be easily under or over representated in the sample. There is a tendency to select those individuals who are more articulate or approchable, which generally means the wealthier or more educated community members. The actual basis of selection may appear in retrospect as having been largely ad hoc even when specific criteria were considered.
Probability sampling is generally seen as more "scientific" because it supposedly will yield a sample that is precisely representative of the population. In practice, though, there are limits to the use of probability sampling. A random or systematic sample needs to be drawn from a defined universe, but frequently little census information is known about the population and its geographical distribution is undermined. Thus, a sampling frame has to be created. Sometimes maps and aerial photographs, perhaps combined with an overflight of the area, can help to construct a sampling frame. An area sample could be chosen, then one particular area randomly selected on the basis of agro-environmental and socio-economic variables. Households in the selected area can then be listed and a random or systematic sample chosen.
Not all researchers have had to start from scratch. Digernes used the local rates lists (which show the assessments for public services) in Bara, Sudan, to construct a stratified random sample. Fortunately, rates are based on such important socio-economic variables as house size, location, number of rooms, building materials, number of-latrines, number of household members, and their socio-economic position. Digernes, who carried out her study in 1976 and 1977, found that the latest list was from 1973, and it seemed "complete and fully representative". She stratified the households into three groups according to the levels of rates paid, selecting a 10 percent random sample from each group. Twenty-five of the 162 sampled households had moved or been dissolved and were excluded from the survey. No new households were added. A list of the twenty-five public institutions and private businesses using charcoal was obtained from the local government, and these were included in a
fuelwood consumption survey (Digernes, 1977:57).
Another problem with probability sampling is that a high percentage of those selected must consent to being studied. In most cases some households will not consent and others will have to be chosen. Conversely, households that were not selected will want to be studied. When possible in such cases the data ought to be collected, although it should not be included with the sample.
All communities, even the poorest, have gradations of poverty and wealth. Stratifying the sample is usually essential. This means dividing the population into different strata or groups, based on income or other relevant variables. In probability sampling, study units can be selected randomly or systematically from each strata. With non-probability sampling, a quota might be allocated to each stratum, and case studies might be selected from each for intensive study.
Once again, there is often a paucity of data on income, land ownership and other critical variables necessary to stratify a sample. Proxy indicators of income, such as housing type, condition and construction materials, and possession of consumer goods, can be used to rank households. Perceptions of local people can also be used in constructing a stratified sample. Hill asked several "key informants" to rank village households according to their ability to cope with seasonal food shortages. A random sample was taken of the resulting strata and several measures, including land and capital equipment ownership, were used to test the perception. Hill found that the local people were extremely accurate in their ranking, in that their subjective assessment correlated closely with other objective measures (Hill, 1972:59).
3.7 Sample size
Several factors need to be considered to determine the appropriate size of the sample. Sample size is related to costs that can be afforded by the researchers. The most critical consideration, though, is that the sample be large enough to be adequately representative of the study population. Too small a sample can undermine the validity of months of research.
In populations that are socio-economically homogenous, a small sample is sufficient because describing one unit describes them all. But such populations are increasingly rare, indeed it is doubtful if they were ever as prevalent ass once believed. Some analysts recommend that surveys include at least 10 percent of the households with the proportion increasing with bigger, more heterogeneous communities (Connell and Lipton, 1977:106).
A final consideration is that sample size affects techniques and questions. For example, a recent survey in Nigeria covered 11,000 households, so detailed techniques were out of the question. Where a sample is very small, such as fewer than 10, they more resemble case studies than a sample survey.
4. Field workers and study logistics
4.1 Selection
4.2 Training and supervision
4.3 Logistics
Especially among the rural agricultural peoples with whom we are primarily concerned, there will be little difficulty in finding suitable assistants, or "associates", to use a more exact term. We consider some aspects of selection, training, supervision and logistics.
4.1 Selection
Depending on the particular local circumstances, one obvious initial source of likely recruits is among local unemployed high-school graduates, or high-school students or teachers - who are on vacation. We have found that many have the appropriate level of education: what is needed are adequate skills in reading, writing, record-keeping, and interpretation of questions, together with qualities of reliability, honesty and ability to ask questions in a polite, respectful yet firm manner. Those who have only primary education are unlikely to manage the written records, nor will they be able to write their own observations. On the other hand, people who have an advanced education are often unsatisfactory because they regard the job as dull, routine and unglamorous; or they complain constantly about the rigours of long walks along hot dusty paths, or about the mosquitoes or fleas, or whatever is locally an irritant. This is not an anti-intellectual argument, for university
students, both undergraduates and post-graduates, can play very important parts in village surveys; it is simply that they regard themselves as over-qualified for the rather routine and relatively low paying task of gathering basic information.
Government departments are a good source for survey associates, especially such departments as forestry and agriculture. But where forestry officials have law-enforcement duties, they may have such negative images in the community that people distrust them. In selecting associates, certain qualities are desirable - some degree of literacy and sensitivity to people being interviewed, for example. Age, religion, gender, ethnicity, and experience may all be relevant. Above all, people selected should have a real interest in the survey and an understanding of its aims. It may be possible to ask ten potential associates to do some simple interviews and observations for a day, and to report verbally and in writing. One or two will emerge as "natural researchers" in that they are interested, competent, sensitive and conscientious; in short, they have the necessary "sociological imaginations".
High school students are not the only people to be considered, Given the poverty in most communities, and the lack of non-farm opportunities, there are likely to be many applicants. Sometimes there will be so many that the choice of individuals becomes difficulty especially when, as often happens, locally important people put forward their kinsfolk or dependents. In some cases this can lead to problems because applicants or their "sponsors" are aligned with factions within the community.
One selection device, which worked quite well in Central Kenya, was to ask about one hundred people to do a rapid four-day survey of their villages, suggesting that they add certain types of supplementary information. On the basis of what they wrote, combined with checking their forms for consistency, it was easy to select five or ten of the best, who were invited to continue in helping with the study for one or two months. Who are the "best"? It is easy to identify those who have a sociological imagination, which is not necessarily correlated with a high level of formal education; it is also usually easy to determine who has completed the questionnaires in an accurate and careful fashion. Some fieldworkers "fudge" results, by deciding, for example, that it is not necessary to walk five kilometers to see one household, preferring to guess from their general knowledge. One soon develops a sense of when this is happening, because of inconsistencies, irregular patterns, and
erratic or unusual responses to questions.
A major aspect of selection is the inclusion of both men and women, as emphasised above. Women should be incorporated because so many aspects of fuelwood, from collecting to cooking, fall mainly within women's sphere of activities,
4.2 Training and supervision
We combine these two categories, as it is rarely possible to organize formal training sessions, beyond perhaps one or two initial meetings when the project is explained, and questions are answered, so supervision becomes doubly important.
Here are some guidelines:
(a) Arrange a definite time and place for supervisor and fieldworker to meet, preferably at least once a week.
(b) Because of the prevailing difficulty of communication, if it proved impossible to meet - for example because of illness, poor road conditions, or vehicle breakdown -arrange a contingency "Plan B", making certain that there was some way of communicating.
(c) Allow enough time for a thorough check of the fieldworkers' records, questioning any unusual or dubious information, and praising any special contribution. This is important, for supervision has both negative and positive goals. As well as serving as a cheek against sloppy or inaccurate performance, it should be used for positive reinforcement. Fieldworkers, like most people, respond well to interest in their work and to appreciation of problems.
(d) Engage, if numbers warrant, "assistant supervisors", so that it is possible to check adequately on all workers. University students, where they are available, have been found to be good in this role.
(e) Constantly and critically assess the survey instrument - are the questions providing the sort of information required?
(f) Eliminate problem questions, especially if they create too many negative reactions to the interview situation.
Research associates should be made to feel that their job is not simply one of mechanically recording responses on a questionnaire. Such an attitude leads the fieldworker to emphasize the rapid collecting of data instead of accurately collecting relevant data. They should fully understand the nature and importance of the survey, and of their own role. Moreover, without any incentive or interest in the research, the fieldworker has "little reason or incentive to make or record or induce a new line of enquiry". Field staff should be paid adequately and they should be given full credit for their contributions. Moreover, their perceptions and observations should be constantly invited by the senior researcher. For these reasons, we recommend that research should be regarded as a co-operative endeavor, with the professional investigator, the associates, and the local people all participating in a common enterprise. There are compelling ethical and practical reasons for adopting
such an approach, which gives proper credit to associates and villagers and which is likely to lead to better (i.e. more comprehensive, more reflective of actual conditions) reports than does the usual top-down survey. Where associates and villagers are literate it is a good idea to ask them to read and comment on draft reports. If some are illerate, it is easy to organize a "bush seminar" to present and discuss the major findings. These can be regarding exercises.
4.3 Logistics
Even though the fieldworkers will presumably be from the same region, and will speak the local vernacular, they will often be working outside their home communities, which results in two distinct sets of problems. First, they may come from a group or faction or lineage that is not really acceptable, or which is not highly regarded, and this should be investigated. Second, there are often problems of logistics - of transport, of housing, food, even of details of finding a bed, or a place to sleep, or a lamp, or a table. We need not dwell on these, except to say that it is preferable to face these potential problems squarely at the beginning, clearly stating what will and what will not be provided, and also specifying precise duties and responsibilities of each fieldworker. The prospects for misunderstanding, as in any relationship, are limitless!
5. Conclusion
We conclude by reiterating three points that should be considered in planning fuel surveys of any scope:
(1) using a combination of methods and procedures will probably give the most complete and accurate portrait of energy use;
(2) be aware of local knowledge, expertise and perceptions; invite local participation in the planning, implementation and analysis of the survey; and
(3) beware of the numerous biases - dry season, elite, male, roadsides, project, etc. that can skew the description and analysis of local fuel situations.
<section>8</section>
5. What sort of information?
Introduction
A. Social
1. Local knowledge and production strategies
2. Land tenure
3. Labour
4. Other aspects of production and distribution of fuelwood
5. Consumption
B. Ecological and resources
1. Ecosystem
2. Fuelwood requirements
3. Land
4. Water
5. Nutrients
6. Labour
7. Seeds
8. Protection
9. Fuelwood collection and storage
10. Distribution
11. Utilization
C. Urban and commercial
1. Background material
2. Urban domestic energy studies
3. Industrial survey
4. Dealer survey
Introduction
In this final paper we ask what sorts of information are relevant for wood fuel surveys, and how this information can be obtained. Throughout this volume we have stressed the variety of fuelwood situations, and the wide range of critical factors. This paper, unlike the preceding ones, is written in three sections, each with a different author. First, Brokensha and Castro emphasise the social anthropological approach, mentioning the various social institutions, and also important ecological aspects, that need to be taken into account. Next Reddy, with his broad multi-disciplinary approach, stresses the various relationships dealing with the ecological context and the resources needed. His section relates both to his own paper and also to deLucia's opening paper, with its emphasis on a systems approach. Finally Morgan, a geographer, examines the key factors involved in surveys of industrial, commercial and urban fuelwood problems.
By presenting these different but overlapping viewpoints, we hope both to indicate the variety of possible approaches, and also to show that there are many areas of agreement, no matter who does the survey nor where it is done.
A. Social
David Brokensha and Alfonso Peter Castro
We consider the socio-economic context of fuel surveys, emphasising:
(i) wood fuels (fuelwood/and charcoal); crop residues; animal dung; other organic matter;
(ii) both household and nonhousehold uses;
(iii) both commercial and noncommercial uses;
(iv) production, distribution, and consumption aspects.
We do not attempt to cover the whole socio-economic context, but concentrate on those aspects most relevant for a fuel survey, with emphasis on land, and on labour, followed by an overview of production, distribution, and consumption of fuelwood. For convenience, we divide our comments into several sections, but we stress that all are interrelated, and changes in one affect the others. We note one major distinction, whether fuel is used domestically, or as a cash-crop, as this has far-reaching implications.
We emphasize wood - fuelwood and charcoal - but in some areas other sources of fuel are important - cow dung in India, llama dung and woody roots in Peru, crop residues in the Sahel. There are clear regional differences; in Africa, for example, dung and brushwood are generally used less intensively than in India. Sorghum stalks are a major fuel source for two-thirds of Nigeria. In Ilorin market, guinea-corn stalks (which are fibrous and burn well) are sold as a preferred fuel, even when fuelwood is available, obviously expressing a cultural preference. Seasonality is very important, as crop residues are only available for a short period; with a longer season, up to six months in the drier areas of the Sahel. Where alternate biomass sources exist, they should be examined systematically, along the lines proposed. In addition, oars should be taken to consider the opportunity costs of using these items as fuel. For example, the dung might have been used as fertilizer for crops:
what is the net loss involved? Crop residues like sorghum stalks are sometimes used as makeshift contour ridges in fields or as livestock feed. Again, what is the extent of the loss? The complex ramifications of using organic residues as fuel must be studied.
The eventual aim of fuelwood surveys is not just to collect information, but to suggest specific lines of action that can improve people's lives. We need first to show the importance of prevailing administrative and legislative policies and practices which set limits for what will be practical. National or sector development policies are vital aspects of any action. The problem is where to draw the lines of what is relevant, because of the wide range of sectors whose policy is significant for any fuelwood programs.
These include forestry, agriculture, rural development, land tenure and land reform, energy and resettlement, to name only the main ones. A knowledge of the broad aims of these sectors (i.e. the ministries and departments that are responsible for them) is required as well as an awareness of relative expenditures, which indicate some order of priorities.
We should also go beyond the national level and consider international policy, as shown by the specific interests of F.A.O., World Bank and other development agencies. And we should also look at lower levels - policies and actions at regional and district levels for these too will affect planned changes.
It is also crucial to be aware of local values and attitudes and of the general social background. We emphasize the importance of understanding and using indigenous knowledge systems in any proposed development. This is particularly necessary in regard to two promising avenues for action - reforestation and conservation of energy - for both involve changes, sometimes substantial, in people's behaviour. A carefully integrated plan - integrated with local values, and worked out in conjunction with the local people - has a better chance of success than has one imposed from above.
Popular participation is a currently fashionable phrase in development circles, yet it is often not clearly defined and therefore difficult to implement. Fortunately, the fuelwood arena is one where participation often has a reasonable chance of success, and local people can and should be involved in initial discussions, in implementation, and in monitoring and evaluation. But local support of forestry programs is not always forthcoming. In part this is because community members may place forests and fuel requirements behind other development needs such as agriculture, water, roads, schools and sanitary facilities. Thus, the priorities and perceived needs of the forester and energy planner may not be the same as those of the local community.
Another factor that inhibits local participation in forestry programs, particularly those based on "community participation," is a factionalism and stratification (Noronha, 1980)e There may be no shared interests in a particular community. Instead, there may be numerous competing political functions based on class, ethnic, religious or other alignments. Moreover, there may be no tradition of cooperation regarding growing or harvesting trees, or fuel supply needs, yet planners sometimes expect cooperative forms, of organization to take root overnight.
Planners should carefully weigh the costs and benefits of using cooperative (or community) versus individual forms of organization in forestry programs. In some oases working through individual landowners may lead to a more successful program of tree planting than relying on a disorganized and undemocratic cooperative. At the same time, planners must also carefully evaluate their goals - a forestry program based on individuals and entrepreneurs may not benefit, and may well be detrimental to the poor.
1. Local knowledge and production strategies
Until recently, most development officials and researchers believed that the peasant had nothing to teach and everything to learn. To a large extent, this attitude still prevails in many circles. Many studies have shown, however, that local people often possess considerable knowledge about resources and their effective management and utilization. This knowledge, the cumulation of years of experience, is a crucial component of local fuel systems, and therefore constitutes an important area of knowledge that should be acquired by responsible officials (see Brokensha et al., 1978; Lipton, 1978).
There are usually clear local preferences for specific firewood species and parts of trees. These preferences are based on burning qualities, availability of wood, intended use and also on prevailing conversion technology. In general, the most desired species are those that are hard, dry rapidly, ignite easily, burn strongly but are easily controllable, emit little smoke, and do not give food an unpleasant taste. For example, the Tarahumara of Mexico say that "oak burns hot and clear, without smoke; pine is used only for kindling; cedar gives a hot fire but throws off dangerous sparks." Studies in India suggest that dry twigs and branches are commonly used because they are often ell that is available. In most parts of the world there have been recent dramatic shifts in preferences as preferred species disappear or become very scarce. The factor of accessibility is crucial, as, to quote a north-of-England folk saying, "if thee cannot get what thee like, thee mun (must) like
what thee get."
2. Land tenure
2.1 Government land tenure
2.2 Group land tenure
2.3 Private land tenure
2.4 Competing land uses
2.5 The "poorest of the poor": The land poor and landless; rural women; the elderly and sick
A grasp of land tenure relationships is essential for understanding the regulation of access to trees and other fuel resources. (We use "land tenure" as a convenient term, though we are really discussing rights over land use). Land tenure includes legal and customary relationships between individuals and groups, involving rights in land: rights to build houses, to plant trees and permanent crops, to cultivate annual crops, to graze cattle, or to collect medicinal herbs or building material - and firewood. Sometimes it is useful to ask local people to draw simple maps showing their fuelwood areas, as this can help to show their own perceptions. In many parts of the world, older types of communal land rights are being replaced by individual title, as part of a so-called "land reform."
We distinguish three general types of land tenure: government, group, and private land tenure. Usually all three are found, either side by side or in combination. Furthermore, tenure relations change over time.
In all types of tenure, conflicts over land use and land tenure do occur. Such conflicts obviously affect the collection of fuelwood, so it will be necessary to find out, as discreetly as possible, who is involved, which lands are concerned and with what consequences. With group lands, conflict may arise from questions of who has which rights to gather wood, while with individual tenure there are often quarrels and litigation over the title itself.
2.1 Government land tenure
In government tenure, rights to land and its products are vested in the nation-state and its public agencies and bodies. The amount of forest lands directly controlled by central governments varies considerably. In Nigeria, the state reportedly holds only 2 percent of the total land area. The Republic of Korea's government owns nearly 20 percent of the forest lands. In China, natural forests and many forest plantations are controlled by communes. In many countries, such as Mexico, the actual structure of forest ownership (including both public and private lands) is not known with accuracy.
Land ownership is not always a precise indicator of forest land control. Central governments may nominally own forest resources, but delegate control to local public authorities. For instance, local governing bodies, the panchayats, control forest lands in Nepal although the national government is the official owner. Control over federal forest lands in Mexico is spread among different organizations, including decentralized federal and state government agencies, government companies, private companies with permits and concessions, local land reform communities (ejidos), and other public and private bodies.
Besides direct ownership of forest lands, central governments may control fuelwood resources through land use regulations. This control has occurred in some nations as a response to deforestation and fuelwood shortages. For example, the Ecuadorian government has legislated provision for owners of forest land to reforest and conserve their forests. Land owners are allowed three options: carrying out afforestation and maintenance themselves at their own expense; having the Ministry of Development pay for the work in exchange for donating 70 percent of the wood production to the National Forestry Service; relinquishing ownership of the forest areas to local communities, which will control and maintain the forests. The last option is said to be the government's preferred method, although very little has been done in this way, and often co-operative groups that control land are in a confused state.
How government tenure affects access to fuelwood at the local level varies. Collection of fuelwood on government forest lands may be prohibited. People who live near forest reserves in Tanzania are allowed to collect dead or fallen wood left behind by a small number of licensed timber cutters. In Mexico and the Sudan, fees or taxes are collected on each load of sold woods. In Bara, Sudan, forestry officials admitted that much cutting goes on without permission on government land. "They said that their weak control over the activities carried out is due to lack of personnel and transport facilities" (Digernes, 1977:53): this situation also occurs in other countries. Thus, access to fuelwood resources on government land depends upon the specific country's policies and its ability to enforce them.
In enquiring into government control, a survey should concentrate on certain topics. First, what restrictions are there on access, how do local people perceive these regulations, and have they led to any friction or problems between forest service and local people? If this has led to reluctance or opposition to engage in forest conversation or reforestation, then the survey should ask "what can be done?" This question should be asked of a wide range of local residents, as well as officials.
Aside from the central government, local governing bodies such as village councils may regulate access to public forest lands. This local control has sometimes developed over long periods as a means of conserving important forest stocks In other cases, it has arisen as a local-level response to fuelwood shortages. Community control of forest lands is discussed further in the next section.
We need to ask how people perceive trees and forests, recognizing that there is a wide spectrum, including the Than of Borneo who are described as "having an insatiable craving for virgin land," and for whom treefelling is a major measure of manhood. At the other extreme are people such as the Kikuyu (Kenya) or the Chaga (Tanzania) who treated large trees with reverence, even appeasing the spirit of the tree when it was out down, At Mwanza (Tanzania), and in the Sahel too, local farmers out down trees because they serve as resting places for the seed-eating birds. When do people perceive of forests as for their benefit - and why?
2.2 Group land tenure
Rural communities in almost all developing nations enjoyed from ancient time certain customary privileges on nearby forest lands. Although this is sometimes called "communal tenure", the term "group land tenure" is preferable. This is because access to land may be based on criteria other than community membership, such as common descent or ethnic affiliation. For example, in many tropical African societies wood is collected solely from land which a lineage or other descent group controls, or else from the household's own "bush farm." Moreover, communal tenure may imply "collective" production, a condition rarely present in local-level societies.
Group land tenure differs from modern western forms of land-holding in that people who had rights in land usually had rights in use, which were clearly defined, but they had no right to sell the land. There were exceptions, but in general land could not be alienated. When people had limited rights of use, it was often stated that they might cultivate and harvest annual crops, but they were not allowed to plant permanent crops like trees. This is important as it could be a major barrier to tree planting.
Thus, all members of the community, ethnic group, lineage, or other supra-household land-owning entities were allowed to collect fuelwood for their own use. Group members freely gathered or out as much wood as they need; sometimes certain species of trees were placed in a special category, and people were need; allowed to out theme Forest lands were sometimes found on hillsides or scrub and thorn forests which were unsuitable for farming. In some oases, land was held in reserve for future generations.
Although one study found that 93 percent of all land in Malawi is still under the control of village headmen and chiefs, in most areas group tenure is being, or already is, replaced by private land ownership though private tenure and group tenure may co-exists.
What often occurs is that farm and other intensively used land will become privately owned, but forests and waste lands will remain under group tenure. In these oases, such as in Guatemala, community members retain access to the group's forest land, though it is not necessarily on a strictly egalitarian basis - those persons in power may have readier access to the forests than do marginal persons. The group-held forest land becomes an especially important resource to the poor and landless, and every township, village or settlement that possessed group-held forest was responsible for supervising its use, and for seeing that laws were enforced. Because the local people were directly involved, they were more effective in preventing encroachment, or illegal cutting, than forest guards usually are. Those people who depend on the forest for their income, as woodcutters or carpenters, are especially vigilant in preventing forest clearance.
Where socio-economic differences are pronounced or where political factionalism is intense, control over group-held forests may become the bone of contention among opposed groups. In his community study of Tepoztlan, Mexico, Oscar Lewis states that control over village forest resources led to intense friction between local political factions. One group, comprised of poorer peasants, and ex-Zapatistas (revolutionaries) protested about the depletion of the forests. The other group, led by the sons of the ex-caciques (wealthy political leaders), wished for expanded commercial production of firewood and charcoal (Lewis, 1951:236-238).
Forest depletion and fuelwood scarcity may cause changes in group land tenure, as well as in farming and settlement patterns. For example, firewood scarcity, along with population pressures and poverty, provoked families in Chamula, Mexico, to migrate to new forest areas, leading to competition for land and to quarrels with neighboring communities (Pozas, 1959).
2.3 Private land tenure
With private tenure, land is considered a commodity. The individual is free to sell, to buy, and to accumulate land. Private land tenure implies a monopoly, under which a certain person or group has absolute rights over land, and can exclude others. Bonds of friendship, kinship, and customary relationships between landed and landless may "soften" or "relax" this exclusivity to land. For instance, near Ibadan, Nigeria, wood can be taken from a neighbour's farm. However, with increased commercialization land tends to become stripped of social obligations, and treated as any other commodity.
When group land tenure changes to individual tenure, it may encourage an increased planting of trees, as the owners feel more secure and can afford to do long-range planning, as happened in Kenya. Studies have shown that once farmers get individual title to their land, they tend to set aside a portion of their land for planting with eucalyptus, Grevillea robusta or other quick-growing useful species.
Under private tenure, the question of land ownership distribution becomes crucial. Many areas are characterised by patterns of land concentration. That is, land and fuel ownership are concentrated among a few individuals or families.
2.4 Competing land uses
Fuelwood systems must be seen in relationship to existing patterns of land use, Areas of low population density and extensive land use have tended to be most appropriate for traditional community forestry systems. Such conditions are increasingly disappearing because of rapid population growth and the expansion of commercial agriculture and forestry.
Researchers should be aware of any changes in local infrastructure, technology, or residential patterns that could alter current land use patterns. The construction of roads and bridges opens up areas to settlement and increases access to markets. The introduction of tractors may lead to the clearing of trees from fields. Power saws make the cutting of trees easier and faster. Increases of population and the colonization of new lands presents greater pressure on forests.
2.5 The "poorest of the poor": The land poor and landless; rural women; the elderly and sick
In a recent paper Marilyn Hoskins (1979:5) has written that, "Enthusiastic participation in any project only comes from those who believe they have something at stake and who are committed to the project's success." While Hoskins was referring to one particular (and very important) disadvantaged sector of rural society - women her statement could easily cover the position of others, including the land poor, the landless, tenants, and the sick all of whom lack power. Since the 1970s, international development agencies have declared their concern for the "poorest of the poor." It is these groups whom we know least about, especially in regards to their access to fuel supplies. Although so far we have been discussing mainly those people who have some land rights, in many parts of the world a rapidly growing proportion of the people has no formal rights in land. Moreover, another large proportion of the population has rights to land, though the amount held is insufficient to meet
household subsistence demands. Sometimes the land poor or landless are tenants or sharecroppers, having access to another's land in exchange for rent or other services. Although a tenant may have some security of tenure through customary or legal relationships, implied in tenancy is that the landowner may sometime reclaim direct use rights over the land. In some areas where farming has recently become capitalized and commercialized, as in the "green revolution" areas of Asia, the eviction of tenants has occurred.
Besides 'landless,' 'land poor,' and 'tenant,' there are other terms associated with these groups: a semi - or full - proletariat and 'penny capitalists.' The former terms related that these sectors comprised the seasonal or year-round wage labour force for farms, plantations, public work projects, mines, factories and other enterprises. The latter term points out that many of the rural poor engage in small-scale, often ambulatory, commerce, and other non-farm occupational specializations.
Besides direct market purchase, access to wood fuel supplies is often obtained through public or community lands. Although these lands may nominally be held by the 'community,' a community of interest is frequently absent and competition and conflict between different village factions and users for control of this land is intense. Another common means of access to fuel supplies is through social relationships based on kinship, patronage or some other tie. Those without formal access to land may have access through wealthier relatives or through patrons. A tenant or wage-worker may be allowed access to fuel supplies by the landowner, but such access continues only as long as they are associated with the owner. Finally, access to fuel supplies may be obtained through the customary rights of the poor to gather crop residues, dung or other fuel sources, although such rights are lost as these become considered valued resources.
Another forestry-related issue associated with the landless and land poor is that they engage in charcoal-making and wood fuel sales as part or full-time specializations. Driven by the need for survival and the lack of alternative means of livelihood, these desperate people become prime agents of deforestation. Simply denying these people legal access to forests is an insufficient solution to this problem because it invites poaching and the general non-cooperation of the local people in any forestry efforts. A difficult yet more realistic solution is to create alternative means of livelihood for the rural poor. Moreover, the use of trees as an income source and the needs of forestry programs can be integrated so that the rural poor receive some direct economic benefit from any afforestation or conservation project.
The position of poor rural women in local fuelwood systems deserves careful attention. Recognition is usually given to several important aspects of Women's involvement such as cooking and wood collection, but other activities and sources of involvement remain largely unexplored. Little attention has focussed on how women obtain access to trees. Land rights are often assumed to be held by the 'head of household' - the adult male - yet this simplifies the complex arrangements that exist at the local level. The impact of divorce, separation and widowhood on access to fuel supplies is only beginning to be considered. Women's expertise in the use of forest products has seldom been taken into account. How forestry programs affect women's economic activities is also in further need of investigation.
The elderly and the sick are frequently overlooked in development projects, and forestry programs seem no exception. Once again, little investigation of their participation in local situations has taken place. Consideration of their plight underscores the need of researchers to be aware of those forms of poverty that tend to be hidden on the surface. Moreover, it draws attention to the fact that social relations must be seen in a wider framework than individual nuclear households. Many times children are given the responsibility of supplying fuel for an elderly or sick individual who may or may not be a relative and a resident of the household. This use of children, as well as the reliance of the elderly or sick on their grown-up sons and daughters for care, illustrates the value of offspring to parents as a form of old age and sickness insurance.
3. Labour
3.1 Labour allocation
3.2 Hired labour
3.3 Distance and frequency of trips - Time
3.4 The social context of collection
3.5 Technology
3.6 Loads
3.1 Labour allocation
The collection of fuel accounts for a significant proportion of household labour. Other activities - agricultural tasks, collecting water, domestic duties, child-care are also time consuming, and the investigator should have a general idea of the relative amount of time that each task takes. This is important, because if people start to spend more time collecting fuel, then they will have less time for other tasks. We need to know how this affects agricultural production, nutrition and health, and general well being. We should know, for example, if special trips have to be made for firewood, when in earlier days the people could combine this with routine agricultural activities. Here, as elsewhere, both the behaviour and the perceptions of the people should be noted. If any changes or innovations are proposed, we must first know how local people perceive the problem, then build on their perceptions.
Data should be collected on who gathers or harvests fuelwood, and on who uses it. Investigators should consider whether firewood gathering is a gender - or age - defined task within the household. For instance, women are mostly responsible for firewood collection in Africa. Women were said to begin collecting wood as young girls, and continue until they are physically unable to do so. Older women's tasks are sometimes lightened by daughters or daughters-in-law.
Sometimes boys and men are assigned the task of gathering fuelwood. For example, in Jamaica, getting wood is a boy's work, and boys ordinarily gathered firewood in Chan Kom, Mexico. Men will quit work early at their farm plots in Guatemala to collect wood, with men and boys sometimes gathering wood together.
Collecting wood is often the responsibility of both men and women, and young and old. In Uchumarca, Peru, Stephen Brush noticed that:
Many people pick up firewood as a normal part of any excursion outside of the village, and it is common to Bee men, women, and children dragging or carrying small bundles of firewood (Brush, 1977:77).
In many cases the distance required for gathering wood will determine who gathers it. "Women tend to stay closer to the village, while men will range farther in search for the best wood." In the Sudan, women gathered wood near the home, but men sought it if the supply was more than four km. away.
Gender and age preference in wood collection tasks are never absolute social facts. As fuelwood supplies diminish, so do sex and age rules adapt to meet changing needs. Moreover, individuals must adapt to their own personal and household circumstances. For instance, in Mbere, Kenya, when wives are absent or sick, then men must collect wood themselves. Unless they have kinfolk, willing neighbours, or the ability to pay, the elderly and the handicapped must; gather fuelwood themselves. When shortages begin, these latter two groups are often the most hard-hit. This is especially true because people who gather for them for no recompense when wood is plentiful may become more reluctant to help as greater distances are involved, and as more time must be spent.
In most areas, fuelwood scarcity has imposed extra burdens on women because collecting wood takes a longer time, and they still have all their other tasks to do, Therefore there should be a systematic examination of ways in which women's lives have changed.
3.2 Hired labour
As fuelwood becomes a commodity, production relations also change, many sellers collecting and transporting the wood themselves. However, in some instances fuelwood collectors may actually be hired workers, and several variations are found. For example, in Cheran, Mexico, wealthy widows without grown sons pay others to collect firewood. Wealthy households in Bara, Sudan, employ servants to gather wood for them now that wood is in short supply while poorer households must collect it themselves.
Where fuelwood production comes under control of larger-scale entrepreneurs, wage labour relationships become more established. In La Abarca, Chile, lorry owners aquired woodyards and during the winter months they hired "idle tenants" from nearby estates to chop wood. Because the winter is the agricultural off-season, work was scarce, so wood-choppers for these firewood contractors tended to be badly paid. There are other accounts of entrepreneurs who contract or who simply sell on the market, using gangs of hired men. Unfortunately, little information is provided on labour conditions and terms for these workers.
With commercialization of fuelwood, there soon appears a wide range of people who have vested interests in the trade that builds up, because their livelihood depends on It. These include the people who collect and transport fuelwood, as well as those involved in distribution and selling, perhaps at distant towns. These vested interests might actively try to prevent any changes in fuelwood supply, such as would result if government agencies or private people established fuelwood plantations. This important aspect of hired labour warrants investigation. In the case of illegal exploitation, as in tribal areas of India, this is a means by which contractors pass the rise of penalties (fines, imprisonment) to the workers.
3.3 Distance and frequency of trips - Time
We are concerned with time; how much time is spent collecting fuel by different households. People may not have accurate ideas of time, so, to determine time spent, we need to know the location of the source, so as to calculate distance, and also to know the number of trips made each week. This is clearly related to transport, as people who can use a bicycle, barrow, sledge, pack-animal cart or track, obviously have an advantage over those who must carry fuel on their own backs. Again, enquiries should be made on changes in time spent on this task. Serious considerations must be given to methods of acquiring this information. For example, there will probably be seasonal and daily variations in distance, time, and especially in the frequency of trips. The concept of "distance" presents a special problem. Also, tasks may be multi-purpose rather than single-purpose. That is, a variety of labour activities (gathering herbs and other plants, visiting neighbours, checking on
fields or herds, returning from farm work) may be carried out on the same trip when firewood is gathered. This can be determined rather easily.
Simple interviewing of local people about distance, time and frequency of trips for fuelwood collection may load to an inaccurate assessment of the local situation. Random spot checks (see the Observation section) are recommended. If there is enough time, these should cover seasonal as well as daily variations. Some sort of stratified sample, based on differential modes of transportation, may be useful in showing distance and time requirements of different households. Accompanying people on fuelwood collecting trips - a real, if arduous, form of participant observation - can help in determining whether a variety of tasks is performed directly or indirectly; it can help in many other ways such as acquiring some sort of "feel" for the rhythms, group dynamics and burdens of this endless, time-consuming task of collecting fuelwood.
Information should be gathered on the extent to which local people consider these trips as burdens, and whether they believe the amount of time and labour required to collect wood has changed.
3.4 The social context of collection
Obviously, much drudgery is involved in collecting fuelwood, as in collecting water, and other routine tasks. Time must be spent and heavy loads collected and carried home. As wood supplies diminish, the drudgery and hardships increase. Furthermore, fuelwood collecting may be a task which is a particularly heavy burden on certain groups such as women, children, the elderly, the handicapped and the poor.
At the same time, ethnographic reports and other accounts of community life show that in many instances fuelwood collection is an important social activity. Mary Elmendorf, commenting on the Mayan woman of Chan Kom, Mexico, writes:
I had never really understood why most of the women did not seem to mind going to the wood, the immense loads of firewood they brought back looked painful to carry on their tumpline, their foreheads straining against the rope... A Mayan friend ... told me later that when women go to lenas (gather wood) it is an outing - a group experience. 'The women love it,' she said. 'They are free in the woods. In addition to collecting wood, they gather all the different kinds of flowers, plants, and roots (Elmendorf, 1976:28-29).
Other observers report that in some areas fuelwood collection is regarded as a pleasant social activity, a welcome break in the routine, when women can chat with their friends.
As mentioned earlier, not everywhere and not everyone has considered gathering wood to be an enjoyable task. Many of the accounts which described it so were written before the onset of serious fuelwood shortages. One report concludes that:
...it is unlikely that firewood collection today provides much satisfaction. Nearly all collectors face long journeys, restrictive laws, selfish landlords, dwindling forests and higher prices, and fuelwood is simply one of life's major sources of anxiety for many collectors (USAID 1980:25).
But fuelwood gathering remains an important social activity in many areas. Conversation, passing gossip, joking, and play by children helps to pass the time and reduces the drudgery of the work.
3.5 Technology
Attention should be given to the technology used, since it influences several aspects of production, distribution, and consumption. Technology limits the range of wood sizes that can be processed and determines which species can be used. For example, hand tools, including axes, hooks on the end of poles, long knives, and machetes, that are most frequently used in collecting fuelwood, can seldom fell and break up large trees. Because wood cannot readily be reduced to small sizes the adoption of new stoves may be restrained. Chain saws, which are presently being introduced in some areas, can lead to accelerated cutting.
A significant part of technology relates to transport - what hand-drawn or animal-drawn carts are available, are pack animals or bicycles used? What are the possibilities of intermediate technology type innovations, which could extend the range of wood gathering, and out down on time?
Also, conversion technology is important. What sorts of stoves and ovens are in use? Much labour may be spent in cutting and preparing wood for stoves, and some stoves require tiny pieces of wood that are difficult to cut.
Another aspect of technology is the manner in which trees are "killed," whether by ring-girdling, burning the base or even applying chemicals, and how long trees are left before being felled.
Finally, technology cannot be understood without enquiring into indigenous knowledge. We need to note what people know/believe about trees and their uses.
The technology used by cutters and gatherers can be easily ascertained through observation. It would also be useful to make a systematic comparison of the technology utilized by different types of producers, such as households, small-scale commercial operations and larger enterprises.
3.6 Loads
Technical problems associated with measuring the amount of wood and energy produced and consumed in fuelwood usage are dealt within Annex III. In this section we discuss some general aspects that investigators may encounter in the field.
Household fuels are difficult to measure exactly, because villagers do not use, scales. They might indicate amounts by referring to a head-load, cart-load, stack or sack (for charcoal), all of which vary considerably. Some people may increase confusion by estimating in kilograms or other international units, without a precise idea of the weight. Wood volume itself will vary according to the particular species, moisture content, the size and shape of branches or logs, and the proportion of twigs and leaves included. Volume-to-weight ratios also vary, according to area or season. Various sized pieces of wood defy traditional forestry appraisal techniques.
4. Other aspects of production and distribution of fuelwood
4.1 Transport
4.2 Marketing and sales
4.3 Storage
4.4 Reforestation
In this section we pay particular attention to the socio-economic rather than to the technical, aspects, and again we have been selective, choosing some important issues.
4.1 Transport
Attention should be given to the infrastructure and the various modes of transporting fuelwood from where it is produced to its consumption or marketing site. Studies indicate that a wide range of transport is used: for instance, a study in Ougadougou, Upper Volta, found that trucks, station wagons, ox carts, mules, bicycles, and pedestrians brought firewood into market. Buses and similar modes of public transport are often used in Guatemala. Very often the vehicles will have mixed loads, such as fuelwood, agricultural produce and livestock, which complicates the measurement. Similarly, the infrastructure used in transporting fuelwood supplies is highly varied. All-weather, well maintained tarmac roads or dirt paths which are inaccessible in wet weather may be used in carrying supplies to market.
The kind of transport available, along with other factors, can have an important impact on the marketing and production structure. Transport networks influence the spatial range of fuelwood markets, determining whether a community has access to commercial supplies for sale or purchase. The construction of rural feeder or access roads can open up new areas of production, allow greater volume to be transported, or make available new markets.
Forest resources may be in areas where no bus service or even roads exist, so that producers will have to take their loads to the marketing sites. Ownership of, or access to, transportation facilities influences entrepreneurial opportunities and the internal structure of fuelwood production and marketing. With the use of trucks, the carrying of the loads of several wood cutters is possible, and middlemen become an important aspect of the distribution systems.
In many areas, enterprising farmers take advantage of fuelwood demand, and of improved communication, to make some income from selling firewood or charcoal. Along many roads, it is a common eight to see people at roadsides, waiting either for a pre-arranged contractor, or for any passing lorry driver who might buy the fuelwood.
In some cases a sort of vertical integration happens. In Chile, lorry owners were able to use woodyards in the winter months, and to employ labourers who would otherwise be idle, in chopping wood. The lorry owners proceeded to sell this chopped wood to bakeries and consumers in urban areas.
4.2 Marketing and sales
4.2.1 Noncommercial and commercial production:
4.2.2 Employment patterns
4.2.3 Seasonality, production and prices
4.2.4 Fuelwood prices and household socio-economic status
4.2.5 Sales
4.2.1 Noncommercial and commercial production:
Fuelwood is often referred to as a "noncommercial" fuel, although charcoal is almost always a commercial fuels This in because many, if not most, rural households collect it for their own consumption. This is much easier when people have their own farms, or have clear rights to gather fuelwood over a particular piece of lands. We need to ask about the non-farmers, not only the landless but also specialists, service people, labourers. Do they buy fuel? Or do they have permission to collect? As a freely obtainable good, no local market existed for fuelwood. In some areas, though, fuelwood has been long considered a commodity. The key factor is usually availability, In the Lake Patzcuaro region of Mexico, people from lake communities, where deforestation already had occurred, traded fish for firewood and ocote (resinous pine) supplied by highland areas. In the Basin of Quetzaltenango, Guatemala, shortages of wood have long caused firewood and charcoal to be commercialized.
Among Pasil villages in the northern Luzon Highlands of the Philippines, firewood is exchanged for rice in-densely populated areas, but no market exists for it in sparsely settled West Pasil. At times, a few individuals may purchase fuelwood while the rest of the population gathers it themselves. For instance, in Mbere, Kenya, school teachers, rural business owners, and bar and canteen owners were buying fuelwood before its transition from a free good to a marketable commodity among the general populations.
William Morgan's paper provides a valuable overview of the commercialization of fuelwood in tropical Africa. With rapid population growth, increased urbanization, changes in land use patterns as agriculture expands or land quality decreases, high prices for fossil fuels, and local shortages of wood, the commercialization of fuelwood is becoming a ubiquitous aspect of life in the developing countries. The change from being a free good to a marketable commodity can occur quickly. In Mbere, Kenya, this transition happened around 1976. Digernes reported that in Bara, Sudan:
Women of all groups used to collect their wood ten years ago, but because of clearance of the town perimeter, most women now find the distance to wooded areas too long for self-collections. Whereas they used to find wood some 15-30 minutes on food from Bara, now they would have to walk for one to two hours. 13 households have stopped using wood at all, since the women say they do not want to pay for a commodity which they used to obtain free until recently. Otherwise the women have got used to dealing with the professionals who have taken over the wood collecting that they themselves carried out previously (Digernes, 1977:78).
In considering marketing and sales, it will often be necessary to go outside the local community and to ascertain how much is being sold to outsiders. For example, in Mbere, Kenya, the weekly (Tuesday) market at Ishiara attracts many outside buyers of fuelwood and charcoal. Buyers come from the wealthier, but fuel-short Kikuyu highland areas, and also from the towns and cities. It seems that every vehicle has many sacks of charcoal precariously balanced on its roof, an it heads towards the urban areas, It is not possible to study a community in isolation; it can only be understood in relation to its net-work - social, economic, political - with the wider world. In studying fuelwood, this network must be identified, described and analysed. For it is now common in anthropological studies to talk of "a single social field" which includes rural and urban people, ideas, goods and resources, with much cries-crossing.
Table 5-1 Seasonal variability in charcoal production Quetzaltenango, Guatemala, 1965
Charcoal Price
Month
Migration Cycle
Subsistence Farming
Charcoal Prod. Frequency
January
returning from the coast w/corn and cash
little activity, upland harvest already completed; no planting
much production takes place; price falls
Feb-Mar
corn planting from Feb. to early March
only few producers
April
out-migration to plant corn for those w/insufficient land.
Migration to the coast to obtain and dry fish for Lent, which is sold in the market
overall decline In production - A base supply is manufactured by 400 - 500 families who produce year-round, except in the planting season
May
wheat sown
production decreases
June-July
production increases slightly, rainy season
Aug-Oct
Coastal migration to harvest corn, work on coffee and corn farms.
Half the 100 families to the coast
production decreases; minor shortages in Q. but shortages are not critical
Nov-Dec
first two weeks of Nov, majority of highland families return from the coast
corn and wheat harvest begins
charcoal manufacture comes to a "virtual halt" prices reach their peak in Q
Sources: derived from Hehr, 1967; from USAID, 19801 p. 79.
In losoking at marketing, we need to examine the impacts of diverting fuelwood from local subsistence use to commercial markets that are mostly located outside the local area. What are the costs and benefits, and to whom do they accrue? Will commercialization have positive or negative effects on local fuelwood supplies? Will some individuals or groups be especially hurt - or helped?
Further questions should be asked about the organization of the market. Are prices controlled? Are controls effective? If not, how are regulations by-passed? Is there control of movement of fuelwood by road blocks or vehicle inspection? Do the marketing and pricing mechanisms operate equitably? What are the relations between the fuelwood gatherers and producers, middle-men, sellers - and forest service officials? Who dictates the rules? What are the relative powers and bargaining positions of each group? What changes are desirable, to improve the general fuelwood situation?
4.2.2 Employment patterns
Producing fuelwood for sale may be a full or part-time occupation, though most people engage in commercial fuelwood production as a part-time activity, usually during the agricultural off-season. Thus, it supplements income or wages earned from other activities. For example, Hehr (1967) showed that charcoal production in Cajola, Guatemala, is related to changes in the subsistence farming and labour migration cycles (see Table 5. A-1).
Cutting or selling fuelwood often has a low status attached to it. Whether the remuneration obtained from this activity corresponds with this status depends on the particular situation. In Tepotztlan, Mexico, Oscar Lewis found that making and selling charcoal was more profitable than engaging in agriculture wage labour. Lewis commented:
But charcoal is thought of as dirty work, and it ranks very low in prestige, being identified as a last occupation resort of the poor. Nevertheless, some well-to-do families in the outlying barrios spend part of their time in burning charcoal (Lewis, 1951:164-165).
In remote areas, where fuelwood production is unlikely to offer vast profits, the business tends to be dominated by poor people. But with shortages driving -up prices, more entrepreneurs become involved in fuelwood marketing, especially in places near to good markets or accessible by all-weather roads.
4.2.3 Seasonality, production and prices
We stress the importance of seasonality in fuelwood systems. In terms of production, seasonality influences accessibility to forest stock and it is the bass of the agricultural cycle. The greatest amount of fuelwood collection usually occurs in the dry season, when there is increased accessibility and also there is less time pressure after crops are harvested. Other organic fuels, such as crop residues, also vary in availability according to the season. Conversely, times when labour migrations or harvests occur, and during the wet season, are periods of low production and higher prices, and greater distances from production area to market. During the rainy season in Kano, Nigeria, fuelwood is scarce, poor quality and expensive, so there is an increased substitution of alternate fuels, especially kerosene.
Prices generally increase with the distance from supplying areas, but Digernes states that this increase happens on different scales for various directions. She Suggests that variations occur because of difference in transportation, accessibility, and the relative ages of supply centres.
4.2.4 Fuelwood prices and household socio-economic status
Prices for fuelwood also vary among different residential districts (or town quarters) and classes of households. In Bara, Sudan, there were distinct variations in mean prices within different quarters and between quarters, with the latter being less. In both instances, middle and upper socio-economic status households tended to pay less than poorer households (Digernes, 1977:73-75), The demand for fuelwood is also influenced by seasonal changes in weather and temperatures Cool or wet weather increases fuelwood demand, for heating and cooking uses.
4.2.5 Sales
Depending of course upon the distance from supply source, fuelwood is often sold by the same person who gathered it, with a variety of market strategies being employed by sellers. Fuelwood may be sold in certain areas or stalls of established markets, or vendors may be found along roadsides. Another common strategy is for the vendor to go from door to door, until eventually a vendor may have a regular number of customers who are visited at regular intervals.
At times, large fuelwood consumers such as bakeries or potters, contract with a merchant or a direct producer of fuelwood in order to be assured of a regular supply.
4.3 Storage
Storage of wood becomes more important where fuelwood is commercialized, households usually storing fuelwood for a few days supply, but poorer households may lack facilities for storage, or lack money to buy any reserve supplies of fuelwood.
Sometimes fuelwood is collected in the dry season and stored for use during the wet season, but with firewood scarcity becoming more prevalent, storage can become difficult. However, shortages may prompt conservation through more careful use and longer storage of collected fuelwood. Storing wood does allow it to dry out more, providing more energy per unit weights Some fuelwood entrepreneurs are apparently investing in storage systems, anticipating an increase in demand and prices. For example, traders in Ibadan send trucks into the countryside to buy large loads of wood, which are then stored in towns.
Thus attention should be given to storage. Factors such an the amount of storage space, the duration of storage, and whether supplies are protected from moisture and insects should be considered.
4.4 Reforestation
We include here some comments on reforestation, as this is an important aspect of production: the amount of fuelwood available will depend in large part on wood supplies, which in turn need replenishing. In examining reforestation, some basic questions need to be asked.
1. Who has what rights over land, especially as regarding planting of permanent tree crops?
2. Is control of land separate from ownership of trees?
3. What historical developments have there been in land tenure, and what recent changes?
4. What are traditional perceptions and knowledge of trees? Which species are planted, which particularly valued, which protected for ritual or economic reasons? Who plants trees, where and why? Is there a history of pollarding trees?
5. Are there any multipurpose trees, like the famed Acacia senegal in West Africa, which provides gum arabic, fuelwood, fodder, shade, and fibre?
6. What trees are being planted today? Are they mainly exotic or are indigenous species included? Are trees grown in single species stands, mixed with other species, or scattered about cultivated land? What are the advantages or disadvantages of each method?
7. What is the degree of deforestation? How do people perceive this? What recent changes have there been?
8. What is being done, by individuals, communities or local or national government, for reforestation? How effective are extension efforts? Are seedings easily available, and is their availability known? What is the location of nurseries, and what distribution system exists? (draw rough map). Is any effort made to reach schools, women's clubs or other local groups?
9. For community fuelwood lots, what have been/are the types and extent of local cooperative activities? How are these organized? How many people join in? How active are they? What barriers are there to cooperation - political, class, caste, religious, ethnic?
This is not an exhaustive list, but indicates the sorts of questions that should be asked before starting a forestation programme.
We indicate some aspects of relevant local practices and beliefs. In Bihar, India, the local people are sceptical about single-purpose trees, and especially about single-species stands. They have good reason to regard these as "unnatural" and impracticable, because they are accustomed to useful multipurpose trees that supply their needs for building material, fuelwood food, fibre, forage, woven mats, implements and other things.
To what extent do local people already plant trees? For example, in Kenya there is a great variation in tree planting. In some areas (Kisii, Kakemega, Nyeri) there are many private wood lots, usually eucalyptus for construction and fuel, and there are even privately owned tree nurseries where local entrepreneurs sell seedlings. This is a direct result of high population density, pressure on land and shortage of trees.
Are there indigenous species of trees that should be encouraged, rather than considering the ubiquitous eucalyptus? In Kenya, Markhamia spp in Siaya, and Melia volkensii in savanna country, are two trees that are locally appropriate, popular, useful and often overlooked. For many years the forestry department in Kenya claimed that it was impossible to germinate Melia volkensii, that it just grew. But the local people know very well the seedlings "germinate successfully once the seeds of the fruits browsed by goats have been passed in their droppings." One elder told researchers "every uncircumcized herdboy knows how we germinate mikaum (Brokensha et al, 1980:123). This illustrates the need to enquire into indigenous knowledge, and not just to rely on development from above.
5. Consumption
5.1 Consumers
5.2 Household uses
5.3 Conservation of energy
5.1 Consumers
A basic task of consumption surveys is to determine who consumes fuelwood. Households appear to be the largest overall consumers of fuelwood. In rural areas, firewood is usually the primary fuel, while urban households are the greatest consumers of charcoal. There may be differences in both rural and urban areas in the types of fuels used by various socio-economic strata or classes. Middle and upper classes tend to change to petroleum-based fuels or electricity, particularly in urban areas.
Besides household users, fuelwood is consumed by local industries, small businesses, and other establishments such as schools. Non-household consumers have received relatively little attention in fuel surveys, with notable exceptions being the work of Deanna Donovan and Turi Hammer Digernes (See Annex II). Among traditional manufacturers, fuelwood is used in pottery making, food processing, baking, salt-manufacturing, smelting, smithing, and textile production. Restaurants, tailor shops, hotels and small inns, and food vendors are common users of fuelwood among small businesses. In some oases a growth in tourism, which stimulates the hotel and food establishments, will increase the demand for fuelwood.
There will always be a range in household use; indeed, fuelwood consumption can sometimes serve as a good proxy indicator for wealth. The amount used will depend partly on economic factors - how much household income is available to buy, or household labour to collect, fuelwood? Cultural aspects may also be important, and people's perception, values, beliefs can all be significant. One person may insist on a fire for ritual purposes, for example. The survey should indicate the range of consumption, and also give some reasons for variations.
5.2 Household uses
1. Cooking fires constitute the most significant use of fuelwood in households. Data should be gathered on the organization of cooking activities - whether it is carried out on open fires, open stoves, or more sophisticated stoves (thus, information on the household's socio-economic position is important); it is also important to know who is assigned the tasks of tending fires and cooking.
2. Food preparation - including smoking and drying of crop reserves.
3. Heating - this will vary according to season and geographical zone.
4. Lighting (open fires).
5. Household manufacturing such as pottery making.
6. Brewing of beer or other alcoholic beverages may be locally significant for fuelwood consumption.
7. Simultaneous uses - a single fire may serve multiple purposes, such as cooking, heating, and lighting.
8. Sometimes large scale rural industries exist. The fishermen at Mopti, Mali, for example, use 40,000 tons of wood each year for their fish-drying, and there is rarely any available biomass fuel within a range of 100 kms. Tobacoo-curing in Malawi and Tanzania accounts for large quantities of wood too.
9. Miscellaneous uses, including ceremonial and religious.
Note should be taken of the use of other fuels, either commercial ones like kerosene, or traditional fuels like crop residues, animal dung, which are of major importance in some areas (Sahel and India).
5.3 Conservation of energy
An important aspect of consumption is the energy efficiency of present practices. Many studies confirm the need to understand existing cooking technology, food patterns, and perceptions and food values before proposing changes. Some innovations, such as the Lorena stove, may be successfully introduced, but only if a careful study is first made of existing cooking methods, Innovation should be adapted to what is -there, not simply imposed from above without regard to traditional technology. Some innovators are impatient With this approach, but it usually pays dividends.
Fuelwood is often used in a wasteful manner. The three stone open hearth, common in many parts of Africa and elsewhere is an inefficient way of cooking, as are many of the charcoal stoves currently used, In other areas, the fuelwood shortage has forced people to make more effective use of energy, and wasteful practices have declined. One effective conservation measure is reported from India, where a change in the position of the corpse being prepared for cremation results in one-third less wood being consumed. But many people have until recently regarded fuelwood as a free and abundant resource, and it may be difficult to persuade people to change basic attitudes and beliefs.
B. Ecological and resources
Amulya, Kumar N. Reddy
The ecosystem approach has been used, above,^1 to reveal the many ways in which wood resources are related to the various components and activities of the ecosystems In particular, the inter-relationship between land, water, nutrients, inanimate energy, animal energy, fodder, cooking, trees, buildings, other uses of wood, buildings and human beings on the one hand, and wood on the other hand, has been schematically presented and briefly described. The purpose of the discussion has been to bring out various synergisms and conflicts which affect the outcome of fuelwood projects. It follows that an understanding of these factors is crucial for the planning of these projects. Such an understanding requires many categories and items of information which must now be listed.
^1 In the author's paper "Rural Fuelwood: Significant Relationships".
The listing of information needs can be conveniently organized through a diagram (Figure 5-1) which displays the various material inputs for the production, distribution and utilization of fuelwood. The presentation will be ordered by sequentially considering the various inputs and describing the information required on each of these inputs. In practice, however, an iterative approach is unavoidable, because information on an item further along the sequence may be necessary to obtain data on an earlier item - for example, the species chosen for fuelwood production must be known in order to determine its irrigation requirements.
The aim in what follows is to make the description of information requirements as comprehensive and complete as possible.
Inevitably, therefore, the result will tend to be an ideal list in which all the items are significant for a general discussion. In the context of a particular fuelwood project, however, the whole list may be unattainable for reasons such as non-availability of information, shortage of time, inadequacies of expertise, and so on. In that case, there is no alternative to using short-cut approach (for example, estimating fuelwood use from foodgrain consumption and stove efficiencies), approximate methods (for example, assuming that local biomass productivities are given by national averages), estimates in lieu of quantitative calculations, and judgements regarding priorities in the information list. Fortunately, the chances of success in such limited-information situations are significantly increased by tapping local wisdom regarding the functioning of the ecosystem and other features specific to the region.
1. Ecosystem
At the outset, some basic information is required on the ecosystem for which a fuelwood project is being planned. In particular, it is necessary to know: what is the magnitude of the human population in the ecosystem? and what projections can be made regarding this population? Also, what are the livestock populations corresponding to different categories of livestock? Finally, what is the land area of the ecosystem?
2. Fuelwood requirements
In order to estimate the total fuelwood production that is required, several questions need to be answered: what are all the current end-uses of wood within the ecosystem? and for each end-use, what is the average annual per capita requirement? From this information and the data on population and its growth, estimates can be made of the total fuelwood requirement and how it should increase. But, such estimates are valid only for the current end-use pattern - a different end-use pattern will lead to different requirements. Alternative end-use patterns will have to be considered.
3. Land
The estimate of fuelwood requirements can be converted into land requirements for a project on the basis of fuelwood productivity norms for the species of trees which will be grown. Attention must then be turned to the availability of land for the fuelwood project - the issue is whether there are enough areas which can be allocated to woodlots and whether, even if such areas are identifiable, the land will be made available by those who control the land. An understanding of these issues requires answers to a number of questions. Of these, a crucial one pertains to the current land-use pattern, i.e. what percentages of the ecosystem area are devoted to the human settlement (houses, etc.), water bodies (ponds, tanks, canals, etc.), cropland, pastureland, and utilized land (arable and non-arable)?
In order to estimate the human population which can be supported by the cropland on the basis of agricultural technologies currently in use, it is important to have an idea of the biomass productivity (kgs/ha/year) and the distribution of that biomass between food (grain) and non-grain components that are consumed by livestock as fodder. The carrying capacity, however, is a function of technology, and therefore there must be estimates, based, for example, on national statistics on yields, on carrying capacities with alternative agricultural technologies. From these estimates, it is possible to develop information on the cropland requirements of the present and projected populations with current and alternative technologies.
There are several questions with regard to the pastureland. What is the biomass productivity of the pastureland? What is the percentage contribution of pastureland to the fodder requirements of the livestock population of the ecosystem? Given the fodder production from the cropland and the biomass productivity of the pastureland, what is the livestock population that can be supported by the ecosystem with the fodder production technologies in use and with alternative technologies?
The catchment area for rainwater storage tanks and ponds often consists of land that is invariably non-arable, and highly susceptible to erosion if it is not afforested. Such land is usually a "first choice" for a woodlot, and therefore, it is essential to know the area of the catchment region. Information is also required on the areas of all plots of non-arable land in the ecosystem as well as of arable land which can be made available for woodlots.
The data thus generated on land availability (for woodlots) can then be compared with the estimate of land requirements. If the land available is in excess of the land required for the fuelwood project, the next task is to determine whether the identified land areas will be made available to the project. This depends upon whether the land is owned and controlled by the government/village as common land or by individuals, etc., and whether the owners support the project. It is also crucial to predict realistically how the ownership of the plot(s) suitable for woodlots will affect the distribution of the fuelwood that is produced. In particular, will the fuelwood needs of the poorest families be satisfied, for this is the test of whether the fuelwood project is consistent with development goals?
If sufficient land is not available to meet the fuelwood requirements, then one possible measure is to plant fuelwood trees on the borders of roads, canals, fields, etc., provided that the fuelwood thus obtained is adequate. Information is therefore required on the length of the borders available for "border trees", and the corresponding fuelwood yields. In this case, too, it is important to anticipate how the fuelwood from such trees will be distributed, and whether most of it will simply go to those whose lands are enclosed by the border trees - if so, development objectives will be frustrated.
Another possible measure if land cannot be dedicated to special woodlots is to make land which is already being used for grazing serve the additional function of woodlots. This would involve the growth of two-tier fodder-cum-fuel forests after ensuring that both the fodder and fuel requirements of the ecosystem are fulfilled and that the fodder and fuel needs of all families are satisfied.
Figure 5-1 The Production, Collection, Distribution and Utilization of Fuelwood
4. Water
Information on water is required both to guide the choice of fuelwood species as well as to determine its availability to meet any irrigation requirements of the fuelwood project.
Obviously, basic data is necessary on the rainfall pattern in the region - the average rainfall, and the monthly seasonal distribution of this rainfall. If rainwater is collected and stored in ponds, tanks, etc., the volume of this water should be estimated. Of greater importance is an understanding of the pattern of the use and distribution of the stored water. In the case of ground water, data must be collected on the depth of the water table and the supply that can be sustained.
The irrigation needs - if any - of the fuelwood project can be estimated from the species, its planting density and the area allocated for the project. In addition, it is necessary to know at what part of the year this water is required and for how long.
From a knowledge of the water needs of the project and its availability, an estimate can be made of whether there is adequate water to meet the requirements. Even if the water is sufficient, it is necessary to consider whether the supply of water to the project can be implemented.
In the case of stored water, several questions arise: who controls the stored water? will the irrigation needs of the fuelwood project be spared? can the amount of stored water be increased? will this increase in stored volume be associated with an increase in the area of the water body, and if so, what other area (cropland, pastureland, etc.) will be reduced? will this reduction be tolerated? how will the stored water be transported to the woodlot, and is such transport feasible? Is it possible to have dedicated water shortage, i.e. to harvest water specially for the woodlot?
In the case of ground water, the relevant questions are: at what depth is it? if the plan is to drill for ground water, will the desired output be sustained by recharge? What is the energy required to lift the water? is this energy available within the ecosystem - if so, what is the source? If not, can the required energy be imported from outside the ecosystem?
5. Nutrients
The nutrient requirements of the fuelwood project can be determined from the silvicultural practices required by the tree species which is/are chosen. To estimate whether these requirements can be met from the resources of the ecosystem, it is essential to know its pattern of use of nutrients, particularly the percentage contribution of organic and chemical nutrients. To calculate if the ecosystem's output of organic nutrients can be increased, knowledge is required of the quantity of animal wastes and green manure produced by the ecosystem and whether any alternative uses of this organic nutrient can be avoided, for example, dung-cakes as cooking fuel. Even if the organic nutrients produced locally are adequate for the fuelwood project, it is vital to anticipate whether those who own these nutrients will make it available. If the organic nutrients made available are inadequate (for whatever reason), then the alternative is to import chemical fertilizers, in which case the
quantity and type must be calculated.
6. Labour
A projection of the labour requirements of the fuelwood project requires information on the human hours demanded per hectare for each operation. This would lead to a labour demand "rye which describes the weekly or fortnightly or seasonal variations. A crucial question then arises: is the ecosystem in a position to make available this labour for the fuelwood project? An answer to this question requires information on the present labour-use pattern in the ecosystem. In particular, what other activities will compete for the labour required by the project? If there are competing demands, can the fuelwood project labour requirements be re-scheduled to eliminate the competition? The preference for re-scheduling over successful competition is essentially because marginal and poor farmers (who, apart from landless labour, are likely to be the only sources of labour) often stand to benefit much more from growing food on their farms than going to work (even for wages) on the fuelwood
project.
It is also important to enquire whether the technical knowledge and management capability required for the fuelwood project is available locally or within the district, region, etc.
7. Seeds
The information that has been gathered on the fuelwood requirement, and on the availability of land, water and nutrients can be used to guide the choice of fuelwood species. In addition, there must be knowledge of the soil characteristics and the climatic factors. As already mentioned, preference should be given to species which fix nitrogen, demand little water and permit undergrowth (for example, of a fodder species). There should also be preference for species which confer the highest benefits to farmers and demand the lowest costs. It is also advantageous to emphasize indigenous species with which the farmers are familiar.
8. Protection
Protection against "infant mortality" is a crucial aspect of planning fuelwood projects. In particular, woodlots must be protected during the seedling and sapling stages of tree growth against grazing livestock. There are two approaches to this protection. The first is "to fight the grazers" by means of "insurmountable" fencing and/or guards engaged in round-the-year day-long vigil, but all it takes to lose months of effort is a small gap in the fence or a little relaxation in the surveillance. The second approach is "to join the grazers" by considering the satisfaction of the fodder needs of poor families as vital a development objective as meeting fuelwood needs. The aim therefore is to develop an integrated fuelwood-cum-fodder project in which the "infant mortality" of fuelwood seedlings and saplings is prevented by assured fodder supplies to the grazing livestock. The achievement of this situation requires information on the fodder requirements of the livestock, the
productivity of fodder species, their water, fertilizer and labour requirements, the current grazing patterns and the scheduling of operations in such a twin project.
9. Fuelwood collection and storage
In order to work out a fuelwood collection strategy, there must be an understanding of the growth curves for the trees so that the method and timing of fuelwood extraction can be worked out. This strategy must also provide information on the labour requirements corresponding to the collection, and these requirements must be compared with the labour availability in the ecosystem.
If the fuelwood that is collected is not immediately distributed or utilized, it has to be stored. And this requires the planning of storage facilities based on information regarding the rates of production and distribution/utilization, and also the losses in storage.
10. Distribution
The success of a fuelwood project depends not only on the production of fuelwood, but also on its distribution. The planning of distribution requires information on current fuelwood consumption patterns in the ecosystem, and in particular, the distribution of this consumption between the different economic groups. In addition to the quantities of fuelwood consumed by these groups, and their per capita consumption levels, it is vital to know whether these groups gather the fuelwood or purchase it, and in the latter case, the prices at which it is bought. The question of prices is very important because if the poorer groups currently obtain fuelwood at zero private cost, they are unlikely to be interested in a project which sells them fuelwood even at very low prices. But, if the fuelwood is given away, then how is the distribution to be rationalized and carried cut equitably and justly? An answer to such questions also requires the following information which individuals,
groups and organizations are likely to own/control the fuelwood obtained from the woodlot?
Since fuelwood is not the only output from trees, it is important to consider the distribution of these other outputs, for example seeds. At the same time, information in required regarding alternative technologies for using these products.
Distribution may also require transport, in which case information must be obtained on the distances involved in the distribution, and the associated costs for various transportation modes - headloads, wheel barrows, animal-drawn carts, tractors, trucks, etc. Even after identifying the cheapest transportation mode, it is necessary to know whether these transportation modes are accessible and available to the fuelwood project.
11. Utilization
The planning of fuelwood utilization demands, in the first instance, an understanding of the current end-use pattern for fuelwood, i.e. the amount of fuelwood used for cooking, water heating, space heating, industries and exports, the devices and equipment used for the various end-uses and the efficiencies of these devices. In the case of cooking, which is often the predominant end-use, information is required on the contributions of various cooking fuels fuelwood charcoal, various agricultural wastes, dung-cakes, kerosene, electricity, liquified petroleum gas), as well as on the sources, prices and availabilities of these fuels.
An important question is whether a fuelwood project is considered only as a method of increasing energy supplies to meet current end-use patterns or whether it is part of an overall energy strategy in which both consumption and supply are rationalized. If the aim is to advance development, then it is essential to incorporate fuelwood projects in energy planning. This means that the consumption of fuelwood must be scrutinized in order to evolve more efficient alternative end-use patterns which maximize the satisfaction of energy needs whilst optimizing resource uses For example, the replacement of fuelwood as a cooking fuel with biogas would save all the fuelwood now being used at very low efficiencies (~ 5%) for cooking and release it for alternative uses, for example pumpsets. Hence, it is important to consider alternative end-use patterns and, in order to do this, information is necessary on alternative fuels, energy sources and devices.
C. Urban and commercial
W.B. Morgan
The commercial aspects of fuelwood study, together with related sources of fuel and power, may be expected to have a richer published data resource than non-commercial aspects, and to raise issues and problems having some similarity to those involved in energy studies in the industrial countries. We can, therefore, draw more easily on a wide fund of existing experience and expect in many areas to find some useful basic data already available. This is mainly true at the national level. In cities in developing countries the data base is often still poor compared with that available in industrial countries, and survey work has generally been limited by lack of resources, limited background information and difficulties in obtaining suitably trained or experienced research workers. Such study has either never been done before or usually has been a small part of a survey for other purposes and of very limited dimensions, completed only a few years ago. There are therefore few
guidelines available from previous studies and only a limited prospect of comparison over time.
In view of the paucity of energy studies in urban areas and on commercial distribution systems for rural energy, it is hardly surprising that little is available on survey method. An additional problem is that a high proportion of the little methodological material available has not yet emerged from the mimeographed form in which it is presented to conferences. Most comment on survey method for commercial aspects of fuelwood study is either in general methodological monographs or in a few studies of urban energy supply.^1 The only major papers to concentrate on energy survey methodology in the urban context, as far as the author is aware, are in the National Academy of Sciences 'Proceedings: International Workshop on Energy Survey Methodologies for Developing Countries' (1980).
^1 E.g. Mannier, 1972; Ouedraogo and Vennetier, 1977; Mortimore and Wilson, 1965. See also, for a summary of work in west and central Africa, Bertrand, 1979.
1. Background material
Any study of the commercial organization of energy supply must contain a background survey which sets the energy material into its appropriate economic, social and ecological context. The rural aspects, including the ecological context, are discussed in other papers. The urban aspects require information on population, including demographic pyramids, birth and death rates, composition and geographical distribution, urbanization and migration, employment levels, occupations and income groups, service functions, transport flows, utilities and manufacturing. In particular, all processes and activities which use energy should be considered. Much of this material may be available from existing data sources, particularly from government and local government publications and from planning offices. However, in acme of the lower income groups even basic data of this kind are completely absent for major cities, and in most at least part is missing. It is important to link urban and
rural study since the city acts as the social and political nexus of the surrounding rural area. It is also important-to set the study of any city into the national urban context, so that its place in the urban hierarchy, in the national transport network, and as a regional centre, are all understood. The roles of urban planning and of infrastructural development plans are particularly important, since these refer to future developments and energy uses. Bottle-necks in energy supply need to be understood and appreciated before embarking on schemes for the development of new towns, or of slum clearance and the building of now suburbs or home improvement.
2. Urban domestic energy studies
Apart from the universal problems involved in sampling, interviewing and the design of questionnaires, there are a number of other problems arising from the nature of domestic life and the use of fuel and power in cities in developing countries.
Social prestige is an extremely important and complex factor in energy demand and preference. Its operation must be clearly understood in all survey work. Thus a survey recently conducted in southern Nigeria by staff of the University of Ife discovered that acme respondents thought that dealing in domestic fuelwood was only done by the poorest people. They preferred at first to hide the fact that occasionally they did sell wood. In some countries animal dung is an important fuel, but nevertheless its use is regarded by many people as socially degrading. Where people of high social status use electric cookers, people of lower status may insist on preference for electric cooking, even though they have no experience of it and refuse to accept other alternatives to fuelwood.
Within a "house" there may be more than one household and several families. In some cases their uses of electricity may be separately metered. In other cases they may have to share a meter. Other fuels may be bought jointly or separately. In addition a single supply of fuel may be used for both domestic and commercial purposes. These problems are likely to be particularly important amongst poorer people in multi-occupied dwellings and in informal commercial and industrial activity, i.e. amongst those people for whom fuelwood may be a significant source of energy.
Within the city frequently there is local variation in wood prices. It should not always be assumed that, although wood appears to be the cheapest fuel by some standard method of measurement, it must be regarded as the cheapest fuel by all income groups. Much depends on how fuel is bought, in packet lots or in bulk, and the capital cost of equipment involved. Thus wood can appeal to those who have no capital and need to buy very small quantities of fuel at a times. They can in fact sometimes be shown to pay more per unit of heat derived than richer people buying kerosene or gas in large quantities at a time (Ay 1980). The problem of poor people having to pay high prices for small quantities in commercial systems involving considerable break or bulk and many steps in the dealer hierarchy is a common one in a wide range of goods in the Third World.
Availability of fuel and power at different times and its varying regularity, needs to be carefully examined. It is frequently an important factor in preference and in future energy development. Power failures should be checked for their length and incidence, and for their effect on equipment and users. They are a frequent factor in a preference for using a variety of fuels and equipment enabling substitution. Extra high Costs in fuel and power use in developing countries are a common feature. That wood and charcoal may be stored are important elements in their uses Storage capacities and quantities stored at different times of the year should be recorded.
It is also important to monitor changes in taste and in social customs and habit. Important features in eating habits, for example, are the increasing use of prepared foods, the growth of the industry in ready-cooked foods sold in the street or in market places, the growing popularity of wheat bread, rice and sugar, and the spread in some countries of cassava or manioc flour as a staple food of the urban poor. The increasing use of hot water for a variety of domestic and industrial purposes should be noted, together with the sale of equipment requiring hot water such as washing machines. The air conditioning of at least one room in a house is not uncommon in the larger cities, despite the often high cost, and a wide range of electrically powered tools and equipment is sold. The spread of education has increased the need for electric light or for very powerful kerosene and gas lamps, The desire for clean, safe water has been met only by a heavy energy bill for pumping in the
supply network and filtration plant.
3. Industrial survey
In some countries industry, in the broadest sense, consumes nearly a third of the total national energy consumption. In most developing countries it is not the largest energy consumer, although frequently a significant one, with the highest energy use growth rate. Amongst industrial energy consumers a few large firms together usually consume a large proportion of the total, but a very large number of extremely small units together consume a not insignificant proportion and include the consumers of fuelwood. In industrial surveys direct-use-of-energy data have to be treated with caution, or at least analyzed in relation to a knowledge of industrial structure. Most firms buy materials and components from other firms where energy use also enters into the calculation for the final product. Regulations limiting a firm's energy use need careful framing where firms can apparently achieve increased "efficiency" by the simple expedient of buying part of their process from elsewhere
(Long, 1980).
Most measurements are of energy use intensity, particularly of the main elements in a production process and of the firm's heating, lighting and air-conditioning. Costs must also be measured. Substitution policies should be evaluated, but in the larger firms, although there is often a great deal of room for increased efficiency by substitution, it is rarely by increased use of a local resource such as fuelwood. Most gains are usually to be made by a substitution which makes possible the use of more efficient equipment or by attention to greater efficiency in use of existing equipment and better use of insulation and ventilation. The introduction of better control systems and the modification of lighting and environmental conditioning systems can gain a great deal. The cost advantages of policy changes must be clearly demonstrated, bearing in mind the capital expenditure and interest rates involved. An economic situation of capital scarcity and high interest rates is hardly
suitable for introducing schemes of energy conservation which will require heavy capital borrowing.
In a situation of this kind, where energy savings are required, it may be that more can be done in the informal sector, where efficiency in energy use is likely to be very low and some improvement may be effected at low cost. There is a special need for research into energy use by informal industries, and especially into their use of fuelwood and charcoal about which very little is known. For the sixteen countries included in an International Energy Agency (1979) study, approximately 10% of final energy consumption in the industrial sector is "non-commercial" energy (Foell, 1980). For several developing countries the proportion is undoubtedly very much higher.
In all studies of industrial energy use a very careful examination should be made of national and regional taxation, subsidies and incentives, together with all industrial and employee regulations which may affect current energy use and policy recommendations.
Under the heading of "industrial energy" we may include all other non-domestic consumers of fuel and power, including offices, hotels, hospitals, prisons, colleges and schools. Many of these use fuelwood or charcoal as a stand-by, and some, especially in Africa, use it regularly for cooking and for heating water. More generally, most institutional and office users face problems in the consumption of wood fuels of pollution and lack of suitable ventilation, especially in modern buildings. It may be important in this survey to examine the constraints imposed on the choice of fuel and power by the needs and particular building fabrics associated with each non-domestic use. The rapid expansion of office buildings in the larger cities has often been one of the chief factors in the rise of electricity and oil consumption. Total urban energy study should measure, amongst other features, floor space, volume, use of air-conditioners, lifts, lighting and heating, parking facility,
mode of transport to work and distances travelled. It should seek to attempt some assessment of energy use efficiency. However, such a study must depend on the objectives of the survey, i.e. whether the study is concerned with the role of wood fuels in relation to the total commercial consumption and the varying needs, or whether a simple assessment of the nature of the urban demand for wood fuels is required.
4. Dealer survey
The study of dealers and of commercial exchange is valuable for the knowledge it gives of the distribution system and of the ways in which that system affects energy supply and use. It can also give additional information on production and consumption. Where fuelwood and charcoal are concerned, at the rural end of the system there are sellers to consumers, but we are mostly concerned with dealers selling to dealers, i.e. with "bulkers-up" in a chain of supply via retailers and wholesalers, leading eventually to an urban break-of-bulk. This system is particularly elaborate for domestic supply, but likely to be much simpler for the supply of industrial fuels. Surveyors have therefore to identify a number of distinct yet sometimes overlapping elements in the supply chain. It is particularly important to identify bottlenecks in the system which would limit any scheme for increased production and consumption. Increased efficiency in supply can reach more consumers or producers
and can lower costs. It can also demand changes in the production system where scale economies are required or be affected in turn by a changing production technology.
A dealer survey will need to map the locations of supply depots and retail outlets, and to examine the status of traders, their position in a dealer hierarchy and the facilities at their disposal. The price differential of the various fuels at different points in the supply system will provide a valuable measure of the effectiveness of the system and an indicator of any particular problems in its operation. Price variation with seasons and the seasonality of dealer activities must also be recorded. Dealers may be full- or part-time, immigrants, male or female, from particular age-groups, dependent on capital from family or other businesses, and have particular locations and patterns of movements to effect business. They often have cash flow problems which make it difficult for them to capitalize on gluts and shortages by large scale purchase and storage - a topic for which data may be difficult to find. An important point will be their involvement with transport. They may be
organized in some kind of trading group or as a cooperative. They may be especially concerned about the purpose of the survey and the way in which it may be related to future wood supply or to the use of substitute fuels.
Dealers may also provide very valuable commentary on fuel price inflation, development policy, urban planning, fuel preferences and price controls. The system which they operate is sensitive to any change in the relationships of the various fuels and of demand and production. Open-ended questions are likely to be particularly fruitful with dealers and provide a useful guide to the design of questionnaires for the entire field of study.
Features which may be measured in a dealer survey include:
1. Wood sales: volume, weight, prices, rank order of species, size of pieces and purpose, sources, markets.
2. Charcoal sales: weight, prices, sources, markets.
3. Other fuels: weight, volume, prices, sources, markets.
4. Range of business: other goods, relation to fuel business.
5. Customers: number, location, status, occupation, kind of business, regularity, timing, volume of business, relative importance.
6. Suppliers: number, location, status, occupation, kind of fuel supplied, regularity, time, volume of business, relative importance.
As demand for fuels and power rises, so the wood fuels trade becomes more attractive as a business. There is therefore the possibility that the larger, more powerful traders may tend eventually to dominate it and either "organize" or replace the poorer traders. A dealer survey should note, wherever possible, any changes in the structure of wood fuels trading and in the status and relationships of dealers in relation to changing prices, costs and demand.
<section>9</section>
Annex I - Different categories of wood fuel surveys
by Russell deLucia
Past surveys of fuelwood and other traditional fuel use have varied considerably in scope and methodology. Their scope generally differs depending on whether the objective is to define the dimension of broad issues at the national or regional level, to aid the design of specific projects or to pursue research efforts to develop a better understanding of the physical and social system in which traditional fuels are used. Some efforts have shared more than one of these objectives.
While it would be possible to suggest a classification system that drew primarily on methodological characteristics (i.e. stratified or unstratified sample, formal questionnaire or informal interviews) it is perhaps more Useful to classify past surveys in a few broad categories and then comment on issues pertinent to these cases.
1 (a) Earlier country-wide or regional work undertaken as part of other efforts where the primary focus is not on rural energy issues.
1 (b) Similar to "a", but where in effect traditional fuels become the dominant issue and this markedly affects methodology.
2. Country or region-wide work aimed primarily at defining the energy demand, but encompassing all fuels.
3. More generalized survey approaches that attempt to develop a comprehensive picture for village or region, but do not include resident observation approaches.
4. Region or village work involving detailed comprehensive surveys employing a mixture of statistical, physical sciences, and social sciences, residence observation techniques and covering both demand and supply issues.
5. Ad hoc region or multivillage specific efforts focused either on demand or supply, or both, usually as part of a project design or evaluation.
The first category is the one in which much of the earlier wood consumption survey work of FAO fits. These surveys were designed primarily to assemble information about processed forest product use, rather than wood fuel. Generally these efforts were undertaken Using enumerators and standard questionnaires, with sample selection based on a random stratified design, the latter to probe important regional and user differences. In the same category are surveys which have as their primary focus other subject's such as agriculture or overall consumer consumption, but in which some data on fuelwood and other traditional fuels may be an important focus.
The earlier surveys, because they were focused on wood products, were based on information collected at a single time period and hence usually do not record seasonal change in fuelwood use. Information on fuelwood was obtained relying solely on question and answer approaches, rather than on measurement. The focus on the forest sector and on wood volumes also meant that these surveys usually did not collect much of the important social, economic or physical information What they did do - and this was all they were intended to do in terms of fuelwood information - was to provide rough orders of magnitude of fuelwood consumption at the national level, and on the main categories of users.
More recently, some national wood consumption survey work has emerged which has been designed to overcome some of the earlier weaknesses with respect to information on wood fuels. An example of this is the recent work carried cut by the Planning Commission in Bangladesh with the assistance of an FAO/UNDP project. The survey work includes measurement techniques along with questionnaires, and covers both the demand and supply side of the problem. In this work, the approach included a stratified zone approach to capture ecological differences (as well as differences in the urban fringe and due to effect of proximity to large national forests). The survey was aimed at gathering data on usage of wood (including bamboo) in structures and implements as well as fuelwood and other traditional fuel use, and estimates of standing tree and bamboo volumes and off-take. These data were complemented by economic information such as landholding and income data.
The main survey of some 6,000 households included both measurement and questionnaire approaches, but was complemented by a so-called Field Measurement Survey applied to a random 20 percent (1,200) sample of the main survey frame. The Field Measurement Survey (FMS) both repeated questionnaire and measurement procedures of the Main Survey (for comparison testing) and included more detailed structural and true measurement procedures. However, neither the FMS nor the main survey included measurement techniques for the cooking consumption estimates. Nor were the fuel qualities or actual cooking efforts measured: the data was based only on questionnaire responses. Measurement techniques were used for the noncooking requirements (house, etc.) and for the estimates of village/household tree and bamboo stands.
The results of this work in Bangladesh provide an excellent discussion of many important issues.^1 Amongst these are the reconciliation of survey results with earlier work (and the use of earlier wood fuel survey results in the design phase), the complementary use of demand and supply analysis, and the difficulty of dealing with the fact that much of the fuelwood comes from small twigs and leaves rather than the stem and main branch tree portions.
^1 See the references cited in the summary by Douglas in Annex II.
Another recent example in the first category of survey is that from Malawi summarized in Annex II. In this work, information on wood fuel use and supply is being obtained as part of a broader national survey of small agricultural holdings.
The second category of survey encompasses the frequently cited work of the Indian National Council of Applied Economic Research (NCAER, 1965, 1978). In the case of the 1978 study, which focused on northern India, the survey had as an objective the fuel specific estimation of energy demand for all sectors - domestic, agricultural, rural, industry, and transport, as well as the objective to determine the influence on demand of different environments (hill, plains and areas) and household incomes. This is a classic example of a stratified survey design in which a two-stage design was utilized (first stage village selection, then households within villages). Survey data were collected over two seasons, summer and winter, in order to capture important seasonal differences in both demand and supply aspects. As was discussed earlier, demands vary seasonally, particularly in areas in which there is space heating and the preferred and/or available fuel supply often shifts markedly,
especially in areas in which multiple fuels (fuelwood, crop residues and dung) are used. Serious errors have, for example, been made by extrapolating single season samples to year-round figures.
A more recent survey by the NCAER undertaken during 1978-79 encompassed all the eighteen major Indian states as well as the union territory of Delhi (NCAER, 1981) a total household sample of 13,010 of which 12,560 were selected randomly and 450 were case studies. This study was sponsored by the Indian Oil Corporation. Although the focus of the study was on kerosene and CPG, the survey also considered all traditional fuels. The study continued to rely only on questionnaire approaches and did not include any actual measurements or observations. Measurements could provide estimates less dependent on respondent veracity and capability, and also a better basis for understanding such issues as different end uses of the fuels and the efficiency of use, not to mention supply sources. Consequently, the usefulness of such surveys to design projects to change the situation is limited, but then this was not the focus of the effort. Also, these large surveys which collect considerable
household, social, and economic data as well are used as fuel use information and are rarely subject to as much extensive analysis as the data base might support. Studies such as this, designed for clients like the Indian Oil Company, can provide a data base useful for examining many other issues, but usually are not so used. It should be mentioned that in the latest study, while measurements were not part of the survey effort, complementary experiments on such devices as kerosene lamps and stoves were carried out in a small number of households (NCAER, 1981) to establish certain food and consumption norms.
Not all examples which fit in the second category are quite so extensive and are often ad hoc in their design. An example is provided by the special surveys undertaken as part of the Bangladesh Energy Study, (deLucia and Tabors, 1980). In this case, the surveys were special efforts aimed at reconciling the gap that existed between demand estimates based on earlier surveys, some of which were specifically concerned with fuel issues, and others which had been part of general household expenditure efforts. Some of the problems encountered in such survey efforts were discussed earlier. The Bangladesh demand survey effort also represents an example in which the survey was part of a larger effort specifically focused on energy sector investment planning, albeit the focus of the investment analysis was for conventional energy facilities. The Bangladesh study also included efforts in fuelwood supply estimates using air photo interpretation techniques with complimentary ground
verification (Robinson, Merrit and deVries, 1975). In addition, estimates for agricultural residues supplies were based on detailed analysis of agricultural production patterns (Gaven and Tyers, 1980).
There has been a growing number of larger national or regional efforts which fall in the second category, such as that in Pakistan in the Energy Resources Cell (Government of Pakistan, 1978) and a series of surveys that have been undertaken in Kenya. In the latter, there have been three recent fuelwood/traditional and other fuel focused surveys during the past three years. The first, administered by the Central Bureau of Statistics (1980) in association with the National Council for Science and Technology, focused on consumption of wood, charcoal, kerosene, gas and electricity. The second survey, undertaken by the Forestry Department of the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (Akinga, 1980), focused primarily on wood fuel consumption but considered the role of kerosene as an alternative. The results of the two surveys were quite different. The last survey Was part of the Beijer Institute Wood Fuel Project (Hosier, 1981).
These large consumption survey efforts rely primarily on questionnaire approaches (even if complemented with some actual measurement of fuels consumed). Although they often develop useful information on such factors as the way energy consumption (quantity and fuel mix) changes with various economic, ecological and other characteristics, these surveys are useful only for broad problem identification, not the design of specific interventions. There is a need for complementary efforts to detail the interrelations of the economic, social and physical systems, to understand what activities cooking, ploughing, irrigation, processing, etc., are most in need of new energy alternatives, to understand how energy needs will change over time, and to examine the resource potential of biomass, wind, solar and hydro as well as the technologies to use-these or fossil resources, and to understand the full fuel cycle of the commercial and traditional fuels. It is only with this additional
information that adequate investment strategies for rural energization can be formulated. In many instances the information and experience developed in such broad surveys is utilized in the design of further survey efforts more focused on intervention in the village energy system. For example, the Pakistan Directorate General of Energy Resources, building on the earlier efforts cited above, has gone on to survey selected villages to identify their energy requirements (Qureshi and Iqbal, 1980).
But, given that in many circumstances there is not even an adequate understanding of the broad consumption patterns, there is a continuing interest in some form of national or regional surveys. The interest in this area has promoted some investigators to attempt more generalized approaches that might be applied to different areas. Examples of this include the work of the group at the Institute of Energy Analysis at Stonybrook, and attempts being made by the Peace Corps to develop energy survey approaches to be used by their volunteers in various settings. A number of investigators, including the author, think there are real limits to the possibility of such generalized approaches. While the general issues are common, it is unlikely that universally appropriate questionnaires and approaches can be constructed. Rather, existing approaches can be adapted to the case at hand.
The fourth category represents an important new approach that has recently been attempted by a few investigators, and which has contributed markedly to our understanding of the complexities of traditional fuel systems. A seminal work in this category is that of Briscoe (1979) who conducted a detailed study of the resource use in the village of Ulipur in Bangladesh., Briscoe stayed in the village for the period of the survey, the better part of a year.
The study of Ulipur is one of the most detailed village energy studies available. The study covered a full year of crop data and energy consumption data collection in order to capture the seasonal variation in the availability and use of traditional fuels. Once every two weeks, detailed data were collected from each family on food, fuel, fodder, and fertilizer. This included analysis of the consumption of fodder by the family's animals and an estimate of the production of the animal's dung for a matching 24-hour period. In addition, information was collected on the type of work done by each animal and on the planting, fertilizing, and harvesting of crops. Direct measurement estimates were made of the quantity of crop residuals produced. The use of these residuals was also recorded, and on a quarterly basis each family was visited and their fuel use in preparation of food and parboiling of rice was measured. Only in this manner was it possible to develop an accurate picture
of the interdependencies and energy flows within the village of Ulipur.
The critical methodological contributions of Briscoe were his attention to detailed engineering measurement of quantities of fuels produced and consumed, and his attention to the anthropological analysis of the structure of the village. If there is a fault with Briscoe's analysis, it is in his use of and dependence on the efficiency of analyses and heating value calculations of others. Although it is difficult to analyze efficiency of cookers in the field, for instance, this is an area where matching of new data on chulas (local cookers) with the measured heating values of the traditional fuels would have added greatly to the overall reliability of the study. Despite this, Briscoe's study represents one of the most complete village energy analyses available at the present time.
The importance of such detailed analysis is being increasingly understood. Bajracharya (Bajracharya, 1980) has incorporated such techniques into a study of fuelwood and associated food and deforestation issues in eastern Nepal, and other investigators are implementing the approach elsewhere. Recent work by Weatherly and Arnold in Indonesia is an interesting hybrid of large scale surveys over different geographical areas with the techniques of participant observers in selected villages (Weatherly and Arnold, 1980).
The understanding of many of the important characteristics such as availability and access, socio-economic class or group differences, seasonal variation and other issues discussed earlier in papers in this publication can only be determined by micro village and household oriented surveys. The work of investigators like Reddy, Bialy, Briscoe, Bajracharya, Manibog, Digernes, and Brokensha and Riley^1 has shown the important interrelationships between the physical characteristics of resource stocks and flows and the class/group distributional questions. They also have documented other important interrelationships such as the complexities of the multiple pressures - fodder, fuel, fibre, fertilizer - on the same resource bases in areas of tight people to resource ratios. This type of information is necessary in order to adequately design intervention programs, particularly to ensure that these will not be maldistributive. However, in general it is unclear whether the methodology
of resident observation employed by them is necessary, or whether some form of repeated survey and measurement approaches will capture the details and complexities necessary to good intervention design.
^1 Reddy, 1981; Bialy, 1979a; Bajracharya, 1980; Manibog, 1979; Digernes, 1977 and 1980; Brokensha and Riley, 1978.
Clearly, in some instances, there is an existing body of work that provides much of the information necessary. In other circumstances, more limited village studies provide relatively useful data provided there is sufficient complementary information to support the necessary analysis for design of interventions. Limited studies may not adequately characterize the problem, particularly in areas of extreme pressure of the resource base. Frequently a limited effort may suggest a one dimensional picture of the problem suggesting, for example, that the problem is solely fuelwood related when it may be a more complex problem of other pressures (food, fodder, etc.). The earlier paper by the author in this publication stated that much demographic, economic, agricultural, forestry and other information is necessary, for example to allow the construction of such analytical exercises as representative household fuel, feed and fodder balances. It also suggested various system
perspectives that should be understood.
The fifth category of survey efforts focuses on defining demand patterns, examines the resource base and considers investment alternatives. Such work is sometimes part of project design or evaluation, and may include considerable effort in the examination of technological alternatives which would improve the energy system. There are a number of examples that fall in this broad category. The work in Malawi reported on by French in Annex II forms part of a major wood energy project, which includes, in addition to household surveys, special studies. The International Development Research Center has sponsored various efforts that have integrated demand and supply issues and have also included analysis of technological alternatives - some with particular emphasis on renewable resource technologies. For example, Islam has undertaken surveys of both demand and resource availability for the purpose of the assessment alternative energy technologies in an area in Bangladesh (Islam,
1980). Siwatibau and a group at the University of the South Pacific's Centre for Applied Studies in Development -undertook a survey in Fiji that included present energy demands (and requirements to improve living standards), alternative energy sources available, economic and social assessment of technologies (particularly biogas), and examination of energy conservation alternatives (Siwatibau, 1978).
Included in this category of surveys is an ambitious effort currently underway in Thailand as part of the Renewable Energy Technology Project being conducted for the National Energy Administration (Meta Systems Inc. and Thai Group Co., Ltd., 1981). These investigators have combined a wide range of social and natural science techniques to collect baseline data for assessing the need for various renewable energy technologies, and for designing appropriate equipment. The basic survey instrument is a structured interview schedule for collecting a wide range of social, agricultural and energy information. It is supplemented with open-ended interviews with formal and informal village leaders, and participant observation during the enumerator's month-long stay in the village. In addition, the enumerators, working with technical assistants and survey supervisors, are conducting tests on: the efficiency of different stove designs in boiling water and cooking food, the efficiency of
energy conversion in local charcoal-making activites, the production of biomass post harvest field residues and manure from village livestock. Equipped with scale, tape measures and volume measures, the enumerators are responsible for measuring the demand and supply of different fuels. Samples of different fuels and other forms of biomass are collected for laboratory measurement of moisture content and energy content. Land use maps are prepared to supplement the data collected on biomass productivity per unit area.
In addition to the above activities, the survey is also collecting data on rural industries, their energy use, production processes and technologies. This survey, in its attempt to examine all the issues in the village energy system, should provide valuable insights on how to conduct similar efforts in the future and on the constraints imposed on such efforts by the abilities and knowledge of the enumerators.
<section>a</section>
Annex II - Summaries of selected wood fuel surveys
Introduction
1. National surveys
2. Regional surveys
3. Sectoral surveys
4. Urban surveys
5. Village surveys
Introduction
Two main problems confront anyone searching for systematic studies of fuel use in rural communities. First, few such studies exist. Second, many are not easily accessible. This Annex contains succinct descriptions of some important fuel surveys. Where the surveys have already been completed, the summary accounts have generally been prepared from published material reporting on theme For ongoing work, the descriptions have been contributed by persons involved in their execution. Another major source of description is a study commissioned by the United States Agency for International Development, "The Socio-Economic Context of fuelwood Use in Small Rural Communities." This 1980 report provides a broad and comprehensive review of the literature, with emphasis on socio-economic and environmental aspects. Separate sections deal with firewood and charcoal, each section considering, on a global basis, such topics as - source, type and availability; access to land;
harvest/collection and transport; distribution; consumption; and changes in local fuel systems. Community forestry programmes are examined in another section, and the report ends with "Conclusions" and a series of specific "Issues and Recommended Guidelines." The report includes a 261 item bibliography, and is available at most USAID missions.
1. National surveys
1.1 Surveying wood fuels in Bangladesh
1.2 The Malawi rural energy survey
We include two recent and representative surveys, one from Bangladesh and one from Malawi. Many other developing countries are in the midst of conducting national surveys, or have already done so, India has led in the numbers of surveys at different levels. In the last few years, there has been much activity in Kenya, with the newly created Ministry of Energy co-operating with the Beijer Institute and with the United States Agency for International Development in surveying energy consumption and needs at different levels, including, of course, the national level. As Kenya was the location of the 1981 United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy, it is appropriate that. Kenya should be heavily involved in an impressive range of surveys of energy.
1.1 Surveying wood fuels in Bangladesh
by J.J. Douglas^1
^1 James J. Douglas was Chief Technical Advisor for FAO/UNDP on Project BGD/78/010 and coordinator of the national survey he describes. He is now with the Australian Bureau of Agricultural Economics.
The survey is being carried out ad a Government of Bangladesh/UNDP/FAO Project, BGD/78/010 -Supply and Demand of Forest Products and Future Development Strategies. This has, as its major information gathering objective, the formulation of estimates of consumption of all forest products in Bangladesh. Some information on the supply side has also been collected, but it is intended that the resource data will eventually be finalized on the basis of information from the sister FAO/UNDP project - Village Forest Inventory (BGD/78/020), and from national forest inventory data developed under a new FAO/UNDP Project - Assistance to the Forestry Sector (BGD/78/017).
Information on the production and use of wood fuel, in both the urban and rural enviroments, has been collected as part of the overall data gathering exercise for forest products.
Wood Fuel Usage and Supply Estimation
Wood fuel is the predominant forest product of Bangladesh, and therefore major attention was given to it in the survey procedures. Two major surveys were done:
(a) Urban Fuel Usage Survey
A special purpose survey was mounted in Dacca, the capital city, to measure the fuel consuming characteristics of the urban population. The city was divided into five major Strata: a sixth, located on the fringe of the metropolis, was included to measure the gradation from urban to rural fuel consuming patterns. About 2,000 households were covered - something in the order of 10,000 people in all. The objective was to measure usage of wood fuels, and all available alternatives, across income strata.
The Project designed the questionnaire, and Subcontracted the Institute of Statistical Research and Training (ISRT) of Dacca University to carry out the pre-testing, enumerator training, sample design and administration of the survey in the field. Householders were asked to estimate usage of various fuels. Also, where possible, enumerators measured fuel stocks on hand. In the case of natural gas usage, householders were obviously unable to estimate volume of usage - in that case, a Simple recording of the fact that gas was supplied to the household was made.
The survey was applied at a single point in time: no follow-up was judged necessary, given the results, which indicated that, where gas is available (as it already is in most of Dacca, and soon will be in the other major city, Chittagong) it is used to almost the total exclusion of all other fuels. Some 80 enumerators were in the field for a month or so gathering the data. Results were processed manually by IRST. The basic results from the survey have been listed and discussed in the Field Document No. 2 from the project (Douglas, 1981a). They have been used as part of the data for forecasting future wood usage in Bangladesh and for designing sector strategies thereupon. They have also been lodged with the Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics for inclusion in statistical bulletins.
(b) Rural Wood Consumption Survey
Prior to this project little was known about consumption and supply of wood products in rural Bangladesh. Some previous studies of wood fuel use have been made but these were either confined to small regions, or judged by the project to be highly inaccurate.
Accordingly, a major survey of consumption, (with some supply side estimation included, as a temporary data base pending results from the Village Forest Inventory Project) was mounted for the country as a whole. Details of the design of this survey are given in the Field Document No. 1 (Asrat, 1980). Basic frame ideas from FAO's food Survey methodology (see Clayton, 1978) were used. The basic framework of the survey was a stratified, self weighted sample of about 6,000 rural households, selected from 430 villages in 47 Thanas (districts) of the country. Six major zonal stratification were used, on the basis of ecological or geographical factors, and results were recorded within defined landholding (income) strata.
Considerable pre-testing of the questionnaire was done, and questions on known factors were included, to allow testing of the survey design for both sample and non sampling error. Standard error calculations for all major data items were done. These matters are discussed at length in Field Document No. 2. Questions and measurement on all aspects of wood usage in the rural area were included. Extremely detailed measurement of wood in place in house buildings, furniture, implements, etc., were necessary to formulate estimates, but it was impossible to carry out this measurement for all 6,000 households. A 20% sub-sample was therefore drawn for this purpose which duplicated all the questions from the main survey (for testing of the sub-sample), and included a detailed measurement schedule.
So far as tree fuel is concerned, questions and measurement procedures were applied to ascertain householders' usage of fuel over the last day, the last week, and last twelve months - an attempt to pick up the seasonal effect. Supplementary questions asking whether the householder believed he used more, the same, or less fuelwood during the wet season were asked. An attempt was made, by questioning and enumerator observation and measurement, to break down tree fuel usage into categories of stem or main branch volume, and smaller wood, leaf and twig volume - so as to gain some idea of how much fuel came from fellings, as opposed to litter from standing trees. (However, see item (vi) under final remarks below.) Since tree fuel is only one of many used in Bangladesh, questions and measurement of use of other traditional (and commercial) fuels were also included.
An intensive, long-term study of energy use in a single village in Bangladesh by Briscoe (Briscoe, 1979) proved particularly useful for interpreting the national data. The first reason for this is that Briscoe's fuel usage measurement data provided an alternative estimate, with which the appropriate regional data from the national study could be compared. Secondly, because of the very concentrated nature of Briscoe's work, he was able to provide an extensive analysis of the socio-economic implications of the fuel situation, as it is developing in the village. Since Briscoe's findings on impending shortage of fuel for his study village were in fact found in the national study to be a widespread problem, it was possible to generalize parts of his analysis to the national, policy level, on the basis of the data obtained.
Some further validation of all overall survey results was possible using figures provided by Islam (Islam, 1978). Islam measured fuel consumption in a small region of Barisal, in Southern Bangladesh, comprising 23 villages. Islam's study was basically designed to investigate the feasibility of the bio-gas alternative in Southern area, but his very extensive fuel usage data, collected by direct measurement and questionnaire, provide a useful benchmark for comparison with appropriate regional subset from the national data. When this was done, a remarkable similarity in overall energy usage (on a per capita basis), and in the wood fuel group in particular within this, arose between the two sets of data. Less similarity was apparent when the figures were further disaggregated into "fuelwood" and "other tree fuel" components, emphasizing the difficulty of accurately drawing this distinction in the field.
Because of the detail with which Islam reported his individual village results, it was possible to test his results for internal consistency, using regression analysis. This was done, and the results as given in the Project study confirm the reliability of the figures.
Detailed questions and measurement of household tree holdings, and fellings over the previous 12 month period, were included in the survey process, to gain some perspective on standing volume and rate of felling in the village homestead forest resource.
It had been intended to carry out seasonal follow-up to the consumption estimates, but unfortunately the organization sub-contracted to do this was unable to carry out the task. However, it was possible, by using householders opinion response on seasonal variation, combined with some regional studies (for which equivalent figures from the main survey could be extracted), to make a reasonable assessment of the matter.
The survey questionnaire was designed in the Project. The sample design and fieldwork were carried cut by the sub-contractor (ISRT), with considerable input from the projects. Some 120 field enumerators and supervisors were employed, for approximately three months. A further 20 or so laboratory staff were employed. The results were entered via cards onto magnetic tape, and processed on the IBM 370 computer at the Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology.
Major results from the survey are given in Field Document No. 2, and forecasts based on them in Field Document No. 4 (Byron, 1981). The results will be a major input into forestry planning and strategy design in Bangladesh, and have formed an important part of the data base for a large scale ADB farm forestry-project currently under consideration in Bangladesh. Results have also been conveyed for use by the Bureau of Statistics, and some of the methods and survey sampling frame will be used for regular updating information.
The cost of the rural and urban surveys discussed above combined war about US $ 50 000
Final Remarks
Some lessons were learnt in the process of the exercise discussed above.
(i) The results show that a previous attempt to measure tree fuel use in Bangladesh by supply calculations (aerial photo interpretation, combined with field measurement of some trees) was highly misleading. Such methods are not a viable substitute for direct consumption estimation. (See Montreal Engineering et al, 1976).
(ii) There is considerable regional and socio-economic variation in fuel consumption patterns, even in such a small and geographically homogeneous country as Bangladesh. For forecasting purposes in particular, stratification of the sample to measure such variation is necessary.
(iii) For household use, which is the predominant form of energy consumption, wood fuel and other traditional fuels are mutually substitutable to a wide extent. It is pointless, therefore, in a country such as Bangladesh, to assess -usage of tree fuel in isolation: the substitutes must also be included. However, this creates an analytical difficulty: the reason for doing such surveys in the first place is, usually, to assess whether energy consumption is in danger of outstripping supplies. But it is extremely difficult - perhaps impossible - to measure the stock of all traditional fuels, with any accuracy. It is difficult enough to do so for trees alone in Bangladesh. The Project has drawn conclusions on the basis of the assumption that the use of trees, the one fuel source not produced annually, as are the residues, can be used as indicator: in other words, over-use of trees to some extent indicates a shortage of all fuels. This is a matter that should be given some
analytical attention in general, in cases such as Bangladesh where wood fuel is an ingredient in a complex mixture of traditional energy supply.
(iv) In general, the survey exercise demonstrated the importance of proper pre-testing, or pilot surveys: in the case of rural survey discussed above, a number of questions included in the original questionnaire design had to be discarded, or changed radically: in their original form they were answered by respondents extremely poorly, and were clearly not understood.
(v) It is essential, where nationwide, or large scale regional surveys are intended, to include information items which are already known, so that the survey procedure can be tested against a datum. In the case of Bangladesh, good prior data on the distribution of landholding (in itself good proxy for rural income) was available. Questions on this were therefore included in the survey, and the resulting distribution statistically compared to existing census data on this matter. It was possible, in this way, to check the extent of sampling bias present in the survey. This is important, because in areas where field operational difficulties can be severe, the probability of significant bias in results is always high.
(vi) It proved impossible, under field conditions, to obtain a useful breakdown of tree fuel into its felled (stem/main branch) and standing (leaves, twigs, etc.) components: assessment was done at the point of usage, where the distinction is difficult to make. Under the circumstances, the best that could be done to obtain an aggregate division was to apply some published empirical biomas results for tropical tree species to the overall figures. To make a more certain estimate of the breakdown of tree fuel would necessitate observation and measurement over time of fuel gathering in the rural area.
1.2 The Malawi rural energy survey
by David French^1
^1 David French is Senior Energy Adviser in the Energy Unit in the Ministry of Forestry and Natural Resources, Malawi.
The Energy Unit of Malawi's Ministry of Forestry and Natural Resources has carried out a rural energy survey as part of a nationwide sample survey of agriculture. Survey results are principally being used to assist in the planning of the Wood Energy Project, which is establishing government firewood plantations and supporting reforestation activities at farm and community level.
The Questionnaire
The energy survey questionnaire asked which jobs are done that require energy (e.g. cooking, heating water for washing, providing light, making beer or bricks, smoking fish), and what fuels are used to do these jobs. In addition, several questions dealt with firewood collection (perceived difficulty, distance to wood source, whether wood is collected or purchased). Other questions covered planting of-trees, the number of meals cooked each day, and types of stoves used. Finally, to provide basic data about other major tasks that consume energy within the household, questions were included on ways in which flour is prepared and water collected.
In addition to illustrating basic patterns of energy use, the survey questions were intended to show the consequences of wood scarcity. The extent of scarcity in a given area was judged by the distance to the fuelwood supply and by the degree of difficulty experienced by the household in collecting wood. In the tabulations, these measures of scarcity were related to such variables as the use of crop residues or charcoal for cooking, the number of meals cooked each day, purchases of wood, the use of commercially valuable trees (mango) for fuelwood, and planting of trees.
Administration
The energy survey was added to a package of surveys comprising the National Sample Survey of Agriculture 1980/81 (NSSA), a periodic survey effort about the farming and household activities of smallholders, including household composition, income and expenditures, garden cultivation practices, nutrition, and related concerns. To carry out these surveys, 344 enumerators were stationed throughout the country for a one-year period.
For the energy survey, each enumerator interviewed seven sample households, for a national total of 2,408 interviews. Since the survey was primarily concerned with domestic jobs, the questions were asked of the central woman in each household. In order to find out how energy use varies from season to season, the survey was administered both in March-April 1981 (at the end of the rains) and in September-October 1981 (at the end of the dry season).
While NSSA personnel distributed, administered, and collected the survey schedules, the Energy Unit itself assumed the rest of the survey's organizational responsibilities and costs. The Unit's staff drafted and tested the survey, conducted training sessions for enumerators, checked the completed schedules, arranged for computer processing of the data, held workshops throughout the country to discuss results with NSSA field staff, and wrote a final report on survey findings.
By joining an established survey process, the Energy Unit was able to carry out the survey at minimal cost. Total direct costs were only about U.S. $9 000, half for data processing and half for survey preparation, training courses, and post-survey workshops. Excluded from this figure is the cost of time spent on the survey by the Unit's Senior Energy Officer (about six weeks) and the Energy Survey Officer (about six months). Also excluded are minor costs incurred by NSSA in absorbing the energy survey into their existing work programme.
Results
According to the survey, firewood is the dominant energy source for most fuel-consuming jobs done by the rural population, including cooking, keeping warm, heating water for washing, smoking food, and brewing beer. The only non-wood fuels used in significant amounts in rural areas are paraffin for lighting and diesel for commercial maize milling. Secondary fuels such as crop residues, charcoal, and dung are used very little.
Firewood collection is perceived as an increasingly difficult task, and many people are walking lengthy distances for wood. The problem is especially acute in the central and southern regions and lakeshore districts.
So far, however, scarcity of wood has had little measurable impact on rural life. Jobs requiring fuelwood (cooking, brewing beer, heating water) are done as commonly in wood scarcity areas, as in areas where wood is more abundant. In scarcity areas, people are somewhat more likely to purchase some of their wood or to use inferior wood and crop residues for cooking; but these tendencies are not yet pronounced. Although a significant number of farmers plant trees, these are primarily for building poles and fruit rather than for firewood.
The Wood Energy Project has been considering the implications of these findings for the location of tree nurseries, species to be grown, strategies for marketing seedlings, and so on. To pursue such questions further, the Energy Unit will use its own enumeration team to carry out detailed studies of specific issues. For example, one follow-up survey deals with farmers' motivations, preferences, and problems with respect to tree planting.
Reports
Copies of the energy survey final report and related reports can be obtained from the Energy Unit, Ministry of Forestry and Natural Resources, Lilongwe 3, Malawi.
2. Regional surveys
2.1 The rural energy system project, Nigeria
We include just one example of a regional survey, the comprehensive and carefully thought out recent exercise in southwestern Nigeria. There is certainly a need for such surveys, which are intermediate between the costly and time-consuming national surveys, and the locally specific village studies. All levels have their uses and it in a matter of balancing conflicting needs and limited budgets. But, because of regional differences, which are often very marked, it often makes sense to invest at least part of the funds available in a regional energy surveys.
2.1 The rural energy system project, Nigeria
by W.B. Morgan
The survey was jointly sponsored by the University of Ife and the United Nations University and was directed by Professor Go J. Afolabi Ojo of the University of Ife. The project is located in southwestern Nigeria and concentrates on three urban areas and their rural hinterlands: Ibadan (estimated urban population 1,500,000), Ogbomosho (estimated urban population 300,000) and Ile-Ife (estimated population 150,000). Two of these locations are rainforest and one (Ogbomosho) is in relatively moist savanna with a markedly different range of tree species for fuelwood. In scale it is regional, covering an area with a total population of approximately 5 million. Survey work began in January 1979 and continued until September 1980. A number of related studies have either been completed since or are still continuing. It is hoped that energy study, including rural energy systems and the problems of urban energy supply, will become a permanent and major aspect of research at the
University of Ife, so that the project will have become the nucleus of a major academic development. Computer analysis of the data has been completed and the reports of the organizers of each programme are currently being written. A discussion workshop with government energy and forestry staff is planned.
The five programmes of the project included surveys of various forms of energy consumption and distribution together with rural energy production. They consisted of:
1. a study of socio-economic factors affecting rural energy preferences;
2. a study of urban market Influences on rural energy supply, including a survey of dealers and of households, industries, offices, shops and institutions;
3. a land use mapping survey based largely on aerial photography;
4. a study of the ecology of fuelwood production on farms;
5. a group of technology studies, including an attempt to design and test fuelwood stoves, the determination of the specific gravity and caloric values of fuelwood samples, and some preliminary work on appropriate energy devices.
Of a total of probably just under a million households in the region 11,300 were surveyed and questionnaires for 10,800 were successfully completed. 7,437 of these were rural. Additional small surveys were made of transport, dealers, the role of women and children and local wood stove manufacture. Sampling techniques were varied. Rural surveys were based on geographical sectors for the selection of villages whilst an attempt at socio-economic stratification was made in the towns. Only a limited attempt was made to measure quantities of wood. Much more attention was devoted to expenditures and preferences. The survey occupied just over a year and a half, but most places were visited only for a few days. A distinctive feature of the survey was that all 22 members of academic staff and some 30 enumerators (at any one time) belonged to the region. The survey had the advantage also of a considerable existing fund of knowledge of local society and the economy. Preliminary results
indicate widespread use of fuelwood and kerosene in the rural areas and of kerosene, electricity and gas with some wood, particularly as a stand-by, in the urban areas. Charcoal is used mainly for a few special purposes, but, wood is used extensively in informal industries. Wood cutting is concentrated close to the towns and in certain village areas near main roads and there is marked species selection. There are indications of overcutting and of some pressure on local resources despite the apparent resource riches of the rainforest. Two preliminary collections of papers are available from Ife workshops held in 1979 and 1980 (Morgan et al, 1980; Ojo et al, 1981). Publication of the final report for the questionnaire survey will eventually follow.
3. Sectoral surveys
3.1 Wood fuel utilization by small-scale industry in Nepal
3.2 Charcoal in a Guatemalan community
Our two examples here include small-scale industry and charcoal, and indicate the value of concentrating on specific sectors. Depending on the nature of energy use, almost all countries could profitably conduct surveys on specific sectors of economic and energy significance to the particular country.
3.1 Wood fuel utilization by small-scale industry in Nepal
by D. G. Donovan^1
^1 Deanna G, Donovan carried out this survey while she was a Forest and Man Fellow of the Institute of Current World Affairs (ICWA), Hanover, New Hampshire. Concurrently, she was affiliated as a Research Scholar with the Research Centre for Applied Science and Technology (RECAST) of Tribhuvan University, Kirtipur Campus, Kathmandu. During the final four months of the project, expenses were covered by the Agricultural Development Council (ADC), New York.
Nearly 87 percent of total energy consumed in Nepal is derived from wood. Although the majority of fuelwood goes to domestic users, many cottage and small-scale industries also depend heavily on wood fuel. Indeed, with the progressive price increases and supply irregularities of conventional fossil fuels, it is not uncommon to find fledgling industries turning to often cheaper and more readily available traditional fuels such as wood. In order to highlight this widespread dependence on forest resources by much of Nepal's small-scale industry, an investigation of wood fuel use by manufacturing, agricultural processing and service sectors was initiated in 1979.
Preliminary investigations confirmed that, to date, very little information has been systematically recorded regarding energy use by the various cottage and small-scale industries in Nepal. Traditionally, industrial feasibility studies have focused on requirements for raw materials, labour and capital; energy needs have been only briefly discussed, seldom seen as a constraint. Discussions with factory owners prove the opposite. The purpose of this research project, therefore, was to develop an information base on the energy requirements of small-scale industries, especially wood-fueled industries, in order to assist policymakers and planners in designing both environmentally and economically sound development programmes for rural areas.
The major research objectives were to identify those industries using wood fuel, to note the type of energy technology employed and to determine the amount of wood required annually and per unit of finished product. Secondarily, the project sought to assess the economic and environmental consequences of wood fuel use, especially on household consumption patterns. Finally, a brief survey of the energy options available to small-scale industry in rural Nepal and of the feasibility of introducing alternative energy technologies was carried out.
For the purposes of this study, industry was defined as any enterprise engaged in the production of goods and services for sale or exchange in the market place. The scale of production varied widely within as well as between industries. Due to the scarcity of information regarding industrial location, the originally planned nationwide survey of a few selected industries was redesigned to a broader industrial scope, but a narrower geographic focus. Industries included in the investigation were those known to have used wood fuel in the recent past. In the final count, some 35 industries were identified as presently using firewood, charcoal or sawdust at some if not all production sites.
Given the distinct difference in socio-economic and ecological situations in the terai (Gangetic plain) and the hills in Nepal, Plus the disastrous ecological consequences of deforestation in the hill and mountain region, emphasis was placed on those industries operating in the hill districts. Additional points considered in the selection of suitable study areas were:
1. distribution and type of industry;
2. existence of previous socio-economic studies;
3. bioclimatic zone;
4. political development region designation; and
5. physical accessibility.
The seven areas ultimately surveyed - Surkhet valley, Mustang district, Pokhara valley, Trisuli valley, Hetauda valley, Ilam and Phikkal Panchayats in Ilam district and Kathmandu valley - present a cross-section of physical and cultural conditions in the hills of Nepal.
A combination of information-gathering techniques, including sample surveys, structured and unstructured interviews, direct observation and measurement, were employed in the data collection process. Among the information solicited by questionnaire were production levels, types of fuels used and the amount species, form, cost and source of wood fuel. Following the formal interview with a factory owner or manager, a visit was made to the actual production site where the various stages in the production process were recorded. Sketches and photographs were made as information was taken on the design as well as the construction materials of the wood-fired kiln or stove. The condition of the fuel was noted and a sample charge weighed when possible. Not only was the amount of wood used of interest, but also the method of handling and firing especially as related to the efficiency of energy conversion. Additional information regarding household fuelwood consumption and local
economic and environmental conditions were secured through sample surveys and interviews with key informants, such as community leaders and forest department officers.
The interviews and production-site surveys were conducted by the author's Nepalese research assistant together with the author. An attempt was made to visit many different factories in order to gain an understanding of the diversity of technology employed throughout the country. Logistical constraints precluded repeated visits to all but a few factories. Support services, such as transport, typing, porterage, translation and graphic arts, were secured on contract as needed. Numerical data were processed with simple desk calculators.
The project final report, completed in November 1981, will review the rationale and research methods of the project as well as an analysis of the research findings with recommendations for future research and action programmes. Appendices to the main document will present brief profiles of various rural industries and discuss in greater depth economic and environmental conditions in selected study areas. Copies of this report will be submitted to the three sponsor agencies, Institute of Current World Affairs, Research Centre for Applied Science and Technology and the Agricultural Development Council. Formal publication and distribution are being considered. Interested parties should contact the following for copies:
(1) Peter Bird Martin
Executive Director
Institute of Current World Affairs
4 West Wheelock Street
Hanover, New Hampshire 03755, USA
(2) Theodore Smith, President
The Agricultural Development Council, Inc.
1290 Avenue of the Americas
New York, New York 10019, USA
(3) Kedar Lal Shreshta
Executive Director
Research Center for Applied Science and Technology
Tribhuvan University
Kirtipur Campus
Kathmandu, Nepal
3.2 Charcoal in a Guatemalan community
summarized from: "Charcoal: its Multifarious Effects in a Guatemalan Community," John G. Hehr, unpublished M.A. Thesis, Western Michigan University. Kalamazoo, 1967
The author spent three months in 1965 doing fieldwork in the highlands of Guatemala. The study concentrates on the charcoal industry of Cajolá, a small rural municipio (population 5000) located approximately 17 kilometres northwest from Quetzaltenango. Hehr examines the charcoal industry in relationship to rural employment problems and also in terms of its environmental impact. What emerges from his excellent description and analysis are bleak pictures of rural livelihood, impending fuel shortages, and environmental deterioration. Hehr's study is largely descriptive. Besides participant observation (e.g. accompanying charcoal vendors on their door-to-door sales in the city), he interviewed local charcoal makers, district forestry officers, charcoal vendors, municipal officials, a bus driver, a farmer who lives on the coast and the owner of a charcoal depository (15 names of persons interviewed are listed in an appendix). Although community economic (especially agricultural
and wage labour) and fuel-related activities are well described, little information is given on the patterns of socio-economic stratification within this primarily Indian community.
The study in divided into five sections. The first places the community within its regional, environmental, socio-economic and historical context. Part two reviews historical aspects of charcoal production in Cajolá, and relates the incentives that exist for peasants to engage in commercial charcoal makings Especially highlighted is the lack of employment alternatives attributed to Guatemala's rigid class and ethnic stratification as well as local agro-environmental limitations, that leads poor villagers to cut down the few remaining trees for Quetzaltenango's expanding fuel market. Hehr also points out the competition for trees among different communities.
The third section describes the process of charcoal making, from the finding and purchasing of a tree to the firing process. The next section relates the cycle of production and price variation, and describes the spatial commercial movement of charcoal to consumers in Quetzaltenango and on the Guatemalan coast. Hehr's study concludes with an analysis of deforestation and its socio-economic implications.
Besides his description and analysis, the chief value of Hehr's study is its demonstration of how much important data can be gathered by a single field worker in a relatively short time period, using relatively few resources. Unfortunately, no budget is given, but it is obvious from his account that Hehr's intense, local-level focus required few resources.
The type of study presented by Hehr can be particularly important as a pilot study for a more comprehensive large-scale survey, or used for case studies that would supplement macro-surveys.
4. Urban surveys
4.1 Urban use of energy in Papua New Guinea.
One study from Port Moresby in Papua New Guinea is included. Towns and cities have been relatively neglected in wood fuel studies, there having been more emphasis on rural areas. Ideally, what is needed is not one or the other, but one study which examines the complex links between rural and urban areas, regarding them as one single social and economic and energy field. The wood fuels that are consumed by urban residents come either from peri-urban areas, or, in greater quantities, from rural areas, sometimes as far as 250 km away. Therefore, it is important to ask what are the effects on the rural areas of all this export of wood fuels to the towns, and this has seldom been critically examined.
4.1 Urban use of energy in Papua New Guinea.
summarized from "Household Energy Consumption in Port Moresby", by Matthew S. Gamser, Dept Minerals & Energy (Report 8.80), Papua New Guinea, Port Moresby, 1980.
The study surveyed over 1800 low cost, domestic quarters, urban village, and squatter settlement households that comprise 79 percent of the city's dwellings. The study was done in July/August, 1980, with the help of 57 student surveyors from the University of PNG.
97.8 percent of the homes surveyed used firewood or kerosene for cooking and lighting.
Electricity is rarely used for purposes other than lighting because of its high cost.
Almost everyone surveyed paid to obtain firewood, either to buy bundles from sellers or to travel great distances to gather it. Few areas in Port Moresby possess adequate firewood supplies within walking distance from their households.
The average price paid for kerosene in the survey was 39.7 Toea per litre, over 13 Toea, greater than the price controlled price for this fuel at the time of the survey.
Kerosene purchased in small containers from trade stores can cost 4 to 5 times as much as the controlled price charged at petrol stations.
Rapidly decreasing firewood supplies make this fuel more difficult and expensive to obtain each day, and many people are switching to cooking with imported kerosene.
Firewood and charcoal produced from sawmill wastes and sold at community distribution centres can undercut the present energy cost of firewood by 19 to 60 percent and the energy cost of kerosene by over 50 percent.
Port Moresby households pay far too much for domestic fuels and rely far too heavily on imported kerosene. The development of firewood, charcoal and other indigenous energy resources is essential for the city's future, and that of other areas in Papua New Guinea.
5. Village surveys
5.1 Energy use in a Bangladesh village
5.2 Fuelwood in a Nepalese hill village
5.3 Wood fuels in a small Sudanese town
5.4 Wood fuels in a marginal area of Kenya
5.5 Fuelwood in a Tanzanian village
We have here a representative sample of sound village studies from Bangladesh, Nepal, the Sudan, Kenya and Tanzania, all concentrating on wood fuels, but all with somewhat different approaches and methods and time periods involved. It is important, in doing a village study, to try to indicate how representative the selected village is, and what are the implications for the national or at least the regional energy picture. These are but a small sample of the hundreds of village studies that have been done in recent years, with many more currently going on.
5.1 Energy use in a Bangladesh village
summarized from "The Political Economy of Energy Use in Rural Bangladesh", by Jo Briscoe. (mimeo) Environmental Systems Program. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University, 1979, and "Energy Use and Social Structure in a Bangladesh Village" by J. Briscoe, Population and Development Review. Vol, 5, No. 4, 1979.
The Population and Development Review article is a briefer version of the study described in the August, 1979, unpublished paper. The study field work was done in the village of Ulipur, Bangladesh. The village is located in the western part of the Comilla district and in a deep-water flooding plain of the Meghna River. The study population consisted of eight Hindu fishing families and forty Muslim agricultural families (330 people, 48 cattle and 43 acres of agricultural land).
The study aimed at developing a detailed understanding of the natural resources availability and patterns of use with particular focus on energy resources. A major objective was to examine the issues of distribution and control of available resources and the structure of social organizations which govern the distribution of resources from owner to user.
It was an independent investigation, although for part of the period, Briscoe had an appointment with an international institution. The investigator incorporated all energy sources, both animate and inanimate; the latter was dominated by crop residues but also included firewood and other traditional fuels (bamboo, etc.) and very small amounts of conventional fuels.
Both supply and consumption patterns were studied. Field methodology utilized participant observation. Briscoe, who is fluent in Bengali, an important factor in his research, lived in the village for the better part of the year. Survey information was collected at different intervals: initially, a census to gather demographic and economic information on study population including energy-producing resources - land animals and land utilization, crop production and residue production were all estimated by the farmer. Information gathered fortnightly included weighing of overnight dung excretion, type and source of food consumed by animals, human and animal labour activities, crop and residue production (including weighing of residue before and after drying) and accounting for fuels obtained or put in storage). A quarterly close observation of family cooking, including weighing of fuels to be used and an estimate of quantities of food cooked and the number of people eating, was
made.
The data collected over the period of about one year were utilized to study in detail the energy resource flows in this society. The analysis indicated the complex and frugal but inefficient nature of the system. The analysis indicated the importance the social structure has on energy use since villagers of different classes meet their energy (and other) needs in different fashions, given their access to resources. The mechanisms are changing, much to the detriment of the poorer people as traditional forms of social organizations characterized by client/patron relations give way to more market-oriented structures. The analysis indicates the impacts of the introduction of high-yielding varieties and income for non-agricultural sources and shows clearly how the impacts differ dramatically between classes.
Briscoe's study describes and analyses several facets of differential access to fuel. In the village he studied, he discovered that 16 percent of the population owned 80 percent of the trees, 55 percent of the cropped land, and 45 percent of the cattle. Moreover, traditional practices which had allowed the poor and landless access to crop residues and other fuel resources were being discontinued. Poor people were forced increasingly to purchase fuel, or else resorted to theft.
Briscoe's study is particularly important because he considers land tenure change in historical perspective. He related the village's energy situation to changes stemming from the Green Revolution which led to increased concentration of land ownership, a decline in the number of available agricultural jobs and in the prevailing farm labourer wage rate, and in the replacement of customary harvest and gleaning rights by commercialized relationships. Briscoe's analysis demonstrates the necessity of considering local fuelwood situations in terms of how different social and economic groups and classes have been affected by changes in both the local and wider society.
The study is a seminal one in its examination of the complex interrelations of the traditional fuel systems, demonstrating dramatically the importance of more micro level analysis of the different (by class) effects which may be hidden in village aggregate analysis. Its implications for energy policy point to the need to understand these relations.
5.2 Fuelwood in a Nepalese hill village
summarized from fuelwood and Food Needs Versus Deforestation: An Energy Study on a Hill Village Panchayat in Eastern Nepal" by D. Bajracharya, in Energy Analysis in Rural Regions: Studies in Indonesia, Nepal and the Philippines. Part III. Honolulu, Hawaii: East-West Center, 1980.
The study focused on Pangma village panchayat^1 in the Sankhuwa Sabha district of Nepal. This area lies in the hill region of the Kosi zone of eastern Nepal.
^1 A village panchayat in the smallest political unit in Nepal, an distinguished from a district panchayat, a larger unit.
The objective of the research was to examine at the micro scale the multiple fuel, food and fodder pressures on land resources that can lead to deforestation. Consequently, the investigation looked at both traditional fuel needs and supply potential (primarily fuelwood) as well as other food and fodder needs that draw from the same resource base. Land use was estimated from existing aerial panchromatic photographs; tree counts were utilized to establish forest inventory and total forest productivity (large stem and small twigs, etc.), fuelwood needs were estimated from household interviews of 181 (31%) of the 582 households in the study population Bajracharya conducted most of the interviews (with the assistance of three locally hired enumerators). Information was collected on the followings amount and type of fuelwood, time and place of collection and type of combustion (chula or stove versus agena or open hearth). Certain households were selected to cover variations in
ethnic, altitude, settlement cluster and economic status. The interviews also gathered land tenure and use data, crop production data and food consumption data.
Bajracharya's analysis examines the fuelwood versus deforestation question by comparing the needs versus supply potential, taking into account the important differences in availability and access to resources for different classes/groups. The importance of location (altitude) and concomitant access to agricultural and forest lands of different productivity is shown to be important as is the need to simultaneously examine the food, fodder and fuelwood needs which all exert pressure on the land resources. He drawn implications for rural energy and technology policy arguing against simple solutions posed without real understanding of the physical, social and economic structures and against the frequent over-estimated focus on fuelwood demands as the source of deforestation. He suggests that the problem cannot be divorced from the need for better agricultural productivity and the process of innovation and learning that can foster development - a more holistic approach to the
problem is necessary.
5.3 Wood fuels in a small Sudanese town
summarized from "Wood for Fuel - Energy Crisis Implying Desertification: The Case of Bara, The Sudan" by Turi Hammer Digernes. Thesis, Polit Geography Department, University of Bergen, November 1977. (Also Addendum, October, 1978).
The author spent six months (August 1976 to February 1977) doing her fieldwork in the Sudan. The location was a small town, Bara (population 10,750) in Kordofan Province, about 400 km southwest of Khartoum. Digernes set out to study the energy system, and concentrated on use of three major fuels, fuelwood, charcoal, and kerosene.
"During the interviews we talked about (the three fuels), how and where they were obtained, what kinds of trees are used, and where these trees are out, amounts used, prices - seasonal fluctuations and any recent changes". In addition to inquires made in Bara, visits were made to the ten main supply villages of fuel to Bara; these were determined according to information obtained from households and from the Forest Office. At the villages extensive interviews were carried out with sheikhs, wood-cutters and charcoal burners; "sellers of wood and charcoal met on the road were stopped occasionally and asked about their products and supply area".
Household interviews were held at 137 households using the following method of selection. The 1973 local rates list contained 1,620 households which were stratified according to amount of tax paid. A 10 percent random sample was drawn from each group, giving 162 households of which 25 had moved or dissolved since 1973, leaving 137 households which were visited of these,
- 86 were in Group I paying annual rates less than £1
- 29 were in Group II paying annual rates £1 to £7
- 22 were in Group III paying annual rates over £7
This is a simple and effective way of obtaining a stratified sample, so that comparisons can be made between poor, average, and rich households. The rates are fixed according to location and area of house, number of rooms, kitchens and cabinets, building materials, and numbers and economic status of household members. Each selected household was visited, with apparently no refusals, by Digernes and her interpreters (one male, one female). By the last two months of the study, the author had enough Arabic vocabulary to work on her own.
The most important chapter for present readers is likely to be Chapter 4, "Energy Situations in Bara", which provides extensive detail about the three fuels - where and how they are obtained, at what prices, who the suppliers are, what trees are used and major changes over last ten years. Much of this information is conveniently presented in tabular form (Table 10-98), including useful comparisons (e.g. on money spent on charcoal per household member, according to socio-economic group). The basic questions that were asked in interviews are included in an appendix.
Attention is paid to alternative energy sources, including electricity, biogas, windmills, and solar energy.
The report - as one would expect in a geography thesis - includes clear and comprehensive information on the physical environment. There are also good maps and photographs.
A short (15pp) "Addendum" presents the results of a brief follow-lip study made in mid-1978, when 32 of the original 137 households were re-visited, and changes noted, including "the rapidly diminishing supply of kerosene", and an increased awareness among women of the problem of desertification. Extra information is provided on supplies, prices, consumption and commercial use of fuels by schools, prisons, restaurants, bakers, etc.
5.4 Wood fuels in a marginal area of Kenya
summarized from "Forests, Foraging, Fences and Fuel in a Marginal Area of Kenya" by David Brokensha and Bernard Riley. (Unpublished paper, prepared for a United States Agency of International Development, Africa Bureau, Firewood Workshop, Washington, D.C. in June 1978).
The authors are, respectively, a social anthropologist and a geographer who have been collaborating since 1970 on an ongoing study of social and ecological change in Mbere Division, Embu District, Kenya. This paper is a village level study which examines the role of fuelwood and charcoal in the lives of the people of Mbere, with emphasis on recent changes.
Particular significance is attached to the local peoples perceptions of wood fuels, of their system of classification of tree fuel trees. Trees are classified according to overlapping criteria including size, inherent qualities (such as slow-burning, easy to out, smokeless), accessibility and seasonal availability and particular uses. The uses include cooking, brewing beer, log fires, smelting iron, night torches, fire making, roasting meat, simmering milk and the like. An important separate category is charcoal, production. For each use, local people have a clear ranking of preferred species, but because of shortage of many useful species, they are often forced to use third or fourth preferences. For fuelwood, accessibility is much the dominant consideration.
Much detail is given of the production, distribution and consumption of fuelwood and of charcoal, examining men's and women's roles, and looking at time and distance involved in collecting fuelwood. The average was 2 ½ trips per household per week, of 2 ½ hours each, with considerable variation.
"Fences" a major factor in fuelwood collection, referring to the granting of individual titles to land and the consequent restrictions on gathering fuelwood rapidly changed what had been a free good in most circumstances to a commercial commodity, with severe hardships for people such as elderly women living alone, fuelwood is now sold at all the markets.
Much charcoal is produced, mainly by poor people as a substitute cash crop, and is intended for sale in the towns. The demand for charcoal has accelerated the disappearance of valuable hardwood.
This paper stresses the social aspects of wood fuels, with many references to species of trees. The authors based it on their fieldwork carried cut 1970/71, 1974, and 1976/77, with use made of a survey conducted by 100 secondary school students in 1976. These young men and women questioned people at their homesteads about present and past perceptions and uses of fuelwood and charcoal.
5.5 Fuelwood in a Tanzanian village
summarized from "Fuelwood Use in a Peasant Community: Tanzanian case study" by Patrick C. Fleuret and Anne K. Fleuret, Journal of Developing Areas 123 (1978): 315-322.
The authors, both social anthropologists, did field-work in the Usambara Mountains, Lushoto District, in Tanzania in 1975/1977, and this article is part of the result of that research. They focus on one village, Kwemzitu population 173). In contrast to most other African fuelwood studies, this is an area of generally good rainfall, probably a little under 1,000 mm, with an elevation of 1,700 metres.
Farmland in Kwemzitu border a forest reserve, and the inhabitants are allowed to collect fallen trees and branches, and the pieces left over by licensed timbercutters. "It, takes about an hour to walk to the principal fuelwood gathering area, so Kwemzitu people have relatively free access to the wood."
Consumption patterns of fuelwood are outlined, beginning with the fire made at first light to cook breakfast, and continuing until 11 p.m. "if people stay late visiting or if the night is cool".
Data on households and total population are presented. While the former are accurate (33 households in three hamlets), the authors "suspect that population figures are inflated by the inclusion of people socially, but not physically, present". This is an important point, which should be taken into account in all village level surveys. The information provided indicated that the average household size (adjusted for household members not actually in residence) was 5.2 persons.
Fuelwood was measured in four households, two of five members, and two of three members, for comparison. The methods used, while subject to many possible sources of error, are ingenious, and demonstrate how useful information can be obtained in a short period from a small sample, providing that the investigator has a good general background knowledge of the community studies. "Household members were asked to display wood equivalent to that actually used - each piece was measured by length and circumference, and these figures were used to calculate volume". Measurements were taken in April and are believed to be not too unrepresentative of the true yearly average.
Daily household totals were estimated at 0.036 m^3 (21.8kg) with a yearly per capita figure of 4.3 m^3 (2,605 kg) for the three member households, and 2.7 m^3 (19636 kg) for the five member households. These figures were checked by measuring three headloads, which showed the average to be 33 kg - these three loads took five hours to collect, and were estimated to be sufficient for a week, supplemented by wood brought back from agricultural trips. The authors also checked the figures by weighing the amount of wood collected by one household over a one week period, with close agreement with other estimates.
The report also deals with labour aspects - "The fuelwood task is disliked by Kwemzitu women (as) arduous, taxing and time-consuming". Labour surveys showed that women worked an average of 64 hours per week, with
- cooking and housework - 27 hours per week;
- agriculture - 20 hours per week;
- fuelwood collection - 11 hours per week.
Some families, especially wealthier ones, also burn charcoal and wood, and the report includes figures on wood out and wood actually Used. Total fuelwood consumption is estimated at an annual per capita rate of 2.6 m^3, or 450 m^3 for the village, plus 26 m^3 for charcoal. In terms of tree-planting for fuelwood, the authors estimate that "Kwemzitu people would have to plant 1,360 trees every year" (using the locally popular wattle, Acacia mearnsii).
The study concludes with a consideration of total needs for Lushoto District, "tremendous" pressure on the forest reserve, and possible alternate energy sources: "massive reafforestation efforts are needed".
<section>b</section>
Annex III - (a) Measuring cooking fuel economy
by Howard S. Geller and Gautam S. Dutt^1
^1 We would like to thank Richard Schroeder, Tom Lavell and Edward Seliga for sharing their test data with us and Miriam Goldberg for providing advice regarding statistical analysis.
1. Introduction
2. Cooking practices
3. Measuring fuel consumption and efficiency
4. Simulation testing
5. Procedures for a series of cookstove performance tests
6. Interpretation of test data
7. Conclusions
1. Introduction
A recent survey in a group of villages in South India revealed that the energy consumed for cooking in these villages amounts to 8.0 GJ/capita/year (ASTRA, 1981). This is comparable to the fuelwood demand for domestic cooking in other developing countries except where there is an extreme shortage of traditional fuels (Openshaw, 1978). By contrast, the average amount of energy consumed for cooking in the U.S. using gas stoves with pilot lights is 3.1 GJ/person/year (Lin et al., 1976). If the pilot light is eliminated, energy use for cooking on a gas stove would fall to 1-5-2.0 GJ/person/year. The much higher level of cooking energy consumption in villages in developing countries is chiefly a result of lower fuel economy.
One approach to alleviating fuelwood shortages is thus to reduce the demand for fuelwood by introducing more fuel efficient cookstoves and cooking practices. Efforts in this direction have, until recently, been unsuccessful for the most part (Joseph, 1979). However, many projects concerning the design and dissemination of more fuel efficient cookstoves and cocking practices have been initiated in the past few years.^2 As a result, much has been learned regarding the performance of so-called improved cookstoves and the obstacles to introducing new stoves in developing countries.
^2 A recent cookstoves newsletter lists 51 countries where work on improved cookstoves is being carried cut (Aprovecho Institute, 1981).
One lesson is that a successful programme for increasing cooking efficiency could require a number of activities including:
1. the design and development of improved stoves;
2. adapting a stove design to the local cooking needs and cultural conditions;
3. training people to build improved stoves;
4. ensuring that new stoves are being used properly;
5. promotion of the new stoves.
The evaluation of fuel consumption and/or fuel efficiency is likely to be an essential element in the above activities. For example, measurement of fuel consumption or efficiency is needed to design more efficient stoves and to compare stoves (item 1 above), and to determine fuelwood savings under particular operating conditions (items 2 and 4).
Information regarding fuel consumption and energy efficiency during cooking may be useful to individuals other than developers and promoters of improved stoves. For example, government officials could use reliable estimates of fuelwood consumption to forecast future energy demand and to plan fuel substitution programmes. Forestry officials may want to estimate fuelwood demand in order to plan an afforestation project. In addition, rural development specialists may want to encourage the use of improved stoves or cooking practices which are relatively fuel efficient as part of larger development programmes. The evaluation of cookstove performance within a fuelwood survey should provide data which is useful to those concerned solely with improved stoves as well as to those with broader interests.^1
^1 In some developing nations, cooking over an open fire is widely practised. The term "stove" and the methods for evaluating cookstove performance as described in this paper also apply to open fire cooking,
This paper describes the methods for evaluating cooking fuel economy during a fuelwood survey in developing countries. In section 2, we briefly summarize the qualitative information pertaining to cooking which should be collected along with performance data. The principles for measuring fuel consumption, energy consumption, and efficiency during cooking are presented in section 3. Section 4 describes the methods for testing stove performance in the laboratory under conditions simulating cooking. In order for test results to be meaningful, the measurements must be part of a carefully designed testing procedure. Factors to consider when planning a series of tests are presented in section 5 along with a specific procedure for organizing a set of comparative tests. In section 6, the analysis and interpretation of test results are discussed using examples from India and Upper Volta.
2. Cooking practices
A survey of cooking conditions and practices should precede or accompany tests of fuel economy. There are several reasons why such a survey is valuable. At a practical level, one needs to know the basics of the cooking process to design a simulation testing routine (if simulation tests are conducted) and to establish a schedule for the measurements. An examination of cooking practices will help the surveyor or researcher to assess how factors such as stove or pot type and certain operating conditions influence fuel consumption. Consequently, it may be possible to raise the overall fuel economy in an area by discouraging certain practices and encouraging others. A cooking practice survey will also reveal factors other than fuel efficiency (e.g. whether or not smoke serves any useful purpose) which should be taken into account, when designing or disseminating improved stoves.
The information which should be collected in a cooking practice survey includes:
1. the type (s) of fuel used for cocking throughout the year;
2. how fuel is obtained, its availability and price;
3. the types of food cooked and seasonal changes in diet;
4. the details of the cooking sequence for major meals;
5. details of the stove said pots;
6. other uses for the stove;
7. other cultural and physical conditions related to cooking.
In addition, it may be useful to consider the availability of materials and skills for constructing improved stoves during a cooking practice survey.
Questionnaires for cooking practice surveys have been included in a number of cookstove reports (deLepeleire, 1981; Dutt, 1981a; Joseph and Shanahan, 1980). One sample questionnaire is shown in Appendix 1. A questionnaire should be adapted to a particular area and pre-tested before being widely administered.
A few surveys of cooking practices and conditions have been carried out. For example, the food habits, cooking fuels, and other factors related to cookstoves have been studied in villages in four of the ten regions of Upper Volta (Ki-Zerbo, 1980).
Workers concerned with the development and introduction of improved cookstoves have also conducted limited studies of cooking practices including informal surveys in Senegal (Evans et al. 1980) and in a group of villages in South India (Geller, 1981a).
3. Measuring fuel consumption and efficiency
3.1 Fuel consumption
3.2 Energy consumption
3.3 Efficiency
3.4 Test parameter selection
3.1 Fuel consumption
The amount of fuel consumed during cooking is the simplest measurement that can be carried out. Fuel consumption should be measured by weight rather than by volume since it is difficult to measure accurately the volume of a nonuniform fuel such as wood. An individual fuel consumption measurement can be carried out during the preparation of one meal or one day's meals in a particular household. For this measurement, the fuel available to the cook is pre-weighed and the fuel remaining upon the completion of the meal (or the day's meals) is weighed in order to obtain the consumption during cooking.
Although field measurements of fuelwood consumption during cooking seem straightforward, problems can occur. For example, researchers working in two villages in Upper Volta had some difficulties carrying out a small set of daily wood consumption tests (Gern, et al. 1980). In these tests, some villagers did not understand or follow the instructions. One woman tried to minimize fuel consumption by heating up leftover food. In another house, some of the preweighed wood was lost. Thus, care must be taken during fuel consumption tests to see that additional fuel is not added to the preweighed pile and that the preweighed fuel is used only for cooking (Thomas et al. 1981). Furthermore, the standard food items should be prepared in the normal manner. In order to prevent procedural errors, it would be helpful if an individual from the survey team monitors each fuel consumption test.
In some developing nations, fuel type varies throughout the year. For example, in parts of the Sahel region, millet stalks are used instead of wood for several months of the year (Ki-Zerbo, 1980). Likewise, different food staples may be prepared throughout the year. In such areas, it may be necessary to measure fuel consumption separately for each food and/or fuel type in order to accurately estimate annual fuel consumption.
Some form of normalization can be useful for comparing cooking fuel consumption between different households or under different operating conditions. One simple normalization technique involves calculating specific fuel consumption (SFC) in terms of fuel consumption per family member. In this case, the units of SFC are kg/person/day or kg/person/meal. For this type of calculation, household size is sometimes calculated using weighting factors based on age and sex.^1
^1 For example weighting factors based on food intake or protein requirements, such as have been developed in League of Nations, 1932, and FAO/WHO, 1973.
SFC may also be defined in terms of the quantity of fuel consumed per unit of food cooked. Because the quantity of food cooked is taken into account explicitly, fuel consumption per unit of food may be a more accurate normalizing technique than fuel consumption per family member. However, this technique requires weighing food items as well as fuel. If such measurements are possible, then the food can be weighed either in its raw state prior to cooking or in the cooked state. ^2
^2 A step-by-step description of how to measure fuel consumption and specific fuel consumption was recently prepared by VITA, for cookstove researchers in West Africa (Downey, 1981).
3.2 Energy consumption
There are a number of advantages to converting a measurement of fuel consumption into units of energy. First, conversion to energy units corrects for differences in fuelwood type and quality. Second, conversion to energy units is necessary in order to compare fuelwood consumption with other energy demands. In addition, a quantitative estimate of cooking energy demand is needed to evaluate the potential for alternative fuel sources and new cooking technologies.
Fuelwood consumption can be converted into units of energy consumption by multiplying by the calorific value of the fuel (MJ/kg). The calorific value of solid fuels is normally measured using a bomb calorimeter (Bialy, 1979b). Bomb calorimetry yields the higher heating value (HHV), also known as the gross calorific value. In this definition, the moisture produced and released during combustion is assumed to be in the liquid state. When solid fuels are considered, the HHV is usually given as the energy content (Earl, 1975). However, the moisture generated in a woodburning stove or an open fire usually remains in the gaseous state (Bialy, 1979b). The proper measure of the energy content in this case is the lower heating value (LHV), also known as the net calorific value. For air-dry wood, LHV is 6-8% less than HHV.^1
^1 Calorific value is also affected by whether the fuel burns at constant pressure or constant volume. However, the variation in calorific value between these two conditions is less than 1% for solid fuels (Bialy, 1979b). Therefore, this factor can be ignored during fuelwood surveys and the evaluation of fuelwood stoves.
A bomb calorimeter and other instruments needed for measuring calorific value cost about $1 000. Furthermore, these devices may be difficult to obtain in a developing country and some scientific training is required for their operations In addition, the bomb calorimeter and related instruments are somewhat delicate and they must be used in a laboratory. For these reasons, it may not be possible to directly measure fuel calorific value during a fuelwood survey.
As an alternative to bomb calorimetry, the calorific value of biomass fuels can be estimated with minimal error based on their moisture content and the known calorific value of dry fuels. Table III-1 shows the approximate calorific value of different biomass fuels on an oven-dry basis. The oven-dry calorific value is relatively constant for each type of fuel.^2
^2 There is a small difference between the calorific value of hard and soft wood; the value for soft wood is approximately 5% greater because of its higher tar and resin content (Arola, 1978). Also, the calorific value of peat can be somewhat higher than the value in Table III-1 if an older and deeper peat deposit is harvested.
In practice, the calorific value of fuel will differ from the values shown in Table III-1, mainly because of moisture content (Arola, 1978; Bialy 1979b). Moreover, this effect can be significant since moisture content varies over a wide range. Freshly cut wood can have a moisture content of 100% or more on a dry basis while air-dried wood typically has a moisture content of 10-20% on a dry basis (Bialy, 1979b).^3 The actual moisture content of fuelwood depends on the drying time and conditions, the ambient temperature, relative humidity, and the characteristics of the fuel. In one rural area in South India, it was found that wood with an average moisture content of 10-20% on a dry basis is burned for cooking (Geller, forthcoming). On the other hand the use of relatively wet wood for cooking has been reported in Indonesia (Singer, 1961).
^3 Moisture content on a dry basis (Mdb) is the ratio of the weight of the moisture in the wood to the weight of dry wood while the moisture content on a wet basis (M[wb]) is the ratio of the weight of the moisture to the weight of the wet wood. Thus M[db] is always greater than or equal to M[wb] and a moisture content of 100% or more is possible when calculating on a dry basis.
Table III-1 - Calorific Value (HHV) of Different Biomass Fuels on an Over-dry Basis
Fuel
Calorific value (MJ/kg)
Wood (a,b,c)
Wood charcoal (a,b,c)
Peat (b)
Rice husks (a)
Cow dung cakes (a)
(a) Bomb calorimetry measurements by Geller at the Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore, India, 1979-80.
(b) Bialy, 1979b.
(c) Earl, 1975
The actual calorific value of fuelwood E[w] (HHV) can be estimated using Equation (1) if the moisture content of the fuel is known.
where M[db] is the moisture content on a dry basis and E[od] is the calorific value of the fuel when oven dried (see Table III-1).
The moisture content of wood is obtained by drying wood in an oven at approximately 100º C until its weight no longer changes. The quantity of moisture in the wood is determined by weighing the wood before and after drying. Thus, it is easier to estimate the calorific value of fuel through measuring its moisture content than by measuring calorific value directly. If this method of estimating calorific value is used, fuel samples should be stored in an air-tight container from the time of collection to the time of analysis.
For any fuel consumption test, it is possible to calculate specific energy consumption in the same manner as specific fuel consumption. Specific energy consumption normalizes for differences in fuel type as well as for differences in household size or the amount of food cooked. In summary, measuring fuel quantity and moisture content is a relatively simple yet accurate method for estimating energy consumption or specific energy consumption during fuelwood surveys.
3.3 Efficiency
Efficiency is a dimensionless quantity which is indicative of fuel economy. The analysis of cooking efficiency involves some normalizations in addition to those used for specific fuel or specific energy consumption. In particular, cooking efficiency takes into account the foods being cooked and the manner in which they are cooked. Thus, the determination of cooking efficiency facilitates comparison of fuel economy in situations where different foods are prepared or different cooking styles are used.
Cooking efficiency is normally defined as the fraction of the energy in the fuel consumed which has been usefully employed during cooking. The energy usefully employed during cooking can be defined as the energy used to heat the pot, the cooking medium, and the food to the cooking temperature(s) plus the energy absorbed by food as it cooks. This definition is reasonable for foods which are simmered in water (grains, legumes, boiled vegetables, etc.).
A general formulation of cocking efficiency as just described is given in Equation (2).
The measurement and calculation of efficiency is simplest when water is the 0 cooking medium. In this case, the cooking temperature is approximately equal to 100 C at a pressure of one atmosphere. In order to calculate the efficiency using Equation (2), the following measurements or estimates have to be made:
(1) the weights of the pots, cooking water, foods, fuel consumed, and any charcoal reclaimed upon completion of cooking;
(2) the temperatures of ambient air, cooking water at the start of cooking, and the contents of the pots during cooking;
(3) calorific values of the fuel and any recovered charcoal.
Thus, a scale and a thermometer are the only instruments needed to measure efficiency beyond those used for measuring or estimating calorific value.
The specific heats which may be needed to calculate efficiency include C[pi] = 0.88 kJ/kgºC for clay pots, C[pi] = 0,92 kJ/ kJ/kgºC for aluminium pots, and C[mi] = 4.18 kJ/kgºC for water. The specific heats of selected foods are shown in Table III-2.
Table III-2 - Specific Heat of Selected Foods (a)
Food
Moisture content
(wet basis)
Specific heat(b)
(kJ/kgº C)
Rice
Flour
Bread
Lentils
Meat
Vegetable oil
Milk
Carrots
onions
Potatoes
Apples
(a) Table extracted from Charm, S.E., Fundamentals of Food Engineering, AVI Publishing, Inc., Westport, Connecticut, 1963.
(b) Average specific heat between 0º and 100º C.
Although the chemical reactions in food during cooking have been well-studied (Suzuki et al. 1976), these studies do not provide the energy absorbed by food during the cooking process (K[fi]) in a convenient form. However, one set of experiments carried out in India deals directly with the question of the energy absorbed by food during the cooking process (Popali, 1979). Based on this study, the energy required for the chemical reactions in rice during cooking is estimated to be about 170 kJ/kg. Other cereals should have a similar cooking energy requirement. On the other hand, fresh vegetables will absorb a minimal amount of energy for chemical reactions during cooking since they contain 80% or more moisture. ^1
^1 The amount of energy taken up by food for chemical reactions during cooking is relatively small compared to the amount of energy used for the sensible heating of the food and the cooking medium. Therefore, overall efficiency is not sensitive to the assumptions regarding K[fi].
The measurement of cooking efficiency in the field is more difficult if cooking styles such as frying, baking, or grilling are encountered. For these cooking methods, there is a greater variation in cooking temperature compared to water-based cooking. Furthermore, cooking temperatures in excess of the boiling point of water are possible and the cooking temperature of the food may be different from that of the cooking medium. For example, fresh vegetables fried in very hot oil may not heat up above 100 ºC because of their high moisture content. For non-water-based cooking, thermocouples, thermistors, or bimetallic thermometers may be needed and more frequent temperature readings taken in order to estimate the cooking temperature. In such cases, the average temperature of the food during cooking can be used in the calculation of efficiency.
Some cooking techniques involve water evaporation as an essential part of the cooking process. This includes stewing or steaming. For these cooking styles, it is reasonable to count the energy required for evaporating water as part of the energy usefully employed during cooking. Cooking efficiency in this case is given by Equation (3).
In Equation (3), M[ei] is the mass of water evaporated from pot i. M[ei] = 0 if water evaporation is not needed for cooking in a particular pot. L, the latent heat of evaporation of water, is 2260 kJ/kg. The amount of water evaporation can be easily measured by weighing the full pot before and after cooking.
Water evaporation is also an integral part of cooking breads and other baked or grilled foods. Therefore, the energy used for water evaporation should be included as energy usefully employed for these foods. Furthermore, the energy required for water evaporation can be significant with these foods. For example, Geller found that when chappatis (flat breads) are cooked on an open pan in South India, the energy used to evaporate water in the dough is about 2-5 times the energy used to raise the temperature of the dough. When cooking food items such as bread, the amount of water evaporation is also measured by weighing the item before and after cooking.
3.4 Test parameter selection
A number of indicators of cooking fuel economy have been proposed in this section. These include:
1. fuel consumption per meal or day;
2. specific fuel consumption in terms of fuel weight per person;
3. specific fuel consumption in terms of fuel weight per unit of food;
4. energy consumption per meal or day;
5. specific energy consumption;
6. efficiency.
Of course, the researcher or surveyor Must select one or more of these parameters for use in the fuelwood survey. This selection could be based on practical concerns such as equipment availability, complexity, time, and cooperation from the population being surveyed. Complexity, equipment requirements, and the degree of interference in the cooking process generally increase when proceeding down the list above.
It is also possible to select a test parameter according to the analytical precision desired. In this case, the objective is to choose a parameter which shows the least amount of variation between similar tests. The method for calculating the degree of variation within a series of tests is explained in section VI. In general, the degree of variation is expected to decrease as test sophistication increases. This result is due to the increasing application of normalization techniques as the test parameter proceeds from fuel consumption to efficiency.
In order to check the above hypothesis and to select the test parameter with the least variation during an actual fuelwood survey, a preliminary series of tests would have to be conducted. During the preliminary tests, all test types are analysed for degree of variation, Based on these results, a particular test can be selected for the survey as a whole.
In reality, it is likely that some compromise between test complexity and the degree of variation will be needed. If this is the case, specific fuel consumption in terms of fuel and food weight seems to be a reasonable "compromise" testing parameter. The measurement of this parameter is relatively simple and involves only minimal interference in the cooking process (weighing fuel and raw food). The measurement or estimation of fuel calorific value-is not required. Furthermore, the sacrifice in precision with this parameter may be small. For example, field tests in a cluster of villages in India showed similar degrees of variation as well as a high correlation between specific fuel consumption (in terms of fuel weight per unit of food) and efficiency (Geller, forthcoming). Therefore, specific fuel consumption should suffice as a comparative measure of fuel economy in many surveys. This is more likely to be the case if the foods and fuels are reasonably consistent from test to
test within the survey.
4. Simulation testing
Fuel consumption and cooking efficiency tests in the field require the surveyor or researcher to interfere with cooking to some extent. While the level of inconvenience should be minor, it may be difficult to conduct field tests in some locations, Furthermore, fuel consumption and efficiency tests during cooking are highly task and site specific. This makes it difficult to compare fuel economy between different regions.
Because of these problems, the performance of fuelwood cookstoves is often measured using laboratory-based simulation tests. Simulation tests usually involve only the heating and boiling of water. Therefore, they are much simpler than cooking tests. Critical parameters such as fuel and pot types are kept constant during a series of simulation tests unless the effect that one of these parameters has on efficiency is being studied. It may be useful to include simulation tests in a fuelwood survey if cooking tests are not possible or if detailed information regarding cooking fuel economy under controlled conditions is desired.
The term "heat utilized" has been proposed as the figure of merit in simulation tests (Joseph and Shanahan, 1980). Heat utilized is generally the fraction of the energy in the fuel consumed during the simulation test which contributes to either water heating or water heating and water evaporation. Thus, the heat utilized during a simulation test is similar to the definition of cooking efficiency during field tests. Equations (2) and (3) can be used to calculate the heat utilized during simulation tests if the terms involving food are ignored.
The question also arises whether or not to consider evaporative energy as heat utilized in simulation tests. Including water evaporation as heat utilized takes into account all the energy absorbed by the water. However, this method of calculating heat utilized could be misleading when applied to situations where water evaporation is not essential for cooking. Therefore, for simulation tests, it is preferable to measure and report heat utilized using both methods.
A number of simulation test procedures have been used in the past (Morgan et al., 1979). These include:
1. a fixed quantity of fuel is burned and a specific amount of water is repeatedly heated to a certain temperature;
2. a fixed quantity of fuel is burned and the amounts of water heating and evaporation are measured;
3. a fixed quantity of water is heated to boiling and the amount of fuel consumed is measured;
4. a fixed quantity of water is heated to a boil and is then kept simmering for a certain period of time while the amount of fuel consumed is measured;
5. a fixed quantity of water is completely evaporated and then the fuel consumed is measured.
Some of these simulation test procedures may not be representative of actual cooking practices. Furthermore, it has been shown that the optimal heat output level and the efficiency of a stove varies significantly for different operations such as heating water or simmering water (Dutt, 1978), A stove which is relatively efficient for one function may give a poor efficiency for another. Therefore, a simulation test procedure which deviates significantly from the actual cooking routine in a region may not give meaningful results.
Some cookstove researchers are now using simulation test procedures which are based to a greater extent on the way people cook (Joseph and Shanahan, 1980). For example, a simulation test tailored to the cooking routine in a particular region of South India includes periods of water heating, simmering, and the rotating of pots between stove openings (Geller, 1981b). Simulation testing using a procedure reflecting local cooking patterns is recommended even though it may limit the potential to compare test results between different studies.^1
^1 For a detailed explanation of how to conduct simulation tests in this manner, see VITA's stove testing manual. Downey, 1981.
The heat utilized during simulation testing can be much higher than the efficiency realized in the field. Under optimal conditions, heat utilized values of close to 30% have been obtained in simulation tests on an open fire (Krishna Prasad, 1980).^2 This is 2-6 times higher than the efficiency generally reported or assumed for open fire cooking (Morgan et al., 1979; Krishna Prasad, 1980). Even when a simulation test procedure reflects local cooking practices, differences in fuel economy between simulation and cooking tests can result. Geller, for example, measured heat utilized values which were 25-30% higher than the actual cooking efficiencies with traditional stoves in South India (Geller, 1981 and forthcoming). Thus, simulation tests should be viewed as an indicator of relative fuel economy rather than as an indicator of absolute performance.^3
^2 In these tests, the energy absorbed for water evaporation is included as heat utilized.
^3 This is analagous to the situation with automobile fuel economy and the specific gel consumption tests conducted by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Fuel economy based on EPA's simulation tests are generally higher than the "on-the-road" values (Gray and vanMippel, 1981).
5. Procedures for a series of cookstove performance tests
5.1 Test type in relation to testing objective
5.2 Variability between tests
5.3 Comparison of the relative fuel usage of two stoves
5.1 Test type in relation to testing objective
The selection of a testing methodology depends in part on the overall objective of the tests. Tests may be conducted for one or more of the following reasons:
(a) to measure fuel or energy consumption during cooking;
(b) to compare the relative fuel usage of two (or more) stoves;
(c) to check how factors such as pot or fuel type affect fuel consumption;
(d) to understand the distribution of heat in a stove in order to minimize fuel use;
(e) to optimize the dimensions of a stove in order to minimize fuel use.
Table III-3 shows the test procedures which can be used with the different testing objectives. Testing procedures fall into two categories - those carried out in a laboratory and those conducted in the field. Furthermore, they can involve one, a few, or many stoves and either cooking or simulation tests. Objectives (a), (b) and (c) are of the greatest interest to fuelwood surveyors, forestry planners and extension agents. Cookstove researchers, however, may be interested in all of the objectives.
Table III-3 Relationship between Objective and Testing Procedure (*)
Number of stoves
Laboratory tests
Laboratory cooking tests
Field cooking tests
(c) (d) (e)
(c)
(b) (c)
(b)
(c)
6 or more
(a) (b)
* Letters in parentheses refer to the testing objective as listed in the text above.
As shown in Table III-3, objective (a) requires field data from many households. Objective (b), on the other hand, can be satisfied using either laboratory or field measurements depending on the circumstances. A researcher developing efficient stoves would first compare different stoves using simulation tests. Once a promising design is developed in the laboratory, actual cooking tests should be conducted in order to verify the simulation test results. A testing procedure for comparing the relative fuel usage between stoves is described later in this section.
Tests of how critical variables affect fuel economy (objective (c)), can be carried out either in the field or in the laboratory. As described in section 6, the data collected in field surveys of fuelwood consumption can be statistically analysed to determine whether certain variables are associated with higher than average or lower than-average efficiencies. It is also possible to consciously study how factors such as pot or fuel type influence efficiency through comparative testing in the laboratory.
Only stove researchers would be concerned with objectives (d) and (e) since many measurements are required in both cases. Furthermore, tests to satisfy objectives (d) and (e) involve complicated studies of the combustion and heat transfer phenomena in fuelwood stoves. These studies are only realistic in the laboratory.
5.2 Variability between tests
Fuel consumption and efficiency can vary significantly from meal to meal on woodburning stoves in a particular area. This is due to variations in stoves, fuels, the foods being cooked, and the operating methods of the cook. For example, a three-fold variation in cooking efficiency was observed between homes in a group of South Indian villages (Geller, forthcoming). The degree of variation in fuel economy between meals can result in a high level of statistical uncertainty in a series of cookstove performance tests. However, the testing methodology can be designed to minimize the variation and/or the range of uncertainty for a series of tests conducted under similar conditions.
The selection of the test parameter is one factor which can be used to limit the variation in field tests. As mentioned in section 3, the surveyor or researcher has the choice of measuring fuel Consumption, specific fuel consumption, energy consumption, or efficiency. The degree of variation during a series of similar tests should in general decrease as the test parameter proceeds from fuel consumption to efficiency. This phenomenon is demonstrated quantitatively in an example in section 6.
It is also possible to use the field testing procedure to limit the statistical variation between similar tests. One testing procedure involves selecting a large number of households with only one measurement or just a few measurements in each household. This is known as a cross-section study. It characterizes the variation in fuel use or efficiency among households without giving any indication of the variation within a household. A second method, known as a time series study, involves a large number of measurements over a period of time in an individual household. Of course, conducting some tests in a number of households for example, six tests in each of eight households) will provide information on the variation within as well as across houses. In order to minimize the range of uncertainty associated with a test parameter, the tests should be targeted where the degree of variation is greatest. For example, if there is greater variation between households rather than
within households, then a larger number of households should be sampled with fewer tests per house.
5.3 Comparison of the relative fuel usage of two stoves
The evaluation of the relative fuel usage between two stoves is an important element in Stove development programmes. This is also a commonplace testing requirement. Measurements of this type should be done by the stove designer or surveyor prior to attempting to introduce a new stove. In addition, measurements conducted 6 to 12 months after stove introduction are desirable in order to assess the longer-term impact on fuel use. When comparing the performance of two stoves, it is especially important to reduce the effects of variability due to fuel type, moisture content, food cooked and cooking style. One procedure for comparison testing was first developed in Kaya, Upper Volta (Dutt, 1981b).^1
^1 The Kaya procedure is presented as a method to compare two different stoves. It can also be used to compare fuel economy under two different operating conditions (e.g. clay vs. aluminium pots).
In the Kaya procedure, each participating household is given both of the stoves being compared. The cook(s) must agree to alternate their cooking between the two stoves. Measurements of one of the test parameters described in section 3 are repeated each meal or day. A minimum of 5 households and 6 consecutive days of cooking tests per house are essential. The Sample size depends on the level of accuracy sought and is discussed in Appendix III-4.
Alternate cooking tests should follow a certain schedule in order to avoid cooking the same meal on the same stove each day. For locations such as Kaya where two meals are cooked per day, the schedule presented in Table III-4 can be used.
Table III-4 - Kaya Procedure
Day 1
midday meal:
Stove A
evening meal:
Stove B
Day 2
midday meal:
Stove B
evening meal:
Stove A
Day 3
midday meal:
Stove A
evening meal:
Stove B, etc.
The test should be run for an even number of days so that each stove is used the same number of times for a particular meal. A data sheet for the Kaya procedure is shown in Appendix III-2.
6. Interpretation of test data
6.1 Characterizing a series of tests
6.2 Data analysis in comparative tests
6.1 Characterizing a series of tests
A series of tests yields many measurements of the same parameter(s). These measurements may be described in terms of the arithmetic mean. If X[i] is the i^th of n measurements of the quantity X, the arithmetic mean is given by
The arithmetic mean or average does not describe the variability in the measurements. The variability is given by the standard deviation S where
The standard deviation divided by the mean yields a parameter known as the coefficient of variation (COV). COV is a normalized measure of variability which is independent of the units of the quantity being measured.
Table III-5 shows an example of field tests in 13 households (Geller, 1981a). This is a relatively small sample and, consequently, the results are only indicative of the conditions in the population as a whole., Nonetheless, this example can be used to illustrate the analysis of test data. For the 13 tests shown in Table III-5, the average fuelwood consumption is 3.61 kg per household and the average efficiency is 6.0%. The mean, standard deviation, and COV for various test parameters are shown in Table III-6.
It is seen that the COV decreases from 59% for fuel consumption to 36% for efficiency. However, the COV for specific fuel consumption (in terms of food quantity) is only slightly greater than the COV for efficiency. This example supports the conclusions in previous sections that:
1. the coefficient of variation decreases as the complexity of the test parameter increases;
2. from the viewpoint of reducing variability, specific fuel consumption (in terms of fuel consumed per unit of food cooked) is nearly as good a parameter as efficiency in field tests.
Table III-5 - Field Tests in 13 Households in the Ungra Village Area of South India (Geller, 1981a)
Household Size
Predominant pot type (a)
Quantity of food cooked (kg/meal)
Firewood consumed (kg/meal)
Efficiency (%)
C
Al
Al
Al
Al
C
C
Al
Al
Al
C
C
Al
(a) C - Clay; Al - Aluminium
Table III-6 - Variability in the Different Test Parameters from 13 Field Tests in South India (a)
Parameter
Mean
Standard deviation(S)
Coefficient of variation
Fuel consumption (kg/meal)
Specific fuel consumption
(kg wood/capita/meal)
Specific fuel consumption
(kg wood/kg food/meal)
Efficiency (%)
(a) Table based on the work of Geller at the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India. See Table III-5 for the primary data.
6.2 Data analysis in comparative tests
The comparison of fuel consumption or efficiency between two different stoves or two different operating conditions is a common testing objective. For example, in improved stove projects, there is a need to compare the fuel economy of a new stove with a traditional stove (or an open fire). A procedure for conducting comparative tests was presented in the previous section. Here, we give some techniques for determining whether the test parameter is significantly different for the different stoves or operating conditions and, if so, the uncertainty in the difference and the level of significance on a statistical basis.
The simplest way to compare two sets of data is to compare the means from each set. However, there will be some uncertainty in the difference of the two means due to the distribution of the measurements. The level of uncertainty can be estimated using the standard deviation as shown in the following example.
Table III-7 shows the results from a set of tests comparing fuel consumption during cooking for an open fire and a new cookstove designed by a Peace Corps volunteer in Kaya, Upper Volta (Hooper, 1980). The tests were carried out by Peace Corps volunteers following the procedure described in the previous section (Schroeder and Lavell, 1981). In this set of tests, fuel consumption with the Kaya stove was compared with the open fire in six households with 9 - 13 tests conducted per house. Table III-7 shows that the average fuel savings with the stove is 1.01 kg per meal or 28%. A crude estimate of the uncertainty in this value can be obtained by calculating the standard deviation in the average savings per household.^1 The standard deviation for these values is 0.43 kg per meal or 12%. Thus, the estimate of the savings with the Kaya stove may be stated as 1.01 ± 0.43 kg per meal (28% ± 12%).
^1 This estimate is crude because we have not taken into account the fact that there were several tests done with each-stove in each household.
Table III-7 - Fuel use per Meal in open fires and Kaya Stoves
Household
Household
Size
Average wood use per meal (kg) (a)
Fuel savings with the Kaya stove relative to the open fire
open fire
Kaya stove
(kg/meal)
Average
(a) The numbers in parentheses-refer to the number of meals over which the fuel consumption has been averaged.
The "t-test" is another method for statistically comparing sets of measurements for two stoves or two operating conditions. In order to perform the t-test, the mean and standard deviation for each group of tests must be calculated. Then, the t value can be computed from Equation (6).
The computed t value is compared to values in a t-table to determine if the mean from one group is significantly greater than the mean from the other. An abridged t-table is shown in Appendix III-3. The values in the table are listed as a function of the "degrees of freedom" and level of significance. Degrees of freedom is simply the number of test measurements minus the number of parameters which have been estimated based on the measurements. The level of significance is the percentage chance that the result indicated by the t-test is not true. Therefore, the statistical difference between the means from the two groups increases as the indicated level of significance decreases.
The t-table is used by comparing the calculated t-value to the numbers in the table at the appropriate degrees of freedom. It can be said that the mean from one group of tests is greater than the mean from the other at a certain level of significance if the computed t-value is greater than the number in the table at that level.
The application of the t-test may be illustrated using the field test data from South India (Table III-5). The measurements in this table can be divided into two groups according to the predominant pot type, clay or aluminium. Table III-8 shows the mean and the standard deviation in the specific fuel consumption for each group. Using Equation (6), the t-value for this example is 2.20. Furthermore, there are 11 degrees of freedom in the example since 13 measurements were made and two parameters (the means for each group) were estimated, Based on the entries in the t-table at 11 degrees of freedom, the t-value is greater than the number in the table at a level of significance of 2.5% but less than the number at 1.0%^1
^1 The significance level can be improved by increasing the sample size (see Appendix III-4).
This series of tests suggests that households using aluminium pots have a high probability of saving fuel compared to households using clay pots. This does not, of course, prove that the use of aluminium pots is more fuel efficient than the use of clay pots. Households using aluminium pots may have other characteristics that distinguish them from households cooking with clay pots. For example, pot type might correlate with a difference in socio-economic level or diet and one of these latter factors might cause the difference in fuel usage. For a more definitive assessment of the influence of cooking pot type (or some other variable) on fuel use, we recommend alternating pot types in the same household following the Kaya procedure.
Table III-8 - Difference in Specific Fuel Consumption between Households Using either Clay or Aluminium pots in South India
Predominant pot type
Number of Households
Specific Fuel Consumption
(kg fuel per kg food per meal)
Mean
Standard deviation
Clay
Aluminium
7. Conclusions
Appendix III-1 - Cooking survey questionnaire
Appendix III-2 - Kaya procedure data sheet
Appendix III-3 - T-Table
Appendix III-4 - Choosing appropriate sample sizes
The objectives of this report are to present:
1. the reasons for testing the fuel economy of cookstoves;
2. the methods for measuring stove performance in the field and in the laboratory;
3. the procedures for conducting a series of tests;
4. the techniques for interpreting test results.
There are a variety of parameters which can be measured during cooking. These include fuel consumption, specific fuel consumption, energy consumption, and efficiency. Energy consumption can be estimated with minimal error by measuring the quantity and the moisture content of the fuel. Efficiency requires more detailed measurements. Furthermore, specific fuel consumption is simple to measure yet It appears to be nearly as accurate as the more sophisticated testing parameters. Therefore, it is recommended when field testing.
Simulated cooking tests are useful for comparing the efficiency of different stoves or different operating conditions. These tests are conducted in the laboratory and involve the measurement of "percentage heat utilized". When performing simulation tests, we recommend developing a water heating and simmering routine based on the local cocking practices, Simulation tests should be used to gauge relative fuel economy rather than the absolute efficiency which can be expected during cooking.
There will be some variability in the measurement of fuel consumption, specific fuel consumption, or efficiency during a series of tests. However, a series of tests can be structured to limit this variability. A carefully designed testing procedure is also useful for comparing the relative fuel economy of two stoves or two different operating conditions.
In order to draw conclusions from a series of fuel economy tests, it is useful to calculate certain statistical functions. These include the mean, standard deviation, coefficient of variation, and t-value. These parameters can be used to estimate the level of uncertainty of the significance of a test result.
Appendix III-1 - Cooking survey questionnaire*
* This survey was designed by Andre Longmire (Peace Corps, Mali)
1) Background
Name of village:
Household size:_______
Adults __________
Children (under 16) __________
Number of people for whom food is cooked (average):
__________:Adults
Children (under 16) __________
Who does the cooking
How often:
Type of meal usually cooked:
Morning
Time __________
Afternoon
Time __________
Evening
Time __________
Cooking process for each item cooked:
2) Cooking
Are there customs centered around use or placement of the stove or place of cooking? Yes/No. If Yes, describe________________________________________________________________
Do they cook inside or outside?__________________________________________________
State no. of months in each:
inside__________________
outside:__________________
In the cold season do they cook inside to keep warm? Yes/No
If they cook mostly inside now and if an indoor stove released smoke outside, would they mind cooking inside most of the time? Yes/No
If the stove is inside, does it have a chimney? Yes/No
If stove is inside without a chimney, does the smoke serve any useful purpose?
Yes/No; If yes, what? __________________________________________________________
Comments: __________________________________________________________________
3) Stoves - Describe stoves below, listing them by frequency of use.
Stove No. 1 (used most often)
Type: Three stone/2 hole without flue/2 hole with flue
other (specify) ______________________________
Age of Stove:
Location: inside/outside/under a shelter/other _______________________________________
Months of use ______________________________
Frequency of use: daily/3 to 5 times a week/1 or 2 times a week/other ____________________
Which meals are prepared on it: __________________________________________________
Types of pots most frequently used (metal, clay, etc.) __________________________________
Which pot sizes fit this stove best: ________________________________________________
Who built the stove? ___________________________________________________________
How much would it cost now? ____________________________________________________
What are the materials used in its construction? _____________________________________
How long would it last? _________________________________________________________
How is it maintained? __________________________________________________________
Stove No. 2 (used next most frequently)
(Repeat as in stove No. 1.)
What other functions do the stove(s) serve besides cooking? ___________________________
4) Fuel
What is the most common fuel source: ________; other ________;
When wood is used as fuel, what is the approximate length ______;
diameter_____
Type of wood preferred
Reasons: ___________________________________________________________________
Does the household often buy wood? Yes/No
If Yes,
Is wood bought all year? Yes/No (specify) ________________________________________
What is the range of prices paid? ________
to _______________
per ______________
Dry season to per ____________________
to _______________
per ______________
Rainy season to per __________________
to _______________
per ______________
Other times to per ____________________
to _______________
per ______________
How much does it cost now per week?
at a price of
If No, (i.e., family rarely buys wood)
Do they use wood from their own trees? Yes/No
Do they gather wood? Yes/No
If they gather wood, who gathers? (specify relationship to head of household)_______________
How often?__________________________________________________________________
Roughly how much is gathered during each trip?______________________________________
How long does it take for each trip? _______________________________________________
Do they store their wood dry?____________________________________________________
If yes, how long?______________________________________________________________
5) Local materials and technology (a)
(a)This part of questionnaire need only be asked of a few families in any village.
Are there locally made stoves, ovens or other cooking devices? Yes/No
If yes, describe how they are used and how often; how they are made and by whom __________
Are there masons in the area? ___________________________________________________
Do the people use bricks, cement, etc. for masonry construction? ________________________
What do the local people use for mortar for their granaries and houses?
Traditionally what is the best mortar? Describe ______________________________________
Is there someone in the village who makes pottery? Yes/No If yes, describe the type of pottery; how it is made; what materials are used.
Are there stone-cutters in the area? Yes/No
What is the local process for drying vegetables and fish? ______________________________
Appendix III-2 - Kaya procedure data sheet
Stove A: __________
Pot sizes:
Pot type(s):
Stove B: __________
Pot sizes:
Pot type(s):
Principal cook (P.C.)____________________(relationship to head of household)
Weight of wood
Date of cooking
(circle if market day)
Meals cooked (M/E) (1)
Cook (2)
Stove used (A/B) (3)
Before cooking (kg)
After cooking (kg)
Number people eating meal
Leftovers saved for later meal
(yes/no)
Comments on type of wood
A
B
B
A
A
B
B
A
(1) M: mid-day meal; E: evening meal; specify M or E
(2) Enter P.C. if weal was cooked by principal cook. Otherwise enter relationship of cook to head.
(3) If a different stove is used than indicated on schedule, please note it.
(4) Specify if wood is wet or dry, large pieces or twigs. Enter additional comments on reverse along with relevant data and time.
Appendix III-3 - T-Table
Degrees of freedom
Level of significance(%) (a)
(a)This is the one-sided level of significance which is applied when testing whether the mean from one population is greater than the mean from another.
Appendix III-4 - Choosing appropriate sample sizes
The level of significance with which the means of two samples of data can be distinguished depends on the number of measurements (sample size), the standard deviation of the measurements, and the difference between the sample means. If there are n measurements in each sample, the standard deviation is a fraction "a" of the population mean, and the difference between the sample means is a fraction "d" of the population mean, i.e., s = ax and x[1] - x[2] = dx, then, for a significance level of µ,
We have seen in an earlier stove test that a = 0.4. Thus, using A.4.1, for a 2.5% level of significance, n needs to be at least 2 (2.0)^2 0.16/[d]^2=1.28/[d]^2. For a 1.0% level of significance, n should be greater than 2.0/[d]^2. (See the accompanying table for minimum sample sizes at specific values of d and x). For example, given a 20% difference in mean (d=0.2) and a 2.5% level of significance, n should be greater than 32. Of course, a researcher will not know beforehand what the value of d is going to be. Nonetheless, a sample size can be selected based on the anticipated difference, in means and the level of significance desired.
Table III-9 - Minimum Sample Size for Various Percent Differences in Means and Levels of significance
Percent difference in means (100 d%)
Level of significance (µ)
<section>c</section>
Annex III - (b) Measuring fuelwood and charcoal
by Keith Openshaw^1
^1 Keith Openshaw has worked on surveys of wood fuels in Gambia, Kenya, Tanzania and Thailand. At the time of writing this note he was Senior Lecturer in Forest Economics at the University of Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
1. Fuelwood
2. Charcoal
When measuring the consumption of fuelwood and charcoal, conversion factors have to be used in order to convert field observations into standard units. These factors will have to be compiled for the particular country in question but certain procedures are common to all countries.
1. Fuelwood
1.1 Average bundle size
1.2 Volume measurements
1.3 Weight
1.1 Average bundle size
Much fuelwood is collected by the headload. A number of headloads could be measured either by volume or weight and an average for a particular district or country could be established. The main collectors of fuelwood in each district should also be recorded, for if children are the principal collectors in one area, the headload size may differ considerably from another district where women are the collectors. Therefore it is advisable to record the incidence of collectors by sex and age. Again the bicycle or handcart may be used to collect the wood in some areas and naturally the size and weight of the bundle will differ from the average headload size, so the method of conveying the wood should also be recorded.
1.2 Volume measurements
The two methods of measuring, by volume or by weight, each has drawbacks. If volume is used, then the conversion factor from the bundle to solid measure can vary enormously, depending on whether the headload consists of one large log or many small branches, though the average headload conversion factor may be between 0.35 and 0.400 For example, in the Machakos district of Kenya the average headload volume was found to be 0.087 m^3 and the average conversion factor measured by the water displacement method was 0.38, so the solid volume of the average headload was 0.33 m^3.
In some countries the stere or stacked cubic metre is the standard measure, but in using this measure the surveyor does not know the correct conversion factor to apply. If the stere is made up from bundles, then the conversion factor will be much lower than if it is made up from stacked stem wood. Again the stacked measure is not an exact measure and can be up to 20 percent more than a true stere (but it is rarely less than a true stere). This also applies to other stacked measures in use such as a cord (4 feet × 4 feet × 8 feet = 128 stacked cubic feet or the metric cord 1 m × 1 m × 3). One advantage the volume measure has over the weight measure is that the volume of 'wet' wood does not differ greatly from air dry wood (may be up to 5 percent); if a standard conversion factor to convert weight into volume is used, without accounting for the moisture content of the wood, then there can be 100 percent difference in volume estimation, depending on whether the wood is green or
oven dry.
1.3 Weight
(i) Convenience
Weight may be a more convenient measure to use to ascertain solid volume, for the weight of a bundle of wood (or crop residue) is easier and quicker to determine (using a spring balance) than trying to determine the gross volume of an irregularly shaped headload of fuelwood. If the solid volume is to be measured, then every piece of wood will have to be measured separately, or the water displacement method used. This entails the submerging of a fuelwood bundle in a tank of water and determining the volume of displaced water. Of course, if the fuelwood is dry then some water will be absorbed unless the displaced water is measured immediately.
(ii) Moisture content
From surveys in Gambia and Tanzania, the average headload weighed about 26 kg whereas in Kenya it weighs 25 kg and in Sri Lanka 20 kg. However, if weight is used two drawbacks must be noted. First, the weight of wood depends upon the moisture content (m.c.). If wood is cut green and then collected, the moisture content could be 100 percent or more (dry basis measure), i.e. its weight is double the oven dry (bone dry) weight.^1 If the wood is first allowed to dry out and become 'air' dry then the moisture content may be around 12 to 15 percent, depending on the relative humidity of the atmosphere, so the same piece of wood may weigh up to 75 percent more if it is freshly felled compared to air dry. Therefore, it is important to know the moisture content of the wood if weight is the measure for assessing the solid round wood volume. In areas where wood is reasonably available then dead (air dry) wood is collected. However, in areas of scarcity, live branches are lopped. The
collecting of green wood means that the collector is carrying 'unwanted moisture'; second, if green wood is burnt, energy is required to evaporate this water and less energy will be available for cooking and heating.
^1 Moisture content can be measured in two ways:
(a) on a dry basis, that is:
(b) on a wet basis, that is:
In this section all moisture contents have been given on a dry basis but in some countries fuelwood moisture content is given on a wet basis. The formula for changing from dry to wet basis is as follows:
where D = moisture content as a percent of the dry weight basis
and W = moisture content as a percent of the wet weight basis
If the moisture content is 100 percent on the dry basis then the wet basis moisture content = 50 percent.
Similarly a 15 percent dry basis moisture content = 13 percent (wet basis).
The reverse formula for changing from wet basis moisture content to dry basis moisture content is as follows:
The following table gives an idea of the volume of wood at different moisture contents for an average tropical fuelwood species per tonne weight, using a standard conversion factor of 1 t - 1.39 m^3 at 15% m.c.
Moisture content %
(dry basis)
Volume (m^3)
Solid
Therefore, if the wood was assumed to be air dry (15 percent m.c.) when in fact it was green (100 percent m.c.) then the estimated solid volume of 1 tonne would be 1.39 m^3 and not 0.80 m^3, an error of 74 percent.
The above table could be reworked using 1 m^3 as the standard and the weights for different moisture contents would be as follows:
Moisture content %
(dry basis)
Weight (tonnes) per m^3
Solid
Therefore, if weight is going to be the unit of measure then the approximate moisture content should be ascertained. There are moisture content meters which give immediate readings, but they may be difficult to obtain. Another method is to collect samples of the wood in airtight containers and measure the moisture content in a laboratory.
(iii) Density
The second problem with using weight as a measure to determine solid volume is that the weight depends on density, and the density within and between wood species is not uniform. Juvenile wood in young trees is less dense than mature wood in old trees or the same species, and sapwood is less dense than heartwood. Similarly, non-conifers are usually denser than conifers. However, what is important to note is that if the moisture content is the same, the energy given off from a piece of wood is more or less the same on a weight basis irrespective of species, and this is an important factor when planning the needs of a household, community or industry. One kilogram of wood at 6 15 percent moisture content when burnt will give off about 16.0 megajoules (16 × 10^6 J) (MJ/kg) that is 3,820 kilocalories (kcals) or 15,170 British thermal units (Btus).^1 Wood with 40 percent m.c. has a heat value of 12.7 MJ/kg and that of a 100 percent m.c. 8. 2 MJ/kg.^2
^1 This is the low heat value and is equivalent to the heat available when cooking food etc. It can be calculated as follows:
where x = (high) heat value of wood » 20.0 MJ/kg.
and m = the moisture content. The factor of 2.4 MJ per kg of water is the amount of heat required to drive off 1 kg of water from the wood.
^2 The low heat values of III tropical woods from Africa, Asia and South America were found to be on average 18.3 MJ/kg (oven dry state) with a coefficient of variation of less than 8%. The lowest value was 16.7 MJ/kg and the highest 20.3 MJ/kg. The corresponding values for temperate zone non-resinous hardwoods vary from 18.0 to 18.8 MJ/kg and between 19.2 and 20.1 MJ/kg for resinous softwoods (Bialy 1979 To obtain high heat values add 1.3 MJ/kg to the above values.
One survey could conclude that the average per 3 capita consumption of fuelwood in an area is 1.4 m^3 whereas in another area it is 2.4 m^3. If the principal species in the first case is Acacia mearnsii and in the second case Pinus patula then the two different volumes would yield approximately the same amount of heat, therefore it is important to record the species of firewood used in order to work out an approximate energy yield value. When planning fuelwood plantations the potential energy yield per unit area rather than volume is the important measures
Some preferred fuelwood (and charcoal) species are very dense, and even for air dry logs 1 tonne may give a volume less than 1 m^3, whereas the average is about 1.4 m^3 per tonne (air dry) and for conifers it can be 2.0 m^3 per tonne.
2. Charcoal
2.1 Volume and weight
2.2 Fines
2.3 Converting to roundwood equivalent
2.1 Volume and weight
Charcoal is usually sold by volume - per standard bag or basket, per tin or per pile but sometimes directly by weight. If it is sold by weight and is dry (1-15 percent m.c. but on average about 5 percent) then the energy value of the charcoal will be about 33.0 MJ per kilogram (7,890 kcals/kg or 31,300 Btus/kg), or twice that of wood per kg.
Most frequently charcoal is sold by the standard bag, which can vary from area to area and country to country. A 50 kg 'sugar bag' in many areas is considered standard and this has a volume of about 0.1 De The weight of charcoal, like fuelwood, depends on the moisture content and the density of the parent wood. Unless the charcoal has been deliberately wet or stood out in the rain the moisture content will be about 5 percent, with little significant variation. Therefore the weight of charcoal will only depend on the density of the parent wood assuming it has been completely or near completely carbonised. Normal tropical hardwoods with a volume of approximately 1.4 m^3/tonne (15 percent m.c.) will weigh about 33 kg per bag whereas preferred charcoal species will give an average weight of 36 kg per bag. This is equivalent to a wood volume of about 1.3 m^3/tonne (15 percent m.c.).
If the charcoal is made from softwood then each bag will weigh on average about 23 kg equivalent to a wood volume of about 2.0 m^3/tonne (15 percent m.c.). On the other hand mangrove (Rhizophora) charcoal will give a bag weight of 56 kg (wood volume equivalent 0.8 m^3/tonne of 15 percent m.c.). It can be seen that there is over 100 percent difference in weight between the two extremes quoted here and therefore it is important to know the species from which the charcoal is made, and as will be discussed later the method by which it is made. When undertaking a survey, a number of bags in each district/region should be weighed and if there are several sizes of bags (baskets) then they should be categorized (large, medium and small) and the average weight of each class of bag obtained by district.
Charcoal is also sold by the tin and the pile. The tin can vary in size, but if it is a 20-liter paraffin tin then it will contain about 7 kg of charcoal (tropical hardwoods) as mentioned above; if the sides have been forced in, the weight may be reduced to 4-5 kg. The tin and the bag are sold at prices which fluctuate according to season, inflation and statutory controls. On the other hand, the pile is usually sold at a fixed price and therefore the quantity in the pile varies from season to season and over time. Therefore, if the pile is being used as a measure then it should be weighed periodically to see if there are variations. At the same time as recording weight of charcoal, the price per bag, tin, pile should also be recorded.
2.2 Fines
When charcoal is manufactured there is always a certain amount of powdered charcoal or 'fines'. This may be as much as 30 percent of the volume. Some of these fines, maybe up to 5 percent of the volume, are always included in a bag of charcoal and the quantity of fines will increase more or less in proportion to the distance the charcoal is transported due to the vibration of the lorry, etc. If the charcoal is sold by the pile then it must be remembered that the pile does not contain fines and when converting back to bags from piles (and to a lesser extent tins) then only the solid volume in each bag should be considered. This may be 80-90 percent of the weight but it can be determined by actual weighing.
If briquetting of charcoal is undertaken then the output by weight of charcoal may be increased by as much as 50-100 percent because powdered charcoal weighs approximately three times that of unpowdered charcoal on a volume for volume basis. Therefore, the conversion factor will have to be adjusted accordingly.
2.3 Converting to roundwood equivalent
Once the weight of a charcoal bag or tin has been determined a consumption figure by individual end uses could be obtained in a similar fashion to that described for fuelwood. However, conversion factors are required to convert the weight of charcoal back to roundwood equivalent and three basic problems arise; wood density, moisture content of the wood raw material and the method of conversion.
The density of the wood governs the yield of charcoal and therefore as explained above a given volume of charcoal will give different weights of charcoal. For example, 1 m^3 of air dry (15 percent m.c.) wood will give the following weight of charcoal including fines for various species.
Species:
Pines
Average Tropical hardwoods
Preferred tropical hardwoods charcoal species
Rhizophora
Weight of charcoal per m^3 (kg)
Moisture content also has an effect on the yield of charcoal; the drier the wood the greater the yield of charcoal. As a first approximation the yield of charcoal from silar wood at various moisture contents is as follows:
Wood moisture content %
Yield as a percentage
(a)100
(b) 108
Source: (Adapted from Earl, 1973)
Air dry wood at 12 percent moisture content will give approximately three times more charcoal than green wood (100 percent m.c.). Therefore, charcoal production could be increased by using suitably dried wood.
Lastly the method of production can affect the yield of charcoal considerably and the range for average tropical hardwoods at 15 percent moisture content can be from about 4,5 m^3 per tonne produced in a metal retort where most of the fines are briquetted to 27 m^3 per tonne at a 100 percent moisture content in a poorly designed earth kiln with no sale of fines. It is therefore important to know the method of production, the species and their moisture content in order to arrive at a meaningful roundwood conversion factor. Most of the charcoal produced in developing countries is produced in earth kilns and the conversion factor can vary from about 10 m^3 per tonne of charcoal up to 27 m^3 per tonne depending on the moisture content, species and skill of the operator. Therefore, in order to determine the roundwood equivalent, the production method should be known - earth, portable steel kiln, brick kiln, a retort, etc. Then local conversion factors may be worked out from
actual observation, knowing the species and their moisture content. However, the following conversion factors are given as a guide:
Conversion factors per tonne of charcoal sold. ^1 (Average volume 1.4 m^3/t at 15% m.c.) ^2
^1 It is assumed that the fines are briquetted in the retort.
^2 With softwoods about 60 percent, more volume is required per tonne of charcoal and with dense hardwoods such as mangrove about 30 percent less volume is required.
Units m^3 n e
Moisture Content
Kiln type
Earth kiln
Portable steel kiln
Brick kiln
Retort
<section>d</section>
Annex IV - Energy use in agriculture and industry
Notes on non-household energy needs which might be met by wood fuels, and on alternative sources of renewable energy for meeting theme needs
Russell deLucia
Introduction
Alternative energy technologies
Introduction
Shaft power
Process heat
Fuelwood and other traditional fuel requirements are not associated only with domestic users, Not only are there existing uses of fuelwood in the agricultural, commercial, and industrial sectors, there is also the potential for dramatically increasing requirements in these sectors, and in addition there is an opportunity to increase the efficiency of current uses in these sectors as well as in the domestic sector. At the same time, these more concentrated uses provide opportunities for viable substitution of wood fuels by other renewable sources of energy such as wind, biogas, and solar.
In addition to embodied energy in inputs such as fertilizer, energy requirements for agriculture and industry can be divided between demands for shaft power and demands for process heat* This division for rural industries is shown in Table IV-1. Firewood and charcoal can be used to meet these requirements, but there are other sources which are also suitable, as indicated in the same table. In some survey efforts it may be necessary to explore the nature of these demands in detail, since for all of these there are technologies that allow for providing for these demands with wood fuel, and it may be necessary to determine whether this or some other energy form is most appropriate.
Shaft power
All industries can make use of shaft power for materials handling and preliminary processing of raw materials, but only certain industries such as textiles, crop processing, metal and woodworking use shaft power in the primary production activity. The amount of shaft power required depends on the scale of production and the extent to which an industry is run off a central source of power or separately powered machines.
Electric motors have played an increasing role in providing shaft power, especially for portable equipment and small horsepower machines. Studies in India and Taiwan (SIETI, 1976; Samuel, n.d.) indicate that in initial stages of development the use of shaft power in small industries is in areas characterized by relatively small loads per enterprise. In a more developed economy, such as Taiwan, the connected load increases. Where electricity is not available, diesel engines can be used for small horsepower requirements and steam engines or direct hydro-power can be used for larger power requirements. Despite these options, rural industries, by and large, operate on manual power. There is considerable latent demand for shaft power to increase labour productivity and to improve product quality, but this demand is not realized primarily because of lack of finance, and in many areas lack of electricity. Energization of industry is usually associated with the replacement of labour
with capital, although in most rural industries the increase in labour productivity will increase the returns to labour and shift and perhaps reduce the skill requirements.
Shaft power needs are of critical importance in agriculture. The energy requirements for agricultural production are considerable and include fertilizers, agrochemicals, human and animal labour as well as fuels for mechanization, pumping and other activities. Many of these have implicit shaft power needs. Although these activities can be performed by manual or animal labour, there are advantages to mechanizing them and this requires shaft power. These advantages include the ability to meet peak manpower demands, specifically during ploughing, planting, weeding, harvesting and threshing, and to provide water from greater depths and in greater quantities.
The installed shaft power and amount of energy required for cultivating a hectare of land varies with the crop, the soil condition, and the method and cycle of agriculture. For agriculture energy requirements, as for domestic energy requirements, it is not easy to generalize^1 about energy and power requirements. However, a limited amount of data has been collected on local requirements, some of which is presented in Table IV-2.
^1 FAO in the work undertaken in-preparing its study Agriculture: Toward 2000 has developed estimates of the energy requirements for the production of most major crops under various production regimes. These are summarised in Table 4.6 of that publication (FAO, 1981:71); more detailed information may be obtained from the Global Perspective Studies Unit, Economic and Social Policy Department. FAO Rome.
Table IV-1 - Industrial and agricultural energy uses
Activity
Energy
Firewood, Charcoal
Substitutes
Planting and Cultivating
Shaft power
With gasifier
Commercial liquid and gas fuels, biogas
Pumping
Shaft power
With gasifier and/or electricity
Commercial liquid and gas fuels, biogas, solar, hydro-wind, central grid, compressed air
Harvesting
Shaft power
With gasifier
Commercial liquid and gas fuels
Drying
Process heat
Direct combustion, process steam
Solar, biogas, agricultural wastes, commercial fuels
Killing
Shaft power
With gasifier engine or electricity
Agricultural residues, commercial liquid and gas fuels, wind central grid, hydro-electric, biogas, water wheels
Cooking, Baking
Process heat
Direct combustion, process steam
Commercial fuels, solar, biogas, agricultural residues, geothermal, cogeneration
Woodworking
Shaft power
Electrification, process steam
Commercial fuels, wood wastes, central grid, biogas
Metalworking
Shaft power
Gasification, process steam, electrification
Commercial fuels, hydro-electric, central grid, biogas, water wheels, wind
Forging, Smelting
Process heat
Charcoal by direct combustion
Oil, gas, coke
Bricks, Cement
Process heat
Direct combustion
Agricultural residues, commercial liquid and gas fuels, geothermal, cogeneration
Mineral processing
Process heat
Direct combustion
Commercial fuels, agricultural residues
Shaft power
Gasification, electrification, central steam
Commercial fuels, hydro-electric, central grid, hydro, biogas
With mechanized cultivation using small tillers or tractors, the amount of energy required for land preparation can range from 150 to 1050 horsepower-hours per hectare. The higher values are associated with the cultivation of high-yielding varieties. The amount of shaft power required can range from under ten horsepower for a small hand tractor to over a hundred horsepower for a large tractor. The fuel required to provide this energy ranges from 1.4 to 10 gigajoules per hectare, assuming an overall conversion efficiency of 28%. (35% for the engine and 20% mechanical losses). The requirements for installed shaft power and energy for irrigation vary even more than for cultivation, due to differences in the availability of rainfall, surface and ground water. From Table IV-2 a broad range of demand from 150 to over 2000 horsepower-hours can be deduced assuming that the irrigation is provided from wells using pumpsets. These pumpsets can range from 1 to over 50 HP. The amount of
energy required pan be less than 150 horsepower-hours where gravity systems are used, or where shallow wells provide sufficient water. The amount of energy needed can be reduced through careful application, an extreme example of which is the use of drip agriculture which has been used increasingly in the Levant.
The demand for fuels to operate threshing and transport equipment can be better measured in terms of tons processed and ton-kilometres travelled. The fuel requirements for a rice milling operation are on the order of 2 litres of diesel fuel per ton and the requirements for transportation are on the order of 2-2-5 litres of diesel fuel per ton-kilometres.
For all four activities - land preparation, irrigation, milling and transport available technologies exist which utilize renewable fuels. Irrigation and milling require stationary shaft power, while the others require moveable shaft power. The latter can be provided through the use of liquid fuels produced from biomass or gasifier/engine driven tractors. The former can be provided not only from biomass converted to gaseous or liquid fuels, but also from water, solar, geothermal, and wind power (and of course human and animal power).
Process heat
The small industries that are the primary consumers of fuels for heat generation are the brick and lime kilns, crop driers, blacksmith forges, commercial ovens and stoves, and pottery kilns. Fuels used include wood fuels, agricultural and forestry residues, coal, oil, and, in some oases, electricity, The fuel requirements vary over a wide range because of differences in the firing temperature, the thermal efficiency of the conversion unit, the physical characteristics of the raw materials and the type of product. An indication of the range of energy demand is shown in Table IV-3.
For most processes the fuel consumption rates vary by at least ± 50% from the median. The lower consumption rates are generally not associated with a specific fuel type, but the ability to control the feed rate for different fuels is important. The reduction in fuel consumption has been achieved through the use of continuous processing rather than batch processing. The latter has large losses associated with heating and cooling the walls of the processing unit. Other reductions in fuel consumption have been achieved by improving the insulation, using downdraft convection flow, and recycling the exhausted process heat to preheat the input materials
The evolution of technology for generating process heat can be roughly divided into four phases: 1) temporary, earth pit or mound units; 2) permanent, updraft, batch fed units; 3) semi-continuous, down or horizontal draft units with sequential or movable firing and preheating, and 4) continuous, forced convection, moving products units with recycled waste heat. Each subsequent phase requires greater investment in fixed capital production levels which are intermediate in scale between the transport-dependent urban factories and the village-limited rural enterprises.
Table IV-2 Energy requirements for agriculture
Location
Crop
Activity
Requirement* (Hp-hr/ha)
Notes
Source
Up India
HYV Rice
Land prep
Irrigation
Threshing
Tractor
Singh & Singh
HYV Wheat
Land prep
Irrigation
Threshing
We Bengal,
India
Rice
Field Prep**
Field Prep**
Irrigation
Threshing
Transport
8HP/Tiller
35HP/Tractor
Indian Institute of Technology (IIT)
Wheat
Field prep
Field prep
Irrigation
Threshing
Transport
8HP/Tiller
35HP/Tractor
IIT
Asia
Rice
Cultivation
Irrigation
Traditional
Transition
Modern
Traditional
Transition
Modern
Kuether, et al.
Philippines
Rice
Cultivation
Transition
FAO
USA
Rice
Irrigation
Modern
Punjab
Rice
Irrigation
Tractor
Stationary
Machinery
Singh and Miglani
Sri Lanka
Rice
Ploughing, twice
* Amount in horsepower hours per hectare; assume .2 lit/hp-hr and efficiency of drive train equal to 30 percent yielding net .25 lit/hp-hr.
** Includes nursery raising.
Table IV-3 - Sample energy requirements for small industries
Table IV-3 - Sample energy requirements for small industries (Continued)
*Assume coal
29.0 MJ/kg
wood 14.5 MJ/kg
oil 42.5 MJ/kg
Alternative energy technologies
Wind power
Solar power
Several conversion technologies using renewable energy sources are being developed which are both complementary to and competitive with fuelwood and charcoal in some of the applications discussed above. Information on the applicability of several old and new energy technologies in specific and uses is summarized in Table IV-4.
Biogas is one of the technologies that clearly warrants consideration. Biogas plants are in operation in many countries, particularly in Asia, and the technology has the potential for meeting some of the energy requirements of rural areas. The important technical problems are to develop and refine low-cost designs based on local materials, to provide for gas storage requirements and to raise the productivity of the biological system in cold areas, and to deal with factors (toxics, pH, etc.) affecting digester functioning. Economic problems are associated with costs of the systems, breakdowns and repairs, and the difficulties in establishing a system for the inputs, an well as the biogas outputs where community systems are established. Fuel supply problems include availability of domestic animals. The institutional and social implications of the introduction of biogas plants must be carefully studied because evidence indicates that its benefits tend to accrue to the larger
farmers (Bhatia, 1979) at the expense of the poor who previously collected the dung for their own uses
Small-scale hydro-power is being increasingly introduced or reintroduced where the necessary generators and turbines are within the country's manufacturing capability. The primary problem with hydro-power in the limited availability of falling water with sufficient flow and head throughout a years A secondary problem is the need for trained personnel to operate and maintain a hydro-power system including its power take-off equipment.
Wind power
Wind power is also being introduced or reintroduced in a number of countries. A number of designs have been developed to produce power from winds which fluctuate in velocity and directions High-torque and high-speed designs have been introduced, many of which can be locally fabricated and easily maintained, The major problem with wind power devices in the unreliability of supply. Locations such as the coastal areas of Thailand can be selected to ensure a relatively continuous supply of wind, but the demands for energy are not usually located in the same areas One solution to the problem of varying wind supply is the conversion of the kinetic energy to potential energy in batteries, elevated water storage, or other mediums. However, this storage adds considerably to the cost and introduces conversion losses.
Solar power
Another source of energy which in constrained by the availability of supply is solar energy. Passive solar heating can provide hot water and solar concentrators can produce high temperature process heat, but only when there in adequate solar radiation. The introduction of solar cookers has been hindered by a number of factors. Industrial processes are generally dependent on having a supply of energy available as and when needed. Solar drying has been used only in situations where the drying activity was not part of a continuous activity, or where an adequate inventory could be maintained as a buffer against overcast skies.
The generation of electricity using photovoltaics faces the same problem of variation of supply of solar radiation. A product of the space age, some investigations suggest that the rapidly decreasing unit cost of photovoltaics may soon make it competitive, The relative compatibility of this technology with small systems (no real economies of goals) suggests that it may ultimately hold promise for many of the world's small farms, but thin remains to be proven.
Gasifiers and other controlled combustion technologies using wood, charcoal and other materials are being rediscovered and improved for meeting both direct fire and shaft power requirements, the latter when coupled with an engines These technologies have economic potential when applied to agriculture and rural industries as well an to large-scale needs.
Table IV-4 New and old technologies to meet village energy requirements
Table IV-4 New and old technologies to meet village energy requirements (Continued)
Table IV-4 New and old technologies to meet village energy requirements (Continued)
References to Table IV-4
Alvis, R.L. and Alcone, J.M. 1976 Solar Powered Irrigation Systems. Sandia Laboratories, Albuquerque, New Mexico.
Barnett, A., Pyle, L., and Sibramaniam, S.K. 1978 Biogas technology in the Third World - a multi-disciplinary review. Ottawa, International Development Research Center.
DOE (Department of Energy). 1981. Wind energy systems program plan. Washington, D.C.
Dutt, G.S. 1978 Reducing Cooking Energy Use in Rural India, Princeton University Center for Environmental Studies, Report No. 74, Princeton, New Jerseys
Earl, D.E. 1974 Charcoal and Forest Management. University of Oxford, Department of Forestry, C.F.I.
Evans, I. Lorena Owner-Built Stoves. 1979 The Appropriate Technology Project of Volunteers in Asia, January, 1979
Ferrell, G.C., et al. 1979 The application of small wind energy conversion systems to the telecommunications industry. Presented at International Telecommunications Energy Conference, Washington, D.C.
Finkelstein, T. 1959 Air Engines No. 1, 2, 3, 4 - The Engineer, 27 March, 3 April, 10 April, 8 May 1959.
Fraenkel, P. The Power Guide: a catalogue of small scale power equipment. For the Intermediate Technology Development Group, New York, Charles Scribner's Sons.
Georgia Institute of Technology. 1977 Recent efforts to Develop Simple Wood-burning Stoves: a State-of-the-Art Survey of Solar Powered Irrigation Pumps, Solar Cookers and Wood-burning Stoves for Use in Sub Sahara.
Huetter, J.J. 1978 Status, potential, and problems of small hydro-electric power developments in the United States, Washington, D.C., Energy Research and Applications, Inc., for the Council on Environmental Quality.
Joseph, S. 1979 Stove Testing. Report for Intermediate Technology Group, London.
Joseph, S. and Gould, H. 1978 Designing Stoves for Third World Countries. Report for Intermediate Technology Group, London.
Kaupp, A., and Goss, J.R. 1981 State of the art for small scale (to 50 kw) gas producer engine systems. Prepared for USDA Forest Services Davis, California, University of California, Department of Agricultural Engineering.
Kjellström, B. 1981 Producer gas 1980: local electrical generation from wood and agricultural residues. Prepared for Swedish International Development Authority (SIDA), by Beijer Institute of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences and the International Foundation for Science.
Lee, J.F. 1954 Theory and Design of Steam Gas Turbines. McGraw Hill, New York.
Loehr, R. 1978 Methane from Human, Animal and Agricultural Wastes, in Renewable Energy Resources and Rural Applications in the Developing World, G. N. Brown ed., AAAA Selected Symposium, Western Press, Boulder, Coo, 1978.
Meta Systems Inc. 1980 State-of-the-art review of biomass-fueled heat engines. Contract No. 53-319R-0-136, USAID, Bioresources for Energy Project, U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Metz, W. and Hammond, A., Solar Energy in America. AAAA Publication 78-10. Washington, D.C. 1978
Morgan, R.P. et al. 1979 Direct biomass utilization for cooking. Appropriate technology for renewable resource utilization, Washington, D.C., Agency for International Developments.
National Academy of Sciences. 1976 Energy for Rural Development, Washington, D.C.
National Academy of Sciences. 1977a Leucaena: promising forage and tree crop for the tropics. Washington, D.C.
National Academy of Sciences. 1977b Methane generation from human, animal and agricultural wastes. Washington, D.C.
National Academy of Sciences. 1980 Firewood Crops: Shrub and Tree Species for Energy Production. Washington, D.C.
National Academy of Sciences. 1981 Supplement to energy for rural development: renewable resources and alternative technologies for developing countries. Washington, D.C., Board on Science and Technology for International Development, Advisory Committee on Technology Innovation.
Obermeier, J. 1980 Energy and cost calculations for small-scale wind plants. Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Rural Energy Conference, Davis, California, University of California.
Park, J. and Schwind, D. 1978 Wind power for farms, homes, and small industry. DOE/RFP-2841/1270/78/4, Mountain View, California, Nielsen Engineering and Research, Inc.
Pellizzi, G. 1980 Now and renewable energy in agriculture: Annexes item 5 of provisional agenda of European Commission on Agriculture, prepared for FAO in cooperation with National Research Council of Italy and the Institute of Agricultural Engineering of the University of Milan.
Rosenblum, Louis et al. 1978 Photovoltaic Village Power Applications: Assessment of the Near-Term Market, DOE/NASA/1022-78/25, NASA-Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio.
Singer, H. 1961 Improvement of Fuelwood Cooking Stoves and Economy in Fuelwood Consumption. Report to the Government of Indonesia, FAO, Expanded Technical Assistance Programme, Rome.
Smith, D.V. 1977 Photovoltaic power in less developed countries, Prepared for U.S. Energy Research and Development Administration, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Lincoln Laboratory, Report No. C00-4094-1.
Sonterre, M., and Smith, K.R. 1980 Application of the Fuel-Linked Energy Resources and Tanks (FLERT) Approach to Rural Household and Community Scale Anaerobic Digestion Systems, with support from USAID, East-West Center, Honolulu.
Steinbek, K. 1980 Short Rotation Coppice Forestry Research in the Southeast United States, Paper presented at Bio-Energy '80 World Congress and Exposition, Atlanta, Georgia, April, 1980.
Stout, B.A., et al. 1979 Energy for World Agriculture, FAO, Rome.
Tabors, R.D., et al. 1978 Planning and analysis for development and commercialization of photovoltaic energy conversion systems, Cambridge, Mass., MIT Energy Laboratory, Report No, MIT-EL-78-033, Final Report.
Tatom, John W. et al. A Prototype Mobile System for Pyrolysis of Agricultural and/or Silvicultural Wastes, Engineering Experiment Station, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia.
UNIDO (United National Industrial Development Organization). 1978 Technology for Solar Energy Utilization (Development and Transfer of Technology series). New York.
van Buren, Ariane, ed. 1979 A Chinese Biogas Manual: Popularizing Technology in the Countryside, translated from the original, written by the Office of the Leading Group for the Propagation of Marshgas, Szechuan Province, People's Republic of China, for Intermediate Technology Publications Ltd., London.
Wayne, W.W. 1980 Small scale hydro-power equipment. Boston, Mass., Stone & Webster Engineering Corp.
<section>e</section>
References
Akinga, W.W. 1980 Woodfuel survey. Nairobi, Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources, Forestry Department. Mimeographed.
Aprovecho Institute. 1980 Cookstove News, Vol. 1, No. 1, Eugene, Oregon, U.S.A.
Arnold, J.E.M. 1978 Wood energy and rural communities. Eighth World Forestry Congress, Jakarta. FAO, Rome. Mimeographed. Also in Natural resources forum, Vol. 3, No. 3 (1979), pp. 229-252.
Arnold. J.H. 1980 Report on rural industries, bioresources for energy project. U.S. Department of Agriculture/AID.
Arnold, J.H. 1980 A revised methodology for energy demand surveys. Mimeographed.
Arola, R.A. 1978 Fuel definition and analysis. In M.L. Hiser (ed.), Wool energy, Ann Arbor, Mich., Ann Arbor Science Publishers.
Asrat, D. 1981 Household survey of rural consumption of wood and bamboo in Bangladesh: a review of the survey methodology. Field Document No. 1, FAO/UNDP/ Planning Commission Project No. BGD/78/010, Supply and Demand of Forest Products and Future Development Strategies, Dacca, Bangladesh.
ASTRA. 1981 Rural energy consumption patterns - a field study. Bangalore, India, Centre for the Application of Science and Technology to Rural Areas.
Ay, P. 1980 Fuelwood and charcoal in the West African forest: field research in Western Nigeria. In Morgan, W.B., Moss, R.P. & Ojo, G.J.A. (eds.), Rural energy systems in the humid tropics. Proc. 1st Workshop UNU Rural Energy Systems Project, Ife, Nigeria, pp. 26-38, Tokyo, United Nations University.
Bajracharya, D. 1980 Fuel wood and food needs vs. deforestation: an energy study of a hill village Panchayat in Eastern Nepal. In Energy analysis in rural regions: studies in Indonesia, Nepal and the Philippines, Part III, Honolulu, East-West Center.
Bertrand, A. 1979 Consommation et utilisation des combustibles ligneux en Afrique occidentale et centrale: informations disponibles et méthodes d'études. Prepared by the Centre Technique Forestier Tropical for FAO, Rome (mimeo).
Best, M. 1979 The scarcity of domestic energy: a study in three villages, Working Paper No. 27. Cape Town, University of Cape Town, Southern Africa Labour and Development Research Unit.
Bhatia, R. 1979 Energy alternatives for irrigation pumping: some results for small farms in North Bihar. Prepared for International Seminar on Energy, Hyderabad, India, Administrative Staff College.
Bhatia, R. 1980 Fuel alcohol from agro-products: a conceptual framework for a study in India and Papua New Guinea, draft. Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University, Department of City and Regional Planning.
Bialy, J. 1979a Firewood use in a Sri Lankan village: a preliminary survey. Edinburgh, University of Edinburgh.
Bialy, J. 1979b Measurement of the energy released in the combustion of fuels. Edinburgh, University of Edinburgh, School of Engineering Science.
Briscoe, J. 1979a Energy use and social structure in a Bangladesh village. Population and development review, Vol. 5, No. 4.
Briscoe, J. 1979b The political economy of energy use in rural Bangladesh. Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University, Environmental Systems Program. Mimeographed. August 1979.
Brokensha, D. & Riley, B. 1978 Forest, foraging, fences and fuel in a marginal area of Kenya. Prepared for USAID Africa Bureau Firewood Workshop, Washington, D.C.
Brokensha, D., Warren, D.M. & Werner, O. (eds.). 1980 Indigenous knowledge systems and development. Lanham, Maryland, University Press of America.
Brush, S.B. 1977 Mountain, field and family. Pittsburgh, University of Pennsylvania Press.
Byron, N. 1981 Future consumption of wood and bamboo in Bangladesh. Field Document No. 4, FAO/UNDP/Planning Commission Project No. BGD/78/010, Supply and Demand of Forest Products and Future Development Strategies, Dacca, Bangladesh.
Cailliez, F. 1980 Forest volume estimation and yield prediction, Vol. 1 - volume estimation. FAO Forestry Paper No. 22/1, FAO, Rome.
Castro, A.P., Hakansson, N.T. & Brokensha, D. 1981 Indicators of rural inequality. In World development, Vol. 9, No. 5. Pp. 401-427.
Cecelski, E. & Dunkerley, J. 1930 Energy use in the rural and urban household sectors of developing countries: an assessment. Excerpt in Proc. international workshop on energy survey methodologies for developing countries, 21-25 Jan., Jekyll Island, Ga., Washington, D.C. NAS, pp. 206-215.
Central Bureau of Statistics. 1980 Results of rural/urban survey 1968/1979: energy and power modules. Nairobi, Kenya, Ministry of Finance and Planning, Central Bureau of Statistics. Mimeographed.
Chambers, R. 1978 Rural poverty-oriented monitoring and evaluation. Simple is optimal. Brighton, University of Sussex, Institute of Development Studies. Mimeographed.
Chambers, R. 1979 Rural development tourism: poverty unperceived. Brighton, University of Sussex, Institute of Development Studies. Mimeographed.
Chambers, R. 1980 Rural poverty unperceived: problems and remedies. Brighton, University of Sussex, Institute of Development Studies. Mimeographed.
Chambers, R. et al. 1979 Seasonal dimensions to rural poverty: analysis and practical implications. Discussion Paper 142, Brighton, University of Sussex, Institute of Development Studies.
Clayton, S. 1978 Draft programme and guideline for food consumption surveys. ESS Misc./78/4, FAO, Rome.
Connell, J. & Lipton, M. 1977 Assessing village labour situations in developing countries. Delhi, Oxford University Press.
Conway, F.J. 1979 A study of the fuelwood situation in Haiti. USAID Mission to Haiti.
de Backer, M. & Openshaw K. 1972 Timber trends study: Thailand. Detail of surveys and results, project working document, FAO, Rome.
DeLepeleire, G. et al. (eds.). 1981 A woodstove compendium. Prepared for U.N. Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy, Nairobi, Kenya.
deLucia, R.J., 1980 Rural energy survey requirements: some comments and perspectives. Discussion paper prepared for the Workshop on Energy Survey Methodologies, Board on Science and Technology for International Development of the National Academy of Sciences, Jekyll Island, Ga.
deLucia, R.J. 1981 Infrastructure for rural energy systems. Prepared for an Ad-Hoc Expert Group in preparation for the U.N. Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy.
deLucia, R.J., and Lesser, M. 1980 Energy from organic residues in developing countries: present use, potentials, and observations on feasibility. Presented at World Bio-Energy Conference, Atlanta, Georgia.
deLucia, R.J. and Tabors, R.T. 1980 Energy demand estimation. Chapter 4 in deLucia, Jacoby, et al.
deLucia, R.J. H.D. Jacoby and others. 1982 Energy Plans for Developing Countries: a study for Bangladesh. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.
Digernes, T.H. 1977 Wood for fuel - energy crisis implying desertification. The case of Bara, The Sudan, Thesis, University of Bergen, Norway.
Digernes, T.H. 1980 The energy situation of a town in the semi-arid Sudan. In Morgan, W.B., Moss, R.P., & Ojo, G.J.A. (eds), Rural energy systems in the humid tropics, Proc. 1st Workshop UNU Rural Energy Systems Project, Ife, Nigeria, pp. 21-25, Tokyo, United Nations University.
Donovan, D. 1979-1980 Newsletters DGD-9 to the Institute of Current World Affairs, Hanover, New Hampshire.
Douglas, J. 1981a Consumption and supply of wood and bamboo in Bangladesh. Field Document No. 2, FAO/UNDP/Planning Commission Project No. BGD/78/010, Supply and Demand of Forest Products and Future Development Strategies, Dacca, Bangladesh.
Douglas, J. 1981b The industrial forestry sector of Bangladesh. Field Document No. 3, FAO/UNDP/Planning Commission Project No. BGD/78/010, Supply end Demand of Forest Products and Future Development Strategies, Dacca, Bangladesh.
Downey, J.M. 1981 Manual d'essais our les foyers à bois. Mt. Rainier, Maryland, Volunteers in Technical Assistance.
Dutt, G.S. 1978 Reducing cooking energy use in rural India. PU/CEES 74, Princeton, N.J., Princeton University, Center for Energy and Environmental Studies.
Dutt, G.S. 1981a Field evaluation of wood stoves (with special reference to West Africa). Mt. Rainier, Maryland, Volunteers in Technical Assistance.
Dutt, G.S. 1981b Status of wood stove development in Upper Volta. Mt. Rainier, Maryland, Volunteers in Technical Assistance.
Earl, D.E. 1975 Forest energy and economic development. London, Oxford University Press.
Elmendorf, M.L. 1976 Nine Mayan Women. New York, Schenkman.
Epstein, T.S. 1978 Re-surveys and re-studied of rural societies. In Dasgupta, B. (ed.), Village studies in the Third World, Now Brunswick, Transaction Books.
Erasmus, C.J. 1935 Work patterns in a Mayo village. American anthropologist, Volume 57, pp. 322-333.
Evans, I. et al. 1980 Improved cookstoves for rural Senegal. Mt. Rainier, Maryland, Volunteers in Technical Assistance.
FAO. 1981 Agriculture: Toward 2000. FAO, Rome.
FAO. 1981 Map of the fuelwood situation in the developing countries, with explanatory note. FAO, Rome.
FAO/WHO 1973 Energy and protein requirements. Report of a joint FAO/WHO ad hoc expert committee, WHO technical report series No. 522, pp. 78-84. WHO, Geneva.
Ferguson, I.S. 1973 The economics of plantation forestry in the savanna region. FO: DP/NIR/64/516, Samaru, Nigeria, FAO.
Fernandez, J.C. 1980 Household energy use in non-OPEC developing countries. Rand Report R-2515-DOE, Santa Monica, California, Hand Corp.
Fleuret, P.C. and Fleuret, A.K. 1978 Fuelwood use in a peasant community: a Tanzanian case study. Journal of developing areas, Vol. 12, pp. 315-322
Floor, W.M. 1977 The energy sector of the Sahelian countries. Netherlands, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Policy Planning Section.
Foell, W.K. 1980 Rationales and Frameworks for Energy Information Surveys for the Industrial Sector in Developing Countries. Proc. International Workshop on Energy Survey Methodologies for Developing Countries, Jekyll Island, Georgia, January 1980. Washington, D.C., National Academy of Sciences.
Foley, Go and van Buren, A. 1980 Coal substitution and other approaches to easing the pressure on wood fuel resources: case studies in Senegal and Tanzania. U.S. Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy, 2nd meeting of Technical Panel on Fuelwood and Charcoal. London, International Institute for Environment and Development, and Rome, FAO.
Gamser, M. 1980 Household energy consumption in Port Moresby. Konedobo, Papua New Guinea, Department of Minerals and Energy, Energy Planning Unit, Report 8-80.
Gavan, J.D. and Tyers, R. 1980 Agricultural analysis for energy planning. Chapter 3 in deLucia, Jacoby, et al.
Geller, H.S. 1981 Comparison of efficiency between traditional and Hyderabad cookstoves. Bangalore, India, Indian Institute of Science, ASTRA, draft.
Geller, H.S. Cocking in the Ungra Area: fuel efficiency, energy losses, and forthcoming opportunities for reducing firewood consumption. Biomass (forthcoming).
Gern, E. et al, 1980 Improved cookstoves in Upper Volta, Eschborn, Federal Republic of Germany, German Agency for Technical Cooperation.
Government of India 1979 Report of the Working Group on Energy Policy, Planning Commission, Government of India, New Delhi.
Government of Pakistan 1978 Non-commercial energy resources survey, 1974-75. In Energy data book, Energy Resources Cell.
Gray, C.L., and von Hippel, F. 1981 The fuel economy of light vehicles, Scientific American, Vol. 244, p.48.
Hammermaster, E.T. 1981 Village forest inventory of Bangladesh: inventory results, FAO, Rome.
Hehr, J.J. 1967 Charcoal: its multifarious effects in a rural Guatemalan community, M.A. thesis, Western Michigan University.
Hill, P. 1972 Rural Hausa: a village and a setting. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Hooper, J.W. 1980 Wood Stoves termination report. Upper Volta, Peace Corps.
Hosier, R. 1981 Surveys of domestic energy consumption in Kenya: a summary. Wood fuel Project Working Paper, Nairobi, Beijer Institute.
Hoskins, M. 1979 Women in forestry for local community development. Washington, D.C., USAID, Office of Women in Development.
International Energy Agency (IEA) 1979 Basic energy statistics and energy balances of developing countries. Vol. II, Proceedings of workshop on energy data of developing countries. Paris, OECD.
Islam, M.N. 1978 Study of the problem of biogas technology as a mechanism for rural development: study in a pilot area of Bangladesh. Progress Report No. 1 Dacca, Bangladesh, Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology, Department of Chemical Engineering.
Islam, M.N. 1980 Energy use in Bangladesh. Presented at the International Workshop on Energy Survey Methodologies for Developing Countries, National Academy of Sciences, Jekyll Island, Georgia.
Jagadish, K.S. 1979a Energy and Rural Buildings in India, in Energy and Buildings, Volume 2/4, 287.
Jagadish, K.S. 1979b A systems approach to rural housing in Proceedings of the Indian Academy of Sciences (Engineering Sciences), Volume C2, 305.
Joseph, S. 1979 Problems and priorities in developing wood stove programmes. London, Intermediate Technology Development Group.
Joseph, S., and Shanahan, Y. 1980 Designing a test procedure for domestic woodburning stoves. London, Intermediate Technology Development Group.
Julius, D. 1981 Energy pricing in developing countries. Prepared for Energy Department World Bank, Washington, D.C.
Kearl, B. (ed.) 1976 Field data collection in the social sciences: experiences in Africa and the Middle East. New York, Agricultural Development Council.
Ki-Zerbo, J. 1980 Improved wood stoves: user's needs and expectations in Upper Volta. Mt. Rainier, Maryland, Volunteers in Technical Assistance.
Krishna Prasad, K. (ed.) 1980 Some performance tests on open fires and the family cooker. Eindhoven, The Netherlands, Technical University of Eindhoven, Department of Applied Physics.
League of Nations. 1932 Quarterly Bulletin of the Health Organisation, Vol. 1, pp. 477-483.
Lewis, O. 1951 Life in a Mexican Village. Urbana, Ill., University of Illinois Press.
Lin, W. et al. 1976 Fuel choices in the household sector. ORNL/CON-3, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee.
Lipton, M. 1978 Key variables in village studies; pp. 132-136 in Village Studies in the Third World, Be Dasgupta ed., New Brunswick: Transaction Books.
Long, T. V. 1980 Report of the Industry Working Group, Proc. International Workshop on Energy Survey Methodologies for Developing Countries, Jekyll Island, Georgia, January 1980. Washington, D.C. Nat'l Academy of Sciences.
Manibog, F. 1979 Patterns of energy utilization in a Philippine village: sources, end uses and correlation-analysis. Paris, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, International Energy Agency, Unpublished report.
Mbithi, P. 1974 Rural sociology and rural development: its application in Kenya. Nairobi, E. A. Literature Bureau.
McGranahan, G. et al. 1980 Patterns of urban household energy use in developing countries: the case of Nairobi. Energy and environment in East Africa, Nairobi, UNEP, pp. 178-231. International Workshop sponsored by Beijer Institute, Kenya Academy of Science, and UNEP.
Meta Systems Inc. and Thai Group Co., Ltd. 1981 Baseline survey report. Vol. 1, Survey overview and guide to data; Vol., 2, Biomass samples: collection and analysis. Report for Renewable Nonconventional Energy Project, National Energy Administration of Thailand/USAID, Bangkok.
Meta Systems Inc. 1978a Traditional energy and rural development issues and recommendations for Peru. Prepared for Brookhaven National Laboratory and U.S. Department of Energy, Cambridge, Mass.
Meta Systems Inc. 1978b Report (including background notes) of the Brookhaven/USAID Workshop on Rural/Domestic Energy Issues, Cambridge, Mass.
Meta Systems Inc. 1978c A systems study for the water resources allocation and management plan of the Gefara Plain. Prepared for the PAD of the United Nations, Cambridge, Mass.
Meta Systems Inc. 1979a Renewable/non-conventional energy project paper for Thailand. Draft prepared for USAID.
Meta Systems Inc. 1979b Traditional fuels: supporting materials for the World Development Report. Much incorporated in Prospects for traditional and non-conventional energy sources in developing countries, World Bank Staff Working Paper No. 346.
Meta Systems Inc. 1980a Potential for fuelwood and charcoal in the energy systems of developing countries. Prepared for Forestry Department, FAO, Secretariat for the Technical Panel on Fuelwood and Charcoal, U.N. Conference on Now and Renewable Sources of Energy. Bioresources for Energy Project, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service.
Meta Systems Inc. 1980b State-of-the-art review of biomass-fueled heat engines. Contract No- 53-319R-0-136, USAID, Bioresources for Energy Project, U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Meta Systems Inc. 1980c State-of-the-art review of economic evaluation of non-conventional energy alternatives. Bioresources for Energy Project., U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Monnier, Y. 1972 L'approvisionnement d'Abidjan en bois et charbon de bois. Travaux et documents de géogr. trop. No. 7: Le croissance urbaine dans les pays tropicaux. Dix études sur l'approvisionnement des villes, Talence, France, CEGET-CNRS.
Montreal Engineering, Snamprogetti, Meta Systems Inc. and C. Lotti and Associates. 1976 Bangladesh energy study. For the Government The People's Republic of Bangladesh. Administered by the Asian Development Bank under United Nations Development Program.
Morgan, R.P. et al 1979 Direct biomass utilization for cooking. Appropriate technology for renewable resource utilization, Washington, D.C., Agency for International Development.
Morgan, W.B. 1981 Location in the commercialisation of fuelwood production and supply in tropical Africa. L'énergie dans les communautés rurales des pays du Tiers-Monde, Talence, France, UNU-CEGET.
Morgan, W.B. and Moss, R.P. 1981 Fuelwood and rural energy production and supply in the humid tropics, United Nations University, Tokyo, and Tycooly Press International, Dublin.
Morgan, W.B., Moss, R.P., and Ojo, G.J.A. (eds.) 1980 Rural Energy Systems in the Humid Tropical Proc. University of Ife Workshop, 19780 Tokyo, U.N. University.
Mortimore, M.J. and Wilson, J. 1965 Land and people in the Kano close settled zone. Zaria, Nigeria, Ahmadu Bello University, Department of Geography, Occasional Paper 1.
National Academy of Sciences. 1980 Proceedings of the International Workshop on Energy Survey Methodologies for Developing Countries. Washington, D.C., National Academy Press.
National Council of Applied Economic Research (NCAER). 1965 Domestic fuel consumption in rural India. New Delhi.
NCAER 1978 Survey of rural energy consumption in Northern India. New Delhi.
Noronha, R. 1980 Village woodlots: are they a solution? Prepared for Panel on the Introduction and Diffusion of Renewable Energy Technologies, Washington, D.C., National Academy of Sciences.
Odum, H.T. 1971 Environment, power and society. Now York, Wiley-Interscience.
Ojo, G.J.A., Morgan, W.B., and Moss, R.P. (eds.) 1981 Rural Energy in Southwestern Nigeria: a preliminary report. Proc. second Ife Workshop, 1979. Tokyo, U.N. University.
Omotara, B.A. 1974 The supply and distribution of firewood in Ile-Ife. B.Sc. essay, University of Ife.
Openshaw, K. 1978 Wood fuel: a time for re-assessment. Natural resources forum, Vol. 3 No. 1. Also in East Africa Journal, January 1977.
Ouedraogo, M.M. and Vennetier, P. 1977 Quelques aspects de l'approvisionnement d'une ville d'Afrique noire: l'example de Ouagadougou. Travaux et documents de géogr. trope, No. 28: Nouvelles recherches sur l'approvisionnement des villes, Talence, France, CEGET-CNRS.
Popali, S.C., et al. 1979 Cooking at low temperatures: energy and time requirements. Proceedings of the Indian Academy of Sciences C2, p.331.
Pozas, R. 1959 Chamula: un pueblo Indio de los Altos de Chiapas. Mexico, D.F., Instituto Nacional Indigenista.
Quareshi, M.S., and Iqbal, M. 1980 Pakistan experience in energy statistics with special references to renewable (non-conventional) energy resources. Prepared for presentation at ESCAP Workshops on Energy Statistics. Islamabad, Pakistan, Directorate General of Energy Resources Ministry of Petroleum and National Resources.
Ravindranath, N.H., et al. 1981 An Indian village agricultural ecosystem - case study of Ungra Village, part I: main observations. Biomass, Vol. 1, No. 1.
Reddy, A.K.N. An Indian village agricultural ecosystem - case study of Ungra, Village, Part II: discussion. Biomass, Vol. 1, No. 1.
Reddy, A.K.N. et al. n.d. Non-agricultural energy consumption patterns in villages. Bangalore, India, Indian Institute of Science.
Robinson, Merrit and deVries, Ltd. 1975 Bangladesh energy study: firewood assessment. Toronto, Canada.
Sale, M.P. 1981 L'approvisionnement en bois d'une ville dans le Nord-Cameroun: l'example de Maroua. L'énergie dans les communautés rurales des pays du Tiers-Monde, Talence, France, UNU-CEGET.
Samuel, R.S. Decentralized industrialization and rural developments evidence from Taiwan. Bangkok, Thailand, Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific.
Schroeder, Re and Lavell, 1981 T. Private communication. Upper Volta, Peace Corps.
Singer, H. 1961 Improvement of fuelwood cooking stoves and economy in fuelwood consumption. Rome, FAO, Report 1315.
Siwatibau, S. 1978 A survey of domestic rural energy use and potential in Fiji. A report to the Fiji Government and the International Development Research Centre, Ottawa, Canada.
Small Industries Training Institute (SIETI) 1976 Impact of electrification on rural industrial development: a study in Andhra Pradesh. Hyderabad, India.
Suzuki, K. et al. 1976 Kinetic studies on cooking of rice. Journal of food science, Vol. 41, p. 1180.
Thomas, M. et al. 1981 Guidelines on evaluating the fuel consumption of improved cookstoves - a manual. Eugene, Oregon, Aprovecho Institute.
United Nations Environment Programs (UNEP) 1976 Consultancy on firewood - and substitutes in the Sahelian zone and North Africa: report of the consultant. Nairobi, UNCP.
USAID 1980 The socio-economic context of fuelwood use in small rural communities. Washington, D.C., USAID Evaluation, Special Study No., 1, Bureau for Program and Policy Coordination, by Wood, D., Brokensha, D., Castro, A.P., Riley, B.W. et al.
Winterhalder, B., Larse, R. and Thomas, R.B. 1979 Dung as an essential resource in a highland Peruvian community. Human ecology, Vol. 2, No. 2.
World Bank 1979 World Development Report. Washington, D.C., World Bank.
Yang, H.P. 1955 Fact-finding with Rural Peoples. Rome, FAO.
M/Q1085/E/2.83/1/2000
