<title>Unasylva - No. 140 - The importance of medicinal plants</title>
<section>1</section>
The healing plants
Edward S. Ayensu
EDWARD S. AYENSU, of Ghana, is Director of the Office of Biological Conservation, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C. This article is a shortened version of "A worldwide role for the healing power of plants" which originally appeared in the Smithsonian Magazine, published by the Smithsonian Institution.
Medicinal plants native to developing countries are often exported to developed countries where they are screened, analysed and used in drug preparations, only to be returned as high-priced medicines.
The therapeutic value and healing powers of plants were demonstrated to me when I was a boy of about ten. I had developed an acute, persistent abdominal pain which did not respond readily to hospital medication. My mother had taken me to the city's central hospital on several occasions where different drugs were administered. In total desperation, she took me to Egya Mensa, a well-known herbalist in my home town in the Western Province of Ghana. This man was no stranger to the medical doctors at the hospital. He had earned the reputation of offering excellent help when they were confronted with difficult cases where Western medicine had failed to effect a cure.
After a brief interview, not very different from those that occur daily in the consulting offices of many general medical practitioners, he left us waiting in his consulting room while he went out to the field. He returned with several leaves and the bark of a tree, and one of his attendants immediately prepared a decoction. I was given a glass of this preparation; it tasted extremely bitter, but within an hour or so I felt some relief. The rest of the decoction was put in two large bottles so that I could take doses periodically. Within about three days the frequent abdominal pains stopped and I regained a good appetite. I have appreciated the healing powers of medicinal plants ever since.
My experience may sound unusual to those who come from urban areas of the developed world, but for those in the less affluent nations such experiences are a common occurrence. In fact, demographic studies by various national governments and intergovernmental organizations such as the World Health Organization (WHO) indicate that for 75 to 90 percent of he rural populations of the world, the herbalist is the only person who handles their medical problems.
In African culture, traditional medical practitioners are always considered to be influential spiritual leaders as well, using magic and religion along with medicines. Illness is handled with man's hidden spiritual powers and with the application of plants that have been found especially to contain healing powers.
Chief Joseph Olusola Lambo of Nigeria, in a recent interview for the Voice of America, described his own introduction to herbal medicine at the age of 15, some 40 years ago. Currently president of the Nigerian Association of Medical Herbalists, Chief Lambo became interested in traditional medicine as a result of a severe headache he had while very young. A relative escorted him to a village where a traditional medical practitioner washed young Lambo's head in a pool with a locally made soap containing native medicine. Soon after this treatment, his headache vanished. He was so impressed that he began his own research into herbalism. To him, this was "science in action".
Chief Lambo's youngest brother, Dr Thomas Lambo, is the Deputy Director-General of the World Health Organization and an internationally recognized psychiatrist. They are both very much concerned about the relationship between traditional medical practice and modern medicine. Chief Lambo explains: "In the olden days the relationship was very strained because the modern doctors did not believe in traditional medicine. They did not want even to see traditional healers. But lately they have found out that there is a lot to be gained from traditional medicine." The situation has improved so much that at the Drug Research Center at the University of Ife, in Nigeria, a herbalist is employed as a full-time consultant to Dr Abayomi Sofowora's plant chemistry programme. Dr Sofowora and his colleagues, while well-versed in modern scientific research, recognize the importance of herbal medicine and believe there is much to learn from reputable herbalists.
During a recent trip to New Delhi, I visited several "drugstores" filled with only locally manufactured medicinal plant products. One of the storekeepers handed me a tin of medicine labelled Baidyanath Chyawanprash Avaleha. "Take this and use it. It builds up vitality and memory. It can also cure bronchial and respiratory diseases. You can use six to 12 grams with milk or honey twice a day. It will be good for you," he said.
flowers of African tulip tree - Spathodea campanulata heal skin ulcers
peppers = base for many herbal remedies
African vine Strophanthus hispidus both an arrow poison and a cardiotonic
GRADUATION CEREMONY FOR HERBALISTS IN GHANA - many Western-trained doctors prescribe traditional medicines
A HERBALIST'S LABORATORY IN GHANA - local medicines are often healthier than expensive synthetic imports
I picked up some well-packaged bark and roots of Rauwolfia serpentina, a plant that was very well-known in ancient Asiatic medicine and contains the alkaloid reserpine. Before I could ask any questions about it, the storekeeper said, "This is a very important plant. It contains a lot of very powerful chemicals. Do you know that this plant has the power to lower your blood pressure and your pulse? Do you know of anyone who has hypertension? This is the best medicine for it. Well, we also use it to calm down mad people, because alkaloids in the plant have specific influence on the mind." The storekeeper, I later learned, had a medical degree from an Indian university but chose to administer herbal medicine because he felt his people were better off with local medicines than with the expensive, imported synthetic drugs that had no traditional, social or psychological meaning.
He proceeded to lecture me on the fact that India was one of the countries that had pioneered the development and practice of subsequently well-documented indigenous systems of medicine, the two most notable being the Ayurveda (Hindu) and Unani (Greek and Islamic). He stressed that the materia medica of these two systems encompasses a rich heritage of indigenous herbal practices that have helped to sustain the health of the peoples of India for centuries. "I am very much pleased and satisfied that after training as a modern medical doctor I have returned to our kind of medicine, which is most suitable for us," he told me.
In the neighbouring Himalayan Kingdom of Nepal, at the Royal Drug Research Laboratory, where an impressive programme of medicinal plant research is being conducted, I met the Director-General. Dr S.S. Malla, who also expressed tremendous satisfaction in the increased attention to herbal medicine in his country and abroad. He proceeded to remind me that medicinal plants have played an important role in Hindu culture, as shown in the Rig-Veda, which is said to have been written between 4500 and 1600 BC. Then he added, "It is unlikely that the Hindu culture will abandon such a rich heritage, especially in the face of escalating prices of Western drugs."
While on a tour of the research facilities, I was prompted to ask several questions concerning the acceptability of herbal medicine, especially among the Western-educated Nepalese. "Deep down they all trust the local medicines. Some of the crude drugs, species of Rauwolfia, Ephedra, Aconitum and Nardostachys, are still very popular for the cure of hypertension and many heart diseases," reported one of the staff members.
In recent years, medicinal plants have been recognized widely as "chemical factories". The Eurasian aroid Acorus calamus, for example, used currently in 51 different drug preparations because the rhizomes contain an essential oil with insecticidal and sedative properties, is under heavy collecting pressure.
Around the world, the bulk of the raw materials used in preparing drugs are mostly collected from the wild. In fact, heavy collecting of certain plants for local as well as foreign pharmaceutical markets has become a major problem. A striking example is the depletion of a much sought-after species of yam (Dioscorea), whose chemical compound diosgenin is used as the foundation material in the manufacture of birth-control pills.
Vincristine, the chemical derived from the Madagascar periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus) sells for more than US$ 100000 per 0.5 kg (1 lb). It has led to a remarkable decrease in mortality among young leukaemia patients. In China, at present, literally all available soil suitable for the growth of this plant is under cultivation. Because of the low yield of vincristine from Catharanthus roseus, it is necessary for the Chinese to process at least 100000 kg in order to recover a reasonable yield of the alkaloid. The leaves represent about ten percent of the total dry weight of the plant. Therefore the Chinese usually process about 900000 kg of dried plants at a time.
China is perhaps the leading country in systematically amalgamating herbal medicine into natural health-care systems. In several visits to China, I have had the opportunity to observe the practice of herbal pharmacology on a mass scale.
On the outskirts of Beijing, for example, there is an experimental plantation for the institute of Materia Medical This establishment, covering about 26 ha (64 acres), contains some 1500 species of well-tended medicinal plants. "Here about 10000 barefoot doctors are trained every year to gain experience in the cultivation of medicinal plants," an Institute official explained. "Our population is big' therefore we need more such doctors to work with the people in the cities as well as the remote areas." The plantation is also recognized as a reliable supply house where pharmaceutical research laboratories obtain sufficient authenticated plant material for biological evaluations or chemical studies.
In travelling through the developing world. I am pleasantly surprised to find mounting interest among even the best-educated people in traditional medicine. This observation is particularly true of people in the Indian subcontinent. The educated public in Africa and Latin America still have some way to go in reeducating themselves. I am particularly disturbed by Third World Western-trained doctors who show total disregard and disdain for the importance that herbal medicine plays in the world's health situation. Some of these doctors are even ashamed to admit that their parents relied on these ancient folk remedies to treat and save their lives during childhood. Many of the Western-trained doctors seem to have been brainwashed into believing that only drugs originating in the developed countries have healing powers.
Some of these same doctors seem unaware that the major pharmaceutical houses are constantly searching for new active compounds from the medicinal plants of developing countries. Confronted with mounting prices for drugs, particularly the synthetic drugs derived from petrochemicals, chemists are turning their attention back to herbs in their search for new drug substances that have to this day eluded them. Furthermore, many developing countries are aware that their native medicinal plants are imported into the developed countries where they are screened, analysed and used in drug preparations, only to be returned to them at exorbitant prices. This situation has been described by Dr Halfdan Mahler, Director-General of WHO, as "drug colonization".
For health, social and economic reasons it seems clear that developing countries should begin an extensive programme aimed at an examination of the most important medicinal plants. At the moment, information on such plants in most countries is dispersed and unorganized. Much of it is in the heads of aging herbalists who represent a dying breed.
an array of medicinal plants
A WELL-STOCK ED STALL AT AN OPEN MARKET - West Africa's typical "drugstore"
A MODERN HERBAL PHARMACY IN INDIA - a new wave of traditional medicine practices
CHINESE MEDICINE CHEST - a cornucopia of medicinal herbs
MODERN PACKAGING - a new image for traditional medicines
However, there is a general feeling among specialists that gradually the magic, superstition and dogma that surround medicinal plants are giving way to an understanding of the real basis of their curative powers. The proliferation of information on "natural foods" has influenced the recent great interest in herbal remedies.
More and more people realize that a substantial number of the prescriptions bought from drugstores contain different crude plant products. In 1973, the last year in which good data were available on prescriptions in the United States, it was shown that of the 1532 thousand million prescriptions sold in pharmacies throughout the United States, 41.2 percent contained natural products and of these, 25.2 percent were products from flowering plants. If prescriptions offered by state and federal hospitals in the United States alone are considered, it is estimated that prescriptions containing flowering plants or their products amount to US$4 thousand million a year.
For those in the affluent world, it may seem inconceivable that about 85 percent of the world's population in the poor nations, when they are ill, do not consult medical doctors and many never enter a hospital from the time they are born until they die. Such statistics have prompted the World Health Organization, after many years of benign neglect, to initiate a programme to promote and develop traditional medicine to be carried out throughout the developing world.
Traditional medicine "needs to be evaluated, given due recognition and developed so as to improve its efficacy, safety, availability and wider application at low cost," according to WHO reports. "It is already the people's own health-care system and is well accepted by them. It has certain advantages over imported systems of medicine in any setting because as an integral part of the people's culture, it is particularly effective in solving certain cultural health problems. It can and does freely contribute to scientific and universal medicine. Its recognition, promotion and development will secure due respect for a people's culture and heritage."
Dr R.H. Bannerman, until recently the Programme Manager for Traditional Medicine at WHO, summed up the current feeling on traditional medicine as follows: 'There are those who lake a hostile attitude toward traditional medicine, and those who, without reservation, accept all things handed down by tradition. Both of these attitudes are indeed wrong. The more realistic tendency which is emerging is discriminating and discarding the crude and harmful practices while retaining the refined and useful methods for further development and application."
All countries belonging to WHO have pledged to provide primary health-care for all their people by the year 2000. Obviously, we cannot continue to rely exclusively on the administration of Western medicine. This is particularly self-evident when we realize that, for example, there are more medical doctors currently within the metropolitan Washington, D.C. area in the United States than there are in the whole of Black Africa. As traditional medicine gains the respect of our modern societies, there is the likelihood that a new breed of practitioners will emerge. I can foresee a transformation: the development of well-educated herbalists who can write down their diagnoses, follow up their clinical observations, and record the efficacy and safety of the herbs administered. Finally, one hopes the traditional healer will retain the trappings of his medical practice and maintain his psychological position in the community.
<section>2</section>
Medicine trees of the tropics
Robin Levingston and Rogelio Zamora
ROBIN LEVINGSTON, of the FAO Forestry Department, Rome, deals with afforestation. ROGELIO ZAMORA is with the Forest Research Institute, Ministry of Natural Resources, College, Laguna, the Philippines.
Medicinal plants play an important role in the lives of rural people' particularly in remote parts of developing countries with few health facilities.
"LA FORÊT DE LA LAMA" IN THE REPUBLIC OF BENIN - a source of many forest trees with medicinal uses
Tropical forests are the source of a large proportion of the world's recognized medicinal plants. It is variously estimated that there are between 200000 and 700000 species of tropical flowering plants. Such a wealth of identified species, which have been in no sense thoroughly investigated, constitutes an enormous potential source of plant-derived chemicals useful to man.
Tropical forests are disappearing at a frightening rate and man is unwittingly observing the decrease of a natural resource which has been described as a "power-house of evolution" and a major source of "wild medicine". FAO, UNEP, Unesco and IUCN have realized the implications of this steady loss and are trying to stem such destruction of forests, largely caused by shifting cultivation arising out of rural poverty and a hunger for land for subsistence farming.
Since May 1978 the World Health Organization has been making a study of medicinal plants. This study prompted the initial identification of 20000 species of medicinal plants and a more detailed investigation of a short list of 200. A great many of these plants have their origins in the world's tropical forests and their present use is largely rooted in traditional medicines which play a major part in maintaining the health and welfare of both rural and city dwellers in developing countries.
The disappearance of the natural vegetation and even its replacement with artificially established forests of exotic species are changing the ecology of the environment with a consequent disappearance or change in occurrence of many medicinally useful species, thus depriving rural communities of their benefits.
How can FAO assist in the conservation of these species? The most appropriate programmes appear to be those dealing with forest conservation and management and forestry for local community development. The former provides the rationale and systems for managing forests and the latter helps identify and promote the cultivation and use of forest-derived species, which are appropriate for establishment by rural communities because of their potential multiple use.
What appropriate species of medicinal value are already known? The following arc relevant examples and there are no doubt many others awaiting discovery both from literature as well as from field identification and study.
One of the medicinal plants that thrives in humid tropical forests is Mallotus philippensis (Lamk.) Muell-Arg. (fem. Euphorbiaceae) commonly known as "kamala". The natural range of kamala extends from the rain forests of tropical Australia, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines and southern China to the moist evergreen or semi-evergreen forests of India, where kamala is often a secondary species.
The tree itself is generally narrow-stemmed and grows up to 15-20 m in height whereas in India a smaller many-branched evergeen tree with a short buttressed bole is found. Kamala is recognizable by its deep red slash and the downy reddish glandular underside to its shiny-surfaced leaves. The fruit is a globose capsule densely covered with a reddish-brown glandular pubescence from which the main medicinal products are derived.
Kamala has a wide variety of medicinal uses. All parts of the tree can be used as external applications for parasitic infections of the skin. The powdered glands and hairs of the fruit are a useful anthelmintic and extracts of kamala and hexachlorethane have given encouraging results in treating fascioliasis (liver fluke) in cattle. The fruit is also used to treat intestinal worms.
Other functions of kamala include the use of its leaves as fodder; its oil as a fixative in cosmetic preparations, colouring of foodstuffs and beverages and the use of kamala wood in light construction, tool handles, turnery and even for paper pulp. In Australia the wood is used for brushware, flooring, and packing cases. It is also the long-valued source of the dyeing substance used on silk and wool, also known in the trade as "kamala".
Another genus of medicinal value from the humid tropics is Rauwolfia (fem. Apocynaceae). Like kamala, it is pan-tropical and comprises 100 species. The two most important species appear to be Rauwolfia vomitoria Afz. from the humid tropical secondary forests of Africa, ranging from Senegal to the Congo, Uganda and East Africa and Rauwolfia serpentina Benth and Kurz, from the moist deciduous forests of tropical Asia.
The Rauwolfia species have three main medicinal uses: raw material for the extraction of isolated alkaloids, preparation of extracts with a standardized alkaloid content and the production of powdered Rauwolfia roots. The pharmaceutical derivatives are used mainly as antihypertensives and as sedatives. Folk medicinal uses of the root bark and roots are extensive, particularly for their aphrodisiac, emetic, purgative, antipsoric, dysenteric, sedative, abortive and insecticidal properties. Decoctions of the leaves of R. vomitoria have a powerful emetic effect and chopped leaves stewed with animal fat are applied to swellings. In India, R. serpentina root preparations have been used for centuries in the relief of disorders of the central nervous system, as an anthelmintic and for the treatment of intestinal disorders as well as the stimulation of uterine contractions.
Medicinal types
Abortifacient: inducing abortion
Anthelmintic: expelling or destroying parasitic worms, especially of the intestines
Antipsoric: relieving itches
Aperient: gently moving the bowels: a laxative
Astringent: drawing together soft organic tissues; a styptic
Bechic: tending to cure or relieve a cough; an expectorant
Cardiotonic: tending to increase the tonus of heart muscle
Diaphoretic: increasing perspiration
Dysenteric: dispelling dysentery or severe diarrhoea
Emetic: inducing vomiting
Emmenagogic: inducing menstruation
Expectorant: promoting discharge of mucus from the respiratory tract
Haemostatic: stopping bleeding
Hypotensive: causing low blood pressure or a lowering of blood pressure
Febrifugic: mitigating or removing fever
Purgative: purging or tending to purge: cathartic
Rubefacient: inducing redness of the skin by external application
Vulnerary: speeding the healing of wounds
The main buyers of products derived from Rauwolfia in the early 1970s were the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, Switzerland and the USA. Prices then were US$ 3.75-4.00 per 0.5 kg (1 lb) for powdered root of R. serpentina and US$ 0.30-0.40 per gram for the alkaloid, reserpine. The root and root bark of R. vomitoria commanded a price of DM 46 per kg/c.i.f. and at that time the market appeared "remarkably stable".
A third important medicinal plant comes from the tropical forests of South America. Variously called "Tofu balsam." "Peru balsam" or "Quinoquino," Myroxylon balsamum (L.) Harms. (fem. Leguminosae) is another large forest tree growing up to 35 m in height. It is a native of the forests of Venezuela, Peru, Nicaragua, El Salvador, Guatemala and Colombia, ranging from subtropical dry to wet to tropical dry zones.
The species can be distinguished by its yellow-spotted grey bark and evergreen, oddly pinnate, oblong leaflets 6-9 cm long and 3-4 cm wide. The white flowers are borne in axillary racemes 10-20 cm long and produce a winged indehiscent pod (samara) 5-10 cm long with a single seed.
The medicinal product is a balsam: an important ingredient of tincture of benzoin. It is also used in ointment as an antiseptic, in cough syrups as an expectorant, as an inhalant for catarrh and bronchitis and is said to have bactericidal, pectoral, tonic and vulnerary properties. An ethanol extract is an antibiotic against Mycobacterium tuberculosis. It is also used to treat skin complaints, haemorrhoids and bedsores.
Tolu balsam's other non-medicinal uses include the flavouring of cough syrups, soft drinks, confectionery, ice-cream and chewing-gum. Oil of Tolu balsam is used in cosmetics and soaps. The wood can be used for purposes ranging from railway ties to cabinet work. The seed provides flavouring for the alcoholic drink, aguardiente; the tree provides shade for cultivated crops and it is also used ornamentally.
Annual world production (1981) of Tolu balsam is about 65 tonnes of which El Salvador exports 48 tonnes or 74 percent. The price of Peru balsam is US$ 1.30-2.40 per 0.5 kg (1 lb), and roughly half the world's production is exported to the USA.
AT A RURAL COMMUNE HOSPITAL - where Chinese health-care relies on herbal medicines
AT A RURAL COMMUNE HOSPITAL - where Chinese health-care relies on herbal medicines
Less generally useful but of considerable pharmaceutical interest is another representative of the family Apocynaceae, the red or Madagascar periwinkle Catharanthus roseus (L.) G. Don - syn. Lochnera rosea (L.) Reichb, f. or Vinca rosea (L.), which originates in the tropical forests of Madagascar and is now found pan-tropically.
Its unprepossessing common name (red periwinkle) belies the potency of the alkaloids produced from the whole plant, such as vincristine and vincaleukoblastine, which helped in producing a breakthrough in the chemotherapeutical treatment of Hodgkin's disease and leukaemia. Parts of the plant are also used in the preparation of remedies for diabetes in places as far apart as Natal, Viet Nam and Queensland. A wealth of folk remedies are prepared from the plant, which is regarded as having astringent, diaphoretic, emmenagogic, abortifacient, bechic, cardiotonic, hypotensive, febrifugic and tranquillizing properties.
The primary active chemical constituents which are most concentrated in root bark are the alkaloids ajmaline, serpentine and reserpine, but at least 12 others have been positively identified, including leurosine and vincaleukoblastine. Vinceine, tetrahydroalstonine and lochnerine, which are also present in the root bark, are important for pharmaceutical purposes.
There are commercial preparations known as Velban, Covincia and Vinlin, but the main extract is vincristine which sells for around US$ 200000 per kg and requires about 530 tonnes of plant material for its production. The worldwide trade in vincristine is worth about US$ 50 million per annum.
In the arid tropics there is another medicinally valuable species worth mentioning: Jatropha curcas L. of the family Euphorbiaceae, commonly known in Portuguese as "Pinhão de Purga" or "Pinhão de Paraguai" and in English as "Physic nut" or "Purging nut". The species was originally found in tropical America but has now spread to all parts of the tropical world.
In Burma, the seeds are used as an aperient and are edible once the embryo has been removed. Oil from the seeds has been described as laxative, emetic and even drastically purgative. It is also a rubefacient for rheumatism as well as in alleviating toothache. The leaves are antiparasitic and a decoction of these is used as a vulnerary or with natron for gonorrhoea. It can also be used as a cough remedy, if the roots are included, and as an antidiarrhoeic.
Jatropha curcas forms a large shrub 3-4 m high with broadly ovate, cordate, acute, lobed, glabrous leaves measuring 10-15 cm long by 7.5-12.5 cm wide. Its small yellowish-green flowers are in loose panicles of cymes; its fruits are 2.5 cm long, breaking into three 2-valved cocci containing ovoid-oblong dull brownish-black seeds.
Jatropha curcas is drought resistant, and has spread naturally in many tropical countries. It is now even found in the arid Cape Verde Islands from sea-level to 1000 m and thrives particularly well at 450-750 metres.
The shrub is grown readily from cuttings 45-100 cm long, and can also be propagated by seed although growth from cuttings is more rapid. Bushes start to yield seeds at 4-5 months of age and have a life span of about 50 years. When dry, the seeds are retained on the bush for a long time. The leaves are not browsed by goats and the bush stands lopping and trimming well. This, together with its ability to sprout from cuttings, makes it a good hedge plant. The species could also be considered for soil and water conservation purposes on eroded catchments as it is extremely adaptable to most soil conditions.
The seed oil contains curcasine or curcin, a toxalbumin resembling ricine and a resinous substance (resinolipoid) which are both poisonous. Another component is curcas oil which contains myristic, palmitic, stearic, arachidic, loecic and linoleic acids. The seeds owe their purgative property to the above oils.
The abundant sap contains 10 percent tannin and is soapy to the touch; it can be used as marking-ink. The bark contains 37 percent tannin and is said to yield a dark blue dye.
The species is commonly grown for hedges and fences and was introduced by the Portuguese into Asia and Africa where it is still cultivated as an oil-seed crop in the Cape Verde Islands and Madagascar. In Madagascar it is also grown as a support for the vanilla plant. The plant can be used as fish poison and the seed oil is used commercially for the production of soap, a textile lubricant and as an illuminant. Tender leaves are often eaten cooked in Java and Malaysia and used to cultivate the Eri silkworm in Assam.
Commercial yields of seed are said to be In the order of 400-1200 kg/ha in Cape Verde. The seeds are collected and exported mainly to Portugal and France for oil extraction.
The well-known acacia, Acacia nilotica (L.) Del. and A. arabica Willd, of the family Leguminosae are other arid-zone species of medicinal plants. The former covers an area from northern Nigeria to dry tropical East Africa and the latter spreads from South and East Africa through Arabia to northwest India and Pakistan.
The high tannin content of the soap, leaves, bark and young pods makes their extract very astringent and therefore useful as a haemostatic and a remedy for diarrhoea and dysentery. The gum of both species is edible and is useful for the relief of throat and chest complaints. The pods and young leaves are good fodder, and the wood of both species is hard, durable and commonly used for wooden handles, agricultural implements, turnery and cabinet work. It also provides good fuel and charcoal. The trees afford valuable shade in dry hot regions and their bark is a rich source of tannin for processing leather. The gum can serve as a substitute for the "gum Arabic" normally harvested from A. senegal.
The use of medicinal plants plays an important role in the lives of rural people, particularly in remote parts of developing countries which are poorly served with health facilities. Products derived from plants found in the tropical forests are not only useful for traditional medicine, but also often have a considerable market value. The sale of raw materials for pharmaceutical purposes can be especially important for subsistence farmers.
There is therefore, a need to identify tree species which are capable of multiple uses, such as wood production as well as alternative products such as medicines. This would promote recognition of the value of particular species and result in their inclusion and consideration in forest management planning.
It is evident that certain trees, of which only a very few have been described here, can serve man's medicinal and many other needs while assisting in protecting the environment upon which he and other living creatures depend. The cultivation of this type of tree amongst others (whose main uses may be the production of food, wood energy, fodder and wood for industrial purposes) can help to rehabilitate degraded forest lands. Research into the identification of such multiple-use species should continue and be intensified.
References
BAILEY, L.H. 1949 Manual of cultivated plants. New York, Macmillan Company. 812 p.
COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH. The wealth of India: a dictionary of Indian raw materials and industrial products, Vol. 6, p. 229-233.
DALZIEL, J.M. 1937 The useful plants of West tropical Africa, p. 202-204. Crown Agents for Overseas Governments and Administrations, Millbank, London SW1, UK.
DUKE, J.A. 1981 Handbook of legumes of world economic importance, p. 911, 173-177. New York and London, Plenum Press.
FAO. 1981 Agriculture: toward 2000. Rome, FAO.
FRANCIS, W.D. 1951 Australian rain forest trees. Commonwealth of Australia Forestry and Timber Bureau. 230 p.
GODIN, V.J. & SPENSLEY, P.C. 1971 Oil and oil seeds. TPI, Crop products digest No. 1, p. 107-110.
GOOR, A.Y. & BARNEY, C.W. 1976 Forest tree planting in arid zones, 2nd edition, p. 354-355, 359. New York, The Ronald Press Company.
IRVINE, F.R. 1961 Woody plants of Ghana with special reference to their uses, p. 233-235, 633-634. Oxford, UK, Oxford University Press.
MYERS, N. 1981 In search of wild medicine. In Commonwealth, p. 8-9. London, Royal Commonwealth Society.
PENSO, G. 1976 Inventory of medicinal plants and conpilation of a list of the most widely used plants. Geneva, WHO (DPM/WP/78.2).
PERRY, L.M. & J. METZGER. 1980 Medicinal plants of SE Asia. Attributed properties and uses, p. 23-24, 146, 148. Cambridge, Massachusetts and London, The MIT Press.
UNCTAD/GATT. 1974 Markets for selected medicinal plants and their derivatives, p. 113-118. Geneva, ITC.
UNESCO/UNEP/FAO. 1978 Floristic composition and typology. In Tropical forest ecosystems Chapter 4.
USHER, G. 1974 A dictionary of plants used by man. London, Constable and Company.
WATT, J. M. & BREYER-BRANDWIJK, M.G. 1962 The medicinal and poisonous plants of Southern and Eastern Africa, p. 55-58, 420-422, 546-548. London and Edinburgh.
<section>3</section>
The state of forestry in Asia and the Pacific
Y.S. Rao and C. Chandrasekharan
Y.S. RAO is the Regional Forestry Economist for Asia and the Pacific at the FAO Office in Bangkok and C. CHANDRASEKHARAN is the Forestry Economist dealing with the same region at FAO headquarters in Rome.
A MALAYSIAN RAIN FOREST - in tropical Asia more than 5000 ha are deforested daily
Following the 15th FAO Regional Conference in New Delhi (March 1980), three significant FAO meetings on forestry issues in the Asian region were held: the fifth session of the Committee on Forestry, a meeting of the Committee on Forest Development in the Tropics, and the 11th session of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission.
At these meetings two interrelated issues were discussed: increasing population pressure on a limited supply of land and the widespread depletion or degradation of forest cover and its effect on future supplies of forestry goods and services.
Participants noted that wood will remain an important housing material in rural areas of Asia and that the majority of rural people will continue to depend on fuelwood as their primary energy source. Hence, rural forestry activities constitute an important source of income and employment. In the future, participants felt, forestry policies in this region should consciously be directed toward alleviation of poverty through rural development. In doing so, they should integrate productive, protective and social objectives. One social goal, equity, could be used to reinforce a strategy of growth based on active and voluntary participation of the people living in forest communities.
Deforestation and degradation
The FAO/UNEP study Forest resources of tropical Asia (FAO, 1982 reports that the total area under natural woody vegetation, including shifting cultivation areas, in the countries of tropical Asia was 445 million ha in 1980. This is about 44 percent of the total surface (see Table 1).
The countries with the greatest expanse of natural woody vegetation were Indonesia (158 million ha), India (72 million ha), Burma (53 million ha)' Papua New Guinea (40 million ha) and Malaysia (25 million ha).
Closed broad-leaved forests are the most valuable of forest formations The study reports that the 292 million ha of such forests in the region were distributed over 16 different countries (see Table 2).
Open broad-leaved forests comprise 31 million hectares. They predominate in Thailand, India, Laos, Democratic Kampuchea and Papua New Guinea.
The total area covered by coniferous forests is comparatively small (8.4 million ha), with about two-thirds of these considered productive. They are essentially confined to the Himalayan belt in South Asia.
In addition, the region has some five million ha under bamboo, mainly in India. Viet Nam, Thailand and Burma. There are also 73 million ha of forest fallows and about 36 million ha of shrub formations.
Closed broad-leaved forests and coniferous forests together contain a standing volume of about 45 thousand million m³ of wood. This suggests a regional average productivity figure of about 150 m³/hectare. Hardwood resources in virgin productive forests amount to some 21 thousand million m³ or 47 percent of total growing stock. Those in logged-over forests represent 6.6 thousand million m³ or 15 percent of the total growing stock. Total growing stock in closed broad-leaved forests works out at 43.6 thousand million cubic metres. Six countries account for 88 percent of the standing volume (including conifers): Indonesia, Burma, Malaysia, Papua New Guinea, India and the Philippines (see Table 3).
Deforestation, in recent years, has emerged as a central problem, both in Asia and in tropical forests all over the world. Although tropical forests are estimated to contain half the world's plant and animal species as well as offering great climatic and economic benefits, this resource is being "deforested", or converted to non-forestry purposes, at an alarming rate of some 5000 ha daily in tropical Asia. From 1976 to 1980, the total deforested area reached nine million hectares - a yearly deforestation rate of some 1815000 hectares. While this rate is expected to level off at 1826000 ha per year during 1981-85, the trend, if it persists, would by the year 2000 convert some 37 million ha of closed forest area to non-forestry uses. This represents a decrease from a total 306 million ha in Asia in 1980 to 269 million ha in 2000 - or a 12 percent depletion. The average annual rate of deforestation of closed forests is 0.6 percent.
Analysis of deforestation rates by country shows that it is highest in Indonesia (over 500000 ha), followed by Thailand (333000 ha). The range is between 100000 and 250000 ha for Malaysia, India, Laos, the Philippines and Burma. The least affected countries in absolute terms are Bhutan (2000 ha), Pakistan (7000 ha) and Bangladesh (8000 ha). Deforestation is most widespread in logged-over productive forests and least present in unproductive closed forests.
In general, logging operations are causing both qualitative and quantitative degradation of the forests. The extent varies, depending both on intensity of logging as well as on the planning and execution of various operations. Recent studies show that 41 percent of cleared areas were occupied by skid trails, roads, landings, etc. after logging occurred. This means that only 60 percent of the logged area could be replanted after intensive logging. The high intensity of open space and bare soil indicates that many trees are either felled or broken in intensively logged forests. It was estimated that as many as 60 trees/ha of commercial species are either broken or injured. This type of degradation, in varying degrees, was reported in some 44 million ha of logged-over forests in insular Southeast Asia where mechanized logging was practiced.
Logging for export is mainly carried out by multinational corporations. These operations concentrate on commercially exploitable species, ignoring forest products or industries that can improve the living standards of nearby local communities. Critics have noted that commercial logging basically consists of "creaming" the forest for the commercially valuable species. A 1977 study of nine logging companies in a Southeast - Asian country concludes that they did not leave the required number of selected trees behind.
Degradation is also brought about by rural people themselves. In the absence of an organized supply of wood, such populations resort to indiscriminate firewood collection and excessive lopping of trees. Overgrazing leads to depletion of resources, sometimes beyond repair. Fires, pats, mining, and natural disasters have also contributed to forest degradation.
Replanting, meanwhile, is lagging. During the last 25 years or so, the cumulative area replanted reached approximately 5.1 million ha, compared with the estimated 40 million ha deforested within the same period. India and Indonesia accounted for some four million ha out of the region's total of 5.1 million ha of plantations. Six other countries contributed more than one million ha: the Philippines (300000). Viet Nam (204000 ha), Pakistan (160000 ha), Bangladesh (128000 ha), Thailand (114000 ha) and Sri Lanka (112000 ha). Plantations undertaken in Bhutan, Nepal, Burma, Malaysia, Democratic Kampuchea, Laos and Papua New Guinea were marginal. Some two million ha (i.e. 39 percent) of the 5.1 million ha total have been replanted during the period 1976-80. Nearly 40 percent of these were non-industrial plantations, compared to only 24 percent in earlier periods.
AT A VILLAGE WOOD-LOT IN INDIA - products include fuelwood, fodder, poles and sawnwood
FOREST WORKERS AT THE MAT SA PROJECT - do traditional logging methods cause less damage to the forest?
By far the most important industrial plantation species planted in the region is teak (Tectona grandis). Important high-yield hardwood species planted were Albizzia falcataria, Calliandra calothyrsus, Eucalyptus spp., Gmelina arborea and Leucaena leucocephala. Among conifers, Pinus merkusii was the chief plantation species.
Prospects for sharply increased replanting are dim. An analysis of plantation policies, programmes and projects, financed either through domestic or international funds, indicates that the planting effort undertaken between 1981 and 1985 will remain at the levels set in the past five years, i.e. about 2.2 million ha over the five years.
If such trends continue, the medium-term prospect is for a decrease in forest growing stock wtih the consequence of a progressive decline in global export potential of tropical wood products. This decline will be exacerbated by the combined effects of population and economic growth, which will translate into expansion of local demand for forest products. This will aggravate local shortages. Fuelwood scarcities, already a critical problem in less-forested areas, could spread.
The depletion of vegetation cover and deforestation of watershed areas change the patterns of river flows by diminishing water storage capacities. Increasing sedimentation following deforestation raises the risk of flash-flooding. Both eventualities could lead to the depletion of soil, a crucial life-support system upon which the bulk of all food production depends.
Table 1. Distribution of woody vegetation by subregion
Million ha
% of region
Insular Southeast Asia
Continental Southeast Asia
South Asia
Papua New Guinea
Table 2. Closed broad-leaved forests in Asia and the Pacific
Country
Million ha
% of region
Indonesia
India
Papua New Guinea
Burma
Malaysia
Philippines
Thailand
Laos
Viet Nam
Democratic Kampuchea
Sri Lanka
Nepal
Bhutan
Bangladesh
Pakistan
Brunei
Table 3. Countries with 88 percent of the standing forests in Asia and the Pacific
Country
Standing volume (VOB) (million m³)
% of region
Indonesia
Burma
Malaysia
Papua New Guinea
India
Philippines
Even under natural vegetation cover, it takes from 100-400 years or more to generate 10 mm of topsoil. Once this topsoil disappears, it has gone, for all practical purposes, for ever. Many countries suffer from some form or other of soil loss. Over the last decade, the loss of the soil's productive capacity due to erosion, salinization, waterlogging and chemical degradation is causing rising concern.
India offers a worrisome example. About half the country suffers from some form of soil degradation. Of India's 3.3 million km² of land, 1.4 million km² are subject to erosion. Another 27000 km² are being degraded by salinity, alkalinity and floods.
The 11th session of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission noted the above trends with concern and called on governments to review all aspects of the transfer of forest lands to non-forestry use and to limit future loss of forest lands. The Commission also strongly supported the idea of a Regional Convention on Minimum Forest Cover and Endangered Forest Habitat and requested FAO to convene such a meeting. Such action would be consistent with the World Conservation Strategy (March 1980), which advocated that essential ecological processes and life-support systems on which human survival and development depend be maintained.
Forestry for rural development. The importance of forestry activities in generating incomes for the landless as well as for small farmers and shifting cultivators has received increasing attention. The World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development held at FAO (in July 1979) stressed linen that forestry activities are essential for broad-based rural development. Forestry contributes to rural development by maintaining ecological balance, increasing the supply of products and in generating employment and income, especially for the landless. Forestry can be used to shape both land and people.
There is considerable potential for introducing trees on land that is conventionally seen as strictly agricultural. The objective is not only to increase wood supply and to ease pressure on forests; it is also to contribute to food production, whether directly, by the fruit or fodder from trees, or indirectly, by providing shelter, restoring nutrients from deeper layers, and increasing nitrogen fixation. Tree introductions may take many forms, ranging from occupying strips of land not at that time used for crops to mixing trees with agricultural crops in varying proportions. Annual crops can be alternated with tree fallow. Trees thus used can produce several primary products such as timber, poles, fuelwood, fodder or food.
Mixtures of trees and agricultural crops can occur in either intercropping or multiple-cropping systems. Recent research shows that these agroforestry practices can be highly productive. Yields may be 20-50 percent higher than for the same crops grown separately. Yield advantage appears greatest when annual crops arc mixed with perennials, including trees.
Several improved varieties of Leucaena leucocephala (ipil ipil) have been found to be a rich source of fodder and fuel. Trials in India with giant varieties showed that average fodder yields of over 10 tonnes/ha/cutting can be obtained even on relatively poor soils with very light irrigation. In less than four years, the trees grew to a height of over 10 m and yielded 200 tonnes of wood per hectare. Even in areas with less than 400 mm annual rainfall and with no irrigation whatsoever, the average height reached 9.5 m in less than four years.
Another Asian tree that can produce both fodder and fuel is Calliandra calothyrsus, which in Indonesia grows 2.5-3.5 m in six to nine months. Trees can be harvested for firewood after a year, or their edible foliage and fruit can be used for animals. They are also valuable for soil restoration and conservation. Once in full production, they yield 20-100 m³/ha firewood yearly.
AN ERODED RIVER BANK IN PAKISTAN - topsoil requires centuries for regeneration
REFORESTATION IN THE UPPER SOLO RIVER BASIN - because trees protect watersheds
In view of this potential, several Asian countries have given increasing support to community forestry. In the design of plantations, monocultures of exotic species are viewed sceptically while there is a positive bias toward multiple use and species-mixing based upon local needs. More farmers are making plantations of tree crops on private farm land. Wood-based industries and private companies are collaborating with forest departments to assist in rural community development. Government corporations in some countries have strengthened the social content of their programmes. An increased flow of aid and institutional credit for forestry projects, designed to alleviate rural poverty, is an encouraging feature in recent years.
However, it is not yet clear whether, beneath the surface of this apparent change, a strong enough momentum exists to secure people's participation and provide direct benefits to the rural communities. So far there seems to be little evidence of institutions that allow participation by local people. Attitudinal changes in various forestry services do not appear to be deep-rooted. Despite these constraints, several countries have achieved progress.
FAO is aware of these useful experiences. It is, therefore, assisting countries to reinforce approaches integrating forestry in rural development. FAO's Forestry for Local Community Development Programme, which is supported by SIDA, became operational in November 1979. It provides small-scale supplementary assistance for countries to initiate or accelerate projects or programmes which support forestry activities at the community level. These must be of direct benefit to rural people. During its first 12 months, the FAO programme received requests for assistance from six countries in Asia. The requests were for assistance in preparing large-scale projects, studies to define future action, developing programmes to make community-level forestry more responsive to the needs of rural women, and training for those involved in community forestry. Supporting activities were carried out to disseminate information about community-level forestry.
A multi-country seminar on Forestry for Rural Community Development was held in Thailand in 1979. In conjunction with this seminar, group study tours were dispatched to the Social Forestry Programme in Gujarat, India, and the Prosperity Approach Programme in Java, Indonesia. In June 1980 another group studied the Village Forestry Programme in the Republic of Korea. Two publications related to the topic, namely, Forestry for local community development (FAO Forestry Paper No. 7), 1978, and Forestry for rural communities, 1979, are used in many countries. A study of the agroforestry systems of India and Sri Lanka has also been completed.
The demographic aspects were considered in a regional project executed at the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific (RAPA), Bangkok. With support from the United Nations Fund for Population Activities (UNFPA), a project entitled "Population data in forestry communities practicing shifting cultivation in Asia" was executed during 1978-80. This project collated the scattered data relating to countries where estimates are available. It shows that some 28 million people are dependent on shifting cultivation, over a total forest area of about 74 million hectares. The areas or countries most affected are Kalimantan Island in Indonesia, the northeastern and dry central states of India, the central highlands of Viet Nam, Sabah and Sarawak in Malaysia, Mindanao Island in the Philippines and parts of Burma, Thailand and Bangladesh in that order. The estimates concerning the area and the number of people involved should probably be regarded as conservative: other estimates exist
which indicate that at least 80 million people and 120 million ha of forest land are involved. A country-level action programme has evolved in the Philippines from this project. Indonesia, India and Thailand have prepared draft proposals.
Table 4. Population involved in fuelwood-deficit situations in Asia and the Pacific, 1980
Rural
Total
(in millions)
Acute scarcity
Deficit
Prospective deficit
A SHIFTING CULTIVATOR'S HOME IN THE PHILIPPINES - land scarcity forces relocation into forests
Not all slash-and-burn practices are destructive to forest or deleterious to the soil. Managed systems - where controlled burning is practiced, where soil fertility is not totally drained to start with, and where a sufficiently lengthy fallow period is maintained - can sustain a forested condition indefinitely, although such forest is unlikely to produce commercial timber. Slash-and-burn systems which destroy forest productivity are those which exhaust the soil and encourage weed growth, leading to accelerated soil erosion and a disruption of the water-regulating function of the forest. Where population density is low, the climate is favourable and long fallow periods are prevalent, damage to forest and soil can be minimal. Although the original forest is destroyed, it is generally replaced by secondary forest which is also productive.
However, there has been increasing population pressure on forest land. Fallow periods have been shrinking. Abandoned slash-and-burn areas are increasingly converted into sterile bush or stretches of grassland with little soil fertility. The problems of shifting cultivation communities need to be understood more fully. Solutions to ensure progress in their well-being are found within the context of overall rural development.
Management prescriptions imposed from above and which ignore the values, culture and natural creativity of the people to whom the approaches are directed are unlikely to succeed. Indeed they often prove counter-productive. Community forestry has social dimensions, including demographic factors, which need to be explored. Traditional approaches should be replaced by new modes of communication and decision-making originated by people who live and work in these communities.
Critical in this approach is a change in the attitudes of government agents. The fifth session of the Committee on Forestry (May 1980), which considered the approaches advocated in the FAO paper Toward a forestry strategy for development (FAO, 1980), recognized this need. The paper stressed that "reformed" forestry strategy should focus sharply on eradication of poverty by seeking to provide the rural poor with greater access to goods, services and opportunity generated by economic growth. Such a strategy should also promote self-reliance and equitable participation of the rural people in forestry and forest-based activities. The Committee concluded that the approach was particularly relevant to the conditions in developing member countries, and fully consistent with the Declaration of Principles and Programme of Action of the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development (WCARRD).
The fuelwood situation
Wood, which is cheaper than fossil fuels and also locally available, is the dominant domestic fuel for rural people and for many of the urban poor. Throughout the world, more than 1.5 thousand million people use wood daily for cooking and heating homes. Developing countries in the Asian region alone use about 1200 million m³ yearly. About half is used for cooking, a third for heating, and the rest for processing and agricultural use.
Wood-fuels, including charcoal, provide at least 80 percent of all energy used in thousands of Asian villages. Charcoal is preferred in urban areas, primarily because of its efficiency in use (greater heat intensity, lack of smoke) and transportability. Charcoal production centred in small-scale enterprises in forest regions is a relatively common practice in some parts of Asia. Charcoal, although produced by rural people, is essentially a commercialized urban fuel.
In tropical Asia, energy needs to sustain daily household life and small-scale industries at the village level vary from a low of about 1.0 m³ of wood equivalent per inhabitant per year in the plains and hills of South and Southeast Asia to a high of 2.2 m³/inhabitant/year in the mountainous areas. In Southeast Asia where wood is still quite abundant and conveniently located, about 1.0 m³/inhabitant/year is consumed. In China and South Asia, where wood is scarce, per caput consumption drops to 0.5 m³ and below. In the Pacific region, where wood is more readily available to local communities, the level of per caput consumption is generally high. It reaches 1.7 m³ in Papua New Guinea.
In the near future, rural people will continue to depend, as they do now, on traditional fuels - charcoal, fuelwood and agricultural residues. They do not have viable options to these fuels. At the same time, the twin processes of deforestation and degradation are affecting the access of rural communities to their traditional energy sources. Population pressure is draining forest resources, in some cases to the extent of removing all trees and scrub cover. In the densely populated Gangetic plain, forest cover has been reduced to 0.35 percent of the land area in West Bengal and to about two percent in Uttar Pradesh. The impact is greatest around cities where industries are concentrated. Bangkok's yearly consumption of three million m³ of fuelwood has an impact on a large part of Thailand's remaining forests.
The search for domestic fuelwood follows a predictable pattern. When dead wood disappears, people lop branches off living trees and then, eventually, the whole tree itself is felled. Even the stump, thorns, scrub and bush are uprooted. Once fuelwood becomes scarce, people turn to animal dung and crop residues for fuel. Such organic waste, if returned to the soil, would help improve its nutrient level, its structure and its capacity to retain moisture. But with fuelwood scarcity, 400 million tonnes of cow-dung are now burnt yearly in parts of Asia, the Near East and Africa. One tonne of dung burned may mean the loss of as much as 50 kg of potential food grain. The result is a reduction in crop yields and a corresponding pressure to plough land covered by trees.
For a long time, both in the developed and the developing countries, there has been a reluctance or inability to recognize that most people in the world depend upon wood for their primary source of energy. They heat their homes, cook their food and often run their basic trades and industries on firewood (see Unasylva, Vol. 33, No. 131 and No. 133, 1981). A recognition of the critical implications of an emerging scarcity of fuelwood and in some countries it is already serious was perhaps the most important single accomplishment of the UN Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy that took place in Nairobi in August 1981. A global reconnaissance survey of fuelwood supplies and needs, which included a map showing where and to what extent fuelwood shortages exist in the Third World, was FAO's most important contribution.
The UN Conference concluded that two thousand million people - three-quarters of the population of developing countries, depend on fuelwood and other traditional fuels for their daily domestic energy needs. In the developing world, fuelwood deficits amount to about 400 million m³ and affect roughly 1150 million people. Some 1050 million rural people live in situations of growing deficits where minimum needs are met at the cost of depleting existing resources. A further 100 million people live in scarcity situations where they are already unable to satisfy their minimum energy needs.
COLLECTING FIREWOOD IN NEPAL AND INDIA - man-hours instead of power lines
COLLECTING FIREWOOD IN NEPAL AND INDIA - man-hours instead of power lines
In 1979, fuelwood and charcoal removals in the Asian region amounted to nearly 736 million cubic metres. Industrial wood removals came to some 101 million m³ in total. Since there are no systematic forecasts of the future supply situation, it is best analysed in terms of emerging scarcities.
Acute scarcity situations are foreseen in zones with high population, a high level of needs, and low resources. Such zones are found mainly in the mountainous areas of northern India and in the hills of Nepal.
Deficit situations are foreseen mainly in the Indo-Gangetic plains of the Indian subcontinent, southern India. Bangladesh, central Thailand and Java. Deficits are especially marked in the more densely populated areas where forest and woody vegetation are already destroyed and agricultural residues largely depleted.
Prospective deficit situations cover a wide range of situations where available fuelwood supplies could fall short of current energy needs by the year 2000. Among these are Pakistan and other regions of India, Thailand and Sumatra.
The only areas where a satisfactory fuelwood situation now exists are those parts of Bhutan, Burma, Laos, Malaysia, Papua New Guinea, Indonesia and the Philippines where an abundance of forest resources coexist with low population densities.
In the Asia-Pacific region in 1980, close to 1024 million people already found themselves in fuelwood-deficit situations. About 31 million people were living in acute scarcity areas and unable to meet their minimum energy needs. Some 832 million people inhabited deficit areas and another 161 million faced prospective deficit situations (see Table 4). By the year 2000, the population facing deficit situations, if current trends continue, will increase from 1024 million to 1671 million. Of these, 1434 million, or 86 percent, live in villages.
An analysis of fuelwood dependence indicates that in South Asia, two-thirds of total energy supply are supplied by fuelwood. The supply situation here is generally acute in all countries except Bhutan. Continental Southeast Asia also relies heavily on fuelwood. Here the supply situation is satisfactory in Laos and Democratic Kampuchea, but critical in Burma and Thailand. In insular Southeast Asia, about half the population in the Philippines and Indonesia depends on fuelwood and in some parts of these countries the situation is approaching critical levels. In tropical Asia, however, Malaysia is the least dependent upon fuelwood and the supply situation elsewhere is satisfactory. Papua New Guinea, for example, is characterized by medium dependence and a satisfactory supply. However, even in those countries where the general supply situation is considered satisfactory, localized situations exist or are foreseen. One example is the highland provinces of Papua New Guinea.
Fast-growing hardwood species, useful as fuelwood, are being planted to a significant extent in most Asian countries. Fuelwood plantations accounted for nearly a third of the total plantation effort up to 1980. Between 1976 and 1980 the stress was placed on fuelwood plantations whereas before 1976 it had been on industrial plantations. In the last part of the decade, out of a total of some two million ha planted, nearly 40 percent were fuelwood plantations compared with only 24 percent in the earlier period. Five countries had more than 100000 ha of fuelwood plantations by 1980: India (532000 ha), Indonesia (472000 ha), the Philippines (235000 ha). Pakistan (160000 ha), and Viet Nam (127000 ha). Together, they accounted for nearly 95 percent of the region's total fuelwood plantations.
Forestry on the human level
These are some examples of current projects in Asia aimed at bringing the benefits of forestry to the daily needs of villagers. The emphasis is clearly on fuelwood production but environmental protection for better agriculture is closely associated with the wood-lots.
· Bangladesh, where 150 new extension centres were created, 120 million seedlings were distributed and land was afforested in over 8000 villages. There was also extensive planting along roadsides, railways, canals and on coastal embankments. Tobacco growers were encouraged to meet their future need for firewood by supplying them with seeds and seedlings to raise plantations.
· India, where an area of 800000 ha has been planted under social forestry projects throughout 1980. Following the lead of Gujarat State, which started the programme in the early 1970s, there has been a rapid spread of forestry for rural community development in almost every state of India, notably Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Punjab, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal.
· Sri Lanka, where in a recently launched nationwide programme of social forestry, about 1.2 million tree seedlings were supplied to schools, public institutions and the general public in 1980. A community forestry programme to combat emerging fuelwood shortages is about to be started in four arid districts with multilateral assistance.
· Nepal, where the Government has promulgated new rules which may lead to far-reaching changes. Every village panchayat is eligible for 125 ha of land for the creation of panchayat forest (PF). All income from the sale of products from PFS will go to panchayats themselves. This will affect some 2935 panchayats throughout the country. In addition, every village is entitled to 500 ha of degraded forest land for establishing protected panchayat forests (PPF). Revenue from PPFS is to be shared by panchayats and the Government at a 3: I ratio. The Government will provide seedlings free of charge, prepare management schemes and assist with trained staff. Some 1105000 ha of forest land, almost a quarter of the existing forest area, have been earmarked for this programme.
· Indonesia, where a so-called "prosperity approach" in Java is not confined to raising plantations, but is being extended to villagers. The programme encompasses such varied activities as tree planting, house building, taungya intensification, honeybee projects, elephant grass plantations, traditional medicinal plant cultivation, and fisheries. People appear to be responding positively because these activities raise their living standards.
· Thailand, where previous efforts in creating forest villages have been expanded. By 1980, this programme included 70 villages in low-land areas and eight project sites (1760 ha of village wood-lots) concerning hill tribes in highland areas.
· The Philippines, where in 1980 a Forestry Extension and Education Division was created to disseminate information, transfer technology and encourage people's participation in tree planting. Government support has been extended to people raising tree farms or planning agroforestry plots. The President then decreed every citizen of ten years of age or older should plant one tree each year for five consecutive years. Some private logging concessions are also active in implementing community-oriented reforestation programmes, as one operated by the Paper Industries Corporation of the Philippines (PICOP).
LOPPING A TREES LAST LEAVES IN NEPAL - a buffalo consumes 40 kg fodder per day
· The Republic of Korea, where forest associations play a significant role, at the village/community level, in raising and protecting forests on private lands. There were, in 1980, 20453 village forest associations with a membership of nearly two million people. The Government subsidizes these associations and provides extension support. Well-managed private forests were set up as models.
· Japan, where in 1978 a forest owners' association was set up, providing for development of forest owners' cooperatives.
· China, where the magnitude of the effort in reforesting devastated areas has aroused great interest. In 1958, the late chairman Mao Zedong exhorted his people "to cover the country with green trees". He also decreed the execution of forestry projects, wherever possible. These decrees were implemented thoroughly. What evolved was a "four-side forestry" approach: planting trees wherever possible, along all four sides of houses, around the perimeters of villages, on both sides of canals, commune fields, etc. People's participation in planning and implementing reforestation targets was sought. The production of timber, fuelwood, fruits and litter for organic manure (which constitutes the life-blood of soil in China) all increased, providing supplemental income. The result is that since 1950 the area under forests in China has doubled.
· Democratic People's Republic of Korea, where the planting and maintenance of trees and forests is literally the business of all people. Mass mobilization for the task of afforestation is almost total. Work teams for reforestation and afforestation have been organized in every enterprise - wood-based industries, food-processing units, textile mills, coal-mines. It is mandatory for all forestry-related enterprises to constitute core teams for afforestation consisting of 5 percent of their workers or members. Enterprises not directly related to forestry need allocate only 3 percent of their workers toward the afforestation core team. The teams are trained in all aspects of the raising and upkeep of plantations. It is claimed that over the last 30 years all areas fit for planting trees have been planted and that there are no large unplanted areas left in any province in the country.
Recent efforts in increasing fuelwood plantations are the response to region-wide concern over dwindling supplies. They also reflect a desire to meet the needs of local communities, together with a broader aim of securing for forestry an enhanced role in rural development. The location, design, choice of species and technology used in fuelwood plantations are visibly altering. There is an increasing emphasis on village wood-lots, agroforestry, silvipasture and multiple-product forestry. In choosing species for fuelwood, most countries favour short-rotation species with ability to coppice vigorously and pro duce dense wood of high calorific value. Species selected are usually managed on a rotation of eight to ten years. There are indications that for some species it may even be reduced to three years (e.g. Calliandra calothyrsus and Sesbania grandiflora).
Customary methods of extracting energy from firewood are highly inefficient, allowing most of the heat to dissipate. Open-fire cooking is estimated to require five times as much energy as a kerosene stove. Simple wood-burning stoves lose as much as 90 percent of the heat. Studies in Indonesia show that a good stove design can increase efficiency from a level of 6-7 percent to as high as 19-23 percent. More efficient use of fuel is obviously one of the most important ways of dealing with over-use and shortages of fuelwood. Consequently, stove design now commands more serious concern. FAO, the World Bank and other international agencies and governments are realizing that investments in everyday cooking efficiency translate into savings. Programmes and funds for improved stoves are already under way, but much more support is needed.
In view of the vital importance of wood-based energy, the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission (APFC) underlined the necessity to incorporate wood-based energy production within an integrated system of forestry and forest industry management. APFC highlighted the need for rationalization and improved supply of forest-based wood energy. It supported the action programme suggested by the Technical Panel on Fuelwood and Charcoal of the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy, namely: intensifying productivity of existing fuelwood resources; creating new fuelwood resources; organizing fuelwood distribution; improving conversion technologies; improving wood-burning stoves; and substituting wood-fuels with traditional or commercial fuels. Subsidized supply of alternative fuels to developing countries, which are poor in rural energy resources, was also suggested. It was recommended that FAO, under its programme on Forestry and Rural Energy, provide technical
support and assistance for strengthening of institutions, mobilization of resources, training, research and extension.
Tropical timber utilization and marketing
The rate at which forests are logged is, to a great extent, a response to an increasing demand for timber and fuelwood by a growing population. Demand by rural populations for small timber, poles, bamboos and fuelwood has spiralled. With the growth of urban populations, demand for processed wood products (paper, plywood, particle board, fiberboard has surged forward. Furthermore, timber has emerged as a major foreign exchange earner. All these factors lead to increased log harvests.
Recorded removals of roundwood, as a consequence, registered an average annual rise close to three percent in Asia. This is well above the world average. In terms of quantity, fuelwood and wood for charcoal constitute the bulk of the removals. Non-coniferous logs constitute a high proportion of output.
Insular Southeast Asia accounts for more than 80 percent of total log production. The pattern of production and exports within different count tries of the subregion has undergone substantial alteration over the past decade. Log production has declined in the Philippines from 11 to 7 million cubic metres. This drop reflects the decreasing potential of the forests, coupled with a growing awareness of the need for conservation and an expanded domestic demand. There was an increase in domestic production of sawnwood and wood-based panels.
In the Philippines exports of logs fell drastically under the spur of export curbs: from 9 to 1.8 million m³ over 10 years. In Malaysia, log production rose from 17 to 30 million m³ in a decade, an increase mainly attributable to production in Sabah and Sarawak. The proportion of logs exported declined from 64 percent in 1968-70 to 54 percent in 1977-79.
The most marked changes were observed in Indonesia. Log production there trebled in the past decade from 7.7 to 26 million m³ while exports during the same period grew from 4.3 to 19 million cubic metres. Thus, Indonesia's share in the subregion's log production escalated from 21 to 48 percent and exports from 17 to 51 percent. There was also increased domestic processing, especially in wood-based panels, as evidenced in the rise from 5000 m³ in 1968 to 526000 m³ in 1979. The emergence of Indonesia as the most important log producer in Asia and in the whole tropical world is an outstanding feature of the 1970s.
There are many economic arguments which have been advanced in favour of exploiting tropical forests. One of these is foreign-exchange earning potential. Indonesia. Malaysia and the Philippines together earned some US$2330 million through export of logs in 1979 alone. (Indonesia earned US$1500 million, Malaysia US$690 million and the Philippines US$140 million.) Whether the full export value can be viewed as a benefit to the exporting country is a matter of debate. Since much of the current exploitation is being carried out through foreign-based transnational corporations, net foreign-exchange earnings come after deducting such items as profit repatriation and imports of equipment.
To capture the maximum value added through domestic processing, some countries are progressively restricting log exports. In India, Bangladesh, Pakistan and Thailand, log exports are practically banned. In Peninsular Malaysia the export of 16 popular species in log form has been banned since 1979. In Indonesia, from 8 May 1980, concessionaires may export logs only after they have supplied specified quantities of logs for domestic processing. Government policy here seeks to encourage domestic processing.
The forests of insular Southeast Asia, which hitherto constituted an important resource with significant export surpluses, may actually see a steady decline in overall removals after 1985, with a potential drop from some 75 million m³ in 1985 to 70 million m³ by the year 2000. This decline will have an impact on the policy of promoting domestic processing of logs. For example, Indonesia's 1200 sawmills and 16 plywood mills currently utilize only a fraction of its log output. More than three-quarters of the logs produced are exported. This situation is likely to change as domestic processing units begin to require more logs. Industrial wood output in Indonesia may reach 40 million m³ by 1985 and fluctuate around that level up to the year 2000. Estimated annual output of wood from plantations in 1985 will be some 0.5 million m³, rising to 1.4 million m³ by the year 2000. Removals from Malaysia are estimated to slide from a peak of 33 million m³ in 1979 to barely 18 million m
by the year 2000. In the Philippines, only a marginal increase in removals is expected: from 9.33 million m³ in 1979 to 10.95 million m³ in the year 2000 of which between 3-4 million m³ are likely to be plantation grown.
FAO is working with the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) to develop a programme of cooperative measures in the tropical timber trade. The latest in a sequence of activities was the intergovernmental Meeting of Tropical Timber-Producing Countries held in June 1981 in Bangkok. The meeting discussed the report of the consultative mission to major tropical timber-producing countries in Asia and the Pacific. Subject to the concurrence of governments, it was proposed that an intergovernmental consultative forum of developing tropical timber-producing and exporting countries be established. This would be an interim arrangement before setting up a regional tropical timber community. As a preparatory step, the meeting designated Malaysia to act as coordinator and to communicate with the governments on arrangements for the first meeting of the intergovernmental forum.
INDIAN FORESTRY WORKERS STUDY LOGGING METHODS - chain-saws cut production time anti reduce timber waste
Forestry education, training and research priorities. A review of forestry education and training facilities suggests that a major concern is to expand training facilities in Asia to meet emerging needs, particularly in forest extension work.
An appraisal was carried out in 1977 in six selected countries: Burma, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Sri Lanka and Thailand. It revealed that there were some 4000 professional foresters and 10500 forest technicians in those six countries. Theoretically, an additional 17700 professionals and 50000 forest technicians will be needed between 1977 and the year 2000. Moreover, some 50000 forest guards and 150000 specialized forest workers should also be trained.
In view of the growing needs of integrated forest management and involvement of forest services in rural development, it is necessary to modify and update the content of forestry training. More than ever, foresters must become sensitive to the problems, perceptions and values of rural people.
As in the case of education and training, facilities for research related to forestry and forest industry are far from sufficient. Changes in research priorities are needed as the complexity of the problems involved increases. Thus, the seventeenth International Union of Forestry Research Organizations' (IUFRO) World Congress emphasized that research on agroforestry should be intensified to integrate forest operations as a whole. It should be devoted to combined agricultural and forestry production systems, to the economics of multiple-use forestry and to monitoring ecological changes in tropical forests.
Modern forestry strategy should be clearly geared to the eradication of poverty on the basis of a greater access of the rural poor to goods, services and opportunities generated by economic growth and to promoting self-reliance and equitable participation of the rural people in forestry and forest-based activities. Governments need to review their policies relating to forest protection, wood energy, tropical timber trade, training and research. Priority areas include:
· Safeguarding forest resources and the environment and maintaining a minimum cover. This includes attention to all aspects of transfer of forest lands to non-forestry uses:
· Thorough assessment of social, economic and environmental impacts of fuelwood production and the implementation and the development, on a priority basis, of programmes for increased production and for the efficient use of fuelwood:
· Formulation of national plans and policies for forest production and processing, and for rationalizing trade to strengthen domestic and, more particularly, rural economies;
· Intensification of research on agroforestry, combining agricultural and forestry production systems and promoting multiple-use forestry.
Strengthening national self-reliance and promoting technical cooperation among developing countries are major objectives of FAO. National governments can make full use of these mechanisms to promote forestry development in a spirit of cooperation and mutual assistance. The accumulated experience of FAO is at the service of governments and, therefore, of people.
References
FAO. 1980 Toward a forestry strategy for development. COFO - 80/3.
FAO. 1982 Forest resources of tropical Asia. Technical Report No. 3.
<section>4</section>
Why stoves are resisted
Bina Agarwal
BINA AGARWAL is an economist and Reader at the Institute of Economic Growth, University, Enclave. New Delhi, India.
Recent interest in the promotion of wood stoves stems from the growing recognition by many Third World countries of an energy crisis. This crisis relates not to the widely publicized scarcity of fossil fuels, but to the rapid and widespread depletion of forest in these countries.
Currently, wood is the single most important source of energy in the Third World. Fuelwood and charcoal are estimated to provide two-thirds of all energy in Africa, a third in Asia and a fifth in Latin America (Arnold and Jongma, 1977). In many countries such as Nepal, the United Republic of Tanzania, Uganda, the Upper Volta and Chad, the figure is estimated to be 90 percent of the total energy used. For the majority of other countries in Asia and Africa, it is estimated at being well over 50 percent (Know-land and Ulinski, 1979).
The bulk of energy from wood is used for cooking and heating. Although no macro-estimates exist of the percentage of wood consumed directly as fuelwood and the percentage consumed as charcoal, micro-studies indicate that charcoal is mainly an urban fuel. Since 75 percent of the population in most Asian and African countries is rural, fuelwood constitutes the main if not the sole source of energy.
In most regions, fuelwood has been and still largely continues to be free (Arnold and Jongma, 1977); people depend on what they can gather themselves. Rural households with land can obtain fuelwood from trees on their own plots, supplemented by crop residues. The landless, however, have to depend on wood from common land or gather it from other people's land in return for their labour. Fuelwood is collected mainly by women and children. In the African Sahel, women walk up to 10 km or three hours per day to gather fuelwood. In the Niger, village women will spend four hours every day gathering wood and they may be out from midday to nightfall. Although forests are a renewable resource, deforestation has led to an increasing scarcity of fuelwood in many areas, and the problem is likely to worsen. The shortages are particularly severe for the poor and landless. They are compelled in some parts of the world to cook only one meal a day. Within the household, it is the women who
are most affected, because this scarcity disproportionately increases their work. Digerness (1977) points out that 10 years ago in Bara, the Sudan, fuelwood was available after a 15- to 20-minute walk from the village, whereas now women have to walk for at least 1-2 hours. Eckholm (1975) makes a similar observation about Nepal.
It is in this context that improved wood stoves are seen as one way of alleviating fuelwood shortages since they save on the amount of wood needed for cooking. Clearly the success of improved wood stoves depends on how much wood is saved in practice, and not merely in laboratory tests, and on whether the stoves are acceptable to the mass of rural users, especially to the women of poor households.
The promotion and diffusion of improved wood stoves is, however, not a simple process. The factors which affect diffusion can be divided into five categories: 1) technical aspects - wood-stove design and development; 2) economic aspects; 3) infrastructure aspects (extension and credit); 4) cultural aspects, especially attitudes to change; 5) social structure.
Technical aspects
Two case-studies, one in Guatemala (Sheller, 1981), the other in Ghana, have observed in detail the diffusion of improved wood stoves. They both clearly indicate the importance of field adaptation involving the local users, materials, and craftsmen. Research on the diffusion of the Lorena stove in the severely deforested highlands of Guatemala is based on 36 in depth interviews with stove owners, plus intensive observation of the cooking practices of six families. The stove was developed in 1976 at the Estación Experimental Choqui-ICADA, a small technology centre near Quezaltenango. The Lorena stove was meant to replace the open fire. Formed from a monolithic block of locally available sand and clay, it was designed to conserve firewood and decrease smoke build-up in the kitchen.
The main advantages of the Lorena stove compared to the open fire were: the saving of wood; smokelessness; cleaner, safer and more comfortable working conditions (cooking could be done standing up); less time spent on cooking.
REFUGEES AT A CAMP IN INDIA - a well-designed wood stove would improve nutrition
The main disadvantages were that it provided no space heating; the cooking surface was inflexible; the number of holes for pots was fixed which limited the number of pots in use at one time. Moreover, the absence of smoke was not seen as an advantage in those households with straw roofs which were kept dry by smoke, or where smoke served to eliminate parasites from the ears of corn hung from the rafters. A detailed examination of what people liked and did not like about the Lorena stove can be found in "The sociology of a stove" by Dale V. Shaller in Unasylva, Vol. 33, No. 134. A major conclusion of this study was that the women who used the Lorena stove should have been directly involved in ifs design.
The second case-study describes the attempt to promote an improved wood stove in Ghana (Hoskins, 1979). The model (recommended by the Canadian Hunger Foundation and the Brace Research Institute, and introduced by the Department of Social Welfare and Community Development in the late 1960s) was made from locally available scrap-metal and hand-baked clay tile, brick and masonry. By the mid-1970s, it was clear that the women were not using many of the stoves and that the experiment had been a failure.
On the basis of the women's complaints, Hoskins identifies a number of reasons for the failure: the stove needed larger pieces of wood than were available locally; the stove surface was too high for stirring large pots; the sizes of the pot holes were not suitable for many of the pots already in use; if the unused holes were not tightly covered or the pot fitted only loosely, smoke escaped, the pots were dirtied, and more rather than less wood was used. The stove design was not suited to the users' needs because there had been little or no interaction between the designer and the women prior to designing the stove. This project represents yet another example where adaptation through user-interaction and user-involvement was undoubtedly necessary. The women in Ghana, unlike those in Guatemala, did not attempt to adapt the. They stopped using them.
Hoskins also provides some useful insights into the sorts of factors which have prevented the successful diffusion of wood stoves in the many attempts to introduce them in Africa
- failure to identify the key figures in the stove diffusion process: the women who cook on the stoves; the local artisans who can design, repair, and alter the stoves and cooking utensils; and the local extension agents;
- imposition of laboratory-tried models with Western standards which are unsuitable for the local setting and cultural norms;
- failure to relate the physical elements of stove design to social realities. Stove use often places additional burdens on women. In Ghana, the new stove meant looking for larger pieces of wood, which required going farther afield - a sacrifice which the women were unwilling to make.
Both the Guatemala and the Ghana case-studies clearly indicate that close interaction between designers, users, local artisans and extension agents is a crucial element in the successful diffusion of wood stoves.
Economics
The private financial benefits of investing in an improved wood stove are likely to be small or nil where wood is still not for sale. The cost of the stoves depends on the materials used to build it. When materials available locally, such as mud or clay, are used, the expense may be negligible. If the material is difficult to procure and needs to be bought, some financial expenditure obviously has to be incurred. An indirect cost is also incurred if the stove necessitates the purchase of new cooking utensils. The non-financial benefits of investing in an improved stove include the saving of women's labour time; the absence of smoke (although this may not always be seen as a benefit); the greater ease of cooking where the stove is adapted to the most comfortable cooking posture; the saving of cattle dung (currently burnt as fuel) which has an alternative use as manure; and maintained or improved nutritional levels.
Thus, most of the potential benefits from wood stoves are non-monetary and often intangible, while the costs are in fact monetary. The benefits may not always be perceived by the person making the decision to buy, e.g. when men make the decisions and the benefits accrue mainly to the women. Furthermore, the benefits do not necessarily accrue to all the stove users, for the non-financial benefits are dependent on the economic level of the household. For example, the saving of cattle dung for manure is only important to a land-cultivating household and not to a landless one. On the other hand, the effects on nutritional levels are essentially felt by those households on the margin of subsistence. They cannot afford to buy alternative fuels and therefore have to economize on wood.
All these aspects introduce complexities in wood-stove diffusion. These stoves cannot be placed on the market and promoted through advertisements. Like contraceptives or health-related programmes, their acceptability is determined by many non-financial factors.
Infrastructure
It has been noted how direct user, involvement can be a significant help in getting people to use stoves. The infrastructural aspects of the problem focus on the biases in extension and credit services. Clearly, many of the issues discussed in this context apply to all rural innovations. In Asia and Africa, the extension agents tend to favour the economically and socially privileged households: village-level agricultural extension workers typically contact the richer land-owning farmers (Dasgupta. 1977; Griffin, 1971; Hapgood, 1965 and Lele, 1975). Extension services also tend to favour men to women. In both Asia and Africa, extension agents are usually male and thus generally contact men even when the information is directly relevant to women.
Biases in extension and credit services relating to improved wood stoves affect diffusion adversely. For instance, when information is supplied only to men, women are not in a favourable position to make or influence decisions on stove purchase. Furthermore, appropriate adaptations are not possible if women arc not consulted. The fact that women tend to be isolated from the flow of technical information has adverse implications for the development of indigenous technical knowledge and skills. Women should definitely be recruited as extension agents. They would not have the same problems as men in gaining access to women users.
PREPARING FOOD ON A WOOD STOVE - saves fuel, fatigue and cooking time
The success improved wood stoves depends on how much wood they save and whether they are acceptable to rural users, especially to the women of poor households.
In addition to the above biases, a related factor is the way in which extension agents operate. The village extension agent usually has to handle a wide range of issues from agricultural inputs to family planning without adequate previous training (IADP. 1966; Lele, 1975). Furthermore, extension staff is transferred very frequently, so that any local experience acquired or rapport established with the villagers cannot be used to full advantage.
This problem is two-fold. Firstly, the efficiency of the bureaucracies in the various Third World countries affects extension service and thus determines the quality of information imparted through their extension systems. Secondly, the personal prejudices of the extension agents often determine to whom the information is imparted.
A further problem is that of credit availability, since either the stove itself, or the materials needed for building it, have to be purchased. In absolute terms the expense is small but because many of the potential stove users arc very poor, any monetary transaction depends crucially on subsidized credit. However, just as there is a bias in access to information against the underprivileged groups in the community, so there is a bias in access to credit. In both Asia and Africa, only the economically and politically powerful groups in the rural community have easy access to village credit institutions (Dasgupta, 1977; Apthorpe, 1970). Thus, the poorer households usually cannot afford improved wood stoves.
Cultural factors: attitudes to change
The promoters of stoves frequently complain about the irrational "conservatives" attitudes of rural people. More often than not, the problem is really that these people are poor and in low social positions. Furthermore, what may appear to be irrational to an outsider may in fact be perfectly logical within the cultural context of the people. An understanding of this is crucial.
An interesting illustration is provided by a study of firewood use in Nepal (Bajracharya, 1981). Bajracharya notes how one set of his sample households uses wood stoves and hence less wood than the rest who use the open fire. These different technologies coexist even though the households arc located close to one another and the existence of efficient wood stoves is common knowledge.
One or both of the following explanations explanations could be valid. The first relates to religious beliefs and rituals. The households using the open fire believe that the pitridevta or family spirit resides in it. Their reluctance to switch to the stove is attributed to superstition. They belong to the indigenous caste groups in the area - the Rais, Gurungs, etc. The stove-using households migrated from outside, albeit some generations ago. They belong to the Brahmin and Chhetri castes and have a somewhat different set of religious customs. A second explanation relates to the fact that drinking is common among the Rai/Gurung communities who brew their own liquor. This is done in large pots which need the wider open fire. Among the Brahmin/Chhetri castes, liquor is not generally consumed so this is not a consideration.
In so far as the cause of non-adoption lies in drinking habits, stoves could readily be designed to take this into account. Although adaptation which takes account of religious beliefs is difficult, beliefs have themselves been known to be adaptable (see Hoskins, 1979, on the three-stone stove in African communities).
The potential wood-stove user's attitudes are also governed by past experience with past promoters of innovations. Where the same set of extension agents promote wood stoves as well as a range of other rural technologies (from all types of mechanical equipment to contraceptives), their credibility about wood stoves depends significantly on their degree of success with the other innovations. In some cases, it is easier to get a completely novel idea accepted than a modified old one. For example. Joseph (1980) notes that there was ready acceptance of cooking pots with lids among the Oceanic people who were unused to cooking pots, while in other communities where lidless pots were common, the tendency was to remove the lids of the new pots as well.
"Can a dialogue -be started between the scientists, the village extension agents, an the underprivileged users of innovations, within the hierarchical social structures of most present-day Third World countries?"
Those promoting the wood stove must have a deep understanding of life in the potential adopter's community. This requires an insight into the complex set of factors that govern behaviour and provide an overt or covert logic for doing a certain thing in a certain way.
The promoter's understanding cannot be gained in the laboratory - it necessitates a close interaction with the potential user. Hence, once more, the issue of innovation adaptation in the field and of user-involvement is significant.
Social structures
How is the unequal nature of power balances between the sexes and different classes/castes likely to affect wood-stove diffusion?
As already mentioned, the status of women within the household is a significant factor in wood-stove adoption, especially where adoption requires cash expenditure. Although women are the potential users and, therefore, in the best position to assess the advantages and disadvantages of the wood stove, men usually handle the household cash and make decisions on how it is spent. Where women manage to get independent access to money, they spend it on family needs, whereas men tend to spend it on their own needs, such as drink, clothes, etc. (Arens and Van Beurden, 1977; Bukh, 1979; Hanger and Moris. 1973). Hence, where men make the decisions, the purchase of an improved stove almost certainly does not get priority, especially since its main advantage is greater leisure or convenience in cooking for women.
Likewise, the status of women within the community is an influencing factor. Rural women usually have no direct access to institutional credit or to an independently disposable cash income to purchase new innovations/technologies; and they seldom have access to information on new innovations. There is a strong ideological bias in extension services which is likely to work against the direct involvement of, or consultation with, village women in the experimental design of wood stoves. The Guatemala and Ghana case-studies indicated that female involvement would have been a significant feature in effective diffusion of the improved wood stove. Unfortunately, up to now, rural women have not been given the education, the training or the opportunity to undertake decision-making roles or responsibilities in the public sphere.
Social hierarchies often make it impossible to set up Linkages between indigenous technical knowledge and skills and the more formalized research and development networks, between the user and the scientists and technicians.
The question is whether the urban-based scientists doing "intellectual" work are prepared to listen to the peasants whose knowledge comes more often from field experience than from formal education. Are they prepared to listen to the village extension staff -the local VLWS, or block-development officers? Are the VLWS, who enjoy a certain status in the village as part of a well-entrenched hierarchy, prepared to converse with the poor tenant farmers who cannot provide reciprocal favours? Can a dialogue be started between the scientists, the village extension agents, and the underprivileged users of innovations, within the hierarchical social structures of most present-day Third World countries?
The problem is only partly one of economic inequalities and social differences. The divide between the scientist and the user is also usually a divide between mental and physical labour, between the town and the countryside, between the sexes and often, between the white "expert" and the black-brown-yellow "native". To overcome this divide, attitudes need to change. To increase the participation of women in decision-making both within the household and in the community will require more than a new consciousness toward finances.
Innovations which require adaptation to user-needs, which entail a financial cost but provide no financial benefits, and which are aimed at a mass of economically and socially disadvantaged people, are unlikely to be accepted through a market-oriented approach to promotion.
Improved wood-burning stoves are a prime example. They are of specific and immediate interest because of the rural energy crisis facing large parts of the Third World today. The familiarity of the stove designer with the cultural milieu of the community where the stoves are to be promoted, and the adaptation of the stoves to suit specific user-needs, are crucial factors in adoption. At the same time, the possibility of involving the local people in innovative design and adaptation depends crucially on the structure of economic and social relationships in each area. Class, caste and sex hierarchies could well become serious constraints to diffusion, thus making more extensive material and ideological changes essential.
References
APTHORPE, R.J. 1970 (Ed) Rural cooperatives and planned change in Africa: case materials. Geneva, UNRISD.
ARENS, J. & VAN BEURDEN, J. 1977 Jhagrapur: poor peasants and omen women in a village in Bangladesh. Amsterdam.
ARNOLD, J.E.M. & JONGMA, J.H. 1977 Fuelwood and charcoal in developing countries. Unasylva, Vol. 29, No. 118. Rome, FAO.
BAJRACHARYA. D. 1981 Constraints of energy and the implications for appropriate technology and rural development in Nepal. Univ. Sussex UK. (D. Phil. dissertation)
BUKH, J. 1979 Village women in Ghana. Center for Development Research, Scandinavian Inst. African Studies, Uppsala.
DASGUPTA, B. 1977 Agrarian change and the new technology in India. Rep. No. 77.2. Geneva, UNRISD.
DIGERNESS, T.H. 1977 Wood for fuel - the energy situation in Bara, the Sudan. Dept Geography, Univ. Bergen. Norway. (Mimeo.)
ECKHOLM, E.P. 1975 The other energy crisis. World Watch Paper No. 1. World Watch Inst., USA.
GRIFFIN, K. 1971 The Green Revolution: an economic analysis. Rep. No. 72.6. Geneva, UNRISD.
HANGER, J. & MORIS J. 1973 Women and the household economy. In An irrigated rice settlement in Kenya. Eds R. Chambers and J. Moris. Afrika Studien, No. 83. Ifo-Institutfür für Wirtschaftsforschung München, Afrika Studien Stelle, München.
HAPGOOD, D. 1965 Policies for promoting agricultural development. Rep. No. C/65-3. Conference on Productivity and Innovation in Agriculture in the Underdeveloped Countries. Center for International Studies, Cambridge, USA.
HOSKINS, M.W. 1979 Community participation in African fuelwood production, transformation and utilisation. Workshop on fuelwood and other renewable fuels in Africa. Paris, 29-30 Nov. ODC/AID.
IADP. 1966 Intensive Agricultural Development Programme, 2nd report (1960-65). Expert Committee on Assessment and Evaluation, Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Community Development and Cooperation, Government of India.
JOSEPH, S. 1980 Initiating and implementing a stove programme. Chapter of book in preparation. London. ITDG.
KNOWLAND. H. & ULINSKI. C. 1979 Traditional fuels: present data, past experience and possible strategies. Washington. D.C.. USAID.
LELE, U. 1975 The design of rural development: lessons from Africa. Baltimore and London, Johns Hopkins University Press.
SMALLER. D.V. 1981 The sociology of a stove. Unasylva, Vol. 33, No. 134. Rome, FAO.
FORESTRY IN CHINA
FAO FORESTRY PAPER 35
Price: $12.90
Orders to be sent to FAO Distribution and Sales Section, Via delle Terme di Caracalla 00100 Rome, Italy
or to any of the FAO Sales Agents listed on the inside back cover
<section>5</section>
The wooden houses of Istanbul
June Taboroff
JUNE TABOROFF is an American architectural historian who deals with the problems of conservation of historic monuments and sites.
These houses are falling into decay and the tendency is to replace them with concrete buildings. A unique form of vernacular architecture is being lost that ought to be renovated and preserved.
A street scene in the Zeyrek quarter of Istanbul, one of the poorer parts of the city, where much of the traditional wooden architecture c an he found. The women sitting outside their houses are doing needlework. Although this building is in a relatively poor state of repair, there are many in worse condition and yet all the wooden buildings are inhabited
Istanbul's last wooden houses are collapsing and with them a whole architectural type and culture is vanishing. These wooden houses, examples of ingenuity and taste, are integral to the fabric of the historic city of Istanbul and are key elements in preserving its townscape. The traditional city view-narrow streets lined with bay-windowed wooden houses overlooking the garland of waters surrounding the city - is fast becoming a memory.
Istanbul, the only city in the world which stands upon two continents, stretches from the Thracian plain in the west to Asia in the east. Over five million inhabitants live in the city. Its ancient core, Stamboul, dating from at least the 7th century BC, is located at the southeastern tip of Europe.
Although some may argue that it is energy misplaced to save the wooden houses of Istanbul, considering the host of urban ills facing the city, these structures are of irreplaceable significance. They are the only remaining examples of Istanbul's own domestic architecture, and represent building forms known from at least the 16th century. They are thus direct links with the Turkish past. Furthermore, the number of wooden houses available for preservation represents only a very small percentage of the original wooden building stock and requires a relatively modest investment.
There is an understandable tendency for Third World countries to lose sight of the need to preserve their own physical past because it is often, to contemporary eyes, modest or perhaps crumbling. It is notable that at the Fourth Symposium of the International Committee for the Conservation of Buildings and Structures in Wood, held in June 1982 in Ottawa and Quebec. Canada, this subject was addressed in the recommendations.
The wooden houses of Istanbul, built in large part in the second half of the 19th century and the early years of the 20th century, are of two major types: the konak and the row house. The konak, the older building form, is a single family town house surrounded by a garden. These gardens form an essential part of the spatial and architectural programme. Graced with fountains and pergolas, they function as outdoor rooms in temperate weather. The konak has reception rooms on the ground floor and private living-quarters on the upper floors. An attic floor, built like a pavilion, surmounts the spacious living areas.
The more modest row or terrace-type houses developed at the end of the 19th century when the large konak building lots were divided up. Owing to their later construction date they tend to be in a somewhat better state of conservation than the konaks. There are three basic ground plans, all with a stairwell flanked by a single room or pair of rooms. Almost without exception the row houses have a small garden concealed behind high walls and planted with trees and flowers, often with a well. Early photographs and city views of Istanbul reveal a city dense with green spaces.
Building techniques. The majority of wooden houses are built on stone foundations. A timber skeletal frame support of two or three storeys topped by a terrace-like roof surface is characteristic of both konak and row houses. In Istanbul narrow planks are nailed to the outside surfaces, while the inside walls are coated with lime plaster. This is a particularly rapid and economical building method allowing quick construction by small teams.
In other parts of Turkey and the Balkans the interstitial area of the skeletal frame may be filled by rubble masonry, stone or brick. In Bursa, brick and mortar are used with a wooden frame to approximate half-timber buildings, similar to the German Fachwerk house. The Turkish system is also very similar to the American balloon or basket frame which first appeared in the United States in Chicago in 1833 and within 20 years prevailed in the urban American West.
A shoeblack sits in from of a well-maintained wooden house. Few are found in such condition
The building method, made possible by advances in nail manufacturing and created in response to a need for quick construction, consists of a light frame held together by nails instead of the older system of heavy beams joined by mortise, tenon and pegs. In this newer construction system, wall-plates, studs, floor joists and rafters were all made of thin sawn timbers nailed together in such a way that every strain went in the direction of the fibre of the wood. The timbers formed a cage to which board or clapboard was then affixed.
In Istanbul the favoured wood is pine, with beech used for interior woodwork. In the more refined and luxurious houses, interiors were elaborately fitted with cabinets, wall shelves and decorative ceilings and floors. The lumber used in Istanbul houses came from nearby forests, either on the Asiatic side or the European side. The Caspian coast is especially rich in forests. Lumber was then shipped to the harbour of Istanbul for unloading and distribution.
The relatively simple balloon-frame construction methods contrast with the fanciful decorative features of the houses. The facades are dressed with an enormous variety of carved and cut-out woodwork lending an air of gaiety and whimsy to the houses. A profusion of design motifs decorate door - and window-frames, cornices, corbels under bay windows and at corners. Such features expressed the owner's own fantasies and tastes.
The tradition of wood-carving and woodwork in Turkey is rich and sophisticated. A series of beautifully carved and inlaid wooden doors' dating from the 13th century onward, marked the entrance to mosques and palaces. During the later Ottoman period this originally royal art-form found a place in the domestic architecture of the wealthy citizens of Istanbul. In a more simple manner it was also used in modest houses.
The placement and form of windows are other distinguishing features of Istanbul's wooden houses. Windows are numerous and generous in size, generally concentrated in the upper two storeys. Their positioning reflects the wish for fine views of the city's waterways as well as the joint requirements of privacy and sociability.
The urban setting. The problems confronting the historic city of Istanbul are chronic: the need to preserve a large number of Byzantine and Otto man monuments, an uncontrolled rural migration and lack of funds for rehabilitation.
Although the major historic monuments are not in imminent danger, the areas surrounding them are. This is particularly the case in areas where the traditional wooden houses still exist. Very little pre-20th century domestic architecture remains in Istanbul. It is estimated that only one percent of the original 150000 wooden houses are still standing.
Suleymaniye and Zeyrek. The highest concentration of wooden houses is found in two districts, Suleymaniye and Zeyrek. The overcrowded, crumbling Suleymaniye district - bordered by Ataturk Boulevard, the Suleymaniye mosque complex and the University of Istanbul - mixes the textile traders, market, the wholesale fruit and vegetable market, small industries and warehouses with late 19th-century row houses. Most of these are falling apart, with no kitchen and bathroom facilities, although they have electricity and running water. The present sewerage system dates from about 1910. There are often four or five people renting one room.
Zeyrek is the first landing point in Istanbul for immigrants from Anatolia. Located on the slopes of the Golden Horn, west and above Ataturk Boulevard near the Byzantine monastery complex of the Pantocrator, it is here that immigrants find their first home, often with relatives from their own village. Their stay in these illequipped wooden row houses and konaks is temporary: after finding a job they move to the newer residential areas which have sprung up on the fringes of Istanbul, called gecekendus. The waves of immigrants passing through Zeyrek create a situation of neglect and disrepair. The most necessary repairs remain undone as the house is rented again and again to new tenants by unconcerned owners. Holes soon appear in the roof, grave moisture damage is suffered by the structure and the house collapses. Although public awareness of the artistic and historic value of these houses has increased, the rate of disappearance still continues at an exponential rate.
Both accident and plan have played a role in the building of wooden houses in Istanbul. Devastating fires which sweep through whole areas leaving countless inhabitants injured and homeless have marked the history of Istanbul. These fires resulted in continual rebuilding. To combat the danger of fire, a decisive law was enacted in the 1920s forbidding further building in wood without adequate free spaces between houses. This put an end to building in wood in the densely populated city centre.
The political and economic fortunes of Istanbul also determined the fate of the wooden houses. In the course of the 19th century, Istanbul became the manufacturing centre of Turkey. Industrial buildings filled the upper reaches of the Golden Horn, Suleymaniye and the bazaar. An influx of low-income workers brought rapid population growth. The old Ottoman residential districts changed extensively. The modernization of Istanbul, initiated in the second half of the 20th century under the guidance of French city planners, dealt a devastating blow to the already stressed situation of the historic centre. Only by chance have concentrations of wooden houses been spared.
Causes of deterioration. As is often the case, a complex of factors converge to threaten the continued existence of a traditional building stock. In Istanbul many of the wooden houses are infested by termites which cause eventual deterioration of the structure. Moisture damage is also a serious problem in the conservation of these houses. But perhaps the single most significant factor in the disintegration of the wooden houses is the lack of maintenance.
Particular social and economic conditions create an especially unfavourable climate which works against the conservation of this vernacular architecture. Migrants from eastern Turkey find jobs as carriers, pedlars of fruit and vegetables and seasonal labourers in the vicinity of the markets in the historic peninsula. An ever-changing group of single workers rent rooms in old houses. The boarding-houses become shabby and begin to deteriorate due to lack of care and overcrowding. Families tend to move from the area and a whole downward cycle is set in motion. For some owners who want to rid themselves of their old wooden houses in order to construct a modern apartment building, renting to workers without families becomes a conscious method of demolition.
Characteristic ornate windows-frames. The wood-carving skills of the last century that made this type of ornamentation possible still exist in Turkey and are available for restoration efforts
This carved wooden balcony has characteristic Turkish architectural motifs, row of stalactite forms across the front and a geometric interlace underneath
Tympanums at the tops of buildings are frequently decorated with elegantly carved wooden mouldings
A principal aspect of the problem of conservation of wooden houses is one of cultural discontinuity which makes the public in large measure indifferent to the past and to a relatively abstract heritage which consists, in the eyes of the population, of monuments and sites.
According to Dogan Kuban, one of the most respected Turkish architects, if the existence of an attitude of ambivalence to the past and the practical demands of daily life are taken into account, one cannot be surprised by the spectacle of the rapid disappearance of all the old areas of Istanbul together with their wooden houses. What makes conservation at times impossible in Istanbul, contends Kuban, is the feeling of alienation toward the material culture of the recent past. It is therefore necessary to persuade the population that these dwellings must not be regarded as slums, but as representative of an irreplaceable heritage worthy of preservation.
This situation also implies another obstacle: the discontinuity of construction techniques. In Istanbul until the 1920s wood was the basic building material for domestic architecture. The old techniques of wood construction became unacceptable, not only in a practical sense but also for reasons of a cultural value system. Although it can be argued that the maintenance of wooden buildings and the replacement of damaged elements are expensive, it is largely a matter of cultural attitude that determines the survival of these wooden houses. The replacement of wood by concrete in Istanbul is not only for reasons of safety or economy, but also for the wealth and solid standing symbolized by concrete.
Programmes for conservation. Unesco, the universities of Zurich and Darmstadt and the German Archaeological Institute of Istanbul have all conducted studies aimed at conserving the historic peninsula. To date, surveys of the extant wooden houses in the Suleymaniye and Zeyrek districts have been completed. They consist of detailed drawings of each house, including plan and elevation drawings. The names of the owners have been gathered from the National Office of Registration and sociological interviews with the inhabitants conducted. Proposals for pedestrian spaces and traffic thoroughfares have been drafted. Although the first of these research projects began in 1977, they have not yet been implemented.
Despite the dedicated and sustained efforts of the Unesco commission and the German Archaeological Institute, the fate of the wooden houses of Istanbul is grim. The necessary studies and inventories have been carried out in proper fashion but actual conservation and rehabilitation measures have neither been undertaken, nor even planned.
Fundamentally the ultimate decision is a financial one, since the legal and administrative means to halt the process of demolition are still limited. The designation of Suleymaniye and Zeyrek as protected zones, according to the new historic preservation law, signals legal progress, but has not been met by adequate financial support or planning.
The wooden houses of Istanbul, precious remnants of the life of the old city, will soon be extinct unless active safeguarding initiatives are taken.
<section>6</section>
Wood energy from Australian seeds
How the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization in Canberra is collecting and distributing tree seeds requested throughout the world, particularly acacias, casuarinas and eucalypts.
Warwick Cooper
WARWICK COOPER IS an Australian journalist. This article is a condensed version of one which appeared in Australia Now.
Three major groups of Australian native trees are gaining a new international status as a prime energy source in an energy-hungry world. Acacias, casuarinas and eucalypts are providing timber and fuel in many countries on most continents. They are in demand because they are disease-free, fast-growing and thrive in infertile soils where many other forest trees would not grow.
Acacias, or wattles, whose fluffy yellow flowers are seen in the Australian bush, are reclaiming the edges of the world's great deserts, revitalizing the leached soils of Asia, feeding stock and supplying vital fuel for people in developing countries.
The graceful casuarinas of rivers and coast, called she-oaks by the Australians, are appearing in China, Malaysia, the Mediterranean, the Americas and Africa. Their timber is recognized as one of the best fuels in the world. Like acacias, they can fix nitrogen and improve and stabilize soils. There are millions of eucalypts - the Australian gum trees - growing in more than 100 countries. The four million ha of planted eucalypt forests around the world produce more wood than that harvested each year in Australia and make eucalypts the world's favourite broad-leaved plantation trees.
These eucalypts, together with acacias and casuarinas, are making an impact as a basic energy source in the rapidly increasing number of countries developing major reforestation programmes.
Many commercial forests overseas are the result of a seed export programme initiated by the Australian Government and backed by FAO and other development agencies.
In the past five years, Australia has responded to an upsurge in world demand for seeds for firewood crops, and millions of seeds are being planted in Third World countries. The seed packages sent abroad are the result of intensive laboratory and field research by a small number of scientists and foresters in the Seed Section of the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization (CSIRO) Division of Forest Research based in the tree-lined Canberra suburb of Yarralumla.
The researchers combine the knowledge of soil and climate in countries from the United Kingdom to Zimbabwe with the growth rates and adaptability of the types of eucalypts, acacias or casuarinas which the countries have requested. Teams of foresters then fan out across Australia to collect seeds from suitable trees growing in appropriate environments. The search can be difficult and may mean weeks of camping out in rough conditions and travelling long distances in four-wheel-drive vehicles across the Australian inland. The foresters use rifles, saws, and ropes to bring down the seed-laden boughs. The seeds they collect are shipped back to Canberra for drying, processing and packaging, and sent across the world to start a new forest project. Seeds are sent in packages weighing between 5 g and 1 kilogram. Eucalypt seeds, in particular, are very small and a packet may contain as many as 500000 seeds.
The CSIRO Division of Forest Research began in 1921 as the Australian Government's Commonwealth Forestry Bureau and was incorporated with CSIRO in 1975. The Bureau, and later the Division, exported seed in relatively small quantities until the 1960s, when the UN asked Australia to intensify seed collection of eucalypts for developing countries.
The Federal Government's research and development programme is complemented by a commercial export industry which also supplies seeds to developers and governments, making Australia a world supplier of forest trees. Host countries are now taking seeds from trees introduced through the CSIRO programme for larger forest plantations even better adapted to local conditions.
Australian eucalypts are used throughout the world because of their significant advantages over other forest species. They are relatively pest-free and are capable of high growth rates in infertile soils and with a fluctuating moisture supply - characteristics of the Australian bush - and many of them are fire tolerant. When they are cut down, they will reshoot without having to be replanted, an important advantage in drier areas where forests are needed for pulp and fuelwood. CSIRO researchers say that about 85 percent of eucalypts planted outside Australia are used for either fuelwood or pulpwood and that an increasing amount of the fuelwood is being used for domestic cooking. The remaining 15 percent is used for sawn timber or for roundwood products such as telephone poles.
CONTROLLED POLLINATION IN - Eucalyptus grandis a fast-growing species on the right site
PLANTING Casuarina equisetifolia IN VIET NAM - the world's most sought-after tree
Acacia peuce - SEED COLLECTION - millions of seeds per year for Third-World forest projects
Because of CSIRO research, Australian acacias have uses ranging from timber, pulpwood and stock feeding in Asia, sand binding in the deserts of the Near East and Africa, to being an important source of tan bark in southern Africa and India. Australia has more than 600 of the world's 900 types of acacias, and their seeds have been exported in increasing quantities since the 1960s.
An increasing number of countries are growing mulga, the acacia which in Australia is a stunted, gnarled inhabitant of the fringes of the arid inland, as stock food. Mulgas have long been considered a stand-by as food for sheep by graziers facing the Australian droughts, but now they are taking on a triple role in the Near East and Africa. In the arid areas on the edge of the Sahara Desert, where there is much grazing pressure, acacias, particularly mulgas, are providing stability to the soil, as well as fuelwood and fodder for the stock.
The tree which is gaining the most interest around the world, however, is the casuarina, noted for its wood, sand-binding ability and wind tolerance. About 20 countries - mainly in Southeast Asia, the Indian subcontinent, Africa, Central and South America, and the Caribbean - have expressed a serious interest in growing casuarinas. The Egyptians feel they have a strong potential in the Near East, and the countries of West Africa and the Mediterranean are similarly interested. Australia has about 40 of the world's 67 types of casuarina and, as seed exports increase, is moving to supply about 15 species on a regular basis. There are already large plantations of casuarinas in Argentina, and other South American countries have requested seed supplies from Australia under the export programme. Casuarinas are mainly used for fuel. In fact, they were used in Australian bakers' ovens until the 1950s because they burn to a fine white ash while producing a great deal of heat.
Casuarinas make good wind-breaks as they arc very tolerant of driving sand and other conditions that would kill many other species. The leaves of eucalypts would be ripped to shreds in such conditions, but the pine-needle-type leaves of the casuarinas are much more resistant. They have been planted along the edges of canals in Egypt to stop sand drifting, and with similar success in other parts of Africa.
CSIRO researchers contend that the seed export programme is providing real and lasting benefit as an alternative fuel source, especially for the people of developing countries.
<section>7</section>
The world of forestry
New agroforestry publication
Conference on forestry financing
IUFRO forestry awards
SHIFTING CULTIVATORS IN THAILAND - "slash-and-burn" agriculture can cause soil degradation
New agroforestry publication
A new international, multidisciplinary journal entitled Agroforestry systems began quarterly publication during 1982. The journal, based in The Hague and printed in English, will serve as an outlet for research results on different aspects of agroforestry systems. In addition, it will offer "critical reviews" of sustained-yield land-management systems combining agriculture, animal husbandry and trees.
Agroforestry systems will cover a variety of topics: agroforestry and rural development: agro-sylvi-pastoral systems and ecosystems; the role of trees in multiple land-use programmes: the compatibility of various land-use practices with forest management; shifting cultivation and related practices; tree-based farming and multipurpose tree products; economics of agroforestry; and the acceptability of new policies and techniques to rural societies.
Authors who wish to contribute to Agroforestry systems are invited to send manuscripts or requests for "Instruction to authors" to the Editorial Office, Agroforestry systems, PO Box 566, 2501 CN The Hague, the Netherlands.
A subscription to Volume 1, which will comprise four issues during 1982, costs fl. 148 (ca. US$74) for institutions and fl. 86 (ca. US$43) for individuals. Orders should be sent to: Kluwer Academic Publishers Group, Distribution Centre, PO Box 322, 3300 AH Dordrecht, the Netherlands.
Conference on forestry financing
The inter-American Development Bank (IDB) held a four-day regional forestry conference on 22-25 June 1982 in Washington, D.C. on the theme "Financing forest-based development in Latin America". Although the conference focused on Latin-American forests, the information presented has application in other developing countries. Included on the agenda were protection, reforestation, management, development, financing and industrialization of the forests.
Speakers presented 31 papers, 20 of which were in Spanish, 10 in English and one in French. The papers have been bound into a single volume and are available from: S.E. McGaughey. Inter-American Development Bank, 808 17th St NW, Washington' D.C. 20577. USA.
IUFRO forestry awards
New scientific advances in forestry and wood products were honoured by the international Union of Forestry Research Organizations (IUFRO) in Kyoto, Japan during the Seventh World Forestry Conference held in September 1981.
Seven Scientific Achievement Awards were given in the areas of tree growth, forecasting of growth and yield, wood adhesion, forest-management planning, wood transformation, nutrient cycling and soil micro-organisms. Awards are given only once every five years and only to scientists under the age of 45. The winners were:
· Dr David I. Bevege, Queenstown, Australia, Head of Soils and Nutrition Research at the University of Queensland Department of Forestry. Working with pine, araucaria and eucalypts, Dr Bevege developed techniques for stimulating tree growth through fungi associated with plant roots, and for accurately predicting tree growth by the level of nutrients applied.
· Dr Harold E. Burkhart, Blacksburg, Virginia, USA, Professor of Forestry at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. Dr Burkhart developed new models for forecasting growth and yield for slash pine, radiate pine and hardwoods using advanced statistical methods and computer programmes.
· Dr Suezone Chow, Merritt, British Columbia, Canada, Vice-President of Ardew Wood Products, Ltd. While working with Canada's Western Forest Products Laboratory, Dr Chow developed sophisticated wood-adhesion knowledge and techniques. One study used foliage to produce a new natural adhesive.
· Dr Pekka J. Kilkki, Helsinki, Finland, researcher at the University of Helsinki. Dr Kilkki applied linear and dynamic programming to develop new forest-management planning methods.
· Dr T. Kent Kirk, Madison, Wissconsin, researcher at the US Forest Service's Forest Products Laboratory. Working in the general research area of the transformation of wood by microbes and enzymes, Dr Kirk found a way to apply lignin biodegradation to the manufacture of pulp.
· Dr Hugh G. Miller, Aberdeen, Scotland, Principal Scientific Officer for the Macaulay Institute for Soil Research. Dr Miller conducted research in nutrient cycling through forest ecosystems, including processes in the growth response of trees and forest soils to fertilizers.
· Dr Makoto Ogawa, Ibaraki, Japan, researcher for the Japanese Forestry and Forest Products Research Institute. The ecological roles of soil microorganisms and fungi in pine forests were the focus for Dr Ogawa's research.
<section>8</section>
Environment
The crested iguana
Wildlife survival in Bangladesh
Peat energy in Burundi
Tropical timber research in Mexico
Sri Lanka's forest cover assessed
A second five-year conservation programme for Indonesia
Environmental damage costs in developed countries in GNP terms
The crested iguana
Bachylophus vitiensis
The Fiji Film Unit has prepared a colour film on the life cycle of the crested iguana Bachylophus vitiensis. This rare animal, recognized by Dr J. Gibbons of the University of the South Pacific and first described in 1981, makes its home or, a remote Fiji island.
The film spans a year of animal observation and records behavioural aspects from hatching to death.
The film is available in a 16-mm print or ¾-inch Pal U-matic video cassette and is well suited for teaching English. It lasts 13 minutes.
To purchase a copy of the film, price US$250, contact:
Director of Film Production
Fiji Film Unit
Government Buildings
Suva. Fiji.
Wildlife survival in Bangladesh
Habitat disturbance, shrinkage and destruction in Bangladesh are seriously endangering that country's wildlife. Certain important species have disappeared and the total wildlife population is thought to be considerably below optimum carrying capacity.
The Government has introduced various types of state ownership of property in an effort to curb hunting, trapping and commercial exploitation of forests. About 13100 km² (5060 sq. miles) of forest are under the management of the Forest Department; another 9000 km² (3500 sq. miles) are Unclassified State Forest; and public lands include coastal wetlands and estuaries. Nevertheless, lowland forests have been virtually eliminated as a result of population pressure and the consequences have proved disastrous for reptiles, birds and mammals. For animals such as elephants which have special habitats, changes in the ecosystems are particularly threatening. This is also true of the Bengal tiger, the gaur (Bos gaurus), the clouded leopard (Neofelis nebulosa) and the fishing cat (Felis viverrina) as well as birds and reptiles.
The World Wildlife Fund's expeditions of 1966 and 1967 were instrumental in focusing attention on the wildlife peril in Bangladesh. The Government of Bangladesh responded in 1973 with the Bangladesh Wildlife Preservation Act and Preservation Order No. 23 which acted to safeguard wildlife by creating a national scheme of protected areas. This scheme provided for the establishment and maintenance of three tiger sanctuaries, an elephant sanctuary, six game reserves, one crocodile sanctuary and 14 waterfowl protection centres. There is only one zoo in the country, but it is without an ecologist and lacks the necessary materials and facilities.
Peat energy in Burundi
Forest reserves in Burundi have deteriorated to the point where wood supplies remain for only 10 more years, and the Government, as a consequence, is taking steps to use peat, which the country has in abundance.
The cost per calorie of dry peat is only 40 percent of the per-calorie cost of wood and 80 percent that of charcoal. While Burundi has an estimated two thousand million m³ of peat reserves, the peat sites first have to be drained and then the peat itself packed down and dried. Following the harvesting of the peat, the nutrient-rich bog site can then be replanted for forestry, agricultural or- grazing purposes. All this requires planning, investment and training.
Following the launching of a "Burundi Peat Project," government officials turned for assistance to Ireland, where 20 percent of energy needs are supplied by peat. The Irish Peat Board as well as Ireland's Agency for Personal Services Overseas have provided technical assistance. Funding has come from Catholic Relief Service and the Danish International Development Agency (DANIDA). To consolidate its programme. Burundi established ONATOUR (Office national de la tourbe), a national peat office, under the Ministry of Mines and Geology.
The result, according to many observes (see Appropriate Technology, Vol. 8. No. 1, June 1981. p. 11-12), is that peat shows great future promise as an energy source for Burundi. If Burundi's example proves successful, a number of other African countries with proven peat deposits - Uganda, Rwanda, Zimbabwe, Lesotho and Zaire - might be able to benefit from such an example.
Tropical timber research in Mexico
Since its establishment in 1975, Mexico's National Institute for Research in Biotic Resources, charged with the formidable task of preserving the country's biotic resources, has expanded its efforts into many different areas. One recent result of this expanded effort has been the publication of a book, Grading of timber in Mexico, which has developed a visual grading corresponding to structural strength with the result that industry is much more willing to use different types of tropical wood.
Another new development is the designation of a rain-forest reserve, to be managed as a "germ-plasm bank" of genetic material, at the Institute's field station at El Morro de la Mancha. An adjoining tree and plant nursery contains about 20000 specimens of 100 different species.
Headquartered in Xalapa, Veracruz, the Institute has more than 100 full-time scientists and researchers on the staff with 150 others in supporting roles. In addition. 24 candidates for masters' degrees from Mexico and abroad arc studying at the Institute and another 24 are completing their theses.
Other programmes currently being pursued include the identification and cataloguing of biosphere resources, the teaching of Mexican peasants, the maintenance of a herbarium and various kinds of computerized research. At the La Mancha station, there is an integrated farm which includes, besides the farm itself, a rain-forest reserve, a brackish lagoon, a freshwater pond and a tree nursery. Many programmes such as these are funded with grants from the Mexican Government, from various UN agencies and private foundations
The programme's importance is clear. A good portion of Mexico's wet tropical areas, which together comprise 388500 km² (150000 sq. miles) or 19.7 percent of the country's entire land area, has been destroyed or severely damaged by erosion. The native forests of the States of Tamaulipas and Veracruz, for example, are nearly gone. Those in Tabasco State are disappearing and those in Campeche and Yucatan are being threatened. Through the work of the Institute, this trend may be reversed.
From Research and Development, Vol. 2, No. 11.
Sri Lanka's forest cover assessed
A more precise assessment of Sri Lanka's forest cover is now available, due to the joint efforts of the Sri Lanka Forest Department and the Swiss Remote Sensing Survey Project. Their findings indicate a dense forest cover of 25 percent, and an additional 10 percent of light or other forest cover, totalling 35 percent of the land area of the country. If the vegetative cover of rubber plantations and coconuts is included, the total cover amounts to 45-50 percent. Smaller village gardens, wood-lots and stream reservations would further increase the total tree cover.
Despite the Mahaweli forest clearing, the general situation in Sri Lanka appears healthy.
One important result of the study is the Forest Department's recommendation to enrich planting in wildlife rangelands where grazing, browsing and trampling by herds are harming vegetation.
IN THE MOZQUITAL VALLEY - erosion has already damaged 20 percent of Mexico's land area
Controversy over national parks in Thailand
The year 1962 marked the establishment of the first national park in Thailand, the 216800-ha Khao Yai Park in central Thailand. Spearheaded by Khun Pong Leng Ee, the Director of the National Parks Division since 1978, the number of parks has now risen to 35 with an additional seven in the planning stage. The total national percentage of land area affected has risen to 4 percent. There are also 24 separately administered wildlife sanctuaries.
Despite its expansion, the National Park programme has not met with unanimous praise. Its critics claim that the parks are not up to the standards of the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN): they cite poor management and widespread poaching of wildlife and timber. Rather than enlarging the park system, they urge improvement of the existing parks. The supporters of the present park programme counter with the argument of urgency. With forest cover reduced to 25 percent of land area, compared to 58 percent only 25 years ago, they contend that the speed of deforestation and the pressure of a growing population mean that territory for parks is urgently required while land is still available. Furthermore, they point to the disproportionate geographical distribution of the parks: most are in the hilly areas of the northwest with evergreen and deciduous growth while there are few areas of lowland evergreen forest, wetlands, mangroves or
coral reefs.
A central issue in the park debate is how to improve management standards. It is generally recognized that increase in staff is not a certain cure, but that the support of villagers is a requisite for effective conservation in rural areas.
Tourism is an almost untapped source of park revenue. Although Thailand receives 1.8 million tourists a year, the average visitor stays only five days in the country, which is scarcely enough time to see the national parks. With the proper incentives, it is hoped that foreign visitors will begin to explore Thailand's natural heritage.
A recent FAO report proposes a review of Thailand's protected areas in order to develop a comprehensive system. A major recommendation calls for the integration of the existing wildlife sanctuaries into the national park system and the creation of a graduated scale of parks and reserves.
A second five-year conservation programme for Indonesia
Indonesia, the 13000-island archipelago, recently signed a major five-year conservation agreement with the WWF and the IUCN, aimed at ensuring "sustainable use of natural resources".
The 1981 Conservation Agreement follows an earlier five-year plan which was intended to "yield distinct benefits to the Indonesian people". Since 1977 the WWF/IUCN supported 37 projects, totalling US$1.5 million. At present 20 WWF/IUCN projects are under way. The result will be a network of 196 protected areas covering 4 percent of the total land area of Indonesia.
The fifth most populous country in the world, Indonesia possesses important stands of tropical rain forests. The fact that timber ranks as the biggest foreign-exchange earner after oil means that conservation of natural resources represents a key to the nation's future well-being.
The new conservation programme, funded to approximately the same level as its predecessor, has as a principal objective the coordination of projects with development activities of the World Bank National Park Development Project. It seeks other funds from international development agencies, not only for parks, but for housing about 500000 people living in areas bordering on the parks.
Indonesian initiatives signal an optimistic trend in conservation efforts. The Government increased its budget for nature protection by 56 percent in 1981 to US$5.4 million and there are more than 400 citizen nature groups.
The 1982-1983 WWF Tropical Forests and Primates campaign chose Indonesia as one of 12 countries destined for priority attention. Home of orangutans, tigers, elephants, rhinoceros and 17 percent of the world's bird species' Indonesia is a country rich in both fauna and potential.
Environmental damage costs in developed countries in GNP terms
Damage to the environment in developed countries costs approximately three to five percent of the gross national product, according to Nature, newsletter of the Council of Europe.
The amount of money that is being spent on repair of such damage, reports Nature, is only one to two percent of the gross national product.
AT A TEAK PLANTATION - renewing one of Indonesia's valuable forest resources
<section>9</section>
Books
A basic list of medicinal plants in arid zones
All about tools
Toward sawmilling quality
Hurricane research
Maximizing small log production
Arboriculture in early America
How to plant eucalypts
Designing wood stoves
How to conserve rare plants
Thinking about erosion
Ways to interpret the environment
Nepal and its wildlife
Ornithology: Borneo
Tropical plantation forestry
A basic list of medicinal plants in arid zones
Plants for medicinal uses with special reference to arid zones (from Arid Land Plant Resources. Ed. J.R. Goodin and D.I. Worthington) a paper published by the Office of Biological Conservation, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C. 20560. Available free from Smithsonian Institution.
This paper consists mainly of a list of 443 species in 64 flowering plant families that have medicinal value and occur in various arid regions of the world. An example of just one plant in the list will demonstrate its usefulness at once.
Rauwolfia vomitoria Afzel. Life form: shrub, small tree to 20 ft. Area: Africa-Senegal to Zaire, Uganda and E. Africa. Chemical constituents: A large number of indole alkaloids similar to R. serpentina: major commercial source of reserpine. Uses: Same as above (i.e. R. serpentina Benth. established drug having tranquillizing and hypotensive activity) plus emetic, yaws, dizziness, measles, erysipelas, lice, sprains, swellings, fever, sedative, purgative, indigestion, diarrhoea, colic, jaundice, vertigo, abortion, snake bite, leprosy, gonorrhoea, urethral discharge. Reference: A5062, Unesco, MPWA.
Reprints of references are available by citing the number and writing to the International Center for Arid and Semi-arid Land Studies, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas 79409.
This paper was undoubtedly prepared with public health authorities and physicians of semiarid tropical countries chiefly in mind. It is an effort to make them more aware of the many valuable medicinal plants that exist all about them. It is perhaps more important that foresters in these countries, who are the main authorities in charge of not only forestry, but "marginal lands" and semi-deserts, should be aware of another valuable resource that is theirs to manage and conserve. The easy-to-use list in this paper can be a basic piece of reference for them. It is only now, as a result of the energy consciousness that grew out of the oil price increases starting in 1973, that fuelwood has come to be treated with the seriousness that it deserves by those who deal with forestry and energy questions. Indeed, the fuelwood uses of semi-desert areas are being given priority for management and conservation planning. An awareness of the many valuable medicinal plants that grow in the
same kind of environment can help the foresters to further establish the importance of semi-desert areas.
Dr Edward S. Ayensu, a Ghanaian scientist who is Director of the Office of Biological Conservation of the Smithsonian Institution, prefaces the list with a refreshingly candid essay on the importance of herbal medicine, and therefore of the importance to husband these valuable resources.
"The task that confronts people who are interested in public health," he says, "particularly those living in rural and remote areas of the underdeveloped world, is to attract the attention of the many western-trained medical doctors who show total disregard and disdain for the importance that herbal medicine plays in the world's health situation. I am particularly disturbed by those western-trained doctors, originating from developing countries, who are even antagonistic to ancient folk remedies on which their own survival, while as infants, had relied... Many of these same doctors are even unaware that the major pharmaceutical houses in some countries are constantly searching for new active compounds of pharmacological interest and are maintaining natural product programmes in their establishments where continuous plant screening research is conducted."
Dr Ayensu cites the creation of a Division for Traditional Medicine at the World Health Organization as another evidence of the new awareness of herbal medicine.
The "wise-women" or "witch-doctors" who use fungi, flowers, fruits and roots are no longer being sneered at by scientists. They are being consulted seriously as primary sources of information for the pharmacopoeia of the overdeveloped world.
T.M. PASCA
All about tools
The modern black-smith. A.G. Weygers. London, Van Nostrand Reinhold. 1981. 112 p. Price: UK£5.20.
The making of tools. A.G. Weygers. London, Van Nostrand Reinhold. 1981. 93 p. Price: UK£5.20.
The recycling, use and repair of tools. A.G. Weygers. London, Van Nostrand Reinhold. 1981. Price: UK£4.85.
Both woodworking and metalworking tools are considered in these three books by Alexander G. Weygers, a self-taught craftsman. Weygers emphasizes the gradual development of skills in using tools as well as in making them. Beginning with such basic tools as the anvil and forge, Weygers works his way up to more complicated tools such as power drills, saws, grinders and hammers.
All three books are suitable for beginners, though it is best to read them in the order listed above. In each book, simple but comprehensive instructions are accompanied by the author's hand-drawn sketches. A particular feature throughout is the emphasis on using scrap materials wherever possible.
A BLACKSMITH'S SHOP IN TOGO - learning about tools begins early
The first part of The modern blacksmith describes a smithy and suggests how one might construct a working model of such a workshop merely from equipment at hand. Then, through a series of exercises, it moves into basic metalworking methods. The second half of the book contains descriptions of how to make a variety of forged tools and other equipment.
There is more emphasis on power tools in The making of tools than in the previous book, but again the dominant theme is that it is possible for a beginner, with the proper materials and equipment, to make an improvised version of even a complicated tool. Metalworking tools here arc given greater weight than woodworking tools.
The most comprehensive of the three books, The recycling, use and repair of tools, deals mainly with woodworking tools. Instructions arc given, for example, for the manufacture of a wood-turning lathe. The author assumes that some of the basic techniques in the other two books have been mastered.
J.D.G.G. HOWE
Intermediate Technology,
Vol. 8, No. I
Toward sawmilling quality
Quality control in lumber manufacturing, ed. Terence D. Brown. Miller Freeman Publications, San Francisco, California. 288 p. Illustrated. Price: US$55 hard cover, US$44.50 soft cover.
Quality control in lumber manufacturing, just released by the publishers, gives mill-proven systems and methods for using quality control to save money in every operation. Edited by Dr Terence D. Brown of Oregon State University, it includes contributions by 15 industry professionals knowledgeable in various aspects of quality control.
In seven sections and 20 chapters, the book provides the kind of practical examples and technical information needed by mill owners, managers and quality control personnel to start or improve successful quality control programmes.
The first section shows how to organize quality control programmes. It explains systems, staffing, reporting and how to gain the cooperation of personnel in mills of every type.
The next sections proceed step-by-step through the manufacturing process, from woods through the mill to drying, planing and shipping. Here Brown and the contributors present efficient, standardized procedures for monitoring machinery and evaluating personnel. Lumber size control - - the heart of recovery maximization - is clearly and completely explained. The uses of finished lumber evaluation - to troubleshoot mill problems and assure customer satisfaction - are fully covered.
The last part of the book gives case studies of actual quality control programmes in a southern pine mill, a medium-sized mill and a large mill. The final chapter looks at future opportunities for even greater control of the manufacturing process.
The 288-page book is illustrated with 145 photographs, diagrams, check-lists and tables. In addition, five appendixes provide time-saving tables and sample documents: shrinkage tables, sampling charts' calculator programmes, checklists and an example quality control handbook. A comprehensive index and contributor biographies are also included.
WORKERS AT A SAWMILL - intermediate technology has its place
Hurricane research
Tropical cyclones: their evolution structure and effects. Richardt A. Anthes. Boston American Meteorological Society, 1982. Meteorological Monographs, Vol. 19, No. 41. Illustrated. 208 p. Price: US$40.
This new book by Richardt Anthes summarizes the research and knowledge accumulated about hurricanes beginning in the early 19th century, through the work of William Redfield, up until about 1980. Anthes also analyses the strong and weak points in our understanding of hurricanes and suggests what might be accomplished in the future.
Of particular interest is a section on the structure and life cycle of tropical cyclones. Considered are the physical processes in tropical cyclones, simulation by numerical models, hurricane modification experiments and theory, interaction between ocean and atmosphere, and forecasting of the movement of the tropical cyclones.
References given are complete and very representative of the good tropical cyclone research reports in the last 40 years. The illustrations include many outstanding photographs of hurricanes and hurricane damage.
From Science, Vol. 217, No. 4557,
23 July 1982. p. 347.
Maximizing small log production
Small log sawmills. Ed M. Williston. San Francisco, Miller Freeman Publications, Inc., 1982. 301 pictures, diagrams, graphs and tables. 368 p. Price: US$52.50 hard cover, US$42.50 soft cover.
There are various types of small-log sawmills: stud, random, length, clears and others. Each requires its own special systems and equipment. For each there is a particular method of increasing productivity, recovery and value in the mill.
This book by Ed M. Williston, who is a lumber industry consultant worldwide and an affiliate professor at the College of Forest Resources, University of Washington (Seattle), USA. is a practical manual for technical and operating personnel. The focus is on specific details rather than theoretical principles.
There are chapters on the following topics: the wood supply, selecting the product line, types of small-log mills, performance of popular small-log processing systems, analysis of log geometry to maximize product line value, maximizing profitability at the edge and trimmer, low-cost methods for improving timber recovery, design and operation considerations for single-length and random-length small-log mills, and exemplary mills. In addition there are a number of different reference tables and appendixes giving yields, figures, nomenclature, etc.
Arboriculture in early America
Maya subsistence: studies in memory of Dennis E. Puleston, ed. Kent V. Flannery. Papers from a Conference, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA, October 1979. New York, Academic Press, 1982. Illustrated. 372 p. Price: US$34.50.
An essay by G.D. Jones in this collection of essays focusing on Maya agricultural practices notes that there is documented evidence of the fact that the 16th-century Maya practiced short-fallow cultivation and arboriculture. Orchard-garden type foods, Jones says, contributed "handsomely" to Maya subsistence.
Dennis E. Puleston, to whom the volume - and the conference on which it is based - - is dedicated, was a student of Maya prehistory. His work helped to bring about a shift in thinking about the Maya. Evidence which began to be accumulated during the 1970s suggested that the Maya were a densely settled populace supported by multiple types of agriculture and other means of intensive food procurement. The present volume expands, refines and sometimes challenges this new view of the Maya.
Among the subjects discussed are the Maya use of wetlands for agriculture by channelization and field raising. One essay recapitulates lowland and highland Maya waterworks, compares various methods of pre-Hispanic wetland cultivation in the New World and evaluates the Maya experimental raised field agriculture in Mexico. An essay by W.T. Sanders and C.N. Murdy shows that Maya farmers operated within short-term economic frameworks and should not be seen romantically as conservationists interested in long-term stability.
The essays here are of interest to both the specialist and the generalist and provide interesting insights and comparisons for modern agricultural and agro-silvicultural practices.
How to plant eucalypts
Eucalyptus seed. D.J. Boland, M.I.H. Brocker and J.W. Turnbull with Scanning electron microscopy by D.A. Kleinig, Division of Forest Research, Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization, Canberra, 1980. 191 p. (B5 Casebound ISBN 0-643-02583-3). Price: $A18.00.
Eucalypts are the world's most widely planted hardwoods and large industries have been built up around them. Seeds are still the best means of regenerating eucalypt forest and raising nursery stock, and this book has been written by scientists at the CSIRO Division of Forest Research in Canberra in response to the many requests they have received from all over the world for information on seed and the choice of species for planting.
This book begins with a description of the reproductive structures, pollination, seed maturation and dispersal of eucalypts, linen goes on to deal with the use of seed morphology in species identification, aided by scanning electron micrographs of over 150 species, a major feature of the book. The literature on managed seed production is reviewed, together with methods used to improve the genetic quality of seed as a means of producing better trees. The book continues with a discussion of the principles and methods of collecting, testing and germinating seed, and raising small numbers of seedlings.
The clearly written text is copiously illustrated with more than 70 line drawings and photographs, has 150 scanning electron micrographs, and is supplemented by an up-to-date bibliography, glossary, and exhaustive subject index.
Designing wood stoves
Wood-conserving cook-stoves: a design guide. Volunteers in Technical Assistance, 3706 Rhode Island Ave. Mt Rainier, Maryland 20822. USA. 1980. 111 p. Drawings, dictionary of terms, bibliography.
The promotion of inexpensive, culturally suitable and environmentally sound wood stoves and cooking methods is the goal of this book. It has an abundance of practical drawings and explanations and is suitable for direct use in the work place. It aims to help the reader to choose appropriate stoves, maximize wood-burning potential, make stoves more efficient and construct four types of stoves.
A chapter on stove efficiency includes sections on conserving heat, improving traditional stoves and the better utilization of stove-building materials such as cast iron, steel plate, sheet metal, ceramics, mud and brick. The four stoves considered in detail are the Lorena stove, developed in Guatemala, the smokeless Chula, whose design is based on research published in 1953 by the Hyderabad (India) Research Laboratory, the Singer stove, which is similar to India's smokeless Chula, and the sawdust cook-stove.
"The reason for the lack of data on wood stoves." write the editors in an introduction, "seems to be that planners have for years assumed that people advanced from wood fires to an electric or gas range, not to an improved wood-burning cook-stove. It was just not considered necessary to think very hard about a better cooking system based on wood usage."
Two factors have changed this situation. One is the virtual disappearance of wood in many developing countries, a fact that puts a high premium on better utilization of the available wood. The second is that the energy crisis, in both industrialized and developing countries, is changing the automatic assumption that gas and electricity are ultimately the best kinds of stoves. Indeed, in several parts of North America there has been a dramatic resurgence in the use of wood stoves for both cooking and heating even in high-income areas.
ROBERT WAZEKA
Rome
THE "SMOKELESS CHULA" - uses less energy than the open fire
LEARNING NEW COOKING TECHNOLOGIES IN RURAL MEXICO - more women extension workers would increase wood-stove use
How to conserve rare plants
The biological aspects of rare plant conservation. Ed. H. Synge. Royal Botanical Gardens, Kew, UK. John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 1981. 586 p. Price: US$84.00 or UK£30.00.
Plant conservation is a young subject which grew out of the concern by taxonomic botanists that many of the plants they were studying and classifying were not only rare, but in danger of extinction. The book, based on an international conference entitled Biology of Rare Plant Conservation, stresses the role biological sciences have to play in conserving plant resources. Ecologists, phytosociologists, plant-population biologists and nature conservators can all contribute to a more complete knowledge of why a plant is endangered, how it responds throughout its life cycle and what constitutes its ecological requirements. This information can then serve as a basis for a conservation programme.
Royalties from the sales of the book are to be assigned to plant conservation projects sponsored by The Fauna and Flora Preservation Society.
Thinking about erosion
Erosion and sediment transport measurement. Proceedings of an international symposium on Erosion and Sediment Transport Measurement, held on 22-25 June 1981 in Florence, Italy. International Association of Hydrological sciences (IAHS) publication No. 133. 53 papers in English, 2 in French, with short abstracts in both languages. Figures and tables, xii + 527 p. Order from: Office of the Treasurer, IAHS, 2000 Florida Av., NW Washington, D.C. 20004, USA. or IUGG Publications Office, 39ter rue Gay-Lussac, F-75005, Paris, France. Price: US$54.
More than 50 papers are included from the proceedings of the symposium, sponsored by the Italian National Research Council and the IAHS International Commission on Continental Erosion. They cover developments and experiences with many erosion and sediment transport measurement techniques in a variety of environments. The papers reflect progress in recent decades in instrumentation, methodology and strategy.
Specific subjects treated are: measurement of bed-load transport; suspended sediment concentrations, suspended sediment sampling and its apparatus: the reliability of sediment load data; laboratory experimentation and measurement of debris flow and mass movement; design of data-collection programmes; measurement of rainfall erosivity and splash erosion: rainfall simulators and laboratory experiments; erosion plot studies; and field measurement of erosion.
The published proceedings are a valuable, compilation of diverse experience gained in the measurement of erosion and sediment transport, even if all the recent advances in these fields are not included. The publication should be useful to research workers as well as to those working in the field of operational hydrology.
From a review by LONG YUQIAN
in World Meteorological Organization Bulletin,
Vol. 31, No. 2.
Ways to interpret the environment
Guidelines and techniques for environmental interpretation. K. Berkmuller. Supported by the van Tienhoven Foundation (the Netherlands), the International Union for the Conservation, of Nature and Natural Resources, and the integrative Studies Center at the University of Michigan. 1981. Price: US$15.00 plus postage.
EROSION DAMAGE IN ETHIOPIA - FAO is assisting reafforestation efforts
This volume considers the conceptual framework and practical means necessary for implementation of low-cost programmes that interpret nature for the public. Based on findings from developing countries, the book discusses the theory of nature interpretation, nature trails, outdoor signs, displays, advanced facilities using audiovisual materials and public relations. Appendixes contain lists of guides, bibliographies and useful addresses.
For further information, contact Mr Klaus Berkmuller, c/o Behavior and Environment Program, School of Natural Resources, the University of Michigan, Samuel Trask Dana Building, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.
Nepal and its wildlife
Wildlife in Nepal. T.K. Shrestha. Tribhuvan University. 1981. 200 photographs and 15 drawings. Available from the Tribhuvan University Bookshop, Basant Purl Kathmandu, Nepal. Price: US$13.00 plus postage.
This book is the product of more than a decade of study and photography by Dr T.K. Shrestha and records the beauty of Nepalese animals and their precarious existence. It offers a panorama of the Himalayan natural heritage and its sanctuaries, the behaviour of the animals that inhabit them and the men who have laboured to preserve them. The whole spectrum of fauna and their survival status is illustrated: the relatively safe spiny babbler and trans-Himalayan pheasant, the rhinoceros, the elephant, the wild buffalo and swamp-deer; the threatened tiger, leopard, blue sheep of Dolpo, muskdeer and blackbuck: the nearly extinct Gangetic dolphin and Indian bustard. Throughout the book the author underlines the need and opportunity for research in environmental management and calls for a rational land- and water-use policy. Appendixes summarize the distribution and status of principal and peripheral wildlife in Nepal. There is also a comprehensive list of common, scientific and
Nepalese animal names.
GUJARAT'S SOCIAL FORESTRY PROGRAMME - involving local villagers in forest management
Ornithology: Borneo
The birds of Borneo. B.E. Smythies. 3rd revised edition prepared by the Earl of Cranbrook. The Sabah Society/The Malayan Nature Society. 1981. cat 500 p.. 47 colour plates. Price: US$60.00 postpaid.
Smythies' classic work, The birds of Borneo, is now available in a third revised edition. The introductory section appears in abbreviated form, with the original chapters 1-6 distilled into a brief essay. The main text, annotated by the Earl of Cranbrook who is an expert on the birds of the area, includes material published since the last edition of 1968 and a bibliography. As Borneo is not covered in the standard handbook of the region by King. Woodcock and Dickinson, A field guide to the birds of Southeast Asia, this manual is especially welcome in its updated form.
Tropical plantation forestry
Plantation forestry in the tropics. J. Evans. Oxford. UK, Oxford University Press. 1982. 460 p. Illustrations. Price: UK£35.00.
Julian Evans, formerly a senior lecturer in silviculture at the Papua New Guinea University of Technology, devotes his book to silviculture in the widest sense of the term. Although technical aspects of tropical plantation forestry are considered, Evans also deals with the reasons why plantations are needed, the social and economic factors behind them and how plantation forestry can be integrated with such other land uses as agroforestry and forest preserves. Examples are included from South America, Africa, Asia and the Pacific.
Following an introductory chapter, the book treats land, social and economic factors in the second chapter. The third chapter examines the techniques of plantation silviculture, covering 11 different topics such as thinning, stand growth, forest nurseries and plantation maintenance. The final chapter treats impacts, interactions and integration of plantation forestry.
every issue in 3 languages
chaque numéro en 3 langues
cada número en 3 idiomas
Unasylva - an international Journal of forestry and forest industries
ORDER FORM to be mailed to: or to any of the FAO Sales Agents listed on the Inside black cover.
Distribution and Sales Section
FAO - Via delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome - Italy
Please enter my subscription to Unasylva for a period of one year (Price: $10.00 *)
* For subscription rates in your currency check with your local FAO Sales Agent.
Name ______________________Street _____________________________
Occupation _________________City __________Country ______________
Edition required: English French Spanish
Form of payment: Cheque enclosed Bank order Unesco coupons On receipt of invoice
Published by FAO with the assistance of the Swedish International Development Authority 1982
This publication of technical notes is one of several designed to make available information needed to promote community and household-level forestry activities
It has been prepared for FAO by the Faculté des sciences agronomiques de l'Etat, Gembloux, Belgium
FAO FORESTRY PAPER 34
<section>a</section>
Where to purchase FAO publications locally - Points de vente des publications de la FAO - Puntos de venta de publicaciones de la FAO
· ANGOLA
Empresa Nacional do Disco e de Publicações, ENDIPU-U.E.E.
Rua Cirilo da Conceição Silva, N° 7
C.P. N° 1314-C, Luanda
· ARGENTINA
Librería Agropecuaria
Pasteur 743, 1028 Buenos Aires
Oficina del Libro Internacional
Av. Córdoba 1877, 1120 Buenos Aires
E-mail: olilibro@satlink.com
· AUSTRALIA
Hunter Publications
P.O. Box 404, Abbotsford, Vic. 3067
Tel.:(03) 9417 5361
Fax: (03) 914 7154
E-mail: jpdavies@ozemail.com.au
· AUSTRIA
Gerold Buch & Co.
Weihburggasse 26, 1010 Vienna
· BANGLADESH
Association of Development Agencies in Bangladesh
House No. 1/3, Block F,
Lalmatia, Dhaka 1207
· BELGIQUE
M.J. De Lannoy
202, avenue du Roi, 1060 Bruxelles
CCP 000-0808993-13
E-mail: jean.de.lannoy@infoboard.be
· BOLIVIA
Los Amigos del Libro
Av. Heroínas 311, Casilla 450
Cochabamba;
Mercado 1315, La Paz
· BOTSWANA
Botsalo Books (Pty) Ltd
P.O. Box 1532, Gaborone
· BRAZIL
Fundação Getúlio Vargas
Praia do Botafogo 190, C.P. 9052
Rio de Janeiro
E-mail: valeria@sede.fgvrj.br
Núcleo Editora da Universidade Federal Fluminense
Rua Miguel de Frias 9
Icaraí-Niterói 24
220-000 Rio de Janeiro
Fundação da Universidade Federal do Paraná - FUNPAR
Rua Alfredo Bufrem 140, 30° andar
80020-240 Curitiba
· CAMEROON
CADDES
Centre Africain de Diffusion et
Développement Social
B.P. 7317 Douala Bassa
Tel.: (237) 43 37 83
Fax: (237) 42 77 03
· CANADA
Renouf Publishing
5369 chemin Canotek Road, Unit 1
Ottawa, Ontario K1J 9J3
Tel.: (613) 745-2665
Fax: (613) 745 7660
Website: www.renoufbooks.com
E-mail: renouf@fox.nstn.ca
· CHILE
Librería - Oficina Regional FAO
c/o FAO Officina Regional para América
Latina y el Caribe (RLC)
Avda. Dag Hammarskjold, 3241
Vitacura, Santiago
Tel.: 33 72 314
Fax: 696 1121/696 1124
E-mail: german.rojas@field.fao.org
Universitaria Textolibros Ltda.
Avda. L. Bernardo O'Higgins 1050
Santiago
· CHINA
China National Publications Import & Export Corporation
16 Gongti East Road, Beijing 100020
Tel.: 6506 30 70
Fax: 6506 3101
E-mail: cnpiec@public.3.bta.net.cn
· COLOMBIA
Banco Ganadero
Vicepresidencia de Fomento
Carrera 9^a N° 72-21, Piso 5
Bogotá D.E.
Tel.: 217 0100
· CONGO
Office national des librairies populaires
B.P. 577, Brazzaville
· COSTA RICA
Librería Lehmann S.A.
Av. Central, Apartado 10011
1000 San José
CINDE
Coalición Costarricense de Iniciativas de Desarrollo
Apdo 7170, 1000 San José
E-mail: rtacinde@sol.rassa.co.cr
· CÔTE D'IVOIRE
CEDA
04 B.P. 541, Abidjan 04
Tel.: 22 20 55
Fax: 21 72 62
· CUBA
Ediciones Cubanas Empresa de Comercio Exterior de Publicaciones
Obispo 461, Apartado 605, La Habana
· CZECH REPUBLIC
Artia Pegas Press Ltd Import of Periodicals
Palác Metro, P.O. Box 825
Národní 25, 111 21 Praha 1
· DENMARK
Munksgaard, Book and Subscription Service
P.O. Box 2148
DK 1016 Copenhagen K.
Tel.: 4533128570
Fax: 4533129387
Website: www.munksgaard.dk;
E-mail: subscription.service@mail.munksgaard.dk
· DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
CUESTA - Centro del libro
Av. 27 de Febrero, esq. A. Lincoln
Centro Comercial Nacional
Apartado 1241, Santo Domingo
· ECUADOR
Libri Mundi, Librería Internacional
Juan León Mera 851
Apartado Postal 3029, Quito
E-mail: librimul@librimundi.com.ec
Universidad agraria del Ecuador Centro de Información Agraria
Av. 23 de Julio, Apdo 09-01-1248
Guayaquil
Librería Española
Murgeón 364 y Ulloa, Quito
· EGYPT
The Middle East Observer
41 Sherif Street, Cairo
Tel.: 393 97 2
Fax.: 360 68 04
E-mail: fouda@soficom.com.eg
· ESPAÑA
Librería Agrícola
Fernando VI 2, 28004 Madrid
Librería de la Generalitat de Catalunya
Rambla dels Estudis 118 (Palau Moja)
08002 Barcelona
Tel.: (93) 302 6462
Fax: (93) 302 1299
Mundi Prensa Libros S.A.
Castelló 37, 28001 Madrid
Tel.: 914 36 37 00
Fax: 915 75 39 98
Website: www.tsai.es/MPRENSA
E-mail: mundiprensa@tsai.es
Mundi Prensa - Barcelona
Consejo de Ciento 391,
08009 Barcelona
Tel.: 301 8615
Fax: 317 0141
· FINLAND
Aketeeminen Kirjakauppa Subscription Services
P.O. Box 23, FIN-00371 Helsinki
Tel.: (358) 0121 4416
Fax.: (358) 0121 4450
· FRANCE
Editions A. Pedone
13, rue Soufflot, 75005 Paris
Lavoisier Tec & Doc
14, rue de Provigny
94236 Cachan Cedex
Website: www.lavoisier.fr
E-mail: livres@lavoisier.fr
Librairie du Commerce International
10, avenue d'Iéna
75783 Paris Cedex 16
Website: www.cfce.fr
E-mail: pl@net-export.fr
WORLD DATA
10, rue Nicolas Flamand
75004 Paris
Tel.: (01) 4278 0578
Fax: (01) 4278 1472
· GERMANY
Alexander Horn Internationale Buchhandlung
Friedrichstrasse 34
D-65185 Wiesbaden
Tel.: 37 42 12
S. Toeche-Mittler GmbH Versandbuchhandlung
Hindenburgstrasse 33
D-64295 Darmstadt
Tel.: 6151 336 65
Fax: 6151 314 048
Website: www. booksell.com/triops
E-mail: triops@booksell.com
Uno Verlag
Poppelsdorfer Allee 55
D-53115 Bonn 1
Tel.: 49 (0) 228 94 90 20
Fax: 49 (0) 228 21 74 92
Website: www.uno-verlag.de
E-mail: unoverlag@aol.com
· GHANA
SEDCO Publishing Ltd
Sedco House, Tabon Street
Off Ring Road Central, North Ridge
P.O. Box 2051, Accra
· GREECE
Papasotiriou S.A.
35 Stournara Str., 10682 Athens
Tel.: +301 3302 980
Fax: +301 3648254
· GUYANA
Guyana National Trading Corporation Ltd
45-47 Water Street, P.O. Box 308
Georgetown
· HAÏTI
Librairie «A la Caravelle»
26, rue Bonne Foi
B.P. 111, Port-au-Prince
· HONDURAS
Escuela Agrícola Panamericana Librería RTAC
El Zamorano, Apartado 93, Tegucigalpa
Oficina de la Escuela Agrícola Panamericana en Tegucigalpa
Blvd. Morazán, Apts. Glapson
Apartado 93, Tegucigalpa
· HUNGARY
Librotrade Kft.
P.O. Box 126, H-1656 Budapest
Tel.: 256 1672
Fax: 256 8727
· INDIA
EWP Affiliated East-West Press PVT, Ltd
G-I/16, Ansari Road, Darya Gany
New Delhi 110 002
Tel.: 32 64 180
Fax: 32 60 538
Oxford Book and Stationery Co.
Scindia House
New Delhi 110 001
Tel.: 91 11 331 5310
Fax: 91 11 371 3275
Oxford Subscription Agency
Institute for Development Education
1 Anasuya Ave., Kilpauk
Madras 600 010
Periodical Expert Book Agency
D-42, Vivek Vihar, Delhi 110095
Bookwell
Head Office:
2/72, Nirankari Colony, New Delhi - 110009
Tel.: 725 1283
Fax: 91-11-328 13 15
Sales Office:
24/4800, Ansari Road
Darya Ganj, New Delhi - 110002
Tel.: 326 8786, 325 7264
E-mail: bkwell@nde.vsnl.net.in
· IRAN
The FAO Bureau, International and Regional Specialized Organizations Affairs
Ministry of Agriculture of the Islamic Republic of Iran
Keshavarz Bld, M.O.A., 17th floor
Teheran
· IRELAND
Office of Public Work
4-5 Harcourt Road, Dublin 2
· ISRAEL
R.O.Y. International
P.O. Box 13056, Tel Aviv 61130
E-mail: royil@netvision.net.il
· ITALY
FAO Bookshop
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Roma
Tel.: 06 57055688
Fax: 06 57055155
E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org
Librería Commissionaria Sansoni S.p.A. - Licosa
Via Duca di Calabria 1/1
50125 Firenze
Tel.: 055 64 54 15
Fax: 055 64 12 57
E-mail: licosa@ftbcc.it
Libreria Scientifica Dott. Lucio de Biasio "Aeiou"
Via Coronelli 6, 20146 Milano
· JAPAN
Far Eastern Booksellers (Kyokuto Shoten Ltd.)
12 Kanda-Jimbocho 2 chome
Chiyoda-ku - P.O. Box 72
Tokyo 101-91
Tel.: 03 3265 7531
Fax: 03 3265 4656
Maruzen Company Ltd.
P.O. Box 5050
Tokyo International 100-31
Tel.: 81 3 3278 1894
Fax: 81 3 3278 1895
E-mail: h_sugiyama@maruzen.co.jp
· KENYA
Text Book Centre Ltd.
Kijabe Street
P.O. Box 47540, Nairobi
Tel.: 330 342
Fax: 22 57 79
Inter Africa Book Distribution
Kencom House, Moi Avenue
P.O. Box 73580, Nairobi
Tel.: 21 11 84
Fax: 254 2 22 35 70
· LUXEMBOURG
M. J. De Lannoy
202, avenue du Roi
1060 Bruxelles (Belgique)
E-mail: jean.de.lannoy@infoboard.be
· MADAGASCAR
Centre d'information et de Documentation Scientifique et Technique
Ministère de la recherche appliquée au développement
B.P 6224 Tsimbazaza, Antanarivo
· MALAYSIA
Electronic products only:
Southbound Sendirian Berhad Publishers
9 College Square, 01250 Penang
· MALI
Librairie Traore
Rue Soundiata Keita X 115
B.P. 3243, Bamako
· MAROC
La Librairie Internationale
70 Rue T'ssoule
PO. Box 302 (RP), Rabat
Tel./Fax: 212 7 75 01 83
· MEXICO
Librería, Universidad Autónoma de Chapingo
56230 Chapingo
Libros y Editoriales S.A.
Av. Progreso N° 202-1° Piso A
Apdo. Postal 18922
Col. Escandón, 11800 México D.F.
Mundi Prensa Mexico, S.A.
Rió Pánuco, 141 Col. Cuauhtémoc
C.P. 06500, México, DF
Tel.: 533-5658 al 60
Fax: 514-6799
E-mail: 1015452361@compuserve.com
· NETHERLANDS
Roodveldt Import b.v.
Brouwersgracht 288
1013 HG Amsterdam
E-mail: roodboek@euronet.nl
Tel.: 622 8035
Fax: 625 5493
Swets & Zeitlinger b.v.
P.O. Box 830, 2160 Lisse
Heereweg 347 B, 2161 CA Lisse
E-mail: infono@swets.nl
Website: www.swets.nl
· NEW ZEALAND
Legislation Services
P.O. Box 12418
Thorndon, Wellington
E-mail: gppmjxf@gp.co.nz
Oasis Official
P.O. Box 3627, Wellington
Tel.: (+64) 4 499 1551
Fax: (+64) 4 499 1972
E-mail: oasis@clear.net.nz
Website: www.oasisbooks.co.nzl
· NICARAGUA
Librería HISPAMER
Costado Este Univ. Centroamericana
Apdo. Postal A-221, Managua
· NIGERIA
University Bookshop (Nigeria) Ltd.
University of Ibadan, Ibadan
· NORWAY
Swets Norge AS
P.O. Box 6512, Etterstad
N-0606 Oslo
Tel.: (+47) 2297 4500
Fax: (+47) 2297 4545
E-mail: nicagen@swets.nl
· PAKISTAN
Mirza Book Agency
65 Shahrah-e-Quaid-e-Azam
P.O. Box 729, Lahore 3
· PARAGUAY
Librería Intercontinental Editora e Impresora S.R.L.
Caballero 270 c/Mcal Estigarribia
Asunción
· PERU
INDEAR
Jirón Apurimac 375, Casilla 4937
Lima 1
Universidad Nacional "Pedro Ruiz Gallo"
Facultad de Agronomía, A.P. 795
Lambayeque (Chiclayo)
· PHILIPPINES
International Booksource Center, Inc.
Room 720, Cityland 10 Tower 2
H.V. de la Costa, Cor. Valero St
Makati, Metro Manila
Tel.: 817 9676
Fax: 817 1741
· POLAND
Ars Polona
Krakowskie Przedmiescie 7
00-950 Warsaw
· PORTUGAL
Livraria Portugal, Dias e Andrade Ltda.
Rua do Carmo 70-74
Apartado 2681, 1200 Lisboa Codex
· SINGAPORE
Select Books Pte Ltd.
03-15 Tanglin Shopping Centre
19 Tanglin Road, Singapore 1024
Tel.: 732 1515
Fax: 736 0855
· SLOVAK REPUBLIC
Institute of Scientific and Technical Information for Agriculture
Samova 9, 950 10 Nitra
Tel.: +42 87 522 185
Fax: +42 87 525 275
E-mail: uvtip @ nr.sanet.sk
· SOMALIA
Samater
P.O. Box 936, Mogadishu
· SOUTH AFRICA
David Philip Publishers (Pty) Ltd.
P.O. Box 23408, Claremont 7735
Tel.: Cape Town (021) 64-4136
Fax: Cape Town (021) 64-3358
E-mail: dpp@iafrica.com
Website: www.twisted.co.za
· SRI LANKA
M.D. Gunasena & Co. Ltd.
217 Olcott Mawatha, P.O. Box 246
Colombo 11
· SUISSE
Buchhandlung und Antiquariat Heinimann & Co.
Kirchgasse 17, 8001 Zurich
UN Bookshop
Palais des Nations
CH-1211 Genève 1
Website: www.un.org
Van Diermen Editions Techniques ADECO
41 Lacuez, CH-1807 Blonzy
· SURINAME
Vaco n.v. in Suriname
Domineestraat 26, P.O. Box 1841
Paramaribo
· SWEDEN
Wennergren Williams AB
P.O. Box 1305, S-171 25 Solna
Tel.: 46 8 705 9750
Fax: 46 8 27 00 71
E-mail: mail@wwi.se
Bokdistributören
P.O. Box 301 61, S-104 25 Stockholm
Tel.: 46 8 728 2500
Fax: 46 8 31 30 44
E-mail: lis.ledin @ hk.akademibokhandeln.se
· THAILAND
Suksapan Panit
Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue
Bangkok
· TOGO
Librairie du Bon Pasteur
B.P. 1164, Lomé
· TUNISIE
Société tunisienne de diffusion
5, avenue de Carthage, Tunis
· TURKEY
DUNYA INFOTEL
100. Yil Mahallesi
34440 Bagcilar, Istanbul
Tel.: 0212 629 08 08
Fax: 0212 629 46 89
E-mail: dunya@dunya-gazete.com.tr
Website: http://www.dunya.com
· UNITED KINGDOM
The Stationery Office
51 Nine Elms Lane
London SW8 5DR
Tel.: (0171) 873 9090 (orders)
(0171) 873 0011 (inquiries)
Fax: (0171) 873 8463
and through The Stationery Office Bookshops
E-mail: postmaster@theso.co.uk
Website: www.the-stationery-office.co.uk
Electronic products only:
Microinfo Ltd.
P.O. Box 3, Omega Road
Alton, Hampshire GU34 2PG
Tel.: (01420) 86848
Fax: (01420) 89889
Website: www.microinfo.co.uk
E-mail: emedia@microinfo.co.uk
· UNITED STATES
Publications:
BERNAN Associates (ex UNIPUB)
4611/F Assembly Drive
Lanham, MD 20706-4391
Toll-free 1-800-274-4447
Fax: 301-459-0056
Website: www.bernan.com
E-mail: info@bernan.com
UN Bookshop
The United Nations Bookshop
General Assembly Building Room 32
New York, N.Y. 10017
Tel.: 212 963 7680
Fax: 212 963 4910
Website: www.un.org
E-mail: bookshop@un.org
Periodicals:
Ebsco Subscription Services
P.O. Box 1943
Birmingham, AL 35201 -1943
Tel.: (205) 991-6600
Telex: 78-2661
Fax: (205) 991-1449
The Faxon Company Inc.
15 Southwest Park
Westwood, MA 02090
Tel.: 6117-329-3350
Telex: 95-1980
Cable: FW Faxon Wood
· URUGUAY
Librería Agropecuaria S.R.L.
Buenos Aires 335, Casilla 1755
Montevideo C.P. 11000
· VENEZUELA
Fundación La Era Agrícola
Calle 31 Junin Qta Coromoto 5-49
Apartado 456, Mérida
Fundación para la Investigación Agrícola
San Javier
Estado Yaracuy, A.P. 182, San Felipe
Fax: 054 44210
E-mail: damac@diero.conicit.ve
Fudeco, Librería
Avenida Libertador-Este
Ed. Fudeco, Apartado 254
Barquisimeto C.P. 3002, Ed. Lara
Tel.: (051) 538 022
Fax: (051) 544 394
Telex: (051) 513 14 FUDEC VC
Librería FAGRO
Universidad Central de Venezuela (UCV)
Maracay
Librería Universitaria, C.A.
Av. 3, entre 29 y 30
N° 29-25 Edif. EVA, Mérida
Fax: 074 52 09 56
Tamanaco Libros Técnicos S.R.L.
Centro Comercial Ciudad Tamanaco
Nivel C-2, Caracas
Tel.: 261 3344/261 3335/959 0016
Tecni-Ciencia Libros S.A.
Torre Phelps-Mezzanina
Plaza Venezuela
A.P. 20.315, 1020 Caracas
Tel.: 782 8697/781 9945/781 9954
E-mail: tchlibros@ibm.net
Tecni-Ciencia Libros, S.A.
Centro Comercial
Av. Andrés Eloy, Urb. El Prebo
Valencia, Ed. Carabobo
Tel.: 222 724
· ZIMBABWE
Grassroots Books
The Book Café
Fife Avenue, Harare;
61 a Fort Street, Bulawayo
Tel.: 79 31 82
Fax: 70 21 29
· Other countries/Autres pays/Otros países
Sales and Marketing Group
Information Division, FAO
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy
Tel.: (39) 06 57051
Fax: (39) 06 57053360
Telex: 625852/625853/610181 FAO I
E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org
