<title>ADCP/REP/83/18 - Fish Feeds and Feeding in Developing Countries - An Interim Report on the ADCP Feed Development Programme. Fish Feeds & Feeding in Developing Countries</title>
<section>1</section>
PREFACE
Feed is one of the main inputs in aquaculture production and a key element in intensive culture. Even in culture systems where the main source of nutrition for the cultured stock is natural food produced by fertilization, supplemental feeding is needed to achieve high production. However, nutrition and feed technology are relatively underdeveloped areas of aquaculture science, particularly in respect of warm-water species and their culture systems. Because of this, the UNDP/FAO Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) adopted 'Feed Development' as an important item of its activities.
Fish feed development in developing countries is very much hampered by the lack of necessary expertise to formulate, prepare and test appropriate feeds and demonstrate their nutritional and economic value. Therefore, one of the early activities that ADCP undertook was the organization of a specialized Training Course in Fish Feed Technology at the College of Fisheries, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, U.S.A. 9 October - 15 December 1978. The immediate objective of the course was to create a small core of trained personnel in selected countries to initiate programmes of feed ingredient surveys, diet formulation, processing and testing of feeds for species currently cultivated. The texts of lectures at the training course have been compiled and published (ADCP/REP/80/11) and this is now used in the senior aquaculturists training courses in the ADCP Regional Aquaculture Centres in Asia, Africa and Latin America for instruction in nutrition and feed technology.
Following the feed technology course, preliminary surveys of feed ingredients and feed milling facilities were started in a number of countries, with the assistance of the personnel trained in Seattle and others. The opportunities offered through FAO and UNDP technical assistance projects also were utilized in this survey and in formulating feeds based on locally available feed ingredients. The ADCP Feed Technologist Dr. K.W. Chow worked for varying periods of time from January 1980 in the ADCP Regional Aquaculture Centres [Dhauli (India), Bangkok (Thailand), Pirassununga (Brazil), Port Harcourt (Nigeria)] and in some FAO and FAO/UNDP technical assistance projects in Venezuela, Mexico, Tunisia, Egypt and Malaysia to assist in the formulation and testing of diets for some of the important cultivated species.
Work on formulation, preparation and testing of feeds based on locally available ingredients is continuing and investigations directed towards finding inexpensive protein sources for fish feeds, are starting in the ADCP Inter-regional Aquaculture Centre in Szarvas, Hungary. This is an interim report of the work so far done under the Feed Development Programme of ADCP. Besides being of value in selecting feed stuffs and formulating compound feeds, it is expected to stimulate further work in this important field in aqua-culture institutes and agencies, as well as in the feed milling industries.
May, 1983
T.V.R. Pillay
Programme Leader
<section>2</section>
1.0 INTRODUCTION
This report describes the results of a fish feed survey conducted in twelve developing countries, review of each country's ability to meet future feed demand for aqua-culture, and results of the initial efforts of the ADCP fish diet development programme in the areas of fish feed formulation, diet testing and feed manufacture in those countries. This work was carried out with the cooperation of Government fisheries departments and research institutions and with the assistance of national counterparts.
The countries covered in this report are: Brazil, Egypt, India, Malaysia, Mexico, Nepal, Nigeria, The Philippines, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Tunisia and Venezuela.
The present work was started in early 1979 as a follow-up of the UNDP/FAO Training Course in Fish Feed Technology in Seattle (ADCP/REP/79/8).
<section>3</section>
2.0 FEED INGREDIENT SURVEY
2.1 Feedstuffs for aquaculture
2.2 Composition of feedstuffs
2.3 Feed quality
The survey of feed ingredients in each country covered all materials of proven value as fish feeds currently used in traditional aquaculture as well as those materials heretofore not utilized as such in that country but, by virtue of their nutrient composition and established safety for use on livestock, are considered suitable for incorporation into formulated feeds for fish. The latter consist largely of what are commonly referred to as "conventional" feedstuffs, such as fish meal and animal rendering by-products, feed grains, and by-products from the milling of cereals and oil seeds as well as the so-called "non-conventional" feedstuffs such as processed waste from the food industry, and protein-rich single-celled micro-organisms from the biotechnology industry.
The survey was carried out at both local and national levels. Essential information on quality and availability was obtained for each ingredient. A questionnaire prepared specifically for this purpose was used (See examples in Annexes).
2.1 Feedstuffs for aquaculture
2.1.1 Legumes
2.1.2 Miscellaneous fodder plants
2.1.3 Roots and tubers
2.1.4 Cereals and cereal by-products
2.1.5 Oilcakes and oil meals
2.1.6 Feeds of animal origin
2.1.7 Miscellaneous feedstuffs
Feeds traditionally used for feeding monogastric farm animals are believed to be suitable for feeding fish (Ling, S.W., 1967; Fowler, L.G. and J.L. Banks, 1976, 1976a; Hastings, W., 1975; Randall Robinette, H., 1977). These materials include the feed grains, oilcake and meals, animal by-products (including fish meal), and an assortment of industrial and agricultural waste products. Most of these, however, have not been properly evaluate as fish feed. Judging from those that have been, their feed value depends invariably on digestible nutrient content. Although fish, being poikilotherms, are less capable of utilizing carbohydrates at low temperatures, they utilize fats and proteins at least just as well as land mammals. Fish, the herbivorous species excepted, are not capable of utilizing cellulose.
The feedstuffs described below represent the broad spectrum of feed raw materials known to be available among the twelve countries covered in the survey. Some feedstuffs are indigenous to a few countries and are not available even as imported items elsewhere. Others such as rice bran are widely available. Because the quality of the same feed material is expected to vary from country to country, indeed among different production sources within a country, there is no single set of compositional analysis that can be generally applied in the feed formulation process. The data reported in the Table of Composition of Feedstuffs in this section were drawn from major published sources (Göhl, B., 1980; Sen, K.C., 1978; Devandra, C., 1979; Oyenuga, V.A., 1968; McDowell, et al., 1974) and represent average values for feedstuffs from the respective regions. Only in one instance (in Orissa, India) was it possible to carry out actual chemical analysis on a variety of indigenously
available feedstuffs. The results of those analyses are included in the table.
Selection was based on known value or potential value of individual feed ingredient for aquaculture production. In classifying each ingredient, the simple, and more practical, system of the FAO's Animal Production and Health Division (Göhl, B., 1980), rather than the complicated INFIC ^1^/ nomenclature for feedstuffs, is employed. The list is not exhaustive and does not include live foods and animal waste materials such as manure used primarily for increasing natural productivity in ponds. Certain food materials normally reserved for human consumption have also been included because of occasional availability of substantial quantities rendered unsafe for that purpose but usable as feed for fish and livestock.
^1^/ International Network of Feed Information Centres. See Harris, L., 1980
Few comparative feeding trials have been conducted to evaluate the relative feed values of common feedstuffs for fish. Studies reported in the literature deal primarily with high protein feed materials (Fowler, L.G. and J.L. Banks, 1976; Jackson, A.J., B.S. Copper and A.J. Matty, 1982; Tiews, K., J. Gropp and H. Koops, 1976) although reports from Auburn University in the USA have also focused on relative energy values of various feedstuffs (Lovell, R.T., 1977).
2.1.1 Legumes
Legumes are potentially a valuable feed resource for aquaculture in the tropics because of their widespread distribution in those areas. As feeds they are rich in protein and minerals. Despite the many varieties that have been identified for use as fodder for livestock, only a few have been utilized commercially for feed manufacture. The raw seeds of many legumes contain anti-nutritive factors (Liener, I.E., 1978). This problem can usually be overcome by processing. Most varieties have not been evaluated as feed for fish.
B.31 Red gram or dahl (Cajunus cajan L. Huth)
Red gram is grown primarily as food for humans. It is one of the most common legumes of the tropics and sub-tropics. The upper (leafy) part of the plant has a high protein content and is usually fed to cattle. The seeds are often used at up to 30 percent in poultry rations. Red gram bran, a by-product of gram flour production, has almost the same protein content as the seed and is used for the same purpose. Although not evaluated as feeds for fish, both seeds and bran are judged safe for incorporation into fish feeds at moderate levels.
B.41 Chick pea, Bengal gram (Cicer arietinum L.)
The chick pea is native of India but is also cultivated in other parts of the tropics. Although grown mainly for human consumption, the seeds of the chick pea are frequently used as feed for poultry and livestock. Although not evaluated as a feed for fish, it is presumed to be safe for inclusion as a major constituent in compound fish feed. The leaves of the plant are also suitable for feeding to fish.
B.65 Lablab or Egyptian bean (Dolichos lablab L.)
A perennial plant native of India, the lablab is grown in many parts of the tropics. The seeds of the lablab, which are fairly rich in protein, have been fed as concentrates to livestock, but have not been evaluated in fish. This plant is not to be confused with lab-lab, an algal complex fed to milkfish in the Philippines.
B.79 Lentil or red dahl (Lens culinaris, Medik)
The red dahl is native of Asia but is also grown in Africa. The plant is cultivated for its seeds which are used primarily for human consumption. During the milling of the seed, a bran rich in protein is produced. The material has a high feed value and, although not evaluated in fish, probably can be used at fairly high levels in compound fish feed.
B.81 Ipil-ipil or kathin (Leucaena leucocephala, Lam de Wit)
The ipil-ipil is one of the two legumes whose leaves and stems have been used commercially on a regular basis in animal feed manufacture in many parts of Asia. Ipil-ipil leaf meal is fairly rich in protein but may not be fed at excessive levels to farm animals due to the presence of the toxic amino acid mimosine. Ipil-ipil has been used at low concentrations (5-10 percent) in compound fish feed in Thailand and the Philippines without noticeable adverse effects. One study conducted on tilapia showed very poor growth when Leucaena constituted 25 percent or more of the dietary protein (Jackson, A.J., B.S. Copper and A.J. Mathy, 1982).
B.84 Lupin (Lupinus spp.)
The lupins are grown in the cooler parts of the tropics. Both the leaves and seeds are rich in protein, the latter fed at up to 20 percent in rations for monogastric animals. Although not evaluated as a feed for fish, it is believed that the seeds of the lupin can be fed at moderate amounts to fish without harm.
B.88 Lucerne or alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.)
The alfalfa is the better known of the two legumes whose leaves and stems are exploited commercially as a principal ingredient in compound feed manufacture. Alfalfa meal, unlike ipil-ipil, does not appear to contain anti-nutritive factors that limit its use in compound feeds. The protein content of alfalfa is comparable to that of ipil-ipil. Alfalfa is known to be safe for incorporation into compound fish feed.
B.106 Velvet mesquite (Prosopis veleutina, Woot.)
A shrub native of Mexico, the mesquite produces an abundant crop of pods which are sugary and contain seeds rich in protein. The seeds are encased in a hard shell which must be crushed to enhance digestibility.
B.110 Saman or cow tamarind (Samanea saman, Jacq. Merr)
The samman is a tree that grows in the tropics. Its leaves are fairly rich in protein but also high in tannins. Its seeds are also used as concentrates for livestock. Both leaves and seeds have not been properly evaluated in fish although preliminary studies in Venezuela have shown that the ground pods fed at moderate levels have no adverse effect on the cachama (a native species belonging to the Characidae family) ^1^/.
^1^/ Studies conducted at the Warmwater Fish Culture Station at Guanapito
B.111-113 Sesbania (Sesbania grandiflora, L. Poir.)
These small fast-growing shrubs are very common in the tropical lowlands of Asia. Its leaves are rich in digestible protein and its seeds are often fed as concentrates to poultry. Although not evaluated in fish, ready acceptance of both leaves and seeds by poultry indicates its safeness.
B.130 Mung bean or black gram (Phaseolus mungo L.)
The mung bean is a native of central Asia, grown primarily for the bean which serves as food for humans. Both leaves and seeds are fairly digestible for monogastric animals. Although not evaluated as feed for fish, the absence of glucosides in the seeds makes them safe for use at moderate levels.
B.132 Red bean or rice bean (Vigna umbellata, Thumb. Ohwi & Ohashi)
Grown primarily for its seeds which are used for human consumption, the red bean is found throughout tropical Asia. It has not been evaluated as a feed for fish, but only the seeds appear suitable for use in compound feed.
B.133 Horse gram (Dolichos biflorus L.)
Also a herb found in tropical Asia, the seeds of the horse gram are used as concentrate feed for cattle. Although not evaluated in fish, because of their low fibre content, these seeds appear suitable for use at moderate levels in compound fish feeds.
B.134 Cow pea or black-eye pea (Vigna unguiculata L.)
The cow pea is grown primarily for human consumption. Its seed is usually too expensive for use as feed for livestock. Its leaves, however, are equally good and appear quite suitable for use in fish feeds, although no evaluation has yet been made.
2.1.2 Miscellaneous fodder plants
Although there are many varieties of fodder plants which can be fed to fish, their exploitation for this purpose, for the most part, has been hindered by low digestibility of nutrients and difficulty in obtaining adequate and regular supplies. Two exceptions in this category are the sago and the kangkong which are relatively abundant in the tropics and which have high feed value for animals because of their high digestibility.
C.62 Kangkong or swamp cabbage (Ipomoea aquatica, Forsk)
Mainly cultivated for food, the kangkong has also been used as stock feed in South East Asia. It has a fairly high feed value, with a higher protein content than alfalfa. Kangkong has been fed successfully to carps in Sri Lanka as a principal component of compound feed.
C.73 Sago palm (Metroxylon sagu, Roth)
The sago palm, which often proliferates in freshwater swamps, is valued for the starch contained in its trunk. The starch, which is normally extracted in small village mills, has a variety of industrial uses apart from its value as food. The unrefined starch, or meal, has been fed to livestock and is considered equally safe for fish. Small quantities incorporated into compound feeds improve pellet quality because of the easy gelatinization of sago starch under the conditions of pelleted feed manufacture.
2.1.3 Roots and tubers
For the most part, roots and tubers are grown as food for human consumption in the tropics. However, because of their high starch content, some varieties are grown as industrial raw material. Notable among these is cassava or tapioca. Roots and tubers are also suitable for feeding to fish, although their use for this purpose appears very limited due to their relatively high cost. Also, because the feed value of roots and tubers is in their carbohydrate content, they cannot be used at too high levels in feed for fish, which have a lower tolerance for carbohydrates than farm animals.
E.13 Sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas, L. Lam.)
Sweet potato is mainly grown as food for human consumption in the tropics. The tubers consist primarily of carbohydrates with a high content of sucrose. Protein content, although low, is almost twice that of cassava. The leaves of the sweet potato are highly digestible, free from toxins, and fairly rich in protein. The starch in the tuber provides good binding for dry and moist-type pellets if heat processing is employed.
E.14 Cassava, tapioca or yucca (Mannihot esculenta, Crantz)
Fresh cassava is seldom used as feed for fish. Most varieties are toxic unless properly processed to prevent the release of hydrocyanic acid by an enzyme present in the tuber. Heat applied during processing destroys the enzyme.
Cassava has low feed value in diets for fish but its presence in small quantities improves the water stability of pelleted feed. Fresh cassava has been included in the diet of milkfish in Indonesia (Hastings, W., 1975).
2.1.4 Cereals and cereal by-products
Grown primarily for human consumption, cereal grains are no less important as feed for efficient animal production. Present-day high energy diets for monogastric farm animals often contain up to 80 percent cereal grains and their by-products. The use of grains is somewhat restricted in fish diets because of generally lower tolerance for dietary carbohydrates by fish. This effect appears to be more pronounced among cold-water species such as the trout than among warm-water species.
While cereal grains are considered mainly as a source of dietary energy, their byproducts represent a fairly rich source of protein and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA).
Cereal grains sometimes constitute a significant percentage of fish feed processed into pellets. Starch present in cereals act as good, natural binders when gelatinized under normal pelleting conditions, giving products that have high water stability. Consequently, cereal grains are indispensable in the manufacture of floating-type pelleted feed.
F.1 Millet (in the tropics, mainly Eleusine coracana, Paspalum scrobiculatum and Pennisetum americanum)
Grown primarily for human consumption, millet is only occasionally available as feed for livestock. Its use as a feed for fish has not been documented. Judging from favourable growth response of monogastric farm animals fed the cereal, millet should, at least, be comparable to maize in feeding value. The seed is hard and proper grinding is necessary before use in fish diets.
F.7 Rice (Oryza sativa L.)
Rice is seldom used for animal feeding because of its high cost, although damaged grain and portions considered unfit for human consumption, viz., sweepings from warehouses and mills, are available for that purpose. In a few countries, notably Thailand, where it is the principal grain crop, rice of low commercial value such as broken rice is also used as livestock feed. On the other hand, by-products from mills are more generally available and constitute the most important feed resource in all rice-producing countries. The by-products include: rice bran, rice polishings and rice mill feed. Rice and its mill by-products are important feed constituents in fish feeds in each of the countries covered in this survey.
Broken rice and cargo rice
Rough rice is very seldom fed to fish. Instead, broken rice (polished) and cargo rice (unpolished) are used in the preparation of traditional type fish feeds as well as in compound diet formulations. The rice is first boiled in water before mixing with other ingredients to make the ration. Rice is an excellent energy source with a low but fairly good quality protein content. No digestibility study has been made with fish but for mono-gastric farm animals, uncooked rice is more digestible than maize. Cargo rice, especially, is rich in the B-vitamins.
Rice bran
Freshly produced rice bran has a high oil content (14-18 percent). The oil is sometimes recovered by solvent extraction because of its high commercial value, especially in countries where demand for cooking oil exceeds supply. The oil present in the bran is rich in polyunsaturated fatty acids which undergo rapid oxidation under normal storage conditions. Rice bran that has turned rancid has markedly reduced feed value. Rice bran has a higher protein content than the grain. It is also fairly high in fibre, thus limiting its use in fish feeds. Often, rice bran is mixed with rice polishings at the mill and sold as rice bran. Adulteration with hulls lowers its feeding value considerably. Good quality pellets can be made from feeds containing unextracted rice bran.
Oil extracted rice bran is almost totally devoid of oil. It is the type of rice bran favoured by feed mills because of its longer shelf-life. Its protein content is somewhat higher than fresh rice bran while its energy content is lower. Pelleted feed containing a high proportion of de-oiled rice bran are not very water-stable. This is because of the water absorption characteristics of fibre, which will be fairly high in such feed.
Where available, rice bran has been successfully used in compound fish feeds for both warm as well as cold water species.
Rice polishings
Rice polishings are produced during the scouring of rice after the bran has been removed. The material, therefore, contains a higher proportion of starch but is lower in protein and fibre content. It is not produced in as large quantities as rice bran, and, in most mills, is often mixed with the latter to give rice pollard. This, however, is usually sold as a grade of rice bran in most countries.
F.9 Sorghum (Sorghum bicolor and S. vulgare)
Sorghum is grown in warm areas where rainfall is inadequate for maize cropping. Its feed value is comparable to maize for most species of livestock. In Mexico where maize is normally reserved for human consumption, sorghum is used as a substitute in compound feed for trout and carp.
Sorghum contains tannic acid which decreases the availability of methionine in the diet. The amount of tannic acid in sorghum depends not only on the variety of sorghum but also on the conditions under which the crop is cultivated.
Sorghum is available in the majority of the countries covered in this report.
F.10 Wheat (Tritricum aestirum L.)
Although primarily a crop of temperate countries, wheat is also grown in parts of the tropics where there is a long period of relatively cool weather. Where it is not grown, it is imported for flour production. Wheat products are, therefore, available in practically every country.
Wheat, often used as an ingredient of compound fish feed in temperate countries is seldom used in the tropics because of its high cost. Damaged grain is, however, frequently available and when fed to fish is at least equivalent to maize in feed value.
Milling of wheat produces three major by-products, two of which are almost exclusively used as feed for livestock. These are: wheat bran and wheat middlings (or fine bran). The third, wheat germ, has higher commercial value as a food item for humans. Occasionally, damaged flour is also available as feed.
Wheat bran
Wheat bran is the primary coat of the wheat grain. It has a fairly high protein content. Because it is also high in fibre, it has a laxative effect when fed at excessive levels to animals. Such an effect, however, will be more difficult to determine in fish. Nevertheless, wheat bran has been successfully fed at fairly high levels to various species of fish without adverse effects on growth. Too much wheat bran in a formulation results in pellets with poor water stability due to the water absorption characteristics of fibre.
Wheat pollard
Wheat pollard is also known as fine bran. The material is less fibrous than wheat bran and has a higher feed value. Wheat pollard also contains a higher proportion of gluten which is a good natural binder for pelleted feed production.
F.11 Maize (Zea mays L.)
Maize is grown throughout the tropics and is the principal cereal grain employed in the feeding of livestock. Maize has also been fed successfully to fish. Whole grain has been used as a supplementary feed for tilapia and carp. However, maize is usually used in finely ground form as an energy component in compound feeds. While there is little published data on the digestibility of starchy components of cereal grains in general, studies on maize have indicated enhanced utilization after cooking. Normal pelleting processes only partially gelatinize the starch granules whereas total starch gelatinization occurs when the cereal is subject to high temperatures under moist conditions as in extrusion cooking. For channel catfish, such processing methods greatly increase the digestible energy value of maize, indicating the relatively low digestibility of raw starch for that species (Lovell, R.T., 1977).
Wet milling of maize is an industrial process for production of valuable components of the maize kernel. The main products of the process are: corn oil and starch (from which dextrins and glucose are obtained after further processing). The by-products include: maize gluten meal, maize bran and maize germ meal. Often all three are mixed together and sold as maize gluten feed. The protein content of maize gluten meal is comparable to that of soyabean meal. However, maize protein has a very low lysine content, and maize gluten meal or maize gluten feed should be used along with other lysine-rich protein sources (animal protein, or soyabean meal).
2.1.5 Oilcakes and oil meals
Oilcakes are by-products of the vegetable oil extraction industry. Although many varieties of seeds and fruits are cultivated primarily for their oil content, the protein-rich residues left after oil removal represent an immense resource upon which the world's production of animal protein for human consumption largely depends.
In the tropics and sub-tropics, soyabean, groundnut, and sesame (gingelly) are the principal oil seeds yielding protein-rich oilcake or meal after oil removal. Among oil-bearing fruits, the coconut and the oil palm nut are the most important sources.
Oil extraction from seed or fruit is carried out by two methods: by pressing, or with chemical solvents. The product obtained by pressing is termed oilcake and that by solvent extraction, oil meal.
Oilcake production is carried out by one of two mechanical processes. The first process involves the use of hydraulic presses that press out the oil from oil seed, or previously shredded dried fruit kernels (e.g., copra), wrapped in cloth. The resulting residue is in slab form. The presses used in this process are of relatively simple design and can be fabricated quite easily. They are, however, not very efficient. The second process involves the passage of seeds or fruit kernels along a screw auger confined in a steam-heated conically shaped jacket with the oilcake emerging at the smaller end. This process, known as the screw expeller process, is more efficient in removing oil. However, because of the high temperatures associated with the pressure applied, oilcakes produced by this method may come out burnt with subsequent lowering of feed value (especially with regard to protein digestibility in general and lysine availability in particular). Because of the high value of
edible oils relative to oilcake residues in developing countries, the screw expeller process is favoured over the less efficient hydraulic press process for mechanical expression of oil from seeds and fruit. However, in South Asia as well as in South East Asia, with the possible exception of Thailand, hydraulic-press extraction continues to be the principal method employed in the vegetable oil industry.
Oil extraction involving chemical solvents is of fairly recent origin. Solvent extraction plants are technically more sophisticated than the screw expeller mills and their operation is economical only for processing large quantities of oil seeds or fruits. These plants are found in most of the countries that came under this survey, although they are more prominent in some than in others. Where they are located, these plants are usually used for extraction of oil from soyabeans that are either grown domestically, or imported. The process is now extensively used for secondary recovery of oil in the palm oil industry in Malaysia as well.
The oil meal that is produced as a by-product of the solvent extraction process has a very low fat content; often less than 1 percent. Temperatures involved in the solvent extraction process are generally low compared to the expeller process. Because of this and because of the need to de-activate antinutritive factors generally present in some oil seeds, toasting of the extracted residues follows solvent recovery. Due to the relatively mild treatment given to oil meals, these products have a comparatively higher feed value than expeller cakes. The lower residual oil content in an oil meal also gives it a higher protein content compared to a similar product obtained by the screw expeller process.
G.3 Groundnut (Arachis hypogaea L.)
Groundnut oilcake is a safe feed for fish. It has been demonstrated in India that diets consisting of 50 percent of the material as the principal protein source can be used in complete feeding of carps. Its high polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) content also makes further addition of fats to such diets unnecessary. Because groundnut protein is especially low in methionine, the oilcake should be used with methionine-rich protein supplements or with synthetic methionine to achieve a proper balance of essential amino acids in the diet.
Quality in groundnut oilcake depends on whether the material is made from decorticated nuts. Removal of the fibrous hulls yields a better quality product with higher protein content. This will also depend on the amount of residual oil in the cake. In a few countries there are two varieties of groundnut oilcake: the mill produced and the 'country' produced. The former is an industrial product with a generally lower residual oil content (less than 7 percent), whereas the latter is produced on often a very small scale in villages and may contain as much as 13 percent oil.
The principal (and often very serious) contaminant of groundnut cake is aflatoxin. Aflatoxin is a group of highly toxic substances produced by the mould Aspergillus flavus. The most prominent of these are Aflatoxins B[1], B[2] and G[1]. The toxins are produced only when the mould exists as a pure culture. Aflatoxin is a hepatotoxin and mortality among afflicted animals and fish invariably results from severe liver damage. Small doses over an extended period of time produces cancer of the liver in humans. The half lethal-dosage, or LD[50] ^1^/ for trout weighing 100 g is 0.5 ppm in the diet. Improper post-harvest handling of nuts is usually blamed for the presence of aflatoxin in groundnut although pre-harvest infestation has also been documented. Aflatoxin is not destroyed by heat.
^1^/ LD[50], the dosage at which mortality among animals consuming the contaminated feed is 50 percent
G.12 Coconut (Cocos nucifera L.)
Coconut oilcake is widely available as a feed for fish and livestock in countries such as Sri Lanka, Indonesia and the Philippines. On the average, 1 000 nuts yield 60 kg oilcake (called poonac in South India and Sri Lanka). Compared with residues of oil seed extraction, coconut oilcake is low in protein and high in fibre. It is difficult to make a water-stable pelleted feed if the formulation contains too much coconut oilcake, as the material tends to absorb large amounts of water, causing the pellet to disintegrate. Poonac is commonly used as a supplementary feed in the pond culture of carp in Sri Lanka. It has also been included in the diet of milkfish in Indonesia (Hastings, W., 1975).
One of the main problems in its use is the tendency of coconut fat to turn rancid in storage. The effects of feeding rancid coconut oilcake to fish have not been studied, although short-chain free fatty acids in the diet have been shown to suppress growth in at least two species, the trout and channel catfish. However, rancid soyabean oil does not appear to affect the growth of carp.
G.15 African oil palm (Elaceis guineensis Jacq.)
The African oil palm has been successfully transplanted in South East Asia. In Malaysia especially, the oil palm has emerged as the major source of cooking oil. The residue of the palm kernel has a slightly lower protein content than coconut oilcake or meal but its feed value is not very different. Like coconut oil, palm kernel oil is low in PUFA's. Use of palm kernel oilcake in fish diets has not been documented although, like coconut oilcake, it should be used sparingly in diets for fish.
G.16 Soyabean (Glycine max (L) Merr.)
Soyabean is one of the world's most important oil seed crops. A legume, like the groundnut, soyabean has a relatively low oil content. Because of this, and because the seeds can be easily flaked by crushing, oil removal of flaked soyabean is carried out by solvent extraction. The residue is very low in fat (less than 1 percent) and high in protein. Decorticated soyabean meal may contain up to 55 percent protein.
Soyabean meal is a good source of essential amino acids (EAA) and is one of very few plant sources rich in lysine. In recent years, soyabean meal has been increasingly used as a substitute for more expensive fish meal in compound fish feeds. Soyabean meal has a relatively low methionine content which can be corrected by addition of synthetic forms of the amino acid in the feed. Anti-nutritive factors, principally urease and trypsin inhibitor present in the raw bean are usually destroyed by heat during the oil extraction process.
Full-fat soyabean processed under high pressure has recently been successfully used as a complete substitute for fish meal in the diets of both warm-water (catfish) as well as cold-water (trout) species (Brandt, T.M., 1979; Reinitz, G.L. et al., 1978). The high PUFA content in full-fat soyabean makes supplementing with extraneous PUFA's unnecessary.
Considerable work has been carried out on the extent to which processed soyabean products can replace fish meal as a protein source in fish diets. While such replacement can be total for carp without effect on growth (Viola, S. et al., 1981) similar replacement in diets for trout resulted in slower growth and poorer feed conversion (Koops, H. et al., 1976).
G.17 Cotton (Gossypium spp.)
Cottonseed per se is rarely used as feed. The seed is processed by first removing the lint and then cutting the tough hull to release the kernel. These operations are carried out by machines. The kernels are then crushed and the oil removed by mechanical means or by solvent extraction. In developing countries the former process is most common. Although cottonseed cake has a high protein content, it is rather lacking in lysine. For fish, therefore, it should be used in combination with other materials such as soyabean meal and animal protein sources.
An important factor limiting usage of cottonseed cake or meal in fish feed is its gossypol content. Gossypol is a toxic phenolic compound confined to the genus of cotton, Gossypium. It is the yellow pigment which constitutes 20 to 40 percent of the substances inside the glands of the seed kernel. The amount of gossypol is proportional to the number of glands present as it does not occur elsewhere in the seed. Cottonseed usually contains 0.4 to 1.7 percent gossypol. There have been few studies on the toxic effects of gossypol in fish although from animal studies, it has been shown to inhibit digestive enzymes. Studies with trout have shown that the toxin persisted in body tissues 12 months after its feeding to the fish. Much of the retained gossypol was found in the liver, kidneys and spleen (Lovell, R.T., 1981). On the other hand, glandless (gossypol-free) cottonseed meal ha? been used at up to 40 percent in diets for salmon without deleterious effect (Fowler, L.G. and J.L.
Banks, 1976).
Binding of gossypol in the oilcake or meal renders the product non-toxic. This can be achieved by treating with water and cooking with steam. The gossypol effect may be counteracted by the addition of ferrous sulphate, although the level of additions required has not been established for fish. The range for land species varies from 1 part ferrous sulphate to 1 part free gossypol for pigs to 4 parts to 1 part for poultry layers. Only free gossypol which can be extracted with aqueous acetone is physiologically harmful.
Although the amino acid profile of cottonseed protein is somewhat similar to that of soyabean, and superior to that of groundnut, the danger posed by high gossypol content makes it unwise to use cottonseed meal beyond 15 percent in fish diets. The rather high fibre content of cottonseed meal also restricts its use.
Cottonseed meal is available in limited quantities in the majority of the countries surveyed, except in Egypt and India, where there are large annual crops of cotton and the feedstuff is the principal protein source for feeds. Cottonseed meal is generally cheaper than soyabean meal.
G.19 Sunflower (Helianthus annuus L.)
Sunflower is a fast-growing cash crop grown primarily for its oil. The leaves and stems of the plant, at two months, are rich in protein and low in fibre and are suitable as feed for fish. There are no known phytotoxins present in the sunflower plant.
Sunflower seed cake made from dehulled seeds has a fairly high protein content. It is also richer in the sulphur-amino acids than soyabean meal although its lysine content is much lower. Sunflower seed meal has been shown to be a good substitute for fish meal in diets for tilapia (Jackson, A.J., B.S. Copper and A.J. Matty, 1982)
G.20 Para rubber (Herea brasiliensis Muell, Arg.)
The seed of the rubber tree has only been exploited recently as a protein source for animal feeding. The release of prussic (hydrocyanic) acid in raw rubber seeds is prevented by wet-heat processing, which destroys the enzyme that produces it from a glucoside present in the seed. The high temperature associated with expeller cake manufacture also destroys the enzymes.
Decorticated rubber seed oilcake has a composition somewhat similar to coconut oilcake. No data on its amino acid composition is available. Use of rubber seed oilcake in fish feeds has not been documented although it appears that its use will be safe at or below the level used in chicken feeds (between 10-15 percent of the diet).
Rubber seed oilcake is available in rubber producing countries such as Brazil, Sri Lanka, India (southern states), and the South East Asian countries.
G.23 Linseed (Linum usitatissimum L.)
Linseed, or flax, is grown for the production of fibre and linseed oil - a drying oil used widely in paints. The oilcake has a protein content comparable to cottonseed oilcake but is considerably richer in methionine. Linseed cake, like rubber-seed oilcake, contains an enzyme that releases prussic acid from a glucoside present in the seed. Normal processing of the seed for oil removal destroys this enzyme. However, it contains other toxins of unknown identity that cause depressed growth in poultry, even when fed at low levels (3 percent of the diet). The toxin may have a more pronounced effect on fish since the requirement for pyridoxine, a B-vitamin very much associated with high-protein diets, appears to be greatly increased in rations containing linseed oilcake.
Linseed oilcake is available in considerable quantities in India where it is safely fed to cattle and in lesser quantities in Thailand. Use of the material in compound fish feed in these countries has not been documented, however.
G.33 Sesame, or gingelly (Sesamum indicum L.)
After the extraction of oil from sesame seeds, a valuable high-protein feed is obtained. The oilcake is highly acceptable to livestock as well as fish. Experiments on the rohu (Labeo rohita) in India have shown that up to 50 percent of gingelly oilcake may be fed in a complete diet with good results.
Although sesame oilcake usually has a higher fibre content than groundnut oilcake, the protein content of both feedstuffs are about the same. Furthermore, sesame oilcake is very rich in methionine (in fact, the richest among oilcakes and meals). Its lysine content, on the other hand, is lower than that of groundnut oilcake. Sesame oilcake and groundnut oilcake used in combination can substitute for the more expensive animal proteins such as meat meal or fish meal. Effects of excessive use of sesame oilcake has not been studied in fish although in conventional livestock, it has been shown to have a laxative effect. Also because of its high phytic acid content, supplemental phosphorus will also be required.
Sesame oilcake is available in fairly large quantities in India, Thailand and Venezuela, and prices are generally lower than soyabean meal but higher than cottonseed meal or groundnut oilcake.
2.1.6 Feeds of animal origin
One distinguishing characteristic of feedstuffs of animal origin is their high protein quality. Animal proteins are rich in essential amino acids (EAA's), especially lysine and methionine that are limiting in most plant proteins. Animal proteins are also rich in trace minerals, vitamins and identified growth factors (UGF). The presence of certain animal proteins, particularly fish meal, even in small amounts, can greatly improve the nutritional value of the entire diet. Their availability among the countries surveyed varies. Nevertheless, they are of great importance as ingredients in fish diets.
H.1 Animal protein supplements (meat meals and raw slaughterhouse waste)
Animal protein supplements, or meat meals, are the principal by-products of animal slaughterhouses. They include meat scraps and trimmings after the fat has been removed during the rendering process, as well as internal organs of slaughtered animals. Their availability as feed depends in part on the food habits of the human population. Animal rendering on a commercial scale is more frequently practised in countries where animal slaughter is stringently regulated and where the internal organs of animals are not valued as human foods.
The quality of meat meal as a protein supplement depends on its production process as well as raw material used. Good quality meat meal is low in rat and mineral content. Meat meal is frequently used as an animal protein source in compound fish feed manufacture although its feed value is generally considered inferior to that of soyabean meal and fish meal (Fowler, L.G. and J.L. Banks, 1976). Fats in meat meal although poor in the PUFA's required by cold water species, are good energy sources for both carp and rainbow trout. (Watanabe, T., 1982).
Meat meal is imported by the majority of the countries covered in this survey to augment local supplies to meet the needs of the feed milling industry. Only Mexico and Venezuela produce meat meal on a commercial scale. In others, raw animal slaughterhouse waste is available instead. Such wastes consist mainly of animal entrails unfit for human consumption. The organs usually involved are livers, kidneys, hearts, lungs and digestive tracts. The entrails of animals have a higher feed value than meat meal; their protein content as well as protein quality are generally higher. However, because of their high water content slaughterhouse wastes are best used in combination with dry feed ingredients to make moist feeds. Heat processing may be necessary and the material used immediately if refrigeration facilities are not available.
Because meat meal is usually an imported item, its cost is usually high. Slaughterhouse waste, on the other hand, is inexpensive when available.
H.2 Blood
Animal blood is obtainable in most areas from abattoirs. In many village abattoirs, it is merely discarded.
Animal blood may be used fresh, or processed into blood meal before using. Although dried blood has a high-protein content and is highly digestible, its amino acid content is not as well balanced as that of muscle tissue.
Fresh blood may be used to enrich commonly available feedstuffs such as rice bran and wheat bran in fish diets. The bran also soaks up the excess moisture in the production of moist pelleted feed. In combination with rumen contents, fresh bovine blood has successfully substituted for fish meal in channel catfish diets (Reece, D.L. and D.E. Wesley, 1975).
Because animal blood is widely available in most countries, often at little or no cost, its use in aquaculture diets can help lower feed cost. Blood meal is superior to meat meal in test-diets for salmon (Fowler, L.G. and J.L. Banks, 1976).
H.4 Bone meals
Bone meals are made by heat processing of animal bones followed by grinding to produce a fine powder. Contrary to common belief, bone meal is not all calcium and phosphorus. Depending on the processing method employed, bone meal can contain up to 36 percent protein. Much of this protein is, however, of low quality since it is mainly collagen, the substance extracted industrially from bones to produce gelatin and glue.
With the development of fish diets containing ever-decreasing content of animal protein such as fish meal and meat meal, bone meal may become more prominant as a dietary source of calcium and phosphorus.
H.11 Hydrolyzed poultry feather meal
Hydrolyzed poultry feather meal is more commonly used as a nitrogen source in ruminant feeding. This is due mainly to its deficiency in most of the EAA's, thus making it unsuitable as a source of animal protein for other livestock. Its protein is predominantly keratin, very rich in the non-EAA cystine (as high as 25 percent). Unless properly hydrolyzed, feather meal is not very digestible for non-ruminants. Fish diets will not be improved by its inclusion unless they already contain other high quality protein sources.
Feather meal is available in those countries that have a highly developed and integrated poultry industry. Among the countries surveyed, only Venezuela, Mexico and Thailand appear to produce it on an industrial scale. Even so, the quantities available are quite limited. Imported feather meal is usually more costly compared to other animal proteins.
H.16 Trash fish
By-catches of the fishing industry have traditionally been used as raw materials for fish meal production or as feed for livestock and fish. The composition of such landings vary with the geographic area where the fish are caught. In tropical waters in the Indo-Pacific region, the threadfin snapper (Lutianus nematophorus) Malaysia, and the silverbelly (Leiognathus splendens) India, Indonesia, Sri Lanka, are among the principal species caught (Disney, 1979; Disney and James, 1980).
Freshly landed trash fish have a high feed value. However, rapid deterioration in quality accompanied by loss of nutrients, particularly protein, occurs with time, unless the fish are frozen. Certain marine species also contain high levels of the enzyme thiaminase which is activated at post mortem. Thiaminase destroys thiamine, a B-vitamin otherwise present in considerable amounts in fish. Trash fish, when fed fresh, with or without prior cooking, are superior to fish meal in terms of protein content (expressed as percentage dry matter) and protein quality. When mixed and properly processed in correct proportions with less expensive but more readily available ingredients, such as rice bran, and with adequate supplementation of vitamins, trash fish make excellent diets for aquaculture. A major problem associated with feeding trash fish is maintenance of water quality. This can, however, be partially overcome by proper choice of the dry components, e.g. rice bran which absorb
the excess moisture and appropriate diet preparation methods to produce feeds that remain stable in water until consumed.
Trash fish in the fresh state are used most extensively for aquaculture in Thailand. The other countries with the exception of land-locked Nepal, also possess this resource, but have not utilized it to the same degree in aquaculture. Unlike most other ingredients, supply of trash fish is highly seasonal. When available, trash fish are considerably less expensive than fish meal.
H.17 Fish meal
Although fish meal production in countries such as Thailand and Peru is an industrial activity linked to world demand for this important feed commodity, in other developing countries it remains a way of utilizing surpluses and fish that cannot be sold for human consumption.
There are two principal ways of making fish meal. The first involves direct oven drying of whole fish and/or residues (the latter usually from canning operations). The product is then ground to produce what is known commercially as white fish meal. The second method involves the cooking of whole fish followed by pressing to remove the oil and finally grinding up of the press cake after it has been dried in a steam jacket. This process produces a dark coloured fish meal. Peruvian and Thai fish meal belong to the latter category. There is a notable difference between these two varieties. Whereas Peruvian fish meal is made from the main catch, usually of a single species, anchovy, Thai fish meal is derived from by-catch consisting of many species. The Peruvian product is therefore more consistent with regard to quality. Protein content of Peruvian fish meal is also higher - 65 percent compared to 50-60 percent for Thai fish meal.
Fish meal quality is also very much affected by the drying process. Some backyard fish meal factories in West Malaysia dry the processed fish over fire in concrete tubs. Although the meal is mechanically stirred during this operation, without proper supervision, over-cooking frequently occurs. The fish meal becomes very dark coloured, a sign of scorching of the product. On the east coast of India and in Sri Lanka, fish meal is usually made from sun-dried by-catch consisting mainly of silverbelly (Leiognathus splendens). Often the drying is not complete with the result that the product becomes infested with Salmonella bacteria. This contaminant poses a serious risk for users of sun-dried fish meal.
Another contaminant of fish meal is urea, sometimes added by unscrupulous merchants to give an otherwise inferior product a deceptively high crude protein content. Good quality fish meal should also contain no more than 2 percent salt added as a preservative before processing, and, if kept for long periods before use, should contain an anti-oxidant.
Fish meal remains an important but expensive ingredient in most fish and crustacean diets. It is especially rich in the EAA's lysine and methionine and minerals, and is highly digestible for fish. Its use appears limited only by high cost and availability.
Dry diets containing a high proportion of fish meal are difficult to pelletize.
H.20 Fish oil
Fish oil is a by-product of fish meal production. It is rich in vitamins A and D, and polyunsaturated fatty acids that are required by fish. Although widely used to supply these nutrients in fish diets in Western countries, fish oil is seldom used in commercial fish feed manufacture in developing countries. The cost of fish oil depends in part on food habits of the human population. In some countries, the oil from fish meal production is merely discarded.
H.22 Fish silage
Fish silage has not come into widespread use as a feed for fish. Although developed upon the need for a less expensive method for preserving trash fish, it is also a cheaper alternative to fish meal for use in aquaculture diets. It is used in commercial salmon farming in Denmark and Norway and in experiments in developing countries involving warm-water species, viz the snake-head in Thailand, and the carp in Indonesia.
Fish silage can be prepared in a variety of ways. These include fish/carbohydrate fermentation, and ensiling with mineral and/or organic acids (Raa, J. and Gildberg, A., in press).
When properly prepared, fish silage contains practically all the nutrients of the raw fish. If an extraneous energy source, e.g. rice bran, is added during processing, as is required in naturally fermented silage, the feed value of the added component is also enhanced.
Efforts so far in the use for fish silage in Indo-Pacific region have been for feeding poultry and pigs. A project at the FAO Regional Lead Centre for Aquaculture in Thailand (RLCT), studies the effects of fish-carbohydrate silage on the growth of snake-head. The silage, in semi-moist form, was extruded into pellets before feeding. Preliminary results showed growth comparable with that achieved with fish meal.
Although more costly to use than trash fish, fish silage is less expensive than fish meal. The main advantage it has over trash fish is its comparatively long shelf-life. Another desirable aspect of fish silage as an ingredient for moist pellet production is its good binding properties.
H.23 Shrimp meal
Shrimp meal is made from freezing-plant waste (heads and scales) or from whole shrimps not suitable for human consumption. The material is first dried in the sun or in an oven and then ground. Because shrimp exoskeleton is primarily chitin, an indigestible nitrogen-containing homopolysaccharide, the true protein content of shrimp meal made from freezing-plant wastes is only 50 percent of the value obtained by proximate analysis. This high content of indigestible matter restricts its use to less than 25 percent in aquaculture diets (Randall Robinette, H. and A.S. Dearing, 1978; Meyers, S.P., 1981), Shrimp meal is especially rich in choline, a B-vitamin.
Because crustacea also contain carotenoid pigments, shrimp meal has long been used in trout and salmon diets to improve flesh colouration in the fish. Up to 15 percent in the diet has been used for this purpose. The exoskeleton of shrimp is tough. Unless finely ground, shrimp meal added in large amounts to the diet may result in difficulty in obtaining good quality pellets.
Shrimp meal, where available, is usually far less expensive than fish meal.
H.26 Silkworm pupae and other insect larvae
Available in quantity only in India and Thailand ^1^/, silkworm pupae are rich in nutrients. When fed fresh they are a good source of protein as well as fats (especially unsaturated fatty acids). The meal, from which the fat has been extracted, has been used with good results as a fish meal substitute in experimental diets for carp (Hickling, C.F., 1962). Due to the high content of chitin in silkworm pupae, its actual protein value is only 75 percent of the value obtained by proximate analysis.
^1^/ Outside the surveyed countries, China and Japan are major producers
Fly larvae grown on animal wastes have also been successfully used as a protein source in diets for tilapia and channel catfish (Bondari, K. and D.C. Sheppard, 1981).
H.28 Milk by-products
Milk by-products such as milk powder, due to their high cost, are seldom used in preparing fish feed, although the milk protein, casein, is widely used in purified diets for experimental purposes. Nevertheless, quite often milk powder and even cheese become available as surplus or damaged items unsuitable for human consumption. Whey powder, on the other hand, is more commonly available as stock feed. The latter is a residue from the manufacture of cheese. In the Indian subcontinent, a high protein waste product is also obtainable from the refining of ghee.
Whey and dairy-processing wastes have been successfully used at the 10 percent level in diets for rainbow trout (Rumsey, G.L. et al., 1981). Their incorporation into diets also improve pellet quality.
2.1.7 Miscellaneous feedstuffs
Apart from the ingredients described in the preceding sections, there are also feed materials which do not quite fit into the categories mentioned above in this section. Many of these have been loosely termed 'non-conventional' feedstuffs. Although materials such as leaf protein concentrate (LPC) and some single cell proteins (SCP) can be included among them, others such as molasses and yeast have long been among common ingredients used in the formulation of feeds for livestock and fish. The availability of these miscellaneous feedstuffs varies from country to country, but quantities presently involved are small. Nevertheless, these unconventional sources of feed proteins are expected to become increasingly important in the future.
I.2 Leaf protein concentrate, LPC
Leaf protein concentrate is produced by first grinding the plant and then separating the juice by pressing. The juice, which contains the dissolved protein, is then coagulated by heating. The curd obtained is removed and dried.
The machinery required for large-scale production of LPC is expensive; the minimum economical output being 10 tons of leaf protein per hour. Smaller units are being designed for use at the village level.
Dried LPC has a protein content somewhat lower than that of soyabean meal. Its protein quality, on the other hand, is higher than that of the latter but lower than that of fish meal. Problems have been encountered in its use in feeding poultry and pigs. LPC made from the genera Leucaena and mimosa contain toxic mimosine, a cyclic amino acid. Although few studies have been conducted with fish, it is presumed that LPC made from alfalfa and other legumes may be safely used. With other sources, the presence of toxins other than mimosine, viz., haemaglutinins, glucosides, saponins, etc., have to be taken into account. Leaf protein concentrates can be produced from the leaves of tropical legumes such as the Acacia and Desmodium species, and from grasses. Leaf protein concentrate from rye grass used at levels of up to 48 percent of total dietary protein have been successfully tested on carp and trout (Ogino, C., C.B. Cowey and J. Y. Chiou, 1978).
High processing cost of juice extraction is a major constraint in wider use of LPC in compound feeds. However, where high quality protein sources such as fish meal and soyabean meal are not available or are prohibitively expensive, LPC may be an acceptable substitute. The raw juice that is pressed out can be used directly by blending with other dry components, and the entire mixture subjected to heat treatment before extrusion into moist pellets. Heat processing will not only destroy most of the toxins and anti-nutritive factors present in the raw juice, but will also lead to production of pellets with good water stability since the soluble protein in LPC coagulates on heating.
I.7 Cane molasses
Refining of cane sugar produces a by-product known as blackstrap molasses. This highly viscous (specific gravity 80-85°C Brix) material is difficult to handle at temperatures below 30°C. Therefore, blackstrap molasses is normally diluted with water to lower the specific gravity to about 79.5° Brix so that it may be more easily transferred by pumping.
Cane molasses is predominantly sugar of which roughly half is sucrose and the other half reducing sugars. Its principal use in the production of compound feed for poultry and livestock is as a dietary energy source, although it also enhances acceptance of the feed. Its incorporation into pelleted feed has a positive effect on the physical properties of the pellets.
Use of molasses in compound fish feed has not been thoroughly investigated. Presumably, its level of usage should not exceed 5 percent of the dry diet, considering its established laxative effect (when used beyond 5 percent for poultry and 15 percent for pigs).
Because of its relative cheapness and wide availability in the tropics, molasses is a good partial replacement for the more expensive cereal grains as an energy source.
Because molasses ferments rapidly it may also be added in small quantities along with rice bran to trash fish in the production of fish silage.
I.12 Brewer's spent grains
Brewer's spent grains, or brewery waste, as they are often termed, are residues from the initial breakdown of starch to fermentable sugars in beer manufacture. Unless dried, the fresh material, even after pressing, contains a very high water content. Ordinarily, the wet material may be kept for up to two weeks at ambient temperature without spoilage. If longer storage is desired, it should be ensiled or dried, the latter process usually preferred by large breweries.
Fresh brewer's grains are fairly rich in protein and digestible carbohydrates. The material, if mixed with other feedstuffs before feeding, should first be boiled to deactivate enzymes that may otherwise act on carbohydrates to produce alcohol, and then organic acids.
Raw brewery waste is available in considerable quantities in large urban areas of most countries, including those covered in this survey. It is usually discarded by the breweries and, therefore, like fresh animal blood from abattoirs, obtainable at little or no cost. Levels of up to 50 percent in the diet have been successfully fed to tilapia in Africa.
I.14 Brewer's yeast
Brewer's yeast is obtained as a residue after the fermentation process in beer production. The quantities recovered are not as great as brewer's grains, but the material has a higher feed value and contains more than twice as much protein on a dry weight basis. The yeast is usually dried over a steam heated drum. Raw brewer's yeast should also be boiled before use in fish feed to de-activate the enzymes present. Yeast is a rich source of B-vitamins (excepting vitamin B[12]) but low in calcium. Due to its high cost, it is seldom used at levels beyond 5 percent of the total diet.
I.15 Grain distiller's by-products
Distillery wastes are obtained from the manufacture of alcoholic spirits. Their composition depends upon the type of grain used, viz., maize, sorghum, wheat or rice. Two processes are employed in making alcoholic spirits. The first is known as the British process which involves the two basic steps of grain conversion, followed by separation of spent grains, fermentation of sugars to alcohol and final distillation of the product. This process yields two products: distiller's grains, and distiller's solubles (including yeast). The other process, known as the American process, does not involve separation of spent grains before the fermentation process and yields only one product that includes both the spent grains and yeast.
Distiller's by-products have a lower fibre content than brewery waste. The material, when added to rations, appears to stimulate growth in poultry and livestock. The effect has been attributed to unidentified growth factors believed to be present in the material. Due to its lower availability and higher feed value, distillery wastes are usually more expensive than brewery wastes. The material is used whenever available at low levels in compound fish feed (Reece, D.L. and D.E. Wesley, 1975).
I.17 Fats
Fish have a relatively high requirement for lipids that serve as a source of poly-unsatured fatty acid and as an energy source. Added fats have also been shown to improve the overall digestibility of fish diets. Other effects of addition of fats in manufactured diets are prolongation of pelleting die life and reduction of dustiness during milling operations.
Fats from a variety of sources are available in the tropics. These sources include: animal fats, fish oils, vegetable oils and soapstocks. Certain fats become rancid rapidly unless anti-oxidants are added. The rate and degree of rancidity occurring in untreated fats depend on its PUFA composition. Fish oils and most raw vegetable fats have a high degree of unsaturation and anti-oxidants are normally added during the refining of such fats. The digestibility of hydrogenated (hardened) fats made from both fish oils and beef tallows for carp and trout has been shown to depend on the melting point of the fat. Hydrogenated fat with m.p. exceeding 40°C is poorly digested (Takenchi, T., T. Watanabe and C. Ogino, 1979).
Processed animal fats are not ordinarily available in the tropics. On the other hand, there is an abundance of vegetable oils and soapstocks. Most common are oils from coconut, soyabeans, groundnut and palm nut. Even then, these are usually refined for human consumption, and with the exception of crude palm oil, are too expensive to use in feeds. Whenever available, however, their inclusion enhances the feed value of fish diets significantly.
Soapstocks are by-products of the edible oil refining industry. They constitute the non-fat residues of crude oil plus the alkaline salts of free fatty acids that are removed in the refining process. Soapstocks can be fed safely to fish at up to 5 percent of the total diet without adverse effects.
The following gives the PUFA content of fats from a wide variety of animal and plant sources.
Fat
% PUFA
Animal or fish source
Lard
Beef tallow
Cod, Atlantic
Herring, Atlantic
Rainbow trout
Common carp
Shrimp
Vegetable source
Rice
Maize
Wheat
Groundnut
Sesame
Cottonseed
Soyabean
Sunflower
Safflower
Palm
Olive
Coconut
Using this information together with lipid content of ingredients provided in Table 1, one could determine if a certain diet is likely to be deficient in polyunsaturated fatty acids.
I.18 Bacterial protein
Bacterial protein is among the single-celled proteins (SCP) that have received increasing attention in recent years. Methanomonas spp. are cultured in an aqueous suspension containing mineral salts and a nitrogen source. A mixture of methane and air is bubbled continuously through the suspension. The harvest of bacteria, usually one every three days, has a high protein content, a good portion of which is nucleo-protein. Although its production may be feasible in countries which have a surplus of methane, the cost of the product is presently high (Anonymous, 1982). Studies on its use in fish feed are not conclusive although there are indications that it is superior to other SCP such as yeast and algae (Atack, T.H., K. Jauncey and A.J. Matty, 1979; Kanshik, S.J. and P. Luquet, 1980).
I.19 Algae
The cultivation of micro-algae as food or feed is not new. The production of algal blooms and benthic algal complexes through fertilization and water management have been practised in Asia for long. Certain species of Chlorella, Scenedesmus and Spirulina have been established as excellent feed for larvae of many cultured species of fish (Rumsey, G.L. et al., 1981). Large-scale mono culture of these SCP's, however, involves technology that is still at a developmental stage. Moderate scale production at the rural level employing animal (particularly pig) manure has been shown to be feasible. The harvested product, when dried, is non-toxic and can be used to supply practically all the protein required without ill effect, although supplementing lysine (for Chlorella) or methionine (for Scenedesmus and Spirulina) may be necessary. Scenedesmus obliquus has been tested quite extensively in carp and found to be a good substitute for fish meal (Meske, Ch. and E. Pfeffer, 1978,
1978a).
I.20 Yeast
The most commonly used and widely available SCP for animal feeding is torula yeast (Candida utilis). This is cultured on substrates comprising a variety of industrial wastes, including: molasses, dried citrus pulp, or sulphite liquor from the wood pulp and paper industries. The harvested yeast is usually dried over steam-heated drum rollers. More recently, paraffin-grown yeasts have been produced in small quantities for evaluation as food for both livestock and humans. Feedstock for production of such yeasts are diesel oil or n-alkanes.
Feed-grade yeast have been shown to be excellent substitutes for fish meal at low levels in diets for both fish and livestock. The amount of substitution depends upon the type of yeast and the manner in which it is produced. In general, yeasts are relatively low in methionine. Proper supplementation with synthetic sources of the amino acid could permit yeast to be the only protein source in the diet. On the whole, petroleum yeasts (Candida lipolytica) have higher feeding value than yeasts made from molasses (C. utilis). Yeasts, like bacterial proteins, are rich in nucleic acids which limit its use as food for humans. Whether this applies also to fish has not yet been determined.
Yeasts from molasses and other industrial wastes are less costly to produce than paraffin-grown yeasts. Nevertheless, due to the high cost of fuel for drying, yeasts as a class of feedstuffs, are still more expensive to use than other protein supplements of vegetable origin. However, this could change in the future.
2.2 Composition of feedstuffs
The composition of the feedstuffs discussed are presented in Table 1. The data have been drawn from sources as noted, including the results of actual analysis at the Regional Aquaculture Lead Centre in India (RLCI). Where values of proximate analysis of particular ingredients from the corresponding countries are not available, published values for comparable materials available in other countries have been substituted. Similarly, where amino acid values for ingredients are not available, computations have been made, based on established values for comparable materials.
Digestible energy values of most feedstuffs have not been established for fish. However, they can be approximated by using the following energy values for the respective nutrients:
Nutrient
Estimated Digestible Energy
(kilo calories/g)
Carbohydrate (non-legumes)
Carbohydrates (legumes)
Proteins (animal)
Proteins (plant)
Fats
It will be noted that 'food quotient' values, derived mainly from traditional feeding practices, and frequently employed to compare the value of individual feedstuffs in supplementary feeding of fish, have been omitted in the present consideration. Basically it is an expression of feed conversion ratio. As such, it is not surprising that food quotient values range widely. For instance, the food quotients for maize and groundnut cake are 4 to 6 and 2 to 4, respectively. Even fish meal has a quotient ranging from 1.5 to 3.0.
Food quotient values reflect not only the nutrient composition of individual feedstuffs, but also the contribution, if any, of natural foods present in the culture medium in particular situations. Fish, like all animals, require diets containing nutrients in proper balance. A deficiency in one essential nutrient may affect the absorption and utilization of others, and an excess may also have the same undesirable effects. Supplementary feeding with individual feed ingredients is usually carried out without consideration of the quality of other foods present in the culture medium and can, therefore, be wasteful.
The Feed Code is an alpha-numeric term employed by FAO for generic classification and identification of feedstuffs.
The abbreviations employed are as follows:
DM
Dry matter
CP
Crude protein
EE
Ether extract
CF
Crude fibre
NFE
Nitrogen free extract
Ca
Calcium
P
Total phosphorus
Table 1 Composition of Feedstuffs
2.3 Feed quality
2.3.1 Protein quality
2.3.2 Anti-nutritional and toxic factors
The nutritive value of an aquaculture diet depends not only upon proper balance of nutrients according to requirements, but also on it being free from anti-nutritive factors that might have been present in the ingredients and remain active after processing. In the search for less expensive substitutes for animal protein, certain plant proteins, particularly those belonging to the Leguminosae family, have emerged as the most promising. These new protein sources are especially important because they are widely available in the tropics. Plant proteins, however, are usually low in certain essential amino acids which are necessary for rapid growth in animals, including fish. Leguminous plants are also known to contain natural substances that, unless removed or deactivated, are either toxic to the consuming animal or interfere with its normal digestive processes. Less is known about toxic factors in microbial proteins.
This section looks at the nutritional quality of some plant and single-celled proteins that are presently considered for use as substitutes for animal protein sources in formulation of diets in aquaculture.
2.3.1 Protein quality
It has been determined from human as well as animal studies that chicken eggs are the richest and best source of food protein. Such being the case, egg protein has been used as a standard against which other food proteins are compared. Although the basis for applying this standard to fish feeds has not been established, it is generally recognized that, based on recently completed work involving feeding different protein sources to fish, amino acid content rather than source determines the nutritive value of protein feeds. The egg standard, therefore, can be applied to aquaculture diets for all practical purposes.
There are many ways of expressing protein quality of a feed. One of these is by comparing its essential amino acid content with that of whole egg. This gives a "chemical score" for the feed. In practice, this would first require amino acid analysis of the feed.
Table 2 gives the individual amino acid scores of a variety of plant proteins. The values of some animal proteins, including fish meal, have been included for comparison. The "protein score" as indicated in the last column is a composite score of six essential amino acids which are critical for growth in animals: isoleucine, leucine, lysine, the sulphur-amino acids cystine and methionine, phenylalanine and valine. Although the other amino acids listed, arginine, histidine, threonine and tryptophan, are also classified as essential, their impact on growth is not as great as the others.
With few exceptions, plant proteins are especially deficient in the sulphur amino acids. These amino acids are also limiting in meat meal. The leguminous seeds, quite surprisingly, are relatively rich in lysine, the amino acid that is most often the first to be limiting in compound feed. Meat meal is also limiting in isoleucine, a branch-chain amino acid. This, together with a low content of methionine, makes meat meal a rather poor quality protein source, despite its animal origin.
From the "score" column, it will be noted that the legumes and single-cell proteins range in the 70's, making them almost comparable to fish meal, which has a score of 79. Indeed, fish meal has been successfully replaced by soyabean meal and yeast after proper supplementation with methionine. Of particular interest is the high score of the beans (mung and red) which, although having comparatively low protein content, hold promise as substitutes for fish meal as well. Unlike other plant proteins, sesame and palm kernel proteins are surprisingly rich in the sulphur amino acids. Sesame oilcake, because of its high overall protein content, is especially valuable as a natural source of supplement for these amino acids. When used with soyabean meal, it would help achieve the proper balance of sulphur amino acids and lysine in the diet.
Table 2 Limiting amino acids and chemical score of essential amino acid content of selected feed proteins ^1^/
^1^/ Scores based on comparison with whole egg protein of the following amino acid composition (percentage of protein): arginine, 6.7; cystine, 2.2; histidine, 2.7; isolercine, 7.0; leucine, 8.5; lysine, 6.8; methionine, 3.3; phenylalanine, 5.4; threonine, 5.5; tryptophan, 1.9; and valine, 8.2.
2.3.2 Anti-nutritional and toxic factors
The seeds of legumes and other plants contain a wide variety of toxic and potentially toxic substances (Liener, I.E., 1978; American Chemical Society, 1969). These include: trypsin inhibitors, phytohaemagglutinins, goitrogens, cyanogenetic glycosides, anti-vitamin factors, and toxic amino acids. The effects of most of these toxins have not been described in fish,
Protease Inhibitors
The most commonly encountered class of feed toxins of plant origin are the protease inhibitors. Most well known among these is the trypsin inhibitor occurring in raw legume seeds, particularly soyabean. The mode of action of trypsin inhibitor has not been studied in fish. In other laboratory animals, it is believed to lead to pancreatic hypertrophy with concommittant loss of endogenous protein secreted by the pancreas. This protein is largely made up of cystine-rich pancreatic enzymes. Trypsin inhibitors were first described in soyabean, but are also known to be present in groundnut and most other leguminous seeds.
Trypsin inhibitors are heat labile. The degree of deactivation of the toxin depends upon the applied temperature, duration of heating, particle size and moisture conditions. Soyabean trypsin inhibitors are totally deactivated by moist heat at 100°C for 15-20 minutes.
Overnight soaking or germination of the beans, while bringing about improvement in their nutritive value, does not destroy the trypsin inhibitors.
Phytohaemagglutinins
These toxins, which cause red blood cells to agglutinate, are present in almost all legume seeds. The potency of the toxin, however, varies from species to species, with those of Phaseolus vulgaris among the most potent. Phytohaemagglutinins are also heat labile, but care should be taken to ensure that adequate heat (normal boiling temperature) is applied.
Goitrogens
Goitrogen effects have only been demonstrated in two legume seeds, the soyabean and the groundnut. The symptom in the rat and chick is enlargement of the thyroid gland. Goitrogens are destroyed by heat.
Cyanogenetic glycosides
Cassava and sorghum are the two feeds most often associated with cyanide poisoning in livestock. Other feeds are linseed meal and certain legume seeds, including the lima bean, the kidney bean, the Bengal gram and the red gram. Cooking in water not only destroys the enzymes responsible for cyanide release, but also volatilizes the HCN released.
Antivitamin factors
Antivitamin D and antivitamin E factors are known to be present in raw soyabeans and raw kidney beans, respectively. These anti-nutritive factors are destroyed by heat.
Toxic amino acids
Ipil ipil (Leucaena leucocephala), a tropical legume exploited as a feed for chicken and livestock, contains a cyclic amino acid, mimosine, which is toxic at high levels. The amino acid is stable to heat and its permanence in the leaf limits use of ipil ipil to less than 20 percent of the diet for most classes of livestock.
<section>4</section>
3.0 FEED SUPPLIES
3.1 Egypt
3.2 India
3.3 Malaysia
3.4 Mexico
3.5 Nepal
3.6 Nigeria
3.7 The Philippines
3.8 Sri Lanka
3.9 Thailand
3.10 Tunisia
3.11 Venezuela
3.12 Feed ingredient prices
Present demand for feedstuffs among the countries covered in the present report comes predominantly from domestic livestock and poultry industries. Only in a few of these countries, most notably Thailand, is intensive aquaculture of a large enough scale to represent a factor in the overall demand for feed materials. Even in that country, the effects on supplies are felt only in those localities where aquaculture activity is concentrated. To some extent this is true also for semi-intensive carp polyculture in the eastern states of West Bengal and Orissa in India.
Demand for feedstuffs is met by domestic production and/or imports. Except for India, imports continue to play an important role in meeting these demands which are still increasing as a result of expansions of domestic livestock and poultry industries. This dependency on expensive imported materials, especially protein-rich feed supplements such as fish meal and soyabean meal, is viewed as one of the major constraints for aquaculture development.
The present survey suggests a fairly diverse feed supply pattern among different countries. Availability of indigenous sources of feed raw materials, especially of oil seed cakes and meals, cereal by-products and rendering products, such as meat meal and fish meal, is dependent not only on overall agricultural production of the particular country, but also on the degree of industrialization in that country and its demand for refined food products. Essentially all the so-called "conventional" feed raw materials, with the exception of feed grains, are industrial by-products.
While much of the information on usage of feed materials reported herein had been obtained first hand during the course of the survey, most of the information on production, especially that concerning mill by-products, was derived from annual crop production figures published by FAO (FAO 1981 Production Yearbook).
Plant sources constitute the major feed resource in the countries surveyed. These include: basic grains, oil bearing seeds and nuts and their mill by-products, and certain forage crops. Such materials are already heavily utilized by the livestock industry in those countries.
Potential feed resources are animal and crop residues which are generally considered as waste materials. The utilization of such materials as feed has been low due to availability of more convenient alternatives. Waste materials include grain, vegetable and fruit wastes from collection and sorting points as well as from breweries and canneries, and slaughterhouse wastes, which in many countries are often discarded. Crop and animal residues provide a feed reserve that may play an increasingly important role in future aquaculture production. Especially in countries where supplies of grains and concentrates are limited, they can be used as substitutes or can contribute to overall supply of feed materials. However, immediate large-scale replacement of conventional feed ingredients by agricultural and industrial waste products, may not be feasible. The availability of such materials are usually localized and they are not easy to use efficiently. Many have not been evaluated for
use in feeding fish, especially as components in balanced aquaculture diets.
3.1 Egypt
The livestock industry in Egypt is undergoing a period of rapid expansion. This places a severe strain on supplies of feedstuffs which traditionally are based on the country's grain and cotton crops.
Maize is the biggest crop with an estimated annual production of about 3 million tonnes. Only a small fraction of this is available as feed. The other major grain crop is rice (2.5 million tonnes) which contributes nearly 400 000 tonnes of feed material in the form of bran and polishings. A slightly smaller harvest of wheat (2 million t) also contributes to the overall feed resource. Assuming that 20 percent of the wheat is milled for flour, this means about 100 000 t of bran and pollard being available as feed.
Production of cottonseed cake and meal is believed to be very large. There are no exact estimates but assuming an annual production of 150 000 t of cottonseed oil, almost 0.5 million t of cottonseed meal must be available each year.
The total supply of all locally produced feedstuffs does not appear adequate to meet demand. Trade in feed commodities is closely regulated by the Government which also has a monopoly of compound feed manufacture. Shortages, especially with regard to animal protein supplements, are met by imports. The country presently imports fish meal, meat meal, and soyabean meal. Supplies to feed mills are subsidized by the Government and receive priority although no re-sale of commodities by the mills is permitted.
Expansion of the feed resource base depends on an increase as well as greater diversification in the country's agricultural base. For the moment, any increase in demand by the expanding feed manufacturing industry will have to be met by imports.
3.2 India
India has ample supplies of feedstuffs to sustain its very large livestock population. From her estimated annual production of 50 million t of milled rice, at least 6 million t of rice bran are available as feed. Her second largest cereal crop, wheat, contributes almost 2 million t of bran and pollard, assuming that only 20 percent of the total harvest of 35 million t of the grain are milled for flour. Among other cereals which are sometimes fed to livestock, even a small percentage of the country's annual production of maize (6 million t) and millet (9 million t) would amount to tens of thousands of tonnes.
India's production of oilseeds consists mainly of groundnut and gingelly (sesame). If the total crop of groundnut is crushed each year for oil, the production of oilcake and meal from this crop amounts to 3.5 million t. Similarly, 0.3 million t of sesame oilcake will be available as feed. To these must be added cake and meal from the milling of cottonseed, soyabean and linseed.
Estimates of production of feeds from India's pulse crops are more difficult to make but supplies of grams and mill by-products of gram flour production are considerable.
Molasses from the country's sugar refineries which process an average annual cane harvest of 120 million t, amount to at least 2 million t of the nutrient-rich feed.
Compared with this huge production of feeds of vegetable origin, India's production of animal protein supplements appears insignificant. Fish meal production in 1972 was said to be only 1 000 t. However, to this must be added considerably larger quantities of dried trash fish which were sold unmilled. Other animal protein sources are wastes from shrimp processing plants and the dairy processing industry. Although demand for poultry products, especially eggs, in the cities, has risen sharply in recent years, total demand for animal protein supplements (for the manufacture of poultry feeds) has not been sufficiently great to stimulate private interests in large-scale exploitation of fish catches for fish meal production. This in turn puts a constraint on expansion and modernization of the feed industry. Nevertheless, the country is for all practical purposes self-sufficient with respect to the supply of feedstuffs, and indeed possesses a substantial surplus of both oilcakes
and rice bran which it exports to neighbouring countries.
3.3 Malaysia
Feed raw material demand in West Malaysia is estimated at 1 million t in 1981. Despite the country's strong agricultural base, 80 percent of all feed ingredients used in the country have to be imported. Demand over the next decade is expected to continue to increase as the feed industry expands at an estimated 6 percent per year. Major items of import are maize, rice bran, sorghum, tapioca ships, meat meal, fish meal, leaf meal groundnut cakes and sesame cakes. The principal supplying countries are Thailand, China, India, Indonesia, Burma, Australia, Chile and Peru. Until 1981, soyabean meal was imported in large quantities. Recent commissioning of two large soyabean crushing and oil extraction plants has rendered the country self-sufficient with respect to this important feed protein source, although all the beans have to be imported.
Local products include: rice bran, wheat bran, palm kernel cakes, copra cakes, soyabean meal, fish meal, torula yeast, distillery and brewery yeasts, grass meal, molasses and shrimp waste. Wastes from slaughterhouses and food canneries, although available in fairly large quantities, are not fully utilized as feeds.
Prices of feed commodities generally reflect free market forces of supply and demand although, for certain items, particularly soyabean meal and wheat bran which are locally produced from imported grains, protective quotas and tariffs imposed on imports raise prices beyond normal levels. As a result of heavy dependence on imports, wide fluctuations in prices are common. Feed grains such as maize and sorghum, the former primarily from Thailand and the latter also from China, are seasonal crops and the absence of buffer stocks often leads to shortages and, consequently, high prices. Silo storage is limited to a few large modern feedmills, but capacities are less than 6 months' consumption.
While the demand for imported feed ingredients may continue into the next decade at a high rate, the ability of traditional supply sources to maintain exports poses a serious problem for planners in the feed milling industry. China, India and Indonesia are rapidly expanding their poultry and livestock industries, and the present surplus may disappear eventually. For the intermediate term Thailand may continue to be Malaysia's most important supplier of basic feed raw materials.
Currently, most of the imports are handled by commodity traders although large quantities are imported by the feedmills themselves. Retail of feed ingredients is widespread since it is estimated that close to 50 percent of all feeds used are mixed on the farm. General availability of most feed ingredients throughout peninsular Malaysia is good due to an efficient road transportation system.
As a country devoted largely to agricultural production, Malaysia is well placed to increase its domestic output of feed ingredients, particularly feed grains and their byproducts which, together, account for well over 50 percent of all feed ingredients consumed in the country.
Fish meal production which became commercial less than a decade ago, was expected to produce about 25 000 tonnes of the product in 1981, triple that in 1976. However, there are indications that production may be reaching its peak since fish reduction plants are now operating at half capacity on a year-round basis. On the other hand, the high cost of fuel may be limiting the harvest of trash fish, at the same time making many reduction plants uneconomical to operate.
The Government agricultural research body, MARDI, has been studying the processing of trash fish into fish silage as a cheaper alternative to fish meal for use in feeding of conventional livestock. Similar studies to develop fish silage as a substitute for fish meal in aquaculture diets are also planned.
Slaughterhouse wastes, particularly fresh blood, are not being fully utilized as a feed resource. The country's well regulated abattoir are suited for collection of such wastes in sufficient quantities to make their use in aquaculture feasible.
The food processing industry is potentially an important, yet inexpensive source of feed raw materials. Canneries, breweries and distilleries produce an assortment of protein-rich waste products that have high feed value for livestock and fish. A leading soya product factory questioned on the subject indicated regular production of large quantities of such material from sauce manufacture, which awaits users. A major brewery likewise indicated availability of spent solids from the fermentation process that can be used as feed for fish. Sludge from the country's massive palm oil industry is presently discarded and represents a major industrial pollutant. This sludge has high nutrient value and can be developed into a major raw material for compound feed manufacture.
Although an Animal Feeds Act regulating the manufacture and sale of compounded animal feeds has been in force for almost two decades, there is still no regulation of feed raw materials. Quality standards of feedstuffs vary with individual ingredients, their production methods and sources. Because the bulk of ingredients imported are for meeting the demand of a rather sophisticated feed milling industry, quality is generally good. Prices are fairly consistent with product quality and, for some items, pegged to those quality specifications most likely to vary, e.g. moisture levels for maize, and crude protein levels for fish meal. The larger feedmills maintain quality control laboratories to check on raw material quality and to monitor feed manufacturing processes. Involvement by the larger mills in commodity trading also helps in maintaining quality of feed ingredients.
The needs of aquaculture for feed ingredients will not have a noticeable impact on their availability for other uses in the foreseeable future.
3.4 Mexico
It is estimated that 10 million t of animal feed and fodder will be consumed by all livestock in Mexico in the current year. Of this figure about one half, or 5 million t, will be made up of feed grains, oil seed cakes, grain milling by-products and animal byproducts, including fish meal.
Until early 1970, Mexico had been a net grain exporter. In recent years it has relied heavily on imports to supplement domestic production of basic grains. An estimated 4 to 5 million t of basic grains are now being imported. Of this quantity, two-thirds are cereal grains. The main items of importation are soyabeans, sorghum and maize. Maize is imported mainly for human consumption, whereas sorghum is imported primarily to meet consumption needs of a greatly increased livestock population. Soyabeans, imported for crushing and extraction to provide edible oils for human consumption, are also the principle protein source, after oil extraction, for animal food production. Whole soyabeans are also being used for this purpose by mills equipped with facilities to process them directly to feed. Other protein-rich feed raw materials that are produced domestically in fairly large quantities are: cottonseed meal, sesame seed meal and fish meal ^1^/. Sunflower seed meal and safflower
seed meal are also available in smaller quantities. Other available feedstuffs are: wheat bran, wheat middlings, rice bran, copra meal, alfalfa meal and brewery by-products. Spirullina, a blue green alga, now produced in Lake Texcocco at the rate of 5 t per day, is used also as a feed for livestock ^2^/.
^1^/ The following information on production of selected grains and fish meal was provided by DEPES ('000 tonnes):
Wheat
Maize
Sorghum
Soyabeans
Fish meal
^2^/ See Section 2, single celled proteins, SCP
Through its agency CONASUPO ^3^/, the Government influences national agricultural production. Guaranteed minimum prices for farmers cover maize, wheat, beans, rice, sorghum, soyabeans, sesame, cotton and other oil seeds. A joint CONASUPO-Commerce Ministry Committee sets prices before each crop cycle, taking into account estimated production costs, demand and prevailing market prices. Such guaranteed prices are intended to stimulate production of basic crops and since they are set above prevailing market prices, provide incentives for farmers to sell to CONASUPO. Considering the fact that CONASUPO also handles all grain imports into the country. Government influence on prices and supply of feed commodities is strongly felt by farmers and feed millers alike. Government involvement through CONASUPO is aimed at achieving national security in basic foodstuffs, as spelled out under SAM ^4^/, by increasing agricultural production and productivity. This policy is underscored by the
fact that ALBAMEX, the feed milling arm of CONASUPO, is able to obtain feed raw materials more readily, while not necessarily required to make a profit in its operations.
^3^/ Compañía Nacional de Subsistencia Popular
^4^/ Sistema Alimentario Mexicano
Government involvement in commodity markets has other beneficial effects. Together with influence from a relatively sophisticated feed industry. Government control of trading of the major feed ingredients helps maintain consistency in quality of these materials.
Feed raw material demand is continuing to grow at a high rate due to continued growth of the feed milling industry. With realization of the Government's plan to dramatically raise aquaculture production, the shortfall in feed ingredient supplies will be increased substantially, especially with respect to protein-rich feedstuffs, since fish diets contain on an average 50 percent more protein than diets for conventional livestock. To meet increasing needs for feedstuffs, current national production will have to be increased and alternative sources exploited. Although the country has a large domestic livestock industry, there is little evidence of exploitation of abattoir wastes as feed raw materials. This resource merits the attention of both the authorities and the feed milling industry. The perennial shrub, mesquite (Prosopis glandulosa) grows wild in the northern part of the country and is exploited by village farms for its foliage and seed pods as scratch feed for pigs and
cattle. The fleshy pods of the plant, while sugary and pulpy, are highly fibrous. The seed is encased in a very hard shell which requires removal before the seed can be used as feed for non-ruminant animals or fish. The syrupy texture of the pod matrix also makes grinding difficult and may be the reason why this material has not been developed for use by mills. Nevertheless, better utilization of this potentially immense feed resource will have a beneficial effect in easing the shortages of ingredients that have equivalent feed value, such as wheat bran.
3.5 Nepal
Nepal's annual estimated production of 2 million t of rice yields almost 100 000 t of rice bran and polishings, and the milling of a part of its 400 000 t of wheat production for flour contributes substantial quantities of bran and pollard to the overall feed supply. Maize is also grown in the plains of the Terai region and this is sometimes used for feed. Meat production is low and is reflected in the very small feed manufacturing industry that caters primarily to poultry farmers.
The country has no traditional source of animal protein supplements. Fish meal and meat meal have to be imported to meet the requirements of the small feed manufacturing industry. Imports are supplemented by some local production of oil seed cakes, although these too are not sufficient and moderate quantities of groundnut oilcakes have to be imported from India. From time to time there are small quantities of damaged dairy products such as cheese and milk powder available.
3.6 Nigeria
Feed resources in Nigeria have seen a decline due to stagnant or dimishing output of certain traditional crops. Recent statistics show that the country increasingly relies on imports to meet the needs of an expanding livestock industry.
Root crops constitute the main staple in the Nigerian diet and these are grown primarily for human consumption. Other major crops are sorghum, millet, rice, maize, groundnut, sesame and oil palm. Millet and sorghum are sometimes fed to livestock. Approximately 4 million t of sorghum and 3.0 million t of millet are produced annually. This is followed by maize, with an estimated yearly production of 1.5 million t. About 150 000 t of sorghum and maize are used in compound feed manufacture. The fourth cereal is rice. It is estimated that only 1 million t of rice are produced annually. This yields less than 150 000 t of bran and polishings. A small quantity of wheat bran is available from imported wheat milled into flour.
From an annual groundnut crop of 620 000 t, more than 380 000 t of oilcake can be made available if all the seeds are crushed for oil. This is not likely, however, because groundnuts serve as a food item, as well as an item for export. Nigeria has also been a traditional exporter of groundnut oilcake, and despite lower production in recent years and local shortages, some of this production still finds its way out of the country. The milling of 350 000 t of African palm kernels yields 200 000 t of oilcakes. This commodity, however, has low feed value for non-ruminant animals. A small quantity of oilcakes, about 40 000 t, can also be obtained from crushing of the annual harvest of sesame seeds.
The country has begun fish meal production on a small scale but the bulk of the feed industry's requirement has to be imported. Also imported are: soyabean meal, meat meal, and occasionally even groundnut cakes.
Nigeria has the potential for expanding its feed resource base. A big increase in crop production is also believed to be possible. Animal blood and offal from slaughterhouses can be a significant source of animal protein supplements. Fish meal production can also be greatly expanded because of the relatively low cost of fuel. Another possibility is the large-scale production of single cell protein from petroleum or natural gas, both of which Nigeria has large reserves.
3.7 The Philippines
The Philippines depend very heavily on imports to meet local demand for feed raw materials. The country's feed resource is based primarily on rice and coconut from which rice bran and coconut oilcakes respectively, are obtained. Considerable quantities of maize and tapioca are also cultivated, but these are primarily for human consumption, although the wet milling of maize for oil and starch recovery produces by-products that are fed to livestock. Quantities of wastes are also available from the industrial conversion of maize to beer and spirits.
Rice bran is the most important feedstuff of indigenous origin. Although only 0.75 million t are available annually compared with 1.25 million t of coconut oilcakes, the higher feed value of rice bran places the latter ahead of coconut oilcakes in importance. Furthermore, almost half of the copra, from which oilcakes are obtained after oil extraction, are exported (511 500 t in 1978).
The country also produces between 12 000 to 15 000 t of fish meal annually, but this only represents a fifth of the total demand for that item. In 1978, an estimated 20 000 t of fish meal had to be imported.
Supplies of protein wastes derived from the country's conventional livestock industry are very limited because blood and offal of farm animals are relished as food items in the Philippines. There are also few poultry processing plants from which rendered poultry waste can be obtained. Use of ipil ipil leaf meal is limited by an anti-nutritive factor (mimosine) present in the plant. Prospects for developing fish silage are hampered by lack of excess trash fish for that purpose, and because of competitive production of fish paste and fish sauce for human consumption. Although production of conventional livestock has risen steadily over the years, the major constraint is the adequate supply of feeds. In order to sustain the relatively modern feed manufacturing industry, large quantities of protein supplements have to be imported annually. In 1977 these included: soyabean meal, 95 600 t; other oil seed meal, 4 000 t; fish meal, 12 000 t; and meat meal, 57 400 t.
The country's aquaculture industry is based mainly on milkfish culture which involves minimal inputs of feedstuffs. The size of the shrimp culture industry at present is too small to significantly affect feeds supply. However, future expansion of this and other intensive culture systems may face problems in obtaining adequate supplies of feeds.
3.8 Sri Lanka
The supply of feeds poses a major constraint for animal production in Sri Lanka. The principal grain crop is rice from which an annual yield of about 2 million t are obtained. From this, somewhat less than 200 000 t of bran and polishings are available. The principal cash crop that contributes to the country's feed resource is the coconut. From an estimated annual production of 160 000 t of copra, 100 000 t of coconut oilcakes are obtainable. Together, rice bran and coconut oilcake represent more than 80 percent of total feed resources in the country. Other indigenously produced feed materials, available in moderate quantities are: wheat bran and flour mill sweepings (obtained from the milling of imported wheat), fish meal, maize meal, shrimp waste, rubber seed meal, and brewer's yeast. Tapioca, although cultivated extensively in the country, is mainly for human consumption. Blood meal, which is available primarily from the main Government slaughterhouse in Colombo, is sold
on tender to feed manufacturers.
Because of the severe shortage of feedstuffs of high protein content, fish meal, meat meal and soyabean meal are imported to meet the requirements of compound feed manufacture. Prospects for increasing the feed resource base are restricted by present emphasis on cultivation of export-oriented cash crops such as rubber, tea and coffee, and the absence of a strong feed manufacturing industry.
Present efforts in developing compound diets for carp culture based on available feed ingredients will not be helped by the already tight supply situation.
3.9 Thailand
The country produces a large surplus of feed grains such as maize and sorghum. Domestic consumption of these feed materials is almost exclusively by the livestock and feed milling industries. Maize and sorghum have not been used for direct feeding to fish but probably constitute a significant percentage in commercially produced floating-type pelleted feed for catfish. Broken rice, as well as cargo rice, on the other hand, are used extensively by fish farmers engaged in traditional feeding methods. The choice of feed grain usage, apart from traditional preference, may be due to processing difficulties with maize, which needs to be pulverized before it can be heat processed to make water stable fish feed. Broken rice, on average, costs more than maize or sorghum, despite its year-round availability.
By-products from the grain milling and oil seed extraction industries constitute the second largest feed resource in the country.
Rice bran is the principal by-product of the milling industry and is also available year round. It is the second most important ingredient for feeding to catfish in the country. Two varieties of rice bran are available. They are raw rice bran, and solvent-extracted rice bran. Raw rice bran is preferred by catfish farmers for two important reasons: unlike solvent-extracted rice bran, which is only available in larger cities, it is available from small village mills or feed stores; and, the misguided belief that oil extracted rice bran is inferior to raw rice bran due to the loss of fat in the former.
By-products from the oil seed extraction industry are, next to fish meal, the most important protein resource for the feed industry. They include (in order of prominence): soyabean meal, cottonseed meal, peanut meal and sesame meal. Except for commercial manufacture of compound feeds, their use for fish feeding by traditional methods has not been reported.
Fish meal represents the most important feed resource in the country. It also represents more than half the total value of all animal feedstuff exports. In 1980 it was estimated that 1.2 million t of marine fish catch were reduced to fish meal. Of the 300 000 t fish meal produced, one-third was exported. Ironically, fish meal consumption by the aquaculture industry is insignificant. Instead, raw trash fish is used. There is no estimate of trash fish usage for aquaculture in the country. From the best estimates of annual catfish production of 50 000 t from ponds, about 250 000 t of trash fish are used yearly for that purpose alone.
Other feedstuffs available are: tapioca meal, molasses, leaf meal, brewery byproducts, shrimp waste and meat meal. With the expansion of the poultry processing industry, increasing quantities of chicken offal are also becoming available. Practically all of this is sold unprocessed for use in pig farms and, more recently, for snakehead culture.
Thailand's feed resource base is expanding with increasing industrialization of poultry and meat processing for production of more marketable products both for export and for local consumption.
Annual production of poultry offal from the country's half dozen poultry processing plants is still too small (estimated to be less than 20 t per day of raw offal plus feathers) to sustain an economically viable rendering plant. At present, the offal is sold to fish and pig farmers who feed it to the animals raw or after cooking. There is also no modern animal rendering plant for pig or cattle offal in the country despite the large animal, primarily pig, population. The country's resource of legume forage plants is not fully exploited. Only kathin is cultivated on a commercial scale for leaf meal production.
The feed supply situation in Thailand, therefore, remains good for the immediate future, and can be expanded as new resources are tapped.
3.10 Tunisia
The country imports most of the raw materials used for animal feed manufacture. The two major items imported are maize and soybean meal. These imports are supplemented by domestically produced cottonseed meal, barley and wheat by-products, particularly wheat bran which appear to be available in considerable quantities at relatively low price (40 T. Din. per tonne). There are few other feedstuffs in use. Due to problems relating to the use of locally produced fish meal, soybean meal is the principal protein supplement used for compound feed manufacture. Imported synthetic amino acids, particularly methionine, are used to provide the desired level of protein quality in the formulated feeds.
During the past five years, the compound feed industry had been expanding rapidly. Apart from by-products from the flour mills, the country has exploited few other raw material resources to support this expansion. Therefore, the industry has to rely on imports of both feed grains (mainly maize) and vegetable protein supplements (mainly soybean meal). These imports are heavily subsidized by the Government in an effort to rapidly build up the livestock industry. The subsidy for soybean meal in 1982 was 60 millims per kg against an import price of 180 millims. The cost of soybean meal to the feed milling industry was only 120 dinars per tonne compared to 180 dinars for locally produced fish meal. Although not considered excessively expensive by comparison, provided the fish meal is of the same grade as Peruvian fish meal (65 percent protein minimum), the local product is of considerably lower quality. The best quality product was said to contain not more than 52 percent
protein, making it more expensive to use than soybean meal. Another problem relating to quality had been contamination of the product by salmonella bacteria.
Since 1981, only a small fraction of domestically produced fish meal was used for industrial feed production, an estimated 1 000 tonnes of unsold fish meal having accumulated in the warehouses by mid-1982. The principal foreign buyer had also temporarily stopped its purchases because of the relatively high price of this low grade product compared with products from other sources.
The collapse of the fish meal manufacturing industry may, therefore, be laid to two factors: (a) Government subsidy of soybean meal imports and (b) lack of quality standardization of the product. If locally produced fish meal were competitive with soybean meal, annual requirements are 6 000 tonnes, according to Government estimates.
Despite the present lack of demand, fish meal will continue to be produced in limited quantities at the Government tuna and sardine canneries. The supply of trash fish, however, will probably continue to decline. What is presently landed is purchased for on-farm preparation of feeds and for human consumption.
There are substantial resources of alternative feed raw materials. Chief among these are slaughterhouse wastes and residues from the massive olive oil extraction industry. There are at present no animal rendering houses to process carcasses of dead farm animals and wastes from abattoirs into meat meal and blood meal. The poultry industry has also grown significantly in recent years. An estimated 50 000 tonnes of chicken are produced yearly from which a good quantity of feather meal can be produced.
The olive oil extraction industry is the biggest export-oriented agricultural industry in the country. About 500 000 tonnes of fruit are pressed for oil annually. The present process involves crushing the entire fruit, seed and all, before oil extraction. The residue, therefore, contains considerable fibrous material which cannot be utilized by monogastric animals, fish included. The crushed shell of the seed apparently provides the abrasive action needed to release oil tightly held in the fibrous matrix of the pulp. A plan is underway to build a pilot plant for separation of shells from the pulp after oil extraction. This will be a costly process but will help reduce considerably (at least 50 000 tonnes of pulp) the country's dependence on imports of feed grains especially as the latter are presently used in ruminant feeds.
The country brews about 35 000 tonnes of beer annually. Waste solids recoverable from the breweries will amount to more than 1 000 tonnes, most of which can be used as raw material for animal or fish feed.
3.11 Venezuela
Venezuela's domestic production of feedstuffs is not sufficient to meet demand. The country's major crops are: cane, bananas, maize, yuca, rice and potatoes. Of these, only cane, maize and rice contribute substantially to the overall feed resources available. Although grown primarily for human consumption, maize is also used in fairly large amounts by the feed manufacturing industry. Local production, which falls far short of demand, is supplemented by large imports. Rice production is estimated at 650 000 t, from which about 80 000 t of rice bran and polishings are available. Wheat is imported for flour production in local mills with substantial by-products such as wheat bran and middlings made available as feeds. Other indigenous feedstuffs available are fairly large quantities of molasses from a large annual crop of cane, and small quantities of sesame oilcake, coconut oilcake, cottonseed meal and by-products from breweries and distilleries.
Animal protein feed supplements are made available as a result of large local production and consumption of livestock. Animal rendering houses contribute substantially to this supply. Their products include meat meal, blood meal and poultry by-product meal. Although some fish meal is also produced locally, it falls far short of demand of the feed manufacturing industry which is a fairly large one. Consequently, large quantities of this item are imported. Imported in even larger quantities is soybean meal.
Trade in feed ingredients falls under stringent Government control by the farm marketing agency CORPOMERCADEO (CMA). Through this agency, prices and supplies to the principal consumers, the feed mills, are regulated.
The feed resource base of Venezuela has good potential for expansion through increased crop output and continued expansion of the livestock industry (which leads to greater output of feedstuffs such as meat meal). Unconventional sources such as forage legumes, which are not presently exploited, also add to this resource. Economic production of single-cell protein (SCP) as feed depends on the prices of petroleum and natural gas available for such production.
3.12 Feed ingredient prices
Prices of feed ingredients are in most cases determined by supplies. In countries where trading of such commodities is highly localized, prices for a particular ingredient can vary considerably from one part of the country to another. This variation is also expected to be greater in those countries where demand by the feed industry constitutes only a very small percentage of total consumption. Thus, feed ingredient prices are generally more uniform on a nation-wide basis in countries such as Venezuela and Thailand than in countries such as India and Nigeria.
Other factors also influence prices, as for example official regulation of commodity markets through Government import controls and price support through subsidies or direct Government purchases.
Table 3 gives the prices of selected ingredients in 10 of the 12 countries covered in the survey. Prices are for the year indicated and were obtained from responsible members in the feed milling industry or by direct enquiry at feed stores in those countries. Prices are in both local currencies and in US dollars (in parenthesis) at rates applied at the time when the information was obtained ^1^/.
^1^/ Currency Equivalents applied in Table 3
Country
Currency Unit
US$ Equivalent
Egypt
Egyptian pound, L.E.
India
Indian rupee, I. Rs.
Malaysia
Malaysian dollar, M.$
Mexico
Mexican peso, Mex.$
Nepal
Nepalese rupee, N.Rs.
Nigeria
Naira
Sri Lanka
Sri Lanka rupee, Cey. Rs.
Thailand
Baht
Tunisia
Tunisian Dinar, T. Din.
Venezuela
Bolivar, V. Bs.
Table 3 Feed Ingredient Prices in Ten Developing Countries
<section>5</section>
4.0 FORMULATED FEEDS FOR AQUACULTURE IN THE TROPICS
4.1 Micro-encapsulated larval diet
4.2 Diets for warm water omnivores
4.3 Diets for warm-water carnivores
4.4 Rainbow trout
Eleven of the twelve countries covered in this report lie within the climatic belt 30 degrees latitude from the equator. Tunisia, although situated north of this tropical belt, lies in the southern Mediterranean and therefore has a climate not unlike that of the tropics throughout much of the year.
Although trout culture has been traditional to at least three of the countries (India, Mexico and Venezuela), recent interest in all twelve countries has been development of aquaculture based on more rapidly growing indigenous warm water species. Development of appropriate diets for these species is therefore essential.
The main objectives in diet formulation for aquaculture are to: (a) satisfy all known nutrient requirements for growth of the species; (b) minimize feed cost; and (c) select and use ingredients that will result in products that are readily utilized to minimize wastage.
The nutrient requirements of most of the local species of fish are not known with certainty. It has been demonstrated, however, that most warm water species that take to artificial feed grow well on diets formulated for common carp, a species on which much of its nutrient requirements are already known. It is a matter of time before the nutrient requirements of the other species are determined. In the meantime, however, the need is for low cost diets that can be efficiently utilized for profitable farming of these species.
With the above objectives in mind, a number of diets were formulated for testing in each of the twelve countries visited. Some of these tests were undertaken during periods of the consultant's visits. The diets were formulated for most of the finfish species identified for mass culture in these countries. Table 4 lists those species and their natural feeding habits.
Tables 5, 6 and 7 specify the essential nutrients and their recommended levels in practical aquaculture diets.
The levels for warm water species are based on present recommendations set for common carp and channel catfish, respectively. Many warm water omnivores, including the tilapia, for which precise requirements of some nutrients, notably the essential amino acids, have not been determined, have responded well to carp diets. Similarly, diets formulated for the basically carnivorous channel catfish have been very successfully applied in Thailand in commercial culture of Clarias batrachus, another carnivorous species whose dietary requirements are still not known with precision. Therefore, until nutrient requirements of the other warm water species of interest to aquaculture are established, the present recommendations permit the formulation of diets that will support growth sufficiently to make commercial production of those species feasible.
The recommended nutrient levels for trout diets take into account availability and cost of raw material in the countries concerned. Because optimum growth in trout requires dietary protein levels that too often are difficult to achieve with local ingredients, the suggested diets are those that can be prepared under constraints of local feed ingredient supply, and at the same time provide for adequate growth rates.
Table 4 - Major Aquacultural Species (Finfish) raised on artificial feeds
Species Name
Common Name
Habitat
Natural Feeding Habits
Countries
Cyprinus carpio
Common carp
Fresh, warm water
Omnivorous
All twelve countries
Labeo rohita
Rohu
India, Nepal, Sri Lanka, Thailand
Catla catla
Catla
Plankton feeders
India, Nepal, Sri Lanka
Cirrhinus mrigala
Mrigal
Omnivorous
India, Nepal, Sri Lanka
Sarotherodon niloticus
Tilapia
All twelve countries
Tilapia guineensis
Tilapia
Herbivorous
Nigeria
Sarotherodon mossambicus
Tilapia
Omnivorous
Nigeria, The Philippines
Ophiocephalus striatus
Snakehead
Carnivorous
Thailand
Pangasius sutchi
Large catfish
Thailand
Clarias batrachus
Catfish
India, Thailand
Clarias lazera
Catfish
Egypt, Nigeria
Ictalurus punctatus
Catfish
Mexico
Pimelodus blochii
Catfish (Mandi)
Brazil
Prochilodus spp.
Pacu, curimbata
Omnivorous
Brazil, Venezuela
Colossoma spp.
Tambaqui, cachama
Brazil, Venezuela
Mugil spp.
Mullets
Brackish, warm water
Omnivorous
All 12 countries except Nepal
Epinephalus tauvina
Grouper
Carnivorous
Malaysia, Thailand
Dicentrarchus labrax
Sea bass
Egypt, Tunisia
Sparus auratus
Sea bream
Egypt, Tunisia
Lates calcerifer
Sea bass
Malaysia, Thailand
Oxyeleotris marmoratus
Sand goby
Thailand
Siganus spp.
Rabbit fish
Herbivorous
Malaysia
Salmo giardneri
Rainbow trout
Fresh, cold water
Carnivorous
India, Mexico, Venezuela
Table 5 Nutrient Specifications for Commercial Aquaculture Feeds
(Warm-water omnivorous species)
Fry and Fingerlings
Juveniles and Growers
Brood Fish
Protein, % min.
Lipids, % min.
Ca, %, min.
Ca, % max.
P, avail, % min.
P, avail, % max.
Met + Cys, % min.
Lysine, % min.
DE Kcal/100 g, min.
Vitamins (Supplement) (per 100 kg)
A, i.u.
D[3 ]i.u.
E, i.u.
K, g
C, g
Thiamine, g
Riboflavin, g
Pantothenic acid, g
Niacin, g
Pyridoxine, g
Biotin, g
Folic acid, g
Choline Cl, g
B-12, mg
Minerals (Supplement) (per 100 kg)
Iron, g
Copper, g
Manganese, g
Zinc, g
Iodine, mg
Cobalt, mg
Selenium, mg
Table 6 - Nutrient Specifications for Commercial Aquaculture Feeds
(Warm-water carnivorous species)
Fry and Fingerlings
Juveniles and Growers
Brood Fish
Protein, % min.
Lipids, % min.
Ca, % min.
Ca, % max.
P, avail., % min.
P, avail., % max.
Met. + Cys., % min.
Lysine, % min.
DE, Kcal/100 g, min.
Vitamin and mineral supplements (See Table 5)
Table 7 - Nutrient Specifications for Commercial Aquaculture Feeds
(Rainbow Trout)
Fry and Fingerlings
Juveniles and Growers
Brood Fish
Protein, % min.
Lipids, % min.
Ca, % min.
Ca, % max.
P, avail., % min.
P, avail., % max.
Met. + Cys., % min.
Lysine, % min.
DE, Kcal/100 g, min.
Vitamin and mineral supplements (See Table 5)
4.1 Micro-encapsulated larval diet
4.1.1 Results of tests with the micro-encapsulated egg diet
A micro encapsulated larval diet based on whole chicken egg has been described in an earlier report (ADCP/REP/80/11, pages 355-361). The table on the composition of chicken egg is reproduced below:
Table 8
Composition of (Chicken) Egg
Whole egg
Egg white
Egg yolk
Protein, %
Fat, %
Gross energy, kcal/kg
Metabolizable energy (ME), kcal/kg
ME: protein ratio
Calcium, %
Phosphorus, %
Amino Acids, %
Arginine
Cystine
Isoleucine
Leucine
Lysine
Methionine
Phenylalanine
Threonine
Tryptophan
Tyrosine
Valine
The encapsulated diet itself consists of whole egg supplemented with vitamins and a mineral source for calcium ^1^/. The diet was tested with good results on fry of rohu (Labeo rohita) and clarias (Clarias batrachus) at RLCT Bangkhen ^2^/. Two methods were used in its preparation. The first was as previously described, i.e. by rapidly adding boiling water with constant stirring to the homogenate. The product was a very fine suspension of micro-capsules which was then separated by medium speed (5 000 rpm for 15 minutes) centrifugation. A modified heat processing method was also tried. In this method, the homogenate was steam cooked for about 10 minutes and the custard-like product passed through a fine mesh nylon cloth to produce the micro-capsules. Since water (cold) was also required in this operation, the capsules were finally separated by centrifuging (at 3 000 rpm for 10 minutes). Product yield by the modified method was considerably higher and less fuel was probably
required for processing. The modified method was also used to prepare a freeze-dried version of the larval feed at RLCI, Dhauli ^3^/. Details of the freeze dried product are provided in the next section of this report.
^1^/ The rate of addition of various vitamins was according to the recommended levels in diets for fingerlings as described in Table. The amount of calcium carbonate or limestone added to one egg weighing 50 g (10 g dry matter) was 0.2 g.
^2^/ RLCT, FAO Regional Lead Centre for Aquaculture in Thailand
^3^/ RLCI, FAO Regional Lead Centre for Aquaculture in India
4.1.1 Results of tests with the micro-encapsulated egg diet
The tests conducted at RLCT involved four species: the rohu, Clarias, sand goby and Pangasius.
Rohu (Labeo rohita)
Two preparations of encapsulated egg diet were tested against boiled egg yolk. The experiment was carried in replicate in glass aquaria each containing 250 fry that were less than 48 hours old. Diet rations were measured out daily and resuspended in water before feeding. The rest of the diet preparations were kept under refrigeration. Daily feed on a dry basis amounted to 20 percent estimated body weight of the fish and were given four times daily. The aquaria were cleaned daily with about 75 percent water replacement.
The larvae were kept on the diets for ten days, during which growth and survival were closely monitored. Fish on both encapsulated egg preparations grew normally and remained active during the period. There was less than 5 percent mortality among larvae fed the encapsulated diets. Fish that were fed the diet prepared by steaming appeared whitish in the abdominal region. However, there was no difference in survival rate between the two encapsulated diets.
Larvae fed boiled egg yolk suffered mortality from the fourth day of the test, and by the tenth day there were few survivors.
Clarias (Clarias batrachus)
The encapsulated egg diet was tested against live Moina and two artificial feeds: dried earthworms from Japan and a larval diet of New Zealand origin. Fish on Moina performed best in terms of growth and survival, followed by the encapsulated diet. Performance of fish on the two other diets was very poor.
Sand goby (Oxyelotris marmoratus)
Larvae of sand goby were fed the encapsulated diet for two weeks. Although there was no observed mortality up to the seventh day, large losses occurred beyond that time period. It was not known whether the losses were due to mortality or because of the increasing presence of water mites from the fourth day of the test.
Pangasius (Pangasius sutchi)
The test of the encapsulated diet on Pangasius larvae was unsuccessful. The aquaria were too densely stocked at the beginning, resulting in uncontrolled cannibalism among the young fish.
These preliminary studies indicate that encapsulated whole egg is a good substitute for live natural food for rohu and clarias larvae.
Earlier attempts were also made to test the encapsulated diet on the cachama (Colossoma spp.) at the Guanapito warm water fish station in Venezuela. However, due to improper procedures carried out in preparing the diet, the results were not conclusive. Attempts will be made at the Inter-regional Aquaculture Centre (IRAC) in Szarvas, Hungary to carry out properly controlled experiments with this new form of larval diet to establish its efficacy and commercial potential.
4.2 Diets for warm water omnivores
4.2.1 Carps and Tilapia
4.2.2 Pacu (Prochilodus spp.) and Tambaqui (Colossoma spp.)
4.2.1 Carps and Tilapia
The practice of carp polyculture in earthern ponds has gained prominence in India in recent years. In this culture system, Indian major carps, the catla (Catla catla), rohu (Labeo rohita) and mrigal (Cirrhinus mrigala) are stocked with the common carp (Cyprinus carpio), the grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella) and silver carp (Hypothalmichthys molitrix) in varying ratios, with a predominance of Indian major carps. The main food supply is the ponds' natural production of algae, plankton, detritus and benthic organisms. However, in order to support higher stocking densities, supplementary feeds are usually given. These feeds consist of a mixture of rice bran and oilcakes (usually groundnut oilcake or mustard oilcake). Sometimes aquatic as well as terrestrial weeds are also provided to augment the food supply. The rice bran/oilcake mixture is in a rough ratio of 1:1 by weight and is given daily at a rate of 1 to 4 percent body weight of fish. Although increased fish production
has been attributed directly to supplementary feeding, an evaluation of its efficacy has not been possible given the many variations of stocking ratios and generally arbitrary way in which supplementary feeding rates are determined. Moreover the rice bran/oilcake mixture lacks minerals and vitamins and rapidly separates into its component ingredients during the feeding process. Considerable wastage is, therefore, expected and the effectiveness of such an artificial diet would also depend greatly on the natural productivity of the pond, especially for the supply of animal protein in the form of zooplankton and benthic organisms.
To determine if an improvement could be obtained by supplementing the diet mixture with minerals and vitamins, a test was conducted at RLCI, Dhauli ^1^/. Two diets based on rice bran and groundnut oilcake to contain 28 percent crude protein were formulated. One of the diets also contained the vitamin and mineral supplement ^2^/. Those diets were fed to rohu fingerlings averaging 3 g at the start of the experiment. Growth of fish fed mineral and vitamin fortified diet was found to be superior to that of control.
^1^/ For full details of this test see "Carp nutrition research at the Freshwater Aqua-culture Research and Training Centre, Dhauli" FI:DP/IND/75/031, Field Document 4, May 1982
^2^/ Control diet: rice bran, 40%; groundnut oilcake, 60%; test diet: rice bran, 32.5%; groundnut oilcake: 65,5%; dicalcium phosphate: 2%, and one normal strength multi-vitamin tablet (for human use) per 1 kg diet mixture
Other diets that were formulated for testing with carps at RLCI appear in Tables 9, 10 and 11. The test diets for each age class differ with respect to protein and/or energy sources. Vegetable protein supplements such as groundnut oilcake, sesame oilcake and soyabean meal are, for practical purposes, interchangeable where a choice does not exist. The same applies for energy feeds such as rice bran and wheat bran, or among cereal grains. The test diets were designed to determine which would be the preferred formulations, should choice of ingredients exist.
The experimental diets described were prepared in the following manner; the rice bran or wheat bran was cooked in water constituting 120 percent ^1^/ of total weight of the diet mixture. The remaining components, after first being properly mixed, were then blended into the hot pasty slurry to form a dough. This was then extruded into pellets by means of a meat mincer fitted with a 3 mm die. The extruded pellets contained about 55 percent moisture and, unless dried in the sun, was used as moist type feed. For storage of the prepared feed, the pellets were spread out over a fine screen and dried in the sun. The dried pellets, which contained about 11 percent moisture, were found to have good water stability and shelf life of more than two months when kept in closed containers.
^1^/ The amount of water used was determined by the absorptive characteristic of the bran. Higher quality rice bran, which contains more starch and less fibre, requires greater addition of water, as in this case
Following the installation of the laboratory model pellet mill at RLCI the dry diet mixtures were pressed out using a 2 mm die. The pelleting operation was carried out first with steam conditioning and then with 6 to 8 percent water blended into the dry mash before pelleting. Better results were obtained using the latter method ^2^/. For dry type sinking pellets, water stability of the products was good (about 90 minutes). Also the percentage of "fines" was very small (less than 1 percent).
^2^/ See section on Manufactured Foods for Aquaculture
In Egypt the most readily available protein feed is cottonseed meal. All others have to be imported, including fish meal and soyabean meal. Two diets were prepared for testing on common carp and tilapia in cages set in a 4 ha pond at El Zaweya. The two formulations tested are shown in Table 12 and details of the experiment are described in the relevant consultancy report prepared for the Project EGY/80/002 (See reference list). Growth measurements made at the end of the first two weeks indicated marginal weight gains in both dietary treatments. The slow growth was most probably due to low water temperatures during the test period (14°C in the early morning and a maximum of 24°C shortly after noon). Although meant to continue for three months, the experiment had to be terminated because of fish escape from all the cages during adjustment of water level in the pond, ten days after the experiment began. Fish that were recovered appeared well fed, and gain in average weight was
registered for both carp and tilapia.
Formulation of diets for tilapia in Port Harcourt, Nigeria, was hampered by acute shortages of conventional feed ingredients, although abattoir waste (mainly fresh cattle blood) was available free in considerable quantities, and fish meal in limited quantities from the NIOMR fish meal pilot plant in Lagos. Table 13 shows the three diets that were formulated for testing at the African Regional Aquaculture Centre (ARAC) at Aluu. A problem associated with the use of fresh animal blood in diet making in the tropics is the rapid proliferation of mold in the product, especially if drying of the pellets is not completed rapidly. On one occasion it was observed that fungal spores (detected with a magnifying glass) had already contaminated the feed within a week after its preparation.
Table 9
Test Diets for Rohu Fingerlings at RLCI, Dhauli, India
Ingredients
Diet No. ^1^/
Groundnut oilcake
Sesame oilcake
Wheat bran
Rice bran
Dicalcium phosphate
Table salt
Trace minerals ^2^/
Vitamin mixture ^3^/
Calculated chemical composition:
Crude protein, %
Digestible energy, kcal/g
Lysine, %
Methionine +cystine, %
Cost/kg (excluding cost of mineral and vitamin supplements) ^4^/
I. Rs.
^1^/ Diets were made into dry pellets as described in the text
^2^/ Trace mineral mix made from CuSO[4] . 5H[2]O, FeSO[4] . 7H[2]0, MnSO[4 ]. H[2]O, ZnO, CoCl[2 ]. 6H[2]0, Kl and CaHPO (filler) to provide the following (ppm total diet): Cu, 10; Fe, 100; Mn, 50; Zn, 50; Co, 0.05; and I, 0.1.
^3^/ Vitamin mixture to provide the following (per kg total diet): Vitamin A, 5 000 IU; vitamin D, 600 IU; thiamin, 10 mg; riboflavin, 20 mg; pantothenic acid, 30 mg; niacin, 50 mg; and ascorbic acid, 200 mg. Due to the unavailability of individual vitamins at the time of diet preparation. Miles Brand multivitamin tablets were used at the level of 1 tablet/kg diet.
^4^/ For costs of individual ingredients, see Table 3.
Table 10
Recommended Test Diets for Carp Fry (India)
Ingredients
Diet No. ^1^/
Groundnut oilcake
Sesame oilcake
Fish meal
Rice bran
Dicalcium phosphate
Table salt
Trace minerals ^2^/
Vitamin mixture ^3^/
1-Lysine ^4^/
Calculated chemical composition
Crude protein, %
Digestible energy, kcal/g
Lysine, %
Methionine +cystine, %
Cost/kg diet (excluding cost of mineral and vitamin supplements) ^5^/
I. Rs.
^1^/ Test diets to be made into dry pellets as described in text. Pellets should be ground to particle size not larger than 0.5 mm
^2^/ As in Table 9
^3^/ As in Table 9
^4^/ Estimated cost: I. Rs. 50/kg
^5^/ For cost of individual ingredients, see Table 3
Table 11
Recommended Test Diets for Carp Brood Stock (India)
Ingredients
Diet No. ^1^/
Groundnut oilcake
Sesame oilcake
Prawn head meal ^2^/
Rice bran
Dicalcium phosphate
Table salt
Trace minerals ^3^/
Vitamin mixture ^4^/
Calculated chemical composition
Crude protein, %
Digestible energy, kcal/g
Cost/kg diet (excluding cost of mineral and vitamin supplements) ^5^/
I. Rs.
^1^/ Test diets to be made into dry pellets as described in text
^2^/ No data available on lysine and sulphur amino acid content
^3^/ As in Table 9
^4^/ As in Table 9
^5^/ For cost of individual ingredients, see Table 3
It is suggested that such feeds be prepared fresh for feeding, to avoid any health problem to fish, unless preservatives such as propionate or benzoate are available for addition to the diet mixture to prevent mold contamination.
Table 12
Composition of Test Diets for Tilapia and Carp Fingerlings for the El Zaweya Government Fish Farm (Egypt)
Ingredients, %
Diet ^1^/
A
B
Cottonseed meal
Soyabean meal
Rice bran
Bone meal
Table salt
d1-Methionine
1-Lysine
Vitamin mixture ^2^/
Total
Calculated chemical composition
Protein, %
Lysine
Methionine + cystine
Digestible energy, kcal/g
Cost, piastres/kg ^3^/
^1^/ Preparation of diets: rice bran and bone meal were mixed and boiled with water constituting 100 percent total weight of the diet. The purpose of boiling was to bring out the natural binding properties of starch to produce water-stable pellets. The slurry was then allowed to cool slightly before the remaining ingredients, previously mixed, were blended in. The resulting dough was then passed through a kitchen meat grinder fitted with a 2 mm die. The moist pellets produced were dried in the sun over a fine mesh screen. Pellets were crumbled to smaller particle size before feeding.
^2^/ The vitamin mixture used was a commercial product for poultry and, as applied, provided the following (per kg diet): vitamin A, 5 000 IU; vitamin D[2], 600 IU; thiamine, 10 mg; riboflavin, 20 mg; pantothenic acid, 30 mg; niacin, 50 mg; pyridoxine, 2 mg; and ascorbic acid, 200 mg.
^3^/ For cost of individual ingredients, see Table 3
Table 13
Test Diets for Tilapia Fingerlings at the African Regional Aquaculture Centre, Aluu (Nigeria)
Ingredients
Diet ^1^/
Fresh bovine blood
Wheat bran
Groundnut oil cake
Fish meal
Vitamin mix ^2^/
Vitamin C supplement ^3^/
Total
Approximate analysis (%)
Dry matter
Protein (dry basis)
^1^/ Amounts in kg except for the vitamin supplements, which are in g. Preparation of diets: Diet 1, Fresh blood or thawed out frozen blood was weighed out in a large container; the pulverized vitamin mixtures were stirred into the blood, followed by addition of the wheat bran; after thorough mixing, the dough was extruded with a meat grinder; the pellets were then spread out over a wire mesh tray for drying in the sun. Diet 2. The wheat bran was cooked in 40 litres of water and blended with the fresh blood into which vitamins had previously been added; the groundnut oilcake was then blended into this mixture followed by extrusion into pellets. Diet 3. The rice bran was cooked in 100 litres of water and then blended with the mixture containing the fish meal and vitamin mixtures; the dough obtained was then extruded as described earlier.
^2^/ The vitamin mixture (Coryl SP) was a commercial preparation meant for supplementing poultry diets at the rate of 1 g per 1 kg feed. It does not contain vitamin C.
^3^/ "Redoxin" lozenges that contain 50 percent ascorbic acid.
Table 14
Composition of Mexican Feedstuffs ^1^/
% Dry Matter
Feedstuff
% Dry matter
Crude protein
Crude fat
Crude fibre
Ash
NFE ^2^/
Max. $/kg ^3^/
Maize, ground
Maize gluten
Maize germ meal
Sorghum
Wheat
Wheat bran
Wheat middlings
Rice bran, solvent extracted
Soyabean, whole
Soyabean meal
Cottonseed meal
Safflowerseed meal, 22%
Safflowerseed meal, 36%
Sunflowerseed meal
Sesame oil meal
Copra meal
Alfalfa meal
Fish meal
Whey powder
Yeast powder
Brewers' grains
Vegetable oil
Molasses
Rock phosphate
Containing: phosphorus, 7%; calcium, 18%
Dicalcium phosphate
Containing: phosphorus, 18%; calcium, 24%
Limestone powder
Containing mainly CaCO[3]
Salt
d1-Methionine
Containing: 98% d1-methionine
1-Lysine
Containing: 98% 1-lysine
Vitamin premix ^5^/
Mineral premix ^6^/
Mesquite:
leaves with pods and seeds
NP ^7^/
pods with seeds
NP ^7^/
seeds
NP ^7^/
^1^/ Source: Latin American Tables of Feed Composition, 1974, Florida and ALBAMEX. Prices provided by ALBAMEX
^2^/ Nitrogen free extract
^3^/ Mex.$ 25 = US$ 1 (approximately)
^4^/ No prices provided by ALBAMEX. Prices indicated based on relative fair value of ingredients.
^5^/ Each gramme of premix to contain the following: Vitamin A, 1 000 IU; Vitamin D[3], 200 IU; Vitamin E, 10 IU; (in mg) Vitamin K, 2, Thiamine, 4; Riboflavin, 4; Pantothenic acid, 10; Niacin, 20; Pyridoxine, 4; Biotin, 0.02; Folic acid, 1; Ascorbic acid, 40; Choline chloride, 90; Vitamin B[12], 0.004; Ethoxyquin (antioxidant), 16.
^6^/ Each gramme of premix to contain the following (mg mineral element): Iron, 50; Copper, 3; Cobalt, 0.01; Manganese, 20; Zinc, 30; Iodine, 0.1; and Selenium, 0.1. The inclusion of selenium is necessary in view of its established role as an essential trace element in animal nutrition and its low levels in plant protein sources which are expected to replace selenium-rich fish meal in the least-cost diets.
Table 15
Least Cost Formulations for Warm Water Species ^1^/
(Mexico)
Fry and Fingerlings
(I)
Grower
(II)
Brood Fish
(III)
A. CONSTRAINTS ^2^/
RHS
Protein, %
Lysine, %
Methionine + Cystine, %
Lipid, %
ME, Kcal/g*
Calcium, 7.
Phosphorus, total, %
Ranges
Calcium, %
Phosphorus, %
Bounds (%)
Alfalfa meal (UP)
Fish meal (LO)
Molasses (UP)
Sorghum (UP)
Cottonseed meal (UP)
Maize gluten (FX)
Vitamin premix (FX)
Mineral premix (FX)
B. SOLUTIONS
Diet
I
II
III
Ingredients, kg/tonne diet ^3^/
Extruded whole soyabeans
Soyabean meal
Sunflower seed meal
Fish meal
Maize gluten
Maize germ meal
Sorghum
Wheat
Wheat bran
Safflowerseed meal
Molasses
Calcium orthophosphate
Limestone powder
1-Lysine
Vitamin premix
Mineral premix
Analysis
Metabolizable energy, Kcal/g
Crude protein, %
Lysine, %
Methionine + Cystine, %
Total phosphorus, %
Calcium, %
Fibre, %
Lipid, %
Raw Material Cost, Mex.$ per kg diet ^6^/
* All metabolizable energy values are for poultry since a list of ME values of individual ingredients for fish is not complete. In setting-up energy requirements for the species, this has been taken into consideration.
^1^/ Formulations carried out with IBM 370 computer at ALBAMEX, using MPSX software package.
^2^/ Constraints provided by FAO Fish Feed Technologist.
^3^/ See Table 14, Table of Composition of Mexican Feedstuffs.
^4^/ Error in set up of constraint for this ingredient. A fix bound at the 10 percent level was omitted in the data card deck.
^5^/ Error in card punch for fix bound at the 0.5 percent level
^6^/ Computed from raw material prices shown in Table 3.
Carp and tilapia farming under intensive culture systems is also being encouraged in Mexico and Venezuela. In Mexico, where the livestock feed industry is large and well-developed, many of the common conventional feedstuffs are available (Table 14). Since the Mexican Government also owns the country's largest feed milling enterprise, aquaculture will have the same access to these raw materials as the already well-established livestock industry. To benefit fully from this resource, however, formulation of aquaculture diets are being carried out using linear programming techniques on an electronic computer. Details of these methods are contained in an earlier report (ADCP/REP/80/11).
Least cost diets were formulated at one of the government mills for common carp and hybrid tilapia ^1^/. The constraints for the computerized formulations are shown in Table 15, and the results appear at the bottom of the table. The diets were to be processed into dry type sinking pellets.
4.2.2 Pacu (Prochilodus spp.) and Tambaqui (Colossoma spp.)
The pacu and tambaqui have been observed to feed on fruits. Because these fish grow rapidly, their culture has been of great interest, especially in Brazil and Venezuela. In both countries there is a potentially large feed resource based on the fruit and vegetable processing industry. Tables 16 and 17 describe diets formulated for testing with these species of fish in Brazil and Venezuela respectively, incorporating some of the non-conventional feed ingredients indigenous to the two countries.
Table 16
Test Diets for Pacu and Tambaqui at the Latin American Regional Aquaculture Centre (CERLA), Pirassununga, Brazil
Ingredients
Diets for fingerlings ^1^/
Diets for young adults ^2^/
Soyabean meal
Fish meal (anchovy)
Wheat bran
Orange pulp meal ^3^/
Orange seed meal ^4^/
Bone meal
Vitamin/mineral mix
Total
^1^/ Approximate protein content of fingerling diets: 33 percent
^2^/ Approximate protein content of adult fish diets: 25 percent
^3^/ Proximate analysis (%): dry matter, 87.6; crude protein, 6.9; crude fat, 4.6; crude fibre, 10.3; NFE, 59.8; and ash 6.0
^4^/ Proximate analysis (%): dry matter, 90.0; crude protein, 30.0; crude fat, 0.9; crude fibre, 19.8; NFE, 33.6; and ash 5.7
Table 17
Test Diets for Curimbata (Prochilodus spp.) and Cachama (Colossoma spp.) at the Guanapito Freshwater Fish Culture Station (Venezuela) ^1^/
Ingredients
Diets for fingerlings ^2^/
Diets for young adults ^3^/
Fish meal
Meat meal
Blood meal
Wheat bran
Tomato seed meal ^4^/
Soman seed meal ^5^/
Vitamin/mineral mix
Total
^1^/ These diets are the author's improved versions of formulations carried out by national counterpart staff contained in a consultancy report prepared for the Project VEN/79/002
^2^/ Approximate protein content of fingerling diets: 30 percent
^3^/ Approximate protein content of diets for adult fish: 25 percent
^4^/ Proximate analysis (%): dry matter, 91.1; crude protein, 25.0; crude fat, 19.6; crude fibre, 17.0; NFE, 22.9; ash, 6.6
^5^/ Proximate analysis (%): dry matter, 85.0; crude protein, 18.0; crude fat, 1.4; crude fibre, 10.9; NFE, 65.1; ash, 4.6
4.3 Diets for warm-water carnivores
4.3.1 Catfishes (Clarias spp., Ictalurus punctatus)
4.3.2 Grouper (Epinephelus tauvina), sea bass (Lates calcarifer, Dicentrarchus labrax), sea bream (Sparus auratus)
4.3.3 Other diet formulations for warm water species
4.3.1 Catfishes (Clarias spp., Ictalurus punctatus)
Because of their voracious feeding habits and capacity for rapid growth, these fishes have been popular among aquaculturists in the tropics. Although most species are considered to be carnivorous, those that presently come under artificial culture readily accept feed in which ingredients of animal origin constitute only a small percentage of the total constituents.
The nutrient requirements for fresh water carnivores are not believed to differ much from those of omnivores. In the United States, recommended dietary protein levels for channel catfish range from 28 to 35 percent. In Thailand, Clarias are successfully grown on traditional diets consisting of trash fish, rice bran and broken rice mixed in ratios varying from 3:1:1 to 10:2:1 (S. Wattanutchariya and T. Panayotan, 1982). This comes to protein levels of 25 to 38 percent on dry diet basis. Most commercially produced dry feeds for Clarias in Thailand contain 30 percent protein. Table 18 shows diets for Clarias and channel catfish formulated with the aid of an electronic computer. Table 19 shows simple diets of varying protein content that are also suitable for catfish production in Thailand.
4.3.2 Grouper (Epinephelus tauvina), sea bass (Lates calcarifer, Dicentrarchus labrax), sea bream (Sparus auratus)
Protein requirements of warm water marine carnivores are generally higher than those of fresh water species. The farming of marine species often takes advantage of limited availability of trash fish from marine fishing operations. The utilization of trash fish in balanced diets is best accomplished by combining the trash fish with a dry mixture of other ingredients which, when combined in predetermined proportions, will yield diets of the desired protein content.
Tables 20 and 21 are formulations for Oregon-type moist pellets for sea bass (Lates spp.) and grouper culture in Malaysia ^1^/. Where the variety of conventional feed ingredients is more limiting, as in Tunisia, the trash fish may be blended directly into the other ingredients and the dough extruded through a meat mincer, as in two test diets prepared for evaluation on fingerlings of mediterranean sea bass (Dicentrarchus spp.) and sea bream (Sparus auratus) in that country (Table 21). Both diets were well accepted by the fish. Young adult mullets, also readily consumed the feeds when offered ^2^/. Table 22 lists five such diets that will be tested on sea bass in raceways at the Government fish culture station in Salammbo.
^1^/ See reference list concerning consultancy report to the Project MAL/77/008
^2^/ See reference list concerning consultancy report to the Project TCP/TUN/0104
4.3.3 Other diet formulations for warm water species
Tables 24 and 25 contain other formulations which are suitable for use in intensive culture of warm water fishes (except marine carnivores). Fish meal, which is expensive and often unavailable to the fish farmer, is not included in most of the formulations, although many include other indigenous animal protein sources such as blood meal, prawn head meal and squid meal. Most importantly, all the diets are expected to meet the mineral and vitamin requirements. These nutrients are of great importance in balanced diets and are often overlooked.
Table 18 - Computer-formulated Least Cost Diets for Catfishes
Table 19 - Diets for Catfish Culture in Thailand ^1^/
^1^/ These diets may either be dry pelleted or processed into moist feed, as described earlier. For diets that include full fat soyabean, it is essential that the latter at least is heat processed to destroy growth inhibitors, such as anti-trypsin factors and urease
Table 20
Oregon-type Moist Pellets for Sea Bass (Lates) and Grouper Culture in Malaysia
A. Dry mixture composition ^1^/
Ingredients
Fry/Fingerling Mixture
(I)
Grower Mixture
(II)
Groundmeal
Soyabean meal
Rice bran
Yeast, feed grade
Fish meal, 55% protein
Vitamin premix ^2^/
Total
B. Complete moist diet composition ^3^/
Ingredients
Fry/Fingerling Diet
Grower Diet
Dry mixture I
Dry mixture II
Trash fish
Fresh livestock blood
Total
Approximate protein content, % dry basis
Approximate moisture content, %
^1^/ The dry components of each of the two mixtures should first be finely ground and then thoroughly mixed.
^2^/ Content mg per gm premix: Thiamine-HCl, 2.0; riboflavin, 3.0; calcium pantothenate, 6.0; niacinamide, 12.0; pyridoxine-HCl, 2.0; folic acid, 0.5; choline chloride, 60.0; biotin, 0.2; vitamin B12, 0.1; ascorbic acid, 50; vitamin A, 500 IU; vitamin D[3], 25 IU; vitamin E, 20 IU; and vitamin K, 0.5 mg.
^3^/ All components of each diet may be blended and passed through a meat grinder. A second or third pass through the grinder will produce a more homogeneously mixed and better quality pellet. Because Oregon-type pellets do not undergo heat processing, shelf-life of these two diets is poor and will have to be stored under refrigeration if held overnight before feeding.
Table 21
Processed Moist Diets for Sea Bass (Lates) and Grouper in Malaysia ^1^/
Ingredients
Fry/Fingerling Diet
Grower Diet
Crude palm oil
Fish meal, 55 % protein
Soyabean meal
Yeast, feed grade
Vitamin premix ^2^/
Fresh livestock blood *
Groundnut cake *
Rice Bran *
Total
Approximate protein content, % dry basis
^1^/ Ingredients marked with an asterisk (*) to be mixed with further addition of 10 parts water and cooked or steamed. The moist slurry is then blended with the other ingredients that had been previously thoroughly mixed. The resultant dough is extruded through a meat grinder fitted with a die of diametre 1,0 mm for fry, 2.0 mm for fingerlings, and 3.0 or 4.00 mm for big fish depending on size
^2^/ See Footnote 2 of Table 20 for composition.
Table 22
Moist-type Pelleted Diets Prepared and Evaluated for Sea Bass (Dicentrarchus) and Sea Bream
(Tunisia)
Ingredients, %
Diet
Trash fish
Wheat bran
Soybean meal
Water
Supplements
Quantity prepared, kg
Estimated moisture content, %
Estimated protein content, % (on dry basis)
Raw material cost per kg diet (T. Din. millions)
Cost per kg on dry basis (T. Din, millims)
^1^/ Dry components of each diet were sent to a milling shop for fine grinding. Trash fish were ground in the frozen state using a 0.5 HP mincer fitted with a 4 mm die plate. The diets were then prepared as follows:
Dry ingredients and the vitamin supplement and trash fish were weighed out in the proper proportion and blended manually (with the aid of a laddle) in a plastic pail to a dough-like consistency. Further blending was achieved by passing the mixed dough once through the mincer using the 4 mm die plate.
Final pelleting was done by passing the feed a second time through the mincer, using a 3 mm die plate
^2^/ For convenience, one tablet of one-a-day multi-vitamin for human use was added per kg of diet prepared agter pulverizing. The expected cost of supplementing feed with feed-grade vitamin mixtures is estimated at 5 millims per kg of the moist pellets. For moist type feed containing trash fish as an ingredient component, the prepared diet should contain supplemented vitamins at the following levels (per kg):
Vitamin A
4 000 i.u.
Vitamin D[3]
750 i.u.
Thiamine hydrochloride
2.5 mg
Riboflavin
12.5 mg
Calcium pantothenate
40.0 mg
Niacin
30.0 mg
Inositol
40.0 mg
Pyridoxine
4.0 mg
Biotin
0.025 mg
Absorbic acid
50 mg
Vitamin E
25 mg
Table 23
Test Diets Proposed for Comparative Feeding Trials involving Sea Bass (Dicentrarchus) in Raceways at the Government Fishery Station in Salammbo (Tunisia)
Diet No. ^1^/
Trash fish
Wheat bran
Soybean meal
Vitamin supplemented ^2^/
Total
Estimated dry matter content, %
Protein (dry basis), %
Raw material cost (millims/kg)
^1^/ The diets should be prepared in the manner described in Table 20. These diets variously meet the dietary requirements for sea bass, sea bream, mullets as well as common carp. The diets with higher protein content should be suitable for all age sizes of the carnivorous species as well as for fry and fingerlings of the mullet and common carp. It will be more economical to feed diets of lower protein content to juvenile and adult stock of mullets and common carp
^2^/ See foot-note 2 in Table 22 for composition. If prepared by the station, wheat bran may be used as the carrier.
Table 24 - 30 Percent Protein Diets for Warm-water Species ^1^/
^1^/ Suitable for fry and fingerlings of: carps, tilapias, cat-fishes, pacus and mullets
Table 25 - 25 Percent Protein Diets for Warm-water Species ^1^/
^1^/ Suitable for juveniles and growers of: carps, tilapias, cat-fishes, pacus and mullets
4.4 Rainbow trout
The nutrient requirements of this species are fairly well established. Recent studies have shown that protein content of trout diets can be predominantly of vegetable origin provided levels of the essential animo acids lysine and methionine in the diet are adequate.
In areas like the Andean region of Venezuela where fish meal, the main protein source in traditional trout diets, is a scarce commodity, alternatives have to be found for its substitution. Slaughterhouse waste may more readily be available in areas where trout farms are located. A diet that consisted primarily of slaughterhouse waste and cereal by-products was therefore prepared and tested on trout fry and fingerlings at the Government trout farm at Boccono, Venezuela. The composition of this diet is detailed in Table 26. Feed conversions (on dry feed basis) were 1.75 for fry and 0.97 for fingerlings.
Table 26 - Composition of Trout Fry/Fingerling Ration made from Slaughterhouse Waste
Ingredient
Percentage
Bovine livers, fresh
Bovine lungs, fresh
Bovine blood, fresh
Wheat bran
Wheat flour
Bone meal
Salt
Vitamin mixture
Calculated analysis (on dry basis):
Crude protein, %
Methionine + Cystine, %
Lysine, %
Calcium, %
Phosphorus, %
Digestible energy, Kcal/g
^1^/ For full details of the experiment, see "Pisciculture Venezuela. Resultos y Recommendaciones del Proyecto VEN/79/002, FAO, 1980".
The feed was produced by first mincing the fresh animal organs before mixing with the dry ingredients. The moist dough was then steamed in a steam cooker made from the cut off bottom half of a 55-gallon steel drum. The feed "loaf" that resulted was then extruded into moist pellets before feeding, using a motor driven meat chopper fitted with a 3 mm extruder plate.
On-farm processing of moist pelleted trout feeds made from dry pellets can be easily carried out by first adding water to the high carbohydrate components, cooking, and then blending the cooked mixture with the remaining dry components. Moist pellets can then be made by passing the final dough mix through a meat chopper fitted with an extruder plate of the desired size.
The composition of seven practical trout rations formulated for use in a trout farm in Venezuela is shown in Table 27.
Because commercial trout farms normally involve heavy capital investments and are usually quite large, all aspects of their operation are designed for efficient production. Because the feeding operation also constitutes the biggest cost, regular sources of efficient feeds of consistent quality are necessary. Industrial feeds can more easily meet the criteria of quality, consistency and regular supply. Manufactured trout rations are usually based on least-cost formulations by computer. Table 28 shows the results of least-cost formulation of trout rations carried out for the Department of Fisheries, Mexico. The ingredient list used was similar to the one employed for formulating diets for the warm water species described earlier. Table 29 shows the quality constraints and detailed results.
Table 27 - Practical Rations for Trout Culture (Venezuela)
Ration No.
Fish meal
Meat meal
Blood meal
Bone meal
Tomato seed meal
Wheat bran
Rice bran
Soyabean meal
Cottonseed meal
Whey powder
Molasses
Maize
Brewer's yeast
Vitamin and Mineral Premix
Total
Calculated analysis:
Protein, %
Table 28 - Computer Formulated Least Cost Trout Rations (Mexico)
Ingredients
Fry and Fingerlings
Grower I
Grower II
Brood Fish
Protein Contents, %
Extruded whole soyabeans
Soyabean meal
Sunflower seed meal
Fish meal
Maize gluten
Sorghum
Cottonseed meal
Molasses
Dicalcium phosphate
Limestone powder
d1-Methionine
1-Lysine
Vitamin and Mineral Premix
Table 29 Least Cost Formulations for Trout ^1^/
Fry and fingerling
(I)
Grower (Summer)
(IIA)
Grower (Winter)
(IIB)
Brood Fish
(III)
A. CONSTRAINTS ^2^/
RHS
Protein, %
Lysine, %
Methionine + cystine, %
Lipid, %
ME, Kcal/g
Calcium, %
Phosphorus, total, %
Ranges
Calcium, %
Phosphorus, %
Bounds (%)
Alfalfa meal (UP)
Fish meal (LO)
Molasses (UP)
Sorghum (UP)
Cottonseed meal (UP)
Maize gluten (FX)
Vitamin premix (FX)
Mineral premix (FX)
B. SOLUTIONS
Diet
I
IIA
IIB
III
Ingredients, kg/tonne diet ^3^/
Extruded whole soyabeans
Soyabean meal
Sunflower seed meal
Fish meal
Maize gluten
Sorghum
Cottonseed meal
Molasses
Calcium orthophosphate
Limestone powder
d1-Methionine
1-Lysine
Vitamin Premix
Mineral Premix
Analysis
Metabolizable energy, Kcal/g
Crude protein, %
Lysine, %
Methionine + Cystine, %
Total phosphorus, %
Calcium, %
Fibre, %
Lipid, %
Raw Material Cost, Mex.$ per kg diet
^1^/ Formulations performed on IBM 370 computer at ALBAMEX, using MPSX software package.
^2^/ Constraints provided by author. For full explanation of RHS, Ranges and Bounds, see Chow, K.W. et al, 1980. Linear programming in Fish Diet Formulation. In Fish feed technology, ADCP/REP/80/11, 241-86, FAO, Rome.
^3^/ See Table 14, Table of composition of Mexican feedstuffs.
<section>6</section>
5.0 MANUFACTURED FEEDS FOR AQUACULTURE
5.1 Survey of the feed manufacturing industry
5.2 Recent developments in pelleted feed manufacture
5.3 Feasibility of using manufactured feeds for aquaculture
There are four major advantages in using artificial feeds for intensive aquaculture purposes. These are: (i) uniformity with regard to quality; (ii) nutrient balance for maximum growth effects; (iii) adequate and easy application; and (iv) generally lower cost.
Because compound feeds are formulated according to precise nutrient specifications, product quality is uniform and assured even when there is a need for the manufacturer to make ingredient substitutions to overcome temporary shortages of certain ingredients. On the other hand, natural food supplies tend to vary in nutrient composition depending upon factors such as stage of maturity of plant and animal organisms that constitute these supplies.
Nutrient requirements of fish are affected by the life stage they are in. For example, very young fish have higher requirements for protein in the diet including protein quality. Artificial diets can be specially formulated to meet such requirements.
An often serious problem in intensive aquaculture is the adequate provision of food for the animals. It is difficult to maintain the required density of food organisms in a culture system. On the other hand, artificial feed can be given as and when required at satiation levels.
The high cost of supplying natural foods for larval rearing is well known. Also, the increasing scarcity of traditional fish foods such as trash fish and the high cost of available supplies make their continued use uneconomical. Artificial feeds, based mainly on feedstuffs of plant origin, are less expensive and can, with proper balance of nutrients, produce comparable results.
Artificial feeding of fish, however, poses peculiar problems for both the fish farmer as well as for the feed manufacturer. Unlike natural foods which normally are present as discreet living forms, and therefore biologically stable until consumed, artificial feeds undergo rapid nutrient loss through normal deteriorative processes and leaching by water unless quickly consumed. Moreover, once in water, feed aggregates tend to disintegrate and separate into their ingredient components, thus losing their original nutritional properties. Therefore, a successful artificial feed, apart from meeting nutritional requirements should have good water stability and acceptance by the feeding animal. To produce feeds with the desired physical characteristics, processing is required. Commercial processed fish feeds are either in the dry or moist pelleted form.
Dry Pelleted Feeds
Production of dry sinking-type pelleted feed appears more practical for feed manufacturers. With proper selection of ingredients, and employing manufacturing procedures designed for high-quality pellet production, products possessing good water stability can be obtained. Use of artificial binders, in most cases, raise the cost of products to prohibitive levels, and is avoided whenever possible. Important prerequisites for water-stable dry pellet production lie in the manufacturing process. Ingredients should be as finely ground as possible (in practice, a hammermill fitted with a sieve of hole diameter no greater than 2 mm) so that during the steam conditioning phase maximum starch gelatinization takes place. This process brings out the adhesiveness of the starch molecule and at the same time increases the digestibility of the nutrient, since fish utilize raw starch poorly. Proper processing procedures for pelleted feed manufacture have been described in an earlier ADCP
report ^1^/.
^1^/ ADCP/REP/80/11
Apart from nutritional consideration, dry pelleted feeds have certain advantages conducive to their use in intensive aquaculture. These include:
(i) ready availability. Except for the production of extruded floating-type feed, the technology for large-scale manufacture of dry pellets exists in most developing countries. Feedmills equipped for manufacturing pelleted poultry feed can also produce sinking-type dry pelleted fish feed with minor modification to the equipment - only the hammer mill screen needs to be changed to one of smaller hole diameter for finer grinding of ingredients;
(ii) long shelf-life. Because the product is dry, it has a fairly long shelf-life. Dry pelleted feed has a shelf-life of at least two months under good storage conditions in the tropics; and
(iii) easy application. Dry feed is easy to dispense. Control of feeding can also be easily exercised to ensure adequate feeding and minimum feed wastage.
One major disadvantage of dry pelleted fish feed is their apparent high cost. Such products are usually made from "conventional" ingredients which have competitive use in the manufacture of feed for livestock. However, because good quality compound feeds are usually more efficient, they may be more cost effective than traditional type feeds.
While dry, pelleted aquaculture diets have gained wide acceptance in Western industrialized countries, they have been introduced only recently in developing countries. Judging from initial response of catfish fish farmers in Thailand, there is considerable resistance to their use. There are a variety of reasons for this resistance, some of them related to product quality and others to high cost and traditional preferences of local fish farmers.
Sinking-type pelleted fish feed inspected by the author in Mexico, Venezuela and Thailand showed a distinct need for product improvement with regard to physical appearance. Pellets were often not graded for size, thus leading to wastage when fed to fish. Furthermore, quite frequently, the mills produced quantities far exceeding market demand, resulting in later sale of products that had deteriorated in quality. Feeds that were supplied to a Government trout hatchery had been in storage for up to eight months before finally fed to fish. The result was high fish mortality following the appearance of symptoms of deficiencies in Vitamin C and E, two vitamins which are particularly affected by prolonged storage.
Another resistance factor is the relatively high cost of factory manufactured feed. To fully appreciate the fish farmer's caution with regard to use of manufactured feed, one might look again at the Thai experience (see later in this section).
At present there are no commercial feed mills among the countries surveyed that are devoted entirely to the manufacture of floating-type pellets. Indeed, only one feed mill (in Thailand) was originally designed solely for fish feed manufacture. This factory, which now also produces feeds for other livestock, is equipped with extruders for the manufacture of floating-type pellets for Clarias. Although there are various important advantages in using this type of feed, its acceptance has been limited due to its high cost.
Moist Pelleted Feeds
Traditional feeds for aquaculture have a high moisture content. Examples are single-ingredient feeds such as trash fish (whole or cut-up) for carnivores, and crop and vegetable wastes for herbivores. More recent acceptance of the balanced-diet concept gave rise to more complex feeds consisting of two or more main ingredient components together with vitamin and mineral supplements. While feeds with a high moisture content are generally more readily accepted by fish, compound feeds of this kind have low water stability. These feeds also lack the commercial attributes of dry diets, such as ease of handling and long shelf-life. Due to escalating energy cost, however, moist feeds are regaining popularity among aquaculturists.
In Thailand, where traditional feeding practices are widespread for intensive Clarias culture, trash fish are minced with rice bran and/or broken rice to produce a moist-type pelleted feed that contains between 50-70 percent moisture. This processing method has two main effects. The first is the integration of feed components into a homogeneous mixture. Secondly, natural gums present in trash fish aid in the binding of the ingredient components to give a fairly water-stable product after the mixture has passed through a mincer/extruder. The feed is usually prepared fresh.
Despite their widespread use in aquaculture, there is still no commercial production of moist fish feeds. The obstacles for development of an industrial product are formidable. Technically, problems associated with handling and storage of the final product are the most difficult to overcome. A successful product ready for immediate use will have to be stored in rigid containers. Even this measure will not prevent the "caking" up of moist pelleted feed resulting from handling and prolonged storage. An alternative would be to manufacture the product in large block or slab forms to be further processed (extruded) on the farm. Due to their high moisture content, moist feeds undergo rapid spoilage during storage unless the moisture content is at or below a permissible level, the product pasteurized and chemical agents added to prevent yeast and mould growth ^1^/. Although processing cost for the manufacture of moist feeds will be lower than for dry feed, additional
^1^/ Semi-moist foods have been successfully developed by the pet food industry. In these products, it has been shown that an expression, known as "water activity", a[W], determines the susceptibility of the products to bacterial spoilage. Water activity is governed by the following equation: where,
where,
N[W] = number of moles of water
N[S] = number of moles of solute.
A semi-moist food with a low a[W] value is desirable. A value of 0.79 or lower prevents yeast growth, while a value of 0.65 or lower effectively stops mould growth as well. Most semi-moist pet foods have an a[W] value of 0.85 or lower. At this level, bacterial growth (by far the most serious threat) is checked; chemical agents are added to prevent the proliferation of both yeasts and fungi. Semi-moist food products usually contain up to 35 percent moisture. expenses for packing, storage (refrigeration may be necessary) and handling (including the added cost of transporting water in the product) may exceed any savings in processing cost. This is probably the reason why moist aquaculture feeds have not been marketed. For the fish farmer who is equipped to make his own feed, moist feeds provide savings. He can take advantage of supplies of cheap ingredients such as slaughterhouse wastes and crop residues as substitutes for more expensive conventional feed ingredients.
Binary-type diets - the other alternative
As pointed out earlier, the Thai catfish farmers' feeding practices continue to be very much influenced by tradition. The tradition of using trash fish and rice bran probably developed during the period when the list of readily available feed ingredients was still quite limited because of lack of demand by a yet undeveloped feed industry. The quantity of trash fish reduced to fish meal annually 15 years ago, for example, was very small and trash fish was then quite cheap and plentiful. Rice bran, on the other hand, had always been readily available, as it still is today, in those parts of the country where fish farming activity is concentrated. The result was the development of moist, binary-type feed that was easy to prepare and inexpensive to use.
The success of a commercial replacement for traditional farm-prepared feeds will be determined not only by the new product's ability to support rapid growth with high percentage fish survival at market time, but also by its cost effectiveness. Manufacturing and marketing costs of compound feeds have risen dramatically over the past decade as a result of a tenfold increase in energy cost. Production cost of dry pelleted feeds is particularly high. Apart from cost factors, the farmers' prejudice against new diets (in this case, of feeding dry pelleted feed opposed to their traditional moist feed) has to be overcome. Such prejudice can be deep rooted.
In order to reduce the cost of manufactured feed yet make as little change in feeding methods as possible, another binary-type feed should be developed in which one of the binary components is an ingredient, or mixture of ingredients that is readily available in the vicinity of the farm (e.g. rice bran) and the other component, a feed concentrate which, when mixed with the other component of the binary, will provide a well-balanced diet for full feeding of fish. Instructions will have to be provided on the proportions the binary components should be combined for a specific feeding purpose. The mixture can then be made into the moist pelleted feed which the fish farmer is most accustomed to use in most cases. Significant savings arise from lower transportation expenses. Other savings will be from cheaper processing costs at the farm, the amount depending upon processing methods used and energy source available.
5.1 Survey of the feed manufacturing industry
The world's feed manufacturing industry, which has its origins in the western industrialized countries, arose from the need to supply large quantities of meat products for urban consumption. The industry initially provided simple services to farmers such as grinding of coarse grains and blending fodders in the proportions dictated more by available supplies than by needed balance of nutrients in the final mixtures. As the demand for animal products increased, new methods for their production became necessary. It soon became apparent that such production could only be achieved by adoption of intensive animal husbandry, whereby traditional feeding methods had to be replaced by more efficient ones based on new knowledge concerning the nutritional requirements of farm animals for growth and production. This new knowledge, together with the discovery that farm animals responded well to diets containing a wide variety of food grains and agricultural by-products, provided basic
dietary nutrient requirements were satisfied, marked the beginning of the compound feed manufacturing industry.
Development and expansion of the industry thereafter has been rapid, particularly in the U.S.A., where the demand for feed grains, created by the industry, was easily met.
As output of the industry increased, so has its level of sophistication. The development of compound feed for aquaculture has brought the industry to the highest level of sophistication with the introduction of extrusion technology for the production of floating-type pelleted feed.
The feed manufacturing industry in developing countries in the tropics is of fairly recent origin. It came with the introduction into those countries of high-yielding breeds of poultry which require properly balanced feed for optimum production of meat and eggs. There is no concensus as to when the industry was established in those areas, although it is generally believed that countries such as Malaysia, Thailand and India saw the building of their first feed mills in the late fifties and other countries such as Nigeria and Nepal considerably later. Mills in other countries with close proximity to the U.S.A., viz., Mexico and Venezuela, were built a little earlier.
Growth and expansion of the feed manufacturing industry in the developing countries followed a somewhat different pattern compared to that in the Western countries. Mills were designed for manufacture of compound feed from the onset. The product-mix of mills in the tropics is also different. The bulk of production goes to poultry and pig feeds. The mills in most of the ten countries dealt with in this report depend on imported feed grains and other crucial ingredients such as fish meal and oilseed meals and cakes. This dependency on external supplies of raw materials undoubtedly is a major constraint to development of the industry in those countries. Nevertheless, the average growth rate of the industry there during the past two decades had been very impressive. Some countries, like Thailand and Malaysia, had averaged about 20 percent with the most rapid growth occurring during the first ten years. Others, such as India and Nigeria, despite major (but dissimilar)
constraints, have still managed an average growth rate, over the last 20 years, of 10 percent/annum.
Although gaps still exist between developed and developing countries concerning knowledge of animal and fish nutrition, and concerning application of technology for animal production, the level of sophistication in feed manufacturing technology is similar, largely because of the setting up of turn-key mills, incorporating the latest technology, in developing countries. The majority of the countries involved now have fully integrated and automated feed mills that have high production capacities while using minimum labour.
Although few countries among those surveyed are presently manufacturing compound feed for aquacultural purposes, those with an established capability for producing pelleted feed for conventional livestock can also provide this service with upgrading of milling processes to produce products with desired qualities for efficient application. Design and construction of fish feed production facilities in developing countries will be the subjects of a future report.
Egypt
In common with the other countries surveyed, the Egyptian feed manufacturing industry's growth and modernization in recent years has been greatly aided by rapid expansion of the poultry industry. One main difference is the Government's almost total monopoly in the feed manufacturing industry in Egypt. There are six major feed mills in the country, three in Cairo, one in Helwan, one in Alexandria, and one mid-way between Cairo and Alexandria. Between them, the mills produced an estimated 500 000 tonnes of poultry feed in 1981. Other smaller mills produce another estimated 100 000 tonnes. A good portion of all compound feed produced went to meet the needs of the Government-owned General Poultry Company which had targeted poultry meat production at 200 000 tonnes for that year. The Company also owns a large poultry egg production operation which produced an estimated 300 million eggs in 1981. Although the annual consumption of cattle food is said to be at least 1 million
tonnes, much of this undoubtedly is in the form of roughages and fodders. There is no commercial production of compounded feed for fish.
The principal ingredients used in feed manufacture that are of local origin are: maize, maize gluten meal, rice bran, wheat bran, sunflower seed meal, cottonseed meal, linseed meal, meat meal, bone meal and poultry by-products. Fish meal and soyabean meal are also imported in large quantities, mainly as sources of high-quality protein for poultry feed. Feed mills obtain their raw materials under a quota system that favours them with adequate supplies and subsidized prices. However, mills are not permitted to resell ingredients.
The quality of compound feed produced in the larger mills appeared good. These mills can be easily upgraded to produce pelleted feed for fish.
India
The feed manufacturing industry in India was established about 15 years ago. In 1967, the Compounded Livestock Feed Manufacturers' Association of India (CLFMA) was set up to represent the interest of manufacturers in the Government (primarily at the state level), cooperative, and private sectors. More than 50 members of CLFMA operated 77 plants in 1979 with an estimated designed capacity of 1.73 million tonnes/annum. However, mills were operating at half this capacity, producing an estimated 900 000 tonnes during that year. Of this quantity, two-thirds were for conventional livestock, mainly dairy cattle, and the remaining third for poultry. There was no commercial production of fish feed although a state-owned mill in West Bengal was testing a product for carp polyculture. Growth of the industry, as reflected by the following yearly production figures for CLFMA members, during a 14-year period, had been erratic, but still showed an impressive average 14 percent compounded
over the period.
Compound Feed Production by CLFMA Members
(excluding public sector and small-scale units)
Year
Cattle and other feeds
Poultry feeds
Total
Sources:
(i) the Standardisation and Control of Quality of Animal Feeds by H. Bhagwan in 'Proceedings of the Conference on Animal Feeds of Tropical and Sub-tropical Origin', Tropical Products Institute, 1975, London
(ii) Animal Feed Industry in Developing Countries by Desmond Bird, Milling Feed and Fertilizer, June 1979
Production by CLFMA members is said to account for 80 percent of all compound feed manufactured. On this basis, the total annual production for 1979 was believed to be a little over a million tonnes. Two large private enterprises, Hindustan Lever and Shaw Wallace, dominate the private sector in compound feed manufacture. Hindustan Lever, the industry leader with 14 mills, accounted for 10 percent of compound feed produced that year. Total feed consumption of all livestock in the country had been estimated at around 40 million t in 1979.
The world's feed industry is characterized by low profit margins. In India profitability is further influenced by competition between the private and public sectors. Returns on investment apparently have not been high enough to encourage capital spending to keep up with new technology introduced into the industry. Few mills produce pelleted feed, and at the Delhi plant of Hindustan Lever this type of feed was still produced using machines with old-fashioned horizontal, rotating plate dies rather than the more advanced ones employing fixed vertical ring-dies. While the old pelleting technique remains suitable for producing large-size pellets for cattle and hogs, it is inadequate for making small-size pellets of sufficient hardness and compactness. The Indian machine tool and engineering industry has demonstrated its ability to fabricate the new type pelleting machine, since such machines made here have been offered for sale in Nepal. Adoption of the more recent pelleting
technique would be required for making small-sized pellets that not only possess hardness but also remain water stable when fed to fish.
A laboratory size feed pelleting machine was recently installed at RLCI in Dhauli for making test experimental diets for carps. The mill, manufactured by California Pellet Mills Co. in USA is capable of producing up to 100 kg product per hour. Dry mash feed mixed with 7 percent water before the pelleting operation yielded very good quality pellets. The water substitutes for steam which is difficult to add for a mill of such size.
Malaysia
The feed milling industry of Malaysia is of fairly recent origin. Begun in 1960, it has grown into perhaps one of the biggest manufacturing industries in the country. There are at present about 70 feed mills throughout peninsular (East) Malaysia, with an additional six mills in the West Malaysian states of Sabah and Sarawak. An estimated 600 000 t of compound feed are produced annually with poultry feeds accounting for more than two-thirds of the total. The rest is mainly for pigs. Total annual demand for mixed feed has been estimated at more than 1 million t. The balance, therefore, is produced by larger farms which do their own feed mixing.
The industry relies very heavily on imported raw materials, since the country has practically no output of feed grains and inadequate production of cereal by-products such as rice bran and wheat bran. Although palm kernel oilcake is available in great abundance, its use in feed for monogastric animals is limited by the material's high-fibre content. The country's reliance on imported fish meal has been reduced somewhat during the last five years. The principal ingredients used in manufactured feed in Malaysia are in maize, sorghum, rice bran, wheat bran, fish meal, meat meal, soyabean meal, coconut oilcakes, groundnut oilcakes, palm kernel cakes, molasses and kathin meal. Product quality is frequently monitored by the Government under a Feeds Act instituted in the early sixties.
An unsuccessful attempt was made a few years ago by the country's largest feed manufacturing group, Gold Coin Mills, to make diets for aquaculture on a commercial scale. It started when a fish farmer wanted some custom-made carp feed made by the Company. Small quantities of this feed were made over a period of six months, after which further orders for it were stopped. The farmer had cited high cost as the reason for ceasing purchases. The feed that was delivered was in mash form.
Although the Malaysian feed manufacturing industry is equipped with machinery that can be easily modified for sinking-type pelleted fish feed production, there is still no expertise within the industry for commercial production of such products. Existing equipment will have to be upgraded for fine grinding of ingredients. Proper selection of raw materials and more stringent manufacturing procedures will have to be adopted for production of pellets possessing high water stability.
Mexico
Mexico has a modern animal feed milling industry. It comprises about 40 companies operating twice as many mills throughout the country, producing complete and supplementary feeds. Total production is expected to reach 5 million t in the current year with almost 70 percent accounted for by poultry feeds. During the past decade the industry has been growing at a fairly high rate of 8.3 percent/year. This rate is expected to increase slightly during the present decade. The industry is dominated by two foreign-owned companies (Purina and Anderson/Clayton), which together account for 50 percent of total feed manufactured in the country. ALBAMEX, the public sector milling company, has the capacity to produce from its two mills half a million Cons annually. The ALBAMEX mill at Guadalajara is one of the most modern in Mexico, with a daily production capacity of 500 t. The bulk of this production is pelleted feed for poultry and pigs. It is also newly equipped with stainless steel
extruders for making expanded soya-based food for human consumption. These extruders are similar to those used for making floating-type pelleted feed for fish. The mill has been producing small quantities of feed for DEPES's trout hatcheries and for the small aquaculture industry. Commercial production and demand for fish feed as a whole remains very limited.
Through CONASUPO, the Government controls the purchase of all imported feed ingredients and the prices at which they are sold to the feed industry. The agency also controls the prices of home-produced ingredients as well as the prices of manufactured products. Profit margins of manufactured feeds are low.
There is still excess capacity within the milling industry, largely because of recent new mill constructions. Together with the Government's willingness to import large quantities of raw materials to support increases in domestic meat production, the feed industry is capable of producing compounded fish feed in such quantities as to meet the needs for achieving aquaculture production targets set by the Government.
Nepal
There are no official statistics on the production and demand of compound feed in Nepal, but given the low demand for red meat, the figures must be quite low. The largest privately owned mill operated by Ratna Feeds is located in Kathmandu. It produced 15 t of mixed feed a day during the time this survey was made in 1979. The bulk of production (80 percent) went to poultry feed and the remainder to cattle and other livestock. No fish feed was being manufactured. The Company was in the process of going into pelleted feed production using machinery made in India. A Government-owned commercial mill at Hetauda produced 6 to 10 t of mixed feed a day. Cattle feed constituted 60 percent of this mill's products, with the balance made up of feed for poultry, pigs and fish. Fish feed produced by this mill was in mash form.
Nigeria
Feed manufacturing in Nigeria is still at a very early stage of development. There are fewer than 24 mills throughout the country. Half of these are under the control Of an American pharmaceutical company that initially provided financial support for their construction in order to create demand for their proprietary products, especially feed supplements. Other mills are owned by private British and Nigerian interests. At least one mill in the eastern part of the country is owned by the State Government. There are no official figures on annual production of compound feed in Nigeria. Based on estimated feed grain consumption by the mills, 300 000 t were said to be produced in 1979, most of it for poultry. The growth rate of the industry during the preceding years had averaged an impressive 25 percent/annum. There is no commercial production of compounded fish feed.
The industry relies heavily on imported raw materials. These range from feed grains, such as maize and sorghum, to protein supplements including soyabean meal and fish meal. Cereal by-products - wheat bran and rice bran - from local mills and residues from the oil extraction industry - groundnut oilcake, soyabean meal and cottonseed cake - constitute the major raw materials available locally. However, supplies of these ingredients are insufficient to meet requirements of the industry. Soyabean meal and groundnut oilcake have to be imported from abroad to make up the deficiency.
One privately owned mill (Desba Feeds) situated in Port Harcourt was producing only poultry feed. Machineries for this mill were imported and consisted of a 1-t vertical mixer and a 30-HP hammer mill. The mill was of recent construction and was operating on one shift, producing about 10 t of mash-type feed per day. Practically all production was for poultry.
The industry is also constrained by a shortage of qualified manpower. Newer technology such as that used in pelleted feed manufacture is still quite uncommon in the industry. Coupled with the absence of commercial demand for fish feed, any development in fish feed manufacture will have to depend on the initiative of Government research institutions.
The Philippines
The Philippines is the one country among those surveyed where the fishery industry plays a more important role in supplying animal protein than the livestock industry. However, the country's feed manufacturing industry more closely reflects developments in the poultry and livestock industries since production of compound fish feed is insignificant. There are more than 80 feed mills registered with the Bureau of Animal Industry. Nearly half of them are located in Metro Manila. The capacities of these mills vary. The largest mill, situated in Metro Manila, has an annual output of 250 000 t, and the five largest account for 40 percent of the total production nationwide. The feed industry's share of the total market for feeds in 1980 was 2 million t, representing approximately 60 percent of total feed consumption for that year. Seventy-five percent of industrial feeds was for poultry, the remainder for pigs. Growth of the industry during the last five years, at 10 percent per
annum, had been average among the countries surveyed.
Feed production is based primarily on locally available ingredients. Chief among these are: maize, rice bran, copra meal, soyabean meal, meat meal and cane molasses. However, the industry is increasingly dependent on importation for its supplies of fish meal, meat meal and soyabean meal.
The enactment in 1972 of several legislations governing the production and marketing of feedstuffs has contributed to greater sophistication in the feed industry. Machineries installed in the larger mills are modern and are capable of manufacturing pelleted fish feed. Such a demand, however, has not arisen because the bulk of fish cultured in the country are milkfish which are fed primarily on algae.
Sri Lanka
After a severe set-back due to the collapse of the poultry industry in 1973, production of compound animal feed continued to make progressive recovery during the last two years. Although production has not quite returned to 1972 levels, when 120 000 t were estimated to have been produced, the largest Government-owned Ceylon Oil and Fats Corporation mill at Seeduwa was operating once more at full capacity (triple shift), producing more than 250 t/day, or, at an annual rate of more than 60 000 t.
The feed industry has been developed around two primary crops - rice and coconut. Both rice bran and copra meal (poonac) are available in relative abundance. Although there is a sizable catch of silver bellies (Leiognathus sp.) from which fish meal could be made, its exploitation is very limited due to the lack of an efficient fish reduction industry. Consequently, most of the protein feed such as fish meal, meat meal and soyabean meal is imported. The Seeduwa mill used the following ingredients for manufacture of poultry feed: poonac, rice bran, dried fish, meat meal, soyabean meal, maize, sorghum, damaged paddy, wheat flour, dhal, lentils and pulses.
Product quality is hampered by periodic scarcity of imported ingredients. Although the Seeduwa mill is of fairly recent design, it is not equipped for pelleted feed manufacture.
Thailand
The Thai feed milling industry is one of that country's largest and fastest growing industries. Of the 60 or so registered feed mills, nine large, integrated mills account for more than half the 3 million t of improved feed manufactured annually. Feed for poultry make up 60 percent of this production, and the balance is primarily for pigs. Less than 10 000 t of fish feed were manufactured in 1981. Factory manufactured feeds, however, represent only one-quarter of the total feed requirements for farm animal production. The balance, mainly for pigs, but also for poultry and fish, is met by on-farm mixing by the farmers themselves. Nevertheless, the feed milling industry plays a prominent role in the operation of the modern farm and, by its own involvement in commercial livestock production, has fostered high quality standards for factory-manufactured feeds.
The industry is supported by Thailand's abundance of diverse feed raw materials. The principal ones used in compound feed manufacture are: maize, sorghum, cassava meal, fish meal, soyabean meal, kapok seed meal, kathin and molasses. Quantities of meat meal and soyabean meal have to be imported from time to time when export pressures on domestically produced fish meal create shortages and drive up prices for that commodity.
The industry has generally kept up with the latest developments in milling technology. The major mills are fully automatic and integrated, with at least one mill having a designed capacity for producing 40 t of pelleted feed per hour. Although commercial, sinking-type pelleted feeds for Clarias culture were introduced ten years ago, their high cost at that time made their use uneconomical. Since then, rising cost and diminishing supplies of trash fish (the traditional feed for Clarias culture), together with increased fish health problems associated with its use, have revived fish farmers' interest in factory manufactured dry feeds. The result has been the introduction, two years ago, of a floating-type, dry, pelleted feed, employing extrusion technology. Feed conversions as low as 1.3 have been claimed with this type of feed, but comparatively higher cost has resulted in its slow acceptance by fish farmers. Unless less expensive formulations based on indigenous ingredients
are developed, farmers will find such products uneconomical to use.
Venezuela
Venezuela has a sophisticated and well organized animal feed manufacturing industry that dates back more than 20 years. In 1979 there were more than 30 mills throughout the country. Of these, 18 were members of the national feed manufacturers' association (AFACA) which accounted for 75 percent of the total output of 2.5 million tonnes of compound feed used in the country. Five companies operating 8 modern mills dominated the industry with an estimated production of 1.7 million tonnes. The largest, Protinal, had a 30 percent share, or 700 000 tonnes. Since 1977, the industry had been growing at a rate of 7 percent/year.
The main product line was poultry food accounting for about 60 percent of the total market, and divided equally between boilers and layers. Of the balance, pig foods accounted for 30 percent, and cattle (mostly dairy) and pet foods shared the remaining 10 percent. A large percentage, about 30 percent, of the production was delivered in bulk to big, mechanized farms. Although Protinal had been marketing a commercial trout feed ^1^/ for some years, annual production of fish feed was small.
^1^/ A trout diet, marketed under the Protinal brand name of 'Trucherina' had the following guaranteed analysis:
Crude protein, min.
Crude fat, min.
Crude fibre, max.
Nitrogen-free extract, min.
Ingredients used included: fish meal, soyabean meal, meat meal, processed cereals, minerals and vitamins. The diet was specified as balanced and was meant for use in complete feeding of trout for all age classes.
The principal ingredients used by the industry included: maize, sorghum, wheat bran, maize gluten, cottonseed meal, groundnut meal, sesame meal, soyabean meal, fish meal, meat meal, feather meal, and alfalfa meal. Trade in many of these ingredients comes under the regulation of the Government farm marketing agency CORPOMERCADEO (CMA). The Agency controls the supply and price of both imported and home-grown feed commodities. Feed manufacturers first estimate their future raw material requirements through AFACA. This information is relayed at quarterly meetings with CMA which then decides on the split between home production and imports. Tenders are then invited in international markets to meet import requirements.
As a result of Government price regulation, the industry has been able to maintain a more or less constant rate of return on capital. In the year of the survey (1980), profitability was estimated at 15 percent on capital employed, and 2.5 percent on turnover.
Product quality is generally good due to the country's relatively high level of development in the livestock sector and the advanced technology employed by the feed industry. Presently, the only commercially available fish feed is for trout.
5.2 Recent developments in pelleted feed manufacture
It is widely recognized in the feed manufacturing industry that steam conditioning is of vital importance in pelleted feed production. The use of steam
(i) increases pellet press outputs and reduces die wear;
(ii) improves pellet hardness and durability; and
(iii) increases the nutritional value of the feed.
Under normal operating conditions involving a single horizontal barrel-type steam conditioner, mash transit time is brief - between 5 and 20 seconds. During this short period, liquids such as molasses or fats that are added may not be absorbed sufficiently to prevent their interference with the subsequent pelleting process. Excess water (from added molasses) may "choke" up the die causing interruption in pellet production. Excess unabsorbed fat results in production of soft pellets with low durability.
To overcome these effects, recent developments have centred on providing greater retention time of feed that include high levels of added liquids in the conditioner. Two new processes have been proposed (Carmichael, R.Q., 1981). One describes a long term conditioning process involving retention of feeds in a ripening kettle. The other, which is still in a developmental stage, involves double pelleting with intermediate ripening of feed. Pellets produced by the two new processes are said to be of higher quality than by the standard process.
5.3 Feasibility of using manufactured feeds for aquaculture
Feed cost represents 40 to 60 percent of total operating cost in intensive aqua-culture. For a fish farm to be profitable, feed cost should not exceed 20 percent of the farm-gate value of the product if the feed used is the dry type, and not more than 10 percent if moist type pellets are employed. Typically, a ton of dry pelleted feed, based on conventional ingredients, in a developing country that relies upon imports for most of its supplies of feed protein supplements ranges from US$ 300 to US$ 400, depending upon its protein content. To this must be added:
(a) manufacturing cost. This can vary from US$ 5 to US$ 10 per ton depending on energy cost, which accounts for 70 percent of total manufacturing cost;
(b) marketing expenses. Normally this represents about 1 percent of the product value; and
(c) operating margin. Generally speaking, feed manufacturing is a high-volume, low-margin business. Margins as low as 2 percent are not uncommon.
The cost to the farmer, then, ranges from US$ 320 for a ton of 27 percent protein feed for tilapia and carp to US$ 425 for one that contains 40 percent protein for trout. At these prices, the farmer breaks even if tilapia and carp fetch US$ 1.60/kg and trout US$ 2.13, at the farm gate ^1^/. Current prices for these fishes, especially for trout, in most countries are considerably higher, indicating the feasibility of employing industrial feeds for their production.
^1^/ Assuming that feed conversion for both trout and the warm water species, on their respective feeds, are similar.
<section>7</section>
REFERENCES
American Chemical Society, 1969. Fifteenth meeting, September 1968. Symposium on natural food toxicants. J. Agric. Food Chem., 17:413-538
Atack, T.H., K. Jauncey and A.J. Matty, 1979. The utilization of some single cell proteins by fingerling mirror carp (Cyprinus carpis). Aquaculture, 18:337-48
Bondari, K. and D.C. Sheppart, 1981. Soldier fly larvae as feed in commercial fish production. Aquaculture, 24:103-9
Brandt, T.M., 1979. The use of heat treated full-fat soyabeans in channel catfish and golden shiner feeds. Paper presented at the Texas Fish Farming Conference, Texas A & M University, College Station, Texas, January 17-19, 1979, 15 p.(mimeo)
Bywater, A.C. and R.L. Baldwin, 1980. Alternative strategies in food-animal production. In Animals, feed, food and people, edited by R.L. Baldwin. Am. Assoc. Adv. Sci. Sel. Symp., (42):1-30
Carmichael, R.Q., 1981. Recent developments in conditioning. In Proceedings of The Holmen feed production Symposium '81. pp. A(1) to A(12), Baringstoke, Hampshire, Holmen Chemicals Ltd., pp. A(1)-A(12)
Chow, K.W., G.L. Rumsey and P.W. Woldroup, 1980. Linear programming in fish diet formulation. In Fish feed technology. Rome, UNDP/FAO, ADCP/REP/80/11:241-86
Devendra, C., 1979. Malaysian feedstuffs. Serdang, Malaysian Agricultural Research and Development Institute (MARDI), 145 p.
Disney, J.G., 1979. Prospects for fish silage in Malaysia, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and the Philippines. IPFC Occas. Pap., (1979/1):51 p.
Disney, J.G. and D. James (eds.), 1980. Fish silage production and its use. Papers presented at the IPFC Workshop on fish silage production and its use. Jakarta, Indonesia, 17-21 September 1979. FAO Fish. Rep., (230):105
FAO, 1981. FAO production yearbook. Annuaire FAO de la production. Anuario FAO de producción. Anuario FAO de producción, 1980. FAO Stat.Ser./Collect.FAO:Stat./Colecc. FAO:Estad., (34)
Fowler, L.G. and J.L. Banks, 1976. Animal and vegetable substitutes for fish meal in the Abernathy diet, 1973. Progr.Fish-Cult., 38:123-6
Fowler, L.G. and J.L. Banks, 1976a. Fish meal and wheat germ meal substitutes in the Abernathy diet, 1974. Progr.Fish-Cult., 38:127-30
Gohl, B., 1980. Tropical feeds. FAO Anim.Prod.Health Ser., (12):529 p.
Harris, L., 1980. Feedstuffs. In Fish feed technology. Rome, UNDP/FAO, ADCP/REP/80/11:111-70
Hastings, W., 1975. Indonesia. Preliminary testing of artificial feeds manufactured from local ingredients for milkfish and shrimps. A report prepared for the Brackish Water Shrimp and Milkfish Culture Research and Development Project. Rome, FAO,FI:DP INS/72/003/2:12 p.
Hickling, C.F., 1962. Fish culture. London, Faber and Faber, 295 p.
Jackson, A.J., B.S. Copper and A.J. Matty, 1982. Evaluation of some plant proteins in complete diets for the tilapia Sarotherodon mossambicus. Aquaculture, 27:97-109
Kanshik, S.J. and P. Luquet, 1980. The influence of bacterial protein incorporation and of sulphur amino acid supplementation to such diets on growth of rainbow trout, Salmo gairdneri Richardson. Aquaculture, 19:173-75
Koops, H. et al., 1976. Die verwertung von sojaprotein durch die regenbogenforelle (Salmo gairdneri). Arch. Fischereiwiss., 26:181-91
Liener, I.E., 1978. Protease inhibitors and other toxic factors in seeds. In Plant proteins edited by G. Norton. Longon, Butterworths, pp. 117-40
Ling, S.W., 1967. Feeds and feeding of warm-water fishes in ponds in Asia and the Far East. FAO Fish.Rep., (44) vol.3:291-309
Lovell, R.T., 1977. Digestibility of nutrients in feedstuffs for catfish. In Nutrition and feeding of channel catfish, edited by R.R. Stickney and R.T. Lovell. South.Coop.Ser.Bull. Ala.Agric.Exp.Stn., Auburn Univ., (218):33-7
Lovell, R.T., 1981. Cottonseed meal in fish feeds. Feedstuffs, Minor., 53, issue of December 21:p.28
McDowell, L.R. et al., 1974. Latin American table of feed composition. Gainesville, University of Florida, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, 509 p.
Meske, C. and E. Pfeffer, Growth experiments with carp and grass carp. Arch.Hydrobiol., Beih 11:98-107
Meske, C. and E. Pfeffer, 1978a. Tests on micro-algae, yeast and casein as components of fish meal free dry food for carp. In Animal research and development. Tubingen, Institute for Scientific Co-operation, Vol. 7, pp. 112-21
Meyers, S.P., 1981. Utilization of shrimp processing wastes in diets for fish and crustacea. In Seafood waste management in the 1980's, edited by W.S. Otwell. Rep.Univ.Fla., (40)
Ogino, C., C.B. Cowey and J.Y. Chiou, 1978. Leaf protein concentrate as a protein source in diets for carp and rainbow trout. Bull.Jap.Soc.Sci.Fish., 44:49-52
Oyenuga, V.A., 1968. Nigeria's foods and feedingstuffs. Ibadan, Ibadan University Press, 99 p.
Raa, J. and A. Gildberg, Fish silage; a review. MS (in press)
Randall Robinette, H., 1977. Diet formulations. In Nutrition and feeding of channel catfish, edited by R.R. Stickney and R.T. Lovell. Coop.Ser.Bull.Ala.Agric.Exp.Stn. Auburn Univ., (218):38-42
Randall Robinette, H. and A.S. Dearing, 1978. Shrimp by-product meal in diets of channel catfish. Prog.Fish-Cult., 40:39-40
Reinitz, G.L. et al., 1978. Full-fat soybean meal in rainbow trout diets. Feedstuffs, Minn., 50, issue of January 16
Reece, D.L. and D.E. Wesley, 1975. A blood meal rumen contents blend as a partial or complete substitute for fish meal in channel catfish diets. Prog.Fish-Cult., 37:15-9
Rumsey, G.L. et al., 1981. Dairy-processing wastes as a replacement protein source in diets of rainbow trout. Prog.Fish-Cult., 43:86-88
Sen, K.C., 1978. Nutritive values of Indian cattle feeds and the feeding of animals. New Delhi, Indian Council of Agricultural Research, 92 p.
Soong, P., 1980. Production and development of Chlorella and Spirulina in Taiwan. In Algae biomass, edited by G. Shelef and C.J. Soeder. Amsterdam, Elsevier/North Holland, Biomedical Press, pp. 97-113
Steffens, W., 1981. Protein utilization of rainbow trout (Salmo gairdneri) and carp (Cyprinus carpis); a brief review. Aquaculture, 23:337-45
Takenchi, T., T. Watanabe and C. Ogino, 1979. Digestibility of hydrogenated fish oils in carp and rainbow trout. Bull.Jap.Soc.Sci.Fish., 45:1521-5
Tiews, K., J. Gropp and H. Koops, 1976. On the development of optimal rainbow trout pellet feeds. Arch.Fischereiwiss., 27:1-29
Viola, S. et al., 1981. Partial and complete replacement of fish meal by soybean meal in feeds for intensive culture of carp. Aquaculture, 26:223-36
Watanabe, T., 1982. Lipid nutrition in fish. Comp.Biochem.Physiol., 73B:3-15
Wattanutchariya, S. and T. Panayoton, 1982. The economics of aquaculture: The case of Catfish in Thailand. In Aquaculture economic research in Asia. IDRC-193 e
Anon., 1982. Feed hope or multimillion pound white elephant. Milling Feed Fert., 165(4):27-9
Consultancy reports referred to in text
EGY/80/002, Artificial feeding for polyculture of carp, tilapia and mullet at the Zaweya Fish Farm Egypt (In press)
IND/75/031, Carp nutrition research at the Freshwater Aquaculture Research and Training Centre, Dhauli. FI:DP/IND/75/031, Field Document 4. May 1982
MAL/77/008, Diet development for sea bass, grouper and penaeid shrimp culture in Malaysia (In press)
MEX/77/002, Diet formulation for selected species for aquaculture in Mexico (In press)
RAS/76/003, Fish nutrition research at the NIFI Lead Centre for Aquaculture in Thailand (In press)
TCP/TUN/0104(I), Préparation d'un plan de développement de l'aquaculture (In press)
VEN/79/002, Pisciculture Venezuela (In press)
<section>8</section>
ANNEX
CHECKLIST FOR FEED INGREDIENT SURVEY
CHECKLIST FOR FEED INGREDIENT SURVEY
CHECKLIST FOR FEED INGREDIENT SURVEY
