<title>Wood for energy</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
For their daily energy needs more people depend on wood than on any other single energy source. In this respect, wood can still be counted the world's most important fuel. Unhappily, it is also in desperately short supply. While some 2000 million people still use wood for domestic heating and for cooking, the gap between what they need and what they can obtain easily is now large and grows larger every day.
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) is therefore devoting much attention to the question of obtaining energy from forests. For the first time in the history of organized forestry, providing people in the developing countries with the fuelwood they need has to be included as a major goal of the forestry institutions.
The emphasis on wood for energy need not detract from the other vital functions of forestry. Trees grown for energy can also help restore stability and fertility to the land, increase agricultural production, and improve the quality of rural life - thereby helping to reduce migration to the city. In fact, forests for energy should now be a major part of any rural development programme.
The role which trees can play in easing world energy problems is much broader than is generally realized. Fuelwood and charcoal have, until recently, been regarded simply as subsistence fuels, but it is now clear that they are also fuels of the future.
Fuelwood and charcoal are relatively cheap to produce, compared to fossil fuels, and are derived from a renewable source of energy which can be grown in most countries. Trees offer a range of ecological, agricultural, and social advantages which cannot be paralleled by any other energy source. It is not surprising that today many developed countries are reinvestigating the possibilities of mobilizing more of their forest biomass for energy. In the developing countries, energy plantations may well provide a novel and exciting springboard for development.
This booklet describes both the present problems and the promise which the future holds in the field of energy forestry. There are now more than 30 FAO projects in this field and others are planned. This publication records some of the achievements to date; but, more importantly, it is intended to encourage still greater use of FAO expertise in forestry for energy in the future.
Edouard Saouma
Director-General
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
<section>2</section>
Problems and promises
The fuelwood problem
The human cost of fuelwood shortages
Forests and fuel: An overview
The role of FAO
The fuelwood problem
In 1980 nearly half the world population depended for its energy needs on one fuel: wood. Wood is thus the most commonly used source of energy in the world. For the inhabitants of the developing countries, it is much more than that: it is the staple energy resource of three-quarters of the population. In some of the poorest African nations it still accounts for more than 90 per cent of national energy consumption.
Although fuelwood and charcoal provided only 6.2 per cent of world energy supplies in 1981, most of the wood removed from forest was used for energy- 59 per cent of it in the world as a whole and 85 per cent of it in the developing countries. On average, every person in the developing countries consumed about 0.45m^3 of wood, as fuelwood or charcoal, a year. This is the energy equivalent of about 4.2 gigajoules* (GJ) or 1200 kilowatt-hours (kWh) a year.
* 1 GJ is 10^9 joules and is the energy equivalent of about 35kg of coal or 70kg of dry hardwood
In 1981, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) published a map of the fuelwood situation in developing countries. It revealed that of the 2000 million people who depended on wood, 96 million were already unable to satisfy their minimum energy needs for cooking and heating. A further 1052 million people were in a deficit situation' and could meet their needs only by depleting wood reserves. Out of this total of 1148 million people, more than 64 per cent lived in Asia. Shortages were most acute in the arid regions of Africa, in the mountainous areas of Asia, particularly the Himalayas, and on the Andean plateau in Latin America. Overall, a further 400 million m^3 of fuelwood were needed to make good the deficit.
These are the essential statistics of the current fuelwood crisis. However, the situation is worsening rapidly. Projections for the year 2000 suggest that, without immediate action to improve the situation, 2400 million people will by then either be unable to obtain their minimum energy requirements or will be forced to consume wood faster than it is being grown. By the year 2000 the world fuelwood deficit will have reached 960 million m^3 a year - the energy equivalent of 240 million tonnes of oil a year.
This figure provides a clue to the cost of failing to provide the developing countries with the fuelwood they require. Were the deficit in fuelwood in the year 2000 to be met by increased oil consumption, the cost would be - even at today's price of $30 a barrel for crude oil - about $50 000 million a year.
Obviously the deficit will not be made good in this way. The cost is too high and the developing countries - most of whom are net petroleum importers - cannot afford the foreign exchange which would be needed. In practice, the cost of the fuelwood crisis must be measured, less accurately but more painfully, in terms of human suffering.
The scale of the problem was assessed in a study carried out by FAO for the Technical Panel on Fuelwood and Charcoal of the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Energy Sources held in Nairobi in August 1981. The Panel estimated the cost of meeting basic energy requirements in fuelwood, mainly by tree plantation schemes, at $1000 million a year (1980 prices) for 20 years in the developing countries. This estimate did not include the cost of building up the institutions needed to do the work which, it was thought, might double the cost for the first ten years. As the Panel reported, "There is no risk of over-estimating the magnitude of the necessary efforts."
The human cost of fuelwood shortages
The global statistics of the fuelwood crisis conceal what it means to run short of the energy needed for cooking and heating. Most rural homes in developing countries have no supply of gas or electricity, oil is virtually unobtainable and kerosene can provide a substitute only for the wealthy minority, mostly in urban areas.
As fuelwood becomes scarce, women and children - who are usually responsible for heating the home and cooking the food - are the first to suffer. Rural dwellers have to walk farther and farther to collect the bare minimum of wood needed for survival. And town dwellers must rely on supplies which come from farther and farther away. In Upper Volta's capital Ouagadougou, fuelwood now comes from sources which are on average 54 km away. Every day an average of 1563 fuelwood deliveries are made to the city, of which only 187 are motorized - the rest are made on foot or by bicycle, camel or donkey. In Bangladesh, the charcoal consumed in the city of Dhaka is manufactured more than 300 km away.
Map below shows the 'fuelwood deficit situation' in developing countries. By the year 2000, some 2400 million people will either be short of wood or will be using it faster than it is being regenerated China not included
In Zaire, families in Kinzono on the Bateke plateau require between one and two sacks of charcoal a month to meet their basic needs. The cost of charcoal has now reached $300 a tonne which means that a single sack will cost about one-third of a worker's monthly wage. In the poorer parts of the Andean Sierra and in the Sahel as much as 25 per cent of all household income must be spent on fuelwood and charcoal - a figure which rises to 40 per cent for some East African households.
Difficulties in acquiring sufficient fuel, whether because of distance or cost, lead to hygiene and nutrition problems. Few of the principal food crops in developing countries are palatable or even fully digestible unless cooked. If cooking is skimped because of lack of fuel, protein intake is often lowered. In many areas families can eat only one cooked meal a day instead of two simply because they lack fuel. Agricultural practices are changing because vegetables which can be eaten raw are often preferred to other, perhaps more nutritious, crops which need cooking.
The effects of fuelwood shortage extend far beyond the individual family. A lack of this basic fuel produces a chain of reactions affecting the nature of rural society, its agricultural base and the stability of its environment.
As fuelwood becomes scarcer, substitutes are eagerly sought. In a rural society, agricultural residues are virtually the only alternative and such materials as straw, dried dung, rice husks and even plant roots are burnt. Where these materials formerly provided a useful animal feed, there is a consequent loss to the food production system. Where they were formerly returned to the land, the latter becomes improverished, deprived both of the essential nutrients in the waste and of the humus it would otherwise provide. It has been estimated that in Nepal every tonne of dung which is burnt deprives the country of SO kg of grain.
A related effect occurs where, as in parts of Senegal, a tree cover of species which are naturally nitrogen-fixing, such as Acacia, is removed. Soil fertility declines and in the end the land must either be abandoned or brought back into production with expensive artificial fertilizer.
Land on which the tree cover has been drastically reduced soon suffers from a variety of other ill-effects. It becomes increasingly susceptible to soil erosion, both by wind and by heavy seasonal rainfall. This, in turn, encourages desertification. And soil which is eroded from one place usually ends up somewhere else where it is not wanted - on the bed of a new reservoir or the bottom of a fast-flowing river. Siltation and flooding can then become major problems.
Forests and fuel: An overview
It has been suggested that the solution to the fuelwood problem is to find an alternative energy source for the developing countries. Unfortunately, as the Panel on Fuelwood and Charcoal pointed out in 1981, "There is no alternative source of energy that could provide a viable substitute for fuelwood... within the next quarter century."
In one sense, this is no bad thing. The best alternative to fuelwood is more fuelwood - and the reason is that providing energy in the form of renewable wood solves far more than a drastic energy shortage. Wood plantations can take many different forms and provide many different advantages. As well as yielding fuel, they can help provide timber for homes and village industries, restore fertility to the land, halt desertification, prevent soil erosion, reduce flooding, provide animal forage and improve the climate. No other alternative form of energy can offer such a broad prospectus.
Most of what has been published about forest energy stresses the magnitude of the fuelwood problem but this is only one aspect of the story. In the long run, the role of forest energy in world development is likely to be far more positive. Even today, there are many countries in which fuelwood supply is much higher than demand. In those countries, this important and renewable energy source will play, and already is playing, a key role in national development. Wood, after all, is a cheap and renewable form of solar energy. As one report has put it, "Despite much research, no one has yet invented a cheaper or more adaptable system for capturing and storing solar energy than leaves and wood."
Wood energy can provide a 'soft transition' from a traditional economy and technology to a more advanced one - a transition which, when made with the help of fossil fuels, is often abrupt and unsettling. Many countries are already using forest energy not only to meet the domestic needs of cooking and heating but to meet industrial ones as well. Fuelwood and charcoal have many positive features as sources of commercial energy. They are ideal, of course, for providing both process heat and shaft power for forest industries - sawmilling, chipping, panel production and pulp and paper making, for example. In most cases these industries can now be run more profitably off forest energy than they can off fossil fuel.
Secondly, there are many small-scale, predominantly rural industries where fuelwood or charcoal can provide a convenient source of heat. These include crop drying, brick making, pottery firing, lime production and even the manufacture of cement. Thirdly, forest energy is also used extensively in heavy industry, notably in mineral smelting where charcoal is in some countries the preferred fuel. Finally, the use of fuelwood and charcoal for electric power production is being intensively investigated - and, in fact, a handful of countries is already generating electricity in this way.
It is also significant that the uses of fuelwood are now being intensively investigated in the developed countries. In 1981, 53 million m^3 of fuelwood were harvested in Europe, 104 million m^3 in North America and 78 million m^3 in the Soviet Union. In Sweden about 8 per cent of primary energy consumption comes from wood, and a number of other European countries have intensive development programmes for wood energy.
In the long run, restoring and increasing the number of trees in rural areas is likely to provide more advantages for less expenditure than any other comparable technique for dealing with the fuelwood crisis. But solving the fuelwood problem cannot be conceived as an isolated issue, separate from related problems of rural development, agricultural production and environmental stabilization. The effective solutions will be those which include energy forestry as part of a more general development strategy, and which reap all the rewards which trees can offer, including the supply of fuel.
Villagers in Mali return from a long trek for fuelwood, using donkeys to pull their over-laden carts' Many town dwellers in the Sahel countries now rely on wood which is transported more than 50 km
Cattle browse discontentedly among the stumps of what was once an olive grove in Pakistan long since removed for fuelwood. Soil erosion soon follows the deforestation of steep slopes like these
The role of FAO
FAO, within its Regular Programme, is making determined efforts to improve the fuelwood situation and to help developing countries mobilize more of their forest biomass to provide energy and other goods and services for rural development. It disseminates the information thus produced very widely and acts as a clearing house for the exchange of information on wood energy topics. The development of suitable training material and programmes is also a major area of work.
As part of this work, FAO's Forestry Department is monitoring the changing patterns of fuelwood supply and demand in the developing countries. It is thus in a position to identify areas where there are critical shortages now and where they may occur in the future; and to recommend what kinds of projects are needed to correct them. It is also involved in evaluating the impact of fuelwood shortages and studying the cost of using agricultural waste and animal dung as substitutes for fuelwood. A particularly important area is the preparation of case studies of successful fuelwood production schemes. It is producing technical monographs on the use of different tree species for energy and studying the economics of different ways of growing fuelwood.
In addition, FAO now operates the Forestry and Rural Energy Programme - which is essentially a field programme financed through Trust Funds provided by donor nations. The object of this programme is to help developing countries improve their fuelwood supply by mobilizing additional resources with which to attack the problem. Special importance is attached to the 25 least developed countries which are now experiencing increasing fuelwood scarcities. The aim is to provide the kind of advice and technical expertise needed to develop sizeable programmes to improve fuelwood supply as part of rural development.
A successful programme of this type may well involve using a number of different techniques. Initially, more research may be needed - for example, into fuelwood demand patterns in certain areas or into the most appropriate tree species for use in replanting schemes. Secondly, demonstration projects may need to be arranged to ensure the full participation of local people. Thirdly, extension workers will need to be trained so that they can instruct villagers on plantation techniques and forest management. Fourthly, a country's forestry institutions may need reorganizing and upgrading. In many areas, organized forestry has totally ignored the fuelwood problem and has sometimes taken active steps to prevent local populations from using forests as a source of fuelwood. Consequently, many rural dwellers have become hostile to forestry institutions. Altering this situation must be a major goal in any fuelwood programme.
Finally, good progress can often be made by promoting technical cooperation within developing countries (TCDC). The key here is to establish links between the research and forestry institutions in countries which share similar problems in the same region. In this way, expensive duplication of effort can be avoided and important advances in technique can be rapidly disseminated. FAO has already taken the first steps in organizing a regional energy forestry network of this kind in Asia and others are planned in Africa and Latin America.
<section>3</section>
Energy for subsistence
A strategy for action
Increasing the productivity of existing resources
Creating new resources
Improving fuelwood distribution
Improving conversion technologies
Finding substitutes for fuelwood
Nepal: A case study
A strategy for action
Forests have an important role to play in human development. It is FAO's view that forests can do much more than provide energy for subsistence, and that their role in providing energy for development will ultimately be just as important. For the moment, however, the issue of energy for subsistence has priority because the current fuelwood problem is so acute.
One aspect of the fuelwood problem is encouraging: the solutions are largely known. The critical factor, however, is time the problem has already reached crisis proportions for millions of people and will get rapidly worse without swift action. This action, as has already been stressed, must be taken within the context of integrated rural development.
FAO's Forestry Department has identified five major tactics in the battle against fuelwood deficits. In most field programmes, these tactics will be combined to produce an action plan operating on several different fronts simultaneously. The tactics are:
1. Increasing the productivity of existing resources Putting existing woods and forests under management, particularly by local populations, can increase productivity by as much as 50 per cent. Resting over-worked areas can also be very beneficial and using all existing biomass - including non-forest areas, shrubs, bushes and what is normally regarded as 'waste' - can increase fuelwood supply substantially.
2. Creating new fuelwood resources Planting stands of fast-growing trees presents no serious technological problem. In many areas new plantations can start to yield fuelwood within a few years. The cost may appear high - one estimate shows that delivered fuelwood from new plantations costs $2-4/GJ, compared to about $5/GJ for crude oil. However, the former involves no foreign exchange costs, provides a multitude of other advantages and should eventually become financially self-supporting. Generally, plantations need not compete for land with other agricultural practices. If 2-5 per cent of available land is planted with trees, there need be no net loss of agricultural production - indeed, in some areas, tree planting actually increases food production.
3. Improving fuelwood distribution A key factor in the price of fuelwood and charcoal is the distance over which it must be transported to the user. FAO studies indicate that fuelwood cannot be transported economically over distances of more than 100 km but that the limit for charcoal is in the region of 800 1000 km. There is an urgent need to organize and increase the efficiency of the fuelwood industry by such means as establishing marketing cooperatives, price structures and improved storage facilities.
4. Improving conversion technologies There are three possible ways of improving the efficiency with which fuelwood and charcoal are used and made: pre-processing the fuel, by pressing it into bundles for example; increasing the efficiency of charcoal production (traditional methods waste up to 60 per cent of the energy value of the wood); and large-scale dissemination of efficient woodstoves, combined with efforts to improve cooking efficiency. An efficient wood stove can produce fuel savings of 30 per cent or more for a small cost. In some cases, changes in cooking habits can also produce similar savings.
5. Finding substitutes for fuelwood The impact of substitution over the next two decades is likely to be limited but, biogas and solar energy can usually make some contribution. Fossil fuels may have to be used, regardless of cost, in areas where appropriate forestry solutions cannot be implemented in time to avert a disastrous fuelwood shortage.
Before a programme combining these techniques can be devised, however, it is essential to assess the fuelwood situation in the country concerned. For example, an FAO study of this type in Upper Volta surveyed urban and rural fuelwood and charcoal consumption, the role which other fuels played in the domestic economy and the value of the fuelwood and charcoal industries. Data were also accumulated on the potential of existing resources. The survey showed that Upper Volta could, perhaps surprisingly, provide sufficient fuelwood and charcoal for its own needs - but that there were huge imbalances, creating acute scarcities in certain regions: some of the largest resources were virtually inaccessible. The government of Upper Volta is now preparing its national fuelwood plan on the basis of this information.
FAO's fuelwood strategy comprises five major tactics for combatting fuelwood shortages, each involving several techniques. Most fuelwood projects involve the integration of several or all the tactics to produce a scheme which is compatible with overall plans for rural development
A similar study in Bangladesh revealed a very different situation one where fuelwood use was, in fact, marginal simply because so little was available. Homestead forests, which supply most fuelwood, were being cut at about 10 per cent a year while their growth rate was only 5 per cent a year. Overall, the survey showed a forest products deficit of some 800 000 m^3 a year over and above what was sustainable. On the basis of this and other information, FAO was able to make recommendations to Bangladesh on how best to reduce future shortages.
Increasing the productivity of existing resources
There should, in theory, be no such thing as a fuelwood shortage. The theoretical potential annual growth of the world's forests is estimated at 110.10^9 terajoules (1 terajoule is 10^12 joules) - several hundred times total world energy consumption. One of the problems, however, is that severe local shortages can exist in spite of global abundance. Another is that best use is rarely made of what does exist. Improving the productivity of existing resources is obviously much cheaper than establishing new plantations. Active management is needed not only of the forests themselves, but also of all other types of tree cover - open scrub, small woodlots and even of trees grown for other purposes such as fruit, fodder or shelter. Even simple protection measures can sometimes increase yield by more than 50 per cent. Before the productivity of existing resources can be increased, a number of basic institutional problems has to be faced. Traditionally, forestry has rarely included
the production of fuelwood as one of its specific aims. On the contrary, many forestry services have been established to promote forest industries, such as paper and pulp, and to protect forests against the incursions of local people. In many countries, foresters and local populations have come into conflict. In the light of the current fuelwood crisis, this has to change. The provision of fuelwood must become one of the major goals of national forestry services, and every attempt must be made to win the support and help of local people. Only if they are actively involved in managing and controlling their fuelwood supplies is there any hope of averting worsening problems in the future. There are six basic preconditions to improving the productivity of existing resources:
· production of fuelwood will have to become a major goal of national forestry policy
· national policy must reconcile the conflicting demands of preserving forests for timber production and providing fuelwood for local people
· new legislation must be passed to provide local people with access to fuelwood resources and stimulate them to become involved in forest management and control
· forestry institutions must be strengthened so that they can help local people manage their own fuelwood resources sustained yield management practices must be adopted to stimulate forest biomass production
· the fuelwood potential of existing resources must be surveyed and publicized
One important reason for the low productivity of today's forests is past unplanned use, resulting in a low level of yield. Introducing scientific forestry practices can ensure high and sustainable yields. Out of 881 million ha of productive closed forests in the world, only about 41 million ha are now being managed on sustainable yield principles, providing a continuous supply of forest products, including timber and fuelwood.
An FAO project which took place in Ghana during the 1970s demonstrates the advantages of new practices (and the waste inherent in some old ones). In Ghana, the original forest has been extensively cut in the past for valuable hardwood species. Although the forest remains, it is not highly productive. Such forests are often simply felled and burnt, and then replanted for specific products such as paper and pulp.
This practice is not only wasteful but encourages the growth of weeds on the cleared land - so much so that as many as 12 separate weedings may be needed before the new trees become finally established. On 57 000 ha of the Subri River Forest Reserve in south-west Ghana, however, it was decided to adopt a new technique.
The forest was cleared for replanting with fast-growing species suitable for pulp and fuelwood. As much as possible of the felled timber was saved and sold as lumber, fuelwood or charcoal. The natural forest was left untouched on all steep slopes, stream banks and in swamps.
This technique had a number of advantages. Because the timber was not burnt on site, the weed problem was greatly reduced. Valuable local species were saved yet the open canopy that resulted for the first two or three years allowed crops of plantain and cassava to be grown between the rows of newly planted species. In essence, the technique substitutes the non-productive activities of burning and weeding for the productive ones of sawmilling and charcoal-making.
Charcoal burning on the Subri River Forest Reserve in Ghana. When the area was replanted for paper pulp fuelwood and charcoal were sold off, and agriculture encouraged between the rows of tree seedlings. Returns exceeded cost by several hundred dollars a hectare
The cost of this exercise, of course, was high. However, the returns from the sale of the felled wood exceeded the conversion cost by several hundred dollars a hectare, even without taking into account the benefits of the extra food production and the advantages to local entrepreneurs who made the charcoal.
The Subri Conversion Technique, as it is now called, could be adapted for many other countries. It is now a well-proven way of making better use of existing resources - resources which have a high potential. Recent FAO studies have shown that the wood available per hectare for fuel amounts to 100-200 m^3 in the tropical high forest of Suriname, 88 m^3 in the Cerrado region of Brazil, 75 m^3 in the Terai area of Nepal, 50 m^3 in the Ivory Coast and as much as 30 m^3 in the central southern part of Upper Volta.
However, big savings can also be made by making better use of forest wastes. Nearly half of what is cut in the forest is wasted and though much of it is in the form of small branches, twigs and leaves, techniques do exist for compressing such material into bundles and tying them with straw or wire. Bundles like this burn best if they contain a piece of wood in the middle and they provide steady burning suitable for cooking, unlike the material in its loose state which burns erratically and quickly. Simple hand presses for bundling can be made cheaply by local blacksmiths.
Similarly, small particles of wood, sawdust and charcoal waste normally virtually impossible to burn - can be compressed into briquettes. Although this can be done without a binder, the equipment involved is expensive and the drying process energy-intensive. Simple handpresses can be made to produce briquettes using any number of locally available binders - fish waste, resin, tar or animal manure. In Poland a production line process is used to make fuel briquettes from wood bark.
Many of these products have a surprisingly high calorific value. For example, a briquette containing 30 45 per cent charcoal dust, 30-45 per cent chopped twigs and 15-20 per cent manure burns comparably to a medium-quality hard coal. However, few of these techniques have yet been tried out in developing countries. They need to be developed in combined programmes aimed at improving the design and distribution of stoves, because fuel which has been compressed in some way cannot usually be burnt satisfactorily in an open fireplace.
Another way of increasing production is to incorporate fuelwood projects within other agricultural practices. Often the inclusion of fuelwood trees as part of a mixed economy can have important results. In Thailand, smallholders in a coastal area south of Bangkok have begun responding to that city's shortage of charcoal. Although most of the farmers own only 1-10 ha of land, they have evolved a system in which they use their land for mangroves, shrimp ponds and salt pans. The mangroves are converted to charcoal. In this way the smallholders benefit to the maximum extent possible by selling a mixture of energy, food and minerals.
Most of the tools needed for bundling and pelletizing fuels can be made by a local blacksmith. These and other techniques could increase the yield of existing fuelwood resources by up to 20 per cent (a)
Most of the tools needed for bundling and pelletizing fuels can be made by a local blacksmith. These and other techniques could increase the yield of existing fuelwood resources by up to 20 per cent (b)
In Bangladesh, the intensive use which is made of homestead land is somewhat similar. There, individual families plan multiple uses for the land which surrounds their houses in order to make the family more or less self-sufficient in both food and energy. Even individual trees are intensively managed and used.
An existing resource can also be rejuvenated just by leaving it alone for a period. An FAO project at N'Djamena in Chad has shown that simply fencing off areas of natural vegetation and controlling grazing and fuelwood collection for a time can be more effective than new plantation.
Using simple techniques to improve the fuelwood potential of existing resources, it seems possible that production could be increased by an average of 20 per cent. This figure can be used to check the economics of improving what already exists as against planting new areas for fuelwood. New plantations may well be essential but improving production from existing resources is normally the first thing worth looking at. Though implementation may be difficult, the gains can be particularly rewarding.
Creating new resources
The FAO study "Agriculture: Toward 2000" estimates that if all fuelwood shortfalls are to be made good by the end of the century, enough trees must be planted to provide an additional 1000 million m^3 of wood in-20 years) time. This means planting several thousand million trees.
The Nairobi Plan of Action, adopted at the UN Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy in August 1981, recommended that the annual rate of tree planting in developing countries be increased by a factor of five by the end of the century. This formidable task is made more difficult by the fact that the areas in which new trees are most needed are often those in which population pressure is high and environmental conditions are unfavourable. Indeed, it is often pressure on the land which has led to deforestation, soil erosion and fuelwood shortage in the first place.
In such areas, of course, there is little hope of introducing large-scale, block plantations. But there are other possibilities. These include woodlots, shelter belts and the introduction of trees in gardens, on waste land and along roads and rivers, on a collective as well as an individual basis. FAO has been acquiring experience in providing new resources in all these ways over the past few years. One of the main lessons to be learnt is that encouraging farmers to plant trees on an individual basis is often the most effective method.
Worker examines a one year old gao plant (Acacia albida) in a millet field in eastern Niger. Because they are nitrogen-fixers, these trees can increase the yields of millet and sorghum by three or four times if planted in the same nerds as the crops
In the State of Gujarat, in India, the State Forest Service began to plant roadsides and canal banks with trees in the early 1970s. There was little public involvement in the operation but it served to improve the local population's confidence in the forestry department. It also convinced villagers that trees could be grown on marginal land, and between fields, in such a way that it would not interfere with agricultural production. Free seedlings and advice were given to anyone interested, and a massive publicity programme was mounted. After only a few years, tree planting had increased so much that the 50 million seedlings distributed in 1980 were not enough. In 1982 farmers planted 100 million seedlings; in 1983 they were expected to plant 200 million. By the end of 1982 a total of 13 330 km of roadsides and 2 051 km of canal banks had been planted, covering a total area of nearly 30 000 ha. One reason for this intense activity was the growth of cash markets for fuelwood
and poles in nearby towns.
Intelligent legislation, particularly at a local level, can also produce positive results. For example, in the largest city of Gujarat a completion certificate for a new building cannot now be obtained until at least five trees have been planted round it.
The idea of encouraging individuals, particularly farmers, to plant trees has been tried elsewhere. In the Cape Verde Islands, the President has declared it official policy to plant a million trees a year for the next ten years. The policy is backed by extensive publicity campaigns on radio and in the newspapers. In the Philippines, the President has declared that every citizen over the age of ten must plant one tree a year for the next five years.
However, while tree planting may work on an individual basis, this does little to help the landless or the tenant farmer on a short lease. Much attention has therefore been given to communal solutions, such as the village woodlot, which in effect give villagers access to trees even though they own no land.
One of the most successful of these schemes has been in the Republic of Korea. Fuelwood has been in short supply there for many decades but by the early 1960s the problems produced by soil erosion and flooding, as a result of tree felling on steep slopes, had become critical. The government therefore adopted measures to enable every village to plant its own woodlot. Villages were encouraged to set up a Village Forestry Association (VFA) which carried out the work with the help of a government subsidy. Steep or marginal land was used for the woodlots and remarkable coordination was achieved between local, regional and national organizations. Within five years, by 1978, more than 1 million ha had been reforested; 240 000 ha for fuelwood and the rest for fruit and timber. In addition, another 4.4 million ha had been brought under some form of management and a total of nearly 3054 million seedlings had been sown by the 20 000 VFAs then in existence. Nearly all the major
objectives of a 10-year programme begun in 1973 had been completed four years ahead of schedule.
The success of village forestry in the Republic of Korea is attributed to a number of factors:
· villagers were already committed to the idea of rural development, and the forestry schemes were well integrated in this broader programme
· a step-by-step approach was adopted; villagers were not asked to do too much too quickly
· there was cooperative action between government and individuals in which 'top-down' and 'bottom-up' planning were combined
· multipurpose trees were chosen to provide quick returns of fuelwood, timber, fruit and nuts
· research and development were used to provide information about the appropriate species and planting techniques
· villagers were provided with the finance, materials and information they needed promptly and efficiently
· new laws resolved ambiguities as to who had responsibility for what and villagers were encouraged to police their own resources and protect them from abuse.
Nevertheless, the cost was high. The five-year programme cost $600 million, of which 60 per cent had to be found from government resources. The importance of community participation in such schemes is also shown by China's experience. Between 1949 and 1978 a mass mobilization of the Chinese people resulted in an increase of China's forests by 72 million ha. Again, the importance of rural development was already established and local organizations existed to do the work. In China, forestry is closely associated with agriculture. For example, Chinese farmers established a 1 500 km long shelter belt in just two seasons in the north-west of the country. Between 1958 and 1975 10000 ha of windbreaks were established in Fu Kou county and 74 million trees - 140 per person - were planted. Forestry programmes in Chouchou county, including planting 16 million trees, have helped to double agricultural production in ten years. Examples such as these prove the importance of integrating
fuelwood schemes with agriculture and rural development. FAO has provided advice and technical assistance for fuelwood plantations in many other countries including Cape Verde, Nepal, Niger, Peru, Senegal, Sudan, Tanzania, Upper Volta and Zaire. While some of these projects are still in their early stages, it is clear that success depends critically on involving the local people, establishing the project within the broader context of rural development and ensuring that village-level institutions exist to take responsibility for woodlot management. In Gujarat, where individual planting has been more successful than community schemes, FAO is now helping the Indian government assess the impact of one of the oldest social forestry programmes in which work started nearly 15 years ago.
FAO's largest fuelwood project - currently taking place in Peru is for a series of rural plantations to help rejuvenate the Sierra area in the Andes where the forests have virtually disappeared. The government's goal is to produce 9 million m^3 of wood a year within 15 years, with a plantation programme rising from 10 000 to 60 000 ha/year. Cost over the first five years is estimated at $80 million. The National Reforestation Programme was launched in 1980 to carry out the work. FAO is the executing agency for a trust fund project, financed by the Netherlands, set up to help the Instituto Nacional Forestal plan and execute the reforestation programme, and to help rural communities plant and maintain the new forests. The experience gained in Peru is likely to be of great importance for similar schemes in other parts of the world.
Block plantation can also be a key ingredient in supplying urban centres with badly needed fuelwood. In Ethiopia the town of Dire Dawa is surrounded by sparse bushland, supporting only a few nomadic pastoralists. Fuelwood used to come from a hilly region some distance away but this is now largely deforested. The village woodlot solution is inappropriate here because there are, in effect, no villages. Instead, an FAO project is aimed at establishing 400 ha of managed forest in the bush, training people to make and use improved woodstoves, and finding the best species to provide fuel and poles as well as some fodder for the pastoralists on whose land the project is taking place.
Chinese workforce tends a plantation of single-stem bamboo in Hubei province. If fuelwood shortages are to be avoided by the end of the century, several thousand million new trees must be planted to make good the anticipated 1000 million m^3 fuelwood deficit
A similar project plans to supply the town of Kinzono on the Bateke plateau in Zaire with the estimated 500 000 tonnes of charcoal a year it is expected to need by the end of the century. The project would cost $27 million and would involve replanting some 100000 ha with Acacia auriculiformis, to yield 10-12 m^3 ha/year of fuelwood. The project should become self-financing, from sales of timber and charcoal, by its ninth year. Eventually, it should provide employment for as many as 10 000 people.
Chinese workers demonstrate the easy way to improve the distribution of wood on the Bai Yang Ha river in Hunan province. There are possibilities of using similar techniques in African countries such as Benin
Improving fuelwood distribution
A major factor in improving fuelwood supplies is distribution. Methods always have to be found of getting the product from where it grows to where it is to be used. Distribution is often the key to satisfying a demand for fuelwood.
Most rural dwellers have always regarded fuelwood as what economists call a 'free good'- something which costs only the labour of carrying it from the forest to the hearth. But free energy, like free grazing, is subject to the tragedy of the commons: an overstocked commons cannot supply all that is needed and it is in no one's interest to take less. However, current fuelwood shortages are at least beginning to make one important point clear: if fuelwood is to be continuously available within reasonable distances and at reasonable cost, it must be planted, managed, harvested, distributed and sold.
Urban dwellers, on the other hand, have rarely regarded fuelwood as a free commodity. They have had to buy both fuelwood and charcoal in the market place. As supplies have become scarcer, and as wood and charcoal have had to be carried further, so prices have risen.
Over the next few years the supply of rural fuelwood will become increasingly commercialized and the concept of firewood as a free good will disappear. Not only is this inevitable; it is desirable - in spite of the excessive profits which may be exacted by rapacious middlemen, and of the difficulties which inflexible bureaucrats may introduce. A properly organized system for the distribution and sale of fuelwood will do much to protect the rural poor from exploitation by the urban middle classes.
Transport is the most important factor in determining the cost of fuelwood. In Nepal in 1975 the cost of collected fuelwood from government forests was $1/m^3; this rose to $8/m^3 if delivered to a nearby town and to $16/m^3 when delivered to Kathmandu.
According to a study sponsored by FAO in the early 1980s, the cost of planting and managing fuelwood is generally about $0.6 to $1.0/GJ, the cost of harvesting $0.35/GJ and the cost of transport at least 0.8 cents/GJ-km for fuelwood and 0.4 cents/GJ-km for charcoal. These figures, given in 1978 values, compare with a cost for crude oil of about $5/GJ. It follows that the price of fuelwood begins to approach that of oil when the distance transported is in the region of 400 km; and charcoal becomes as expensive as oil at about 800 km. In practice, the distance over which it is economic to transport fuelwood is considerably less. It rarely pays to use lorries to transport fuelwood over distances of more than 100 km.
But there are other means of transport. In Scandinavian countries, in North America and in many parts of China, logs are traditionally floated to sawmills by river. In Nigeria, Lagos is supplied with fuelwood - exceptionally for an urban centre it uses little charcoal - brought in by canoes. Water transport may have new uses elsewhere. FAO has made a study of floating fuelwood from new plantations in the north of Benin down the Ouémé river to the urban areas surrounding Cotonou in the south. The idea seems feasible but only under certain conditions and when the river is in flood. Other FAO studies have examined ways in which the wood-rich areas of the west coast of Africa could be used to supply both fuelwood and charcoal to the Sahel countries. One study has concentrated on supplying the city of Ouagadougou in Upper Volta with fuel from the forests of the Ivory Coast.
Such schemes offer potential benefits to both parties, providing fuel for one and a new industry and employment for the other. In fact, the organization of a fuelwood industry can create many jobs. Supplying Ouagadougou with fuelwood provided work for about 16 000 people in 1980; the value of the fuelwood industry needed to supply that one town was about $4.7 million a year.
Sale of fuelwood is often an important source of income for the rural poor and in India studies have shown that it is usually the poorest - the landless and the jobless - who depend on selling firewood. Many of those who now have to travel long distances to collect fuelwood do so not only to provide fuel for the home but also to provide a modest cash income as well. The danger is that the urban centres, with their huge appetites for fuel and their ability to offer cash for payment, will ultimately deprive the rural dweller of the trees on which he depends for his own energy.
New fuelwood plantations must be accompanied by a formally organized fuelwood industry. Where trees have been planted at considerable cost, perhaps with the help of international loans, the product is not in any sense free. Marketing cooperatives and associations need to be organized, a price structure worked out and storage facilities established so that stocks can be accumulated to satisfy demand when supply is low.
The production and marketing of charcoal is already a commercial business in most countries, and one which is now likely to expand significantly because it is economic to transport charcoal over much greater distances than are viable for wood.
In Benin new fuelwood plantations are being created in the north of the country but the fuel is needed in the south, in the urban areas round Cotonou. One solution may be to float the timber down the River Ouémé when it is in flood
Improving conversion technologies
There are three important ways of increasing the efficiency with which fuelwood is converted into useful energy: improving the efficiency of charcoal production, persuading consumers to use improved cooking stoves, and making economies during cooking itself.
Charcoal manufacture is a wasteful business - between about 30 and 60 per cent of the energy originally present in the wood is lost during carbonization. Because of this charcoal has often been blamed for fuelwood shortages. As one commentator put it:
1 tonne charcoal = 6 cubic metres of wood = rapid deforestation.
Yet the equation is not that simple. Charcoal is an excellent fuel, with a calorific value comparable to that of good quality coal and about twice that of wood. It neither rots when stored nor smokes when burnt, is light and hence cheap to transport and imparts a delicious flavour to food cooked over it. The energy losses incurred during production are no larger than those of a power station. And because charcoal is usually burnt in stoves, and because those stoves are usually more efficient than those which burn wood, it may in fact be nearly as energy-efficient to use charcoal as it is to use fuelwood. Production is therefore only one aspect of the charcoal industry and overall efficiency depends on a whole chain of operations from wood harvesting to use.
Casamance earth kiln is an appropriate technology for charcoal making developed in Senegal. Horizontally stacked wood at the base allows circulation to a metal chimney made from three oil drums - the only item requiring investment ($75)
a sand
b grass and straw
c air inlets
d chimney
e tar condensate pipe
An FAO project in Benin is aimed at satisfying some of the urban energy needs in the south of the country with charcoal production from forests farther north, using mobile charcoal kilns. But in projects such as these, where huge quantities of wood are being carbonized, it is obviously important to produce the charcoal as efficiently as possible. Many of the traditional methods of making charcoal use an earth pit, the wood being covered with grass, brushwood and then loose earth. Yields are only 15 to 20 per cent by weight. The carbonization cycle takes 20-30 days and so charcoal makers tend to earn very little. In some countries portable metal kilns are now being introduced which increase efficiency considerably and speed up the cycle to only 3 4 days. But they cost around $5000 and most charcoal makers are unable to repair or maintain them. Because of this, many producers return to earth pits unless organizations are created to help them finance repairs and replacements.
Brick kilns appear to be a more efficient and reliable technology.
In Senegal, however, an FAO project has produced encouraging results from an appropriate technology charcoal technique, based on the earth pit. Known as the Casamance earth kiln (after the area in which it was first developed), it differs from the traditional technique in that the wood is stacked on a circular platform of logs and a metal chimney, consisting of three oil drums welded together, is provided. Yield is 24-36 per cent by weight, equivalent to about 50 per cent on an energy basis. Carbonization time is cut by two-thirds and the only cost is about $75 for the chimney.
The consumer is the one who benefits - or should benefit when a stove capable of burning either fuelwood or charcoal efficiently is used instead of an open fire. FAO has been active in this area since 1961 when it introduced its first stove project in Indonesia. Since then, it has been involved in stove projects in many other countries.
A Honduran farmer's wife cooks beans on a clay stove in the open air. Stoves like these can be made for $10 or less and may reduce fuel consumption by 30 per cent
It is often claimed that stoves can reduce the amount of fuel needed for cooking by up to 50 per cent, though 30 per cent might be a more realistic figure. This is because the efficiency of open fires is thought to be only 5-10 per cent.
There has been a renewed interest in stoves since the development of the Lorena stove in Guatemala, a project which for the first time seemed to break the price deadlock. In developing countries, stoves are only really useful if they are so cheap ($ 10 or less) that they can be afforded by everyone. The Lorena stove is named from the Spanish words 'loco' meaning mud end 'arena' meaning sand. A stove which is built entirely of mud and sand, with the exception of one or two metal dampers, should be within the economic reach of almost everyone. Similar stoves called 'Ban ak Suuf' - again the local words for mud and sand - are being introduced in Senegal.
One of the problems is that this type of stove does not last long - on average 1-2 years. With use, it gradually crumbles and loses efficiency. Clearly, more research is needed into stoves which are cheap and durable.
There is now some evidence that traditional cooking systems such as the open fire need careful re-evaluation. For instance, many rural families are in real need of lighting and cannot afford kerosene. They use an open fire to provide light, as well as heat and a means of cooking and heating water. A stove provides no light. Further, women who use an open fire can draw on a long tradition of managing the fire in such a way as to burn fuel as efficiently as possible and to make maximum use of this system's flexibility and adaptability.
On the other hand, it is clear that a stove can improve the domestic environment quite dramatically. Ridding the atmosphere of smoke and improving ventilation are two major advantages. Another is that there are fewer burns from stoves than from open fires. Where space heating is important, there is no doubt that the improved energy-efficiency of a stove can produce major savings in fuel consumption. For all these reasons, where the stove is an appropriate solution there is a need to disseminate knowledge of the technology involved very widely.
Senegalese women making the 'Ban ak Suuf - mud and sand stove. The drawings are based on originals by an African artist involved in the wood stove programme
Finding substitutes for fuelwood
If it is seldom possible to find substitutes for fuelwood, it is becoming easier to find supplements for wood energy: biogas or solar energy in one form or another, fossil fuels (particularly kerosene) and of course agricultural residues. Generally, it is better to use the latter as a feed for a biogas plant than to burn it directly because fermentation will produce an improved fertilizer while the fertilizing value of waste which is burnt is usually lost.
Fuelwood substitutes or supplements are an important part of any national fuelwood plan. If fuelwood shortages are very severe, it may be necessary to introduce supplements in the form of fossil fuels on a temporary basis, until new plantations, for example, begin to yield a crop. Many nations have acquired experience of subsidizing a fossil fuel in urban areas to relieve pressure on rural supplies.
India has tried subsidizing the use of coal and kerosene in towns and cities, and reduced fuelwood and charcoal consumption as a result. Attempts have been made to introduce butane in urban areas in Senegal, though with less success. Gambia has banned both the production and the use of charcoal. The Republic of Korea has pressed on with rural electrification. As a result of this and other actions, fuelwood consumption fell from 55 per cent of total energy consumption in 1966 to only 19 per cent in 1979.
One problem is that it is hard to introduce substitutes for domestic fuel if, as is often the case, housewives are attached to the traditional fuels and cannot afford the cost of either the substitute fuel or the equipment needed to use it. But there may be an alternative. Many rural industries, such as brick making, pottery firing and tobacco drying, consume large amounts of fuelwood and can be more easily persuaded to change to a fossil fuel than the average housewife; indeed, there may be other advantages in making the change, such as increased efficiency and better control of process heat.
An Ethiopian woman cooks 'n'jera', the national Ethiopian dish, on a cooker fed with biogas. Biogas plants may well be worth installing simply for the extra fertilizer they provide - the gas can often be considered as a free bonus
Nepal: A case study
A successful fuelwood programme is currently taking place in Nepal. A joint government/World Bank/UNDP/FAO project, it illustrates how the fuelwood tactics just discussed must be combined with strong government action, institution building, training and research if such projects are to succeed.
In 1977 the government passed legislation to encourage the panchayats - the clusters of villages which represent the smallest administrative units in Nepal - to manage their local forests. Two types of forest were created: panchayat forests (PF) which were essentially waste land requiring replanting, and panchayat protected forests (PPF) which needed only protection and management.
With the way thus open for communal forestry to re-establish itself in Nepal, attention was given to the necessary institution-building and training which would be needed to provide the back-up to communal action. A Community Forestry and Afforestation Division was established within the Forestry Department. This Division had specific responsibilities for selecting the species to be planted, running the nurseries that were needed, providing training and extension services, and monitoring and evaluating the programme as it progressed. At the same time training facilities were expanded to provide the additional foresters needed, and forestry research was considerably strengthened.
Three of the five fuelwood tactics are being used in Nepal to increase forest cover and improve the efficiency with which the fuelwood is burnt:
1. The productivity of existing resources is being increased by getting the panchayats to protect and put under management some 39100 ha of PPF.
2. New resources are being created in two ways: by planting 11750 ha of PF, and by providing 900 000 saplings for private planting. This part of the project involves setting up nurseries in each of the 340 hill panchayats which are involved in the project.
3. Conversion technologies are being improved by disseminating locally developed clay and ceramic stoves. The aim is to introduce 15 000 stoves which should save fuelwood equivalent to the annual requirements of 4000 households (25 000 tonnes of firewood a year).
The project is succeeding through a combination of training, education, extension and demonstration work which is, in effect, informing nearly everyone in the hills of the possibilities of the programme. Furthermore, the mechanisms exist for turning villagers into the forest watchers and guards that are needed and for providing the community forestry assistants to help the villagers work out what to do.
The five-year project will cost $24.8 million. Eventually, it should provide roughly one-third the fuelwood requirements of 570 000 people and sufficient leaf fodder for 132 000 cattle. Agricultural production will also be increased because less dung and crop waste will be used as fuel. According to one estimate, as much as 156000 tonnes of grain a year will be saved, nearly one-third the total production of the hill region.
<section>4</section>
Energy for development
The distillation of wood
The promise of gasifiers
Electricity from wood
The importance of charcoal One relatively simple way for a country to use its forest resources for development is to promote its charcoal production for domestic ends or for industrial use. An FAO study in Cameroon has shown that, simply by improving the efficiency of charcoal production and introducing improved stoves, about 1.9 million m^3 of fuelwood a year could be freed for other purposes. The use of kerosene in towns and cities could thus be reduced and life in rural households made much easier. Furthermore, the move would free some of the imported fossil fuel for other uses, such as chemical feedstock.
There are good arguments for promoting a charcoal industry wherever wood fuel has to be transported long distances. Such an industry also provides a number of social and economic benefits. It will:
· create employment
· distribute money from the urban to the rural sector
· save foreign exchange
· earn foreign exchange if the charcoal is exported
· provide a chemical and fuel base for industry
· increase forest profitability
· provide a smokeless fuel for cities
Charcoal production can be particularly profitable in forests where valuable hardwoods are grown. Here the more valuable trees will benefit if the less valuable species are regularly thinned out. This is a time-consuming task which is often not cost-effective. But if the thinnings are turned into charcoal, the forestry cost is nil, and wood which would otherwise have been wasted is turned into fuel. At the same time jobs are created.
The existence of a charcoal industry can provide both small and large industries with an alternative to fossil fuels. Charcoal is, in fact, the preferred fuel for some small-scale rural industries. Mixed with limestone it can be fired to produce quicklime. It can also be used as a pulverized fuel to produce cement - about 1 tonne of charcoal is needed to produce 4 tonnes of Portland cement.
Its reducing properties are also useful in metal extraction where it is held to be as good as, if not better than, coke. Charcoal-iron industries exist in Brazil, Argentina, Malaysia, Australia and India. The Brazilian steel-making firm Acesita uses about 480 000 tonnes of charcoal a year for steel smelting, 250 000 tonnes of it supplied from eucalyptus plantations grown for the purpose. Charcoal also has many uses as a chemical raw material, rather than a fuel, in water purification and sewage works, and in the manufacture of materials such as gunpowder, pigments, rubber and some animal feeds.
Finally, an FAO study has shown that a number of countries could export charcoal to neighbouring countries, with beneficial results for both, providing certain economic problems can be overcome and excessive import taxes are not charged.
The distillation of wood
Charcoal is a useful by-product of wood obtained by the process of carbonization. Other valuable products can be obtained by treating wood in different ways. Destructive distillation (also known as pyrolysis or wood distillation) is similar to carbonization except that the wood is heated in a closed container and the gases and liquids given off are collected. Some of the gases can then be condensed to provide a range of useful chemicals; those that do not condense can be used as a gaseous fuel for the distillation process itself, or for some other use.
One tonne of dry wood treated in this way produces 300 kg of charcoal, 140 m^3 of combustible gas, 14 litres of methyl alcohol, 53 litres of acetic acid, 8 litres of esters, 3 litres of acetone, 76 litres of wood oil and light tar, 12 litres of creosote oil and 30 kg of pitch. Many of these products can be used directly and others can provide chemical feedstocks for other industries.
Wood distillation is really another way of making charcoal. The equipment needed is more complicated than that for conventional charcoal production but the process is also more energy-efficient. Making charcoal in a retort and condensing the effluent gases can substantially increase the amount of energy recovered. Countries which made their charcoal in this way would have much to gain simply from the extra energy obtained. In addition, they can use the by-products in simple but effective ways; for example, in Ghana and Costa Rica the gases produced are used to dry fuelwood used in heating systems and the liquids employed as an effective wood preserver.
The potential energy savings of this technique have been studied in detail for Ghana - a country which produces about 100 000 tonnes of charcoal a year. This is equivalent to some 420 000 barrels of fuel oil. The yield is 15 per cent and so about 700 000 tonnes of dry biomass are needed. With new pyrolysis equipment, some 500 000 tonnes of charcoal, oils and gases could be recovered, representing 70-80 per cent of the energy content of the original biomass, and worth the energy equivalent of more than 2 million barrels of oil. The difference of more than 1.5 million barrels of oil is worth about $45 million in foreign exchange at today's prices and is equal to nearly a quarter of Ghana's total energy consumption.
The new fuelwood technologies have considerable potential. FAO is promoting their use, for example, by publishing technical manuals on both simple and industrial methods of making charcoal. It is also helping a number of developing countries by organizing training courses, workshops and seminars on charcoal production. In addition, it is helping countries evaluate the possibilities of using fuelwood as a substitute for the industrial use of fossil fuels, as in the "Wood for Energy" programme in Honduras. There studies are being made of the technical and economic possibilities of using fuelwood in the cement, lime and brick-making industries; and in generating steam for use in the food processing and forest products industries.
Of the three main types of gasifier, the updraught model (A) is usually used to provide gas for direct heating and the downdraught model (B) for shaft power. The crossdraught model (C) is now produced commercially in Brazil and is used for running engines of up to 50 kW power A updraught (a)
a biomass
b gas
c drying
d pyrolysis
e reduction
f combustion
g grate
h air
Of the three main types of gasifier, the updraught model (A) is usually used to provide gas for direct heating and the downdraught model (B) for shaft power. The crossdraught model (C) is now produced commercially in Brazil and is used for running engines of up to 50 kW power B downdraught (B)
Of the three main types of gasifier, the updraught model (A) is usually used to provide gas for direct heating and the downdraught model (B) for shaft power. The crossdraught model (C) is now produced commercially in Brazil and is used for running engines of up to 50 kW power C crossdraught (c)
a moisture drawn off
b tars and other volatiles driven off
c C+2H[2]® CH[4]
C+H[2]O® CO+H[2]
C+CO[2]® 2CO
d C+O[2]® CO[2]
e burning char
f ash
The promise of gasifiers
Pyrolysis should not be confused with the process of gasification in which wood, charcoal or other organic materials are burnt in a restricted air supply, giving off a combustible gas in the process. This gas, called producer gas, can be used for a variety of purposes; it is an ideal fuel for either petrol or diesel engines and hence can be used in transport, to run stationary motors and to produce electricity.
Many industrial uses of wood have a long history and are now being rediscovered by developing countries unable to afford huge bills for importing fossil fuels when their exports are declining, Gasification is one of these technologies. It was last used on a wide scale in Europe during World War II when it kept 700 000 vehicles running at a time when other fuels were virtually unobtainable. In 1941 the Swedish state railway company was operating more than 100 trains on producer gas.
Today gasifiers are being produced in the Philippines where 44 per cent of export earnings are spent on fuel imports - for only $50 per kilowatt (kW). In its first year of production the Filipino firm of GEMCOR sold 850 small gasifiers: 450 rated at 12 kW to power the small inshore fishing boats called bancas; another 200 rated at 45 kW to power irrigation pumps; and the rest to run light commercial vehicles. GEMCOR was expected to sell 4 000 units in 1983 and the Filipino demand for gasifiers is estimated at 419 000 over the next five years achieving an energy saving worth more than $ 1 000 million on oil imports.
In Brazil, some 60 companies are involved in gasifier technology Gasifiers are being used to run vehicles, power furnaces and kilns, and to produce lime (an industry in which it is claimed that gasifiers can reduce wood consumption from 2.5 to 0.8 tonnes of wood per tonne of lime produced). In Brazil only charcoal is used as a fuel for gasifiers because this reduces the cost of the equipment - gasifiers using other fuels must be capable of getting rid of large quantities of sticky tar. Maize husks, wood waste in the form of chips or blocks and coconut shells can all be used to fire gasifiers. Research is still needed on more difficult fuels such as sawdust and rice husk briquettes.
In Paraguay, second hand engines have been modified to run off producer gas. Since 1981, the Sapire sawmill - and the houses of nearby labourers - have been supplied by electricity generated in this way. This has saved substantial quantities of diesel fuel, which previously had to be purchased in the nearest town 100 km away. FAO has also designed an integrated energy system for Sri Lanka. The idea behind this project is to demonstrate the feasibility of using wood gasification to generate electricity in rural communities. Finland is supporting this Trust Fund project.
In many parts of Thailand the wood waste from the sawmilling industry is not put to constructive use. However, recent FAO reports suggest that it would be economic to feed gasifiers with woodchips and use the gas to produce electricity. Experiments at the Sri Maharaja Sawmill in Cholburi Province claim that 54 kg of chips can produce 14 kWh of electricity. Small units on nearby farms might be used to increase productivity - experiments in the Philippines suggest that gasifiers can be profitably used in crop drying and rice milling. Gasifiers fed on coconut husks and shells are already supplying electric power on the Pacific Islands of Zahiti and Kiribati and are being built in Western Samoa for copra drying.
A similar technique which FAO is promoting in Costa Rica is the development of a small convertor to produce charcoal from sawdust, and at the same time produce energy in the form of heat, electricity or shaft power via a steam engine. The fine particles of charcoal which result from the process are valuable in the production of cement and lime, and as reducers in the metallurgical industries, and can be used to save considerable quantities of fossil fuels.
A related but simpler technology, which may once again be of considerable economic interest, is that of the traditional boiler and steam engine. With the new technologies and materials which are available today, cheap and efficient machines can now be coupled to a boiler run on such fuels as sawdust, rice husks and straw. These fuels can be burnt in their natural state, without expensive preparation. Boilers of this type can now burn several different fuels simultaneously, even mixtures of solids, liquids and gases.
All the techniques mentioned so far involve some knowledge of chemical and mechanical engineering. The only way of producing fuels which are similar to oil products from trees directly is to find a species which exudes a latex with the right technical properties. Several are currently being investigated, most of them members of the euphorbia family. Calculations have suggested a plant processing 1000 tonnes of Euphorbia lathyris a day, from a 13000 ha plantation, could yield 80 tonnes of oil a day at a cost of $40-60 a barrel. Other calculations have suggested that euphorbia oil could be produced for as little as $20 a barrel.
Modern gasifiers in action: (1) in the lime production industry in Brazil
Modern gasifiers in action: (2) in a Filipino fishing boat
Modern gasifiers in action: (3) powering a concrete mixer in the Philippines
Modern gasifiers in action: (4) powering a tractor in Brazil
There are other possibilities. Sunflower oil, for example, is already used as an additive to diesel fuel in some countries. The Brazilian plant Copaiba multijuga produces oil in its leaves and a borehole in its trunk can provide a yield of 20 30 litres in 2-3 hours. Diesel engines have been run off oil taken directly from this tree.
However, more research is needed before any of these naturally-producing trees can be expected to yield a commercial fuel. One exciting possibility for the future is that genetic manipulation might be used to tailor a tree to produce a fuel with such good specifications that it might not need further refining.
Electricity from wood
The wood-processing industry has, naturally enough, nearly always used wood fuel to power some of its activities. However, the paper industry is particularly energy-intensive and has come to rely heavily on oil. An FAO study carried out by a Finnish firm has concluded that, in the developing countries, wood can provide energy for mills producing paper and newsprint more cheaply than oil, whether the wood is used to produce process heat in the form of steam, or power in the form of electricity.
Similar conclusions have been reached for mills producing sawn lumber and wood panels. Although wood-fired plants are more costly to build than oil-fired ones, they are much cheaper to run. The extra investment required, according to the FAO report, is paid back in 3 to 4.5 years as a result of fuel savings. Sawn wood, according to this calculation, would cost $11/m^3 with fuel oil as the energy source but only $6 7/m^3 using wood fuel. Similar savings are possible when producing plywood.
There are now also real possibilities of using timber to generate electricity economically outside the area of forest industries. One place where this technology is being tested is in the Pacific islands, where imported fuel is very expensive and many of the trees in coconut plantations are nearing the end of their useful life.
Replanting is needed but burying or burning the old trees is expensive. However, a recent FAO study suggests instead that the old trees be turned into electricity - and indeed that large coconut plantations could provide a steady stream of fuel for power stations. If the cost of felling, splitting and removing the timber is regarded as a charge against replantation, the result can be very cheap electricity.
Sawmills are ideal for conversion to wood power. An FAO report suggests that sawn wood can be produced for $11/m^3 using fuel oil as the energy source but for only $6-7/m^3 using wood fuel
The report analyses three sizes of plant - a 20 kW generator to be run 8 hours a day to supply a Fijian village with power, a 100 kW set to supply a coconut research station on the island of Santos in Vanuatu and a 1000 kW installation for an urban centre on Efate Island in Vanuatu. A power station of 1000 kW could be run for one week either on 41270 litres of diesel or on the wood from about 5.5 ha of senile coconut plantations. The island has 7000 ha of coconuts and production could be sustained if 250-300 ha were replanted every year. This would provide sufficient timber to run the power station continuously. The report concludes that the electricity would be considerably cheaper than if diesel were used; similar plants could be built in Tonga or Papua New Guinea, for example.
Wood-fired power stations - otherwise known as dendrothermal plants - have already been built elsewhere, in areas not blessed with an abundance of old coconut trees. In India the State of Gujarat operates one such plant, fuelled from specially grown plantations. In the Philippines, extensive plans are being made for dendrothermal plants which will be fuelled with ipil-ipil (Leucaena leucocephala) grown in nearby plantations. The first unit of 3 megawatts is being built at Pangasinan, Cape Bolinas, on the island of Luzon. It will be followed by others. By 1990 there is expected to be as much as 200 MW of wood-fired generating capacity in the Philippines.
Such activities are not confined to developing countries. Ireland, for example, has a long history of generating electricity by burning peat. Many of its peat fields, however, are now depleted. Ireland plans to replant the exhausted areas with trees, and use the wood produced to fire power stations on a continuous basis. Several other developed countries are also investigating the possibilities of dendrothermal plants.
<section>5</section>
The FAO wood for energy programme
The table below lists some of the most important FAO fuelwood projects. Although the programme has grown rapidly, much still remains to be done if the ambitious targets of the Nairobi Plan of Action are to be met. The most important of these is that the annual rate of afforestation for fuelwood in developing countries be increased by a factor of five by the end of the century. This is an absolute minimum: the needs of many of the rural poor will not be met unless afforestation proceeds even faster. In addition, a massive complementary effort is needed to manage existing resources, and to increase the efficiency with which fuelwood is used.
A specific programme to achieve these objectives was outlined at a meeting of the UN Interim Committee on New and Renewable Sources of Energy, held in Rome in June 1982. The most important objective in the fuelwood programme was identified as helping the developing countries execute their national fuelwood programmes.
Some FAO Wood for Energy projects
Country
Funding Source
Value ($1000)
Duration
Type of project
Bangladesh
United Nations Development Programme
5 years
analysis of supply and demand for fuelwood
Bangladesh
United Nations Development Programme
3 years
community forestry for fuelwood
Bangladesh
United Nations Development Programme
3 years
institution building for fuelwood plantations
Burma*
5 years
development of national fuelwood programme
Cape Verde
Belgium
6.5 years
reforestation
Ethiopia
Norway
2 years
support for fuelwood programmes
Ethiopia
Technical Cooperation Programme
6 months
develop appropriate techniques for community forestry
Honduras
United Nations Fund for Science and Technology
2 years
wood for energy; oil substitution
Honduras*
4 years
afforestation for energy
India
Sweden
1.5 years
evaluation of social forestry in Gujarat
Kenya
Australia
1.5 years
afforestation; wood for energy; demonstration
Mali
Technical Cooperation Programme
1 year
nurseries for village woodlots
Mozambique
Sweden
6 years
afforestation for fuelwood and charcoal for towns
Nepal
United Nations Development Programme
5 years
fuelwood and fodder for hill communities
Nicaragua
Sweden
1 year
development of fuelwood plantations
Nicaragua*
3 years
forestry for energy and rural development
Niger
Sweden
2 years
formulation of programme on forestry for rural development
Niger*
3 years
development of community forestry, including wood for energy
Peru
Netherlands
5 years
afforestation for rural development and energy
Senegal
Finland
2 years
afforestation for rural development and energy
Senegal
Sweden
3 years
village woodlots in Louga
Senegal
Sweden
3 years
village woodlots in Bakel
Senegal
United Nations Decade for Women
1.5 years
trials of woodstoves in cooperation with women
Sudan
United Nations Sudano- Sahelian Office
community forestry for shelter, environment control and energy
Sudan
Netherlands
4 years
management of existing forests, tree planting, charcoal and stoves
Tanzania
Sweden
2 months
support for village afforestation
Thailand
United Nations Development Programme
4 years
forestry for rural development and energy
Upper Volta
Sweden
1 year
conceive local community forestry project
Upper Volta
Italy
3 years
fuelwood plantations
Asia Pacific Region*
4 years
regional wood energy development programme (technical cooperation among developing countries)
* 'pipeline' projects still awaiting definitive funding
The developing countries, particularly the 25 most seriously affected, need urgent help in assessing their resources and needs, formulating policy and identifying priorities; in research and development; in training forestry personnel and extension agents; in strengthening forestry institutions to enable them to tackle fuelwood issues; in identifying possible fuelwood substitutes; in setting up pilot and demonstration projects; and in evaluating the financial implications of large projects.
In FAO's experience, providing adequate support for an average national fuelwood programme means spending $5-6 million over three to four years, though costs obviously vary from country to country. Adequate assistance for the 25 most seriously affected countries therefore requires a programme worth about $130 million. A programme to help just five countries over an initial three-year phase would cost $22.6 million.
The Rome meeting identified a number of other important, though less costly, requirements. More research is needed on wood energy in three different terrains: arid and semi-arid areas, mountainous areas and densely populated plains. This was estimated to cost $9 million. Regional fuelwood training programmes were estimated to cost $1.5 million for each region ($6 million for the four regions). A further $4 million is needed to stimulate action in the general area of wood for development, mainly for projects on gasifiers and wood-powered rural industries.
The cost of all these programmes is thus in the region of $150 million. These resources are additional to those which were in existence at the time of the UN Conference on New and Renewable Energy Sources. It is FAO's responsibility, as the lead agency on wood energy within the United Nations system, to help generate these resources and to provide the technical assistance needed to conduct the projects which arise from them. In this way it should be possible both to contain the human, environmental and social costs of fuelwood scarcity and to lay the foundations for development paths which are based on the most important of all the renewable resources: wood.
<section>6</section>
Further reading
· Arnold, J. E. M., and Jongma, J. H. "Fuelwood and charcoal in developing countries: an economic survey". In Unasylva, 29, 118, 1978
· de Montalembert, M. R. "Biomass Resources for Energy: the critical issues". In Ceres, 91, January-February 1983
· Earl, D. E. Forest Energy and Economic Development. Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1975
· Earthscan. New and Renewable Energies 1 and 2. London, Earthscan, 1981, Press Briefing Documents Nos 27 and 28
· Earthscan. The Earthscan Guide to UNERG. London, Earthscan, 1981, Press Briefing Guide No 30
· Eckholm, E. P. The Other Energy Crisis: firewood. Washington DC, Worldwide Institute, 1975, Worldwatch Paper 1
· FAO. Agriculture: toward 2000. Rome, FAO, 1981
· FAO. Forestry for Local Community Development. Rome, FAO, 1978, FAO Forestry Paper No 7
· FAO. Forestry and Rural Development. Rome, FAO, 1981, FAO Forestry Paper No 26
· FAO. Fuelwood Supplies in Developing Countries. Rome, FAO, 1983, FAO Forestry Paper No 42
· FAO. Map of the Fuelwood Situation in the Developing Countries. Rome, FAO, 1981
· FAO. Simple Technologies for Charcoal Making. Rome, FAO, 1983, FAO Forestry Paper No 41
· FAO. Village Forestry Development in the Republic of Korea: a case study. Rome, FAO, 1982
· FAO. "Wood Energy: special edition 1 and 2." Unasylva, 33, 131 and 133, 1981
· Foley, Gerald. "Outside the Oil Economy: rural energy in developing countries". In World Energy Options, London and New York, John Wiley, 1983
· Foley, Gerald, end Bernard, Geoffrey. Biomass Gasifiers for Developing Countries. London, Earthscan, 1983, Earthscan Technical Study No 1
· Joseph, Stephen. Problems and Priorities in Developing Wood Stove Programmes. London, Intermediate Technology Development Group, 1979
· U. S. National Academy of Sciences. Firewood Crops: shrub and tree species for energy production. Washington DC, National Academy of Sciences, 1980
· United Nations. Report of the Technical Panel on Fuelwood and Charcoal. United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy, Nairobi 198 1, A Conf.100/PC/34
· United Nations. Report of the UN Conference on New and Renewable Energy Sources. New York, United Nations, 1981
· Wionczek, M., Foley, G., and van Buren, E. A. (eds.). Energy in Transition from Subsistence Agriculture. Colorado, Westview Press, in press
Prepared by Robin Clarke/Diagram Visual Information Ltd
Produced by FAO Information Division
FAO, Via delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100, Rome, Italy
Also available in Arabic, French and Spanish
I/Q4960/E/12.83/1/2000
