<title>Unasylva - No. 146 - Women in forestry</title>
<section>1</section>
Editorial
Forestry has traditionally been one of the professions in which men have been most firmly and exclusively entrenched. It is not long since forestry schools - and hence the profession itself - were, in many places, open only to men. Arguments that the nature of the work makes it unsuitable for a woman persisted in forestry long after they had disappeared in other "manly" professions. The situation is changing fast. Women now make up a substantial part of the forestry student body in many if not most countries. And women are now practicing as foresters in both public and private service in sufficient numbers to have largely dispelled the earlier myths - though as contributors to this issue point out, these myths still persist in some places.
But the principal issues that need to be addressed in any consideration of forestry and women go far deeper than the question of career and job opportunities in the forestry profession, important though that is. More fundamental are issues relating to forestry and forest products in the lives of rural women in developing countries. Three-quarters of all families in developing countries depend on wood in cooking their food - fuelwood which is used and collected mainly by women. Forests are the source of foods enriching a predominantly cereal diet with protein, vitamins and minerals; they also yield a wealth of products that women can gather and sell. Plants growing in the forest provide most of the available medicines. Trees give shade to the home, and their foliage feeds the small animals that women widely keep around the home as a further source of food and income. In many countries, women are also involved in the manufacture of minor forest products at home.
The issue of women and forestry is thus centrally embodied in the broader relationships of women, food and agriculture highlighted in every country on 1984's World Food Day, 16 October. In devoting this issue of Unasylva to the World Food Day theme of "Women and Agriculture" as reflected in forestry, FAO wishes to do more than just raise awareness of the concerns and needs of rural women. Its purpose is to stimulate action to rectify past neglect. Similarly, this issue is intended to draw attention to what needs to be done to make forestry more relevant to rural women. Since fuelwood accounts for roughly nine-tenths of all wood used in the developing world, women are the principal users of forest products. As such, they would have good reason to expect forest management to be closely tailored to their needs. In practice, the reverse is usually the case. When foresters seek local advice they turn, as men, to the men in the household or village - men whose perceptions of what
is needed or suitable will often be quite different from those of the women. Even when women act as heads of households, as is the case surprisingly often, they tend to be ignored in forest management. By failing to involve women, foresters not only fail to meet their needs but also lose the opportunity to benefit from their unique knowledge of what trees are appropriate.
As is argued in contributions to this issue, one of the measures needed to change this state of affairs is to increase the number of women foresters - particularly extension foresters - to facilitate communication and participation. But it would be unfortunate if women's interests came to be seen as just the concern of women foresters. An understanding of what needs to be done in this respect must pervade all of forestry. To this end, information assembled about women and forestry in different parts of the developing world is being disseminated by FAO. A short publication entitled Rural women, forest outputs and forestry projects, which contains the information available to date, invites readers to add more from their own knowledge and experience. In this special issue of Unasylva we extend the invitation to the wider audience of readers of this journal.
<section>2</section>
Why agroforestry needs women: Four myths and a case study
Louise Fortmann and Dianne Rocheleau
Louise Fortmann is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Forestry and Resource Management, University of California, Berkeley. California, USA.
Dianne Rocheleau is a geographer and senior scientist working with the International Council for Research in Agroforestry, Nairobi, on a Rockefeller Foundation post-doctoral fellowship.
In agroforestry projects, the involvement of women is essential in project definition, design and implementation. Yet women still, for the most part, are being excluded from involvement. Authors Fortmann and Rocheleau, after looking at four myths that are responsible for the exclusion of women from project participation, describe the purposes and results of the Plan Sierra Development Project in the Dominican Republic. This project, among its other accomplishments, clearly demonstrated possibilities for the employment and training of women in agroforestry.
Despite the crucial role of women in the development process (Boserup, 1970), development projects continue to be designed without consideration of their effect on women or of the role of women in their implementation. A study of 43 World Bank forestry projects, for instance, found that only eight made specific reference to women (World Bank, 1980). Agroforestry projects are no exception.
In part this state of affairs is due to the masculine images the word "forestry" conjures up. The reality is, however, diametrically opposed to the image. Women have traditionally played important roles in agricultural production and in the use and management of trees. The importance of these roles is, however, often obscured by the prevailing myths about the roles and status of women. Four of these myths are worth discussing.
1. Women as housewives
The first myth is that women are just housewives. In many, if not most, rural societies they are, in fact, farmers; often they bear the major or sole responsibility for food production. Region by region, country by country, ethnic group by ethnic group, detailed studies have documented the point that women's labour and women's decision-making are absolutely crucial to agricultural production and development (FAO, 1982).
A study of 95 developing countries in 1970 found that women made up between 17.5 percent (in Central and South America) and 46.2 percent (in sub-Saharan Africa) of the total agricultural labour force (Dixon, 1983). If food production alone were to be considered, these figures could be expected to be far higher. The predominant role of women in both plough and hoe agriculture has been demonstrated for sub-Saharan Africa (Bryson, 1981). The involvement of women, particularly poor women, in agricultural production in India has been reported (Sharma, 1980). Women have been demonstrated to play a major role in agricultural work and agricultural decision-making in Nepal (Acharya and Bennett, 1981; Bennett, 1981; Molnar, 1981; Pradhan, 1981; and Rajaure, 1981). Mazumdar (1982) states that in Asia "rural women constitute the single largest group engaged in agriculture and the production of food" and notes that temple murals in northeastern India show women as the "first
domesticators of plants". Colfer (1981) documents the central role of women in swidden agriculture in East Kalimantan. Women in Latin America have been shown to be actively involved in agricultural production (Albert, n.d., Deere, 1982).
Women are frequently responsible for small-stock husbandry and the feeding of larger livestock, particularly milk cows and calves. Thus, agroforestry projects that involve fodder trees, the servicing of crops by trees or intercropping of crops and trees must include women, since it is often women who grow the crops or care for the livestock that will be involved.
2. Forest products as the domain of men
A second myth is that only men are users of and responsible for trees. In fact, women are the primary users of forestry products such as fuelwood, wild foods and fodder. Wood et al. (1980) noted that women "are primarily responsible for wood collection and utilization and often the initial establishment and tending of the wood stock around the village". Bennett (1981) found that 78 percent of the fuel collection in Nepal was done by women, with 84 percent done by women and girls combined. In 1980, the Expert Group on Women and Forest Industries of the UN Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific reported that as much as two-thirds of the time collecting fuelwood was spent by women (ESCAP, 1980).
Women may also make different uses of forest products than men. The priorities of men and women in species preference for Indian afforestation programmes, for example, often conflict (Sharma, 1981). Hoskins also contrasts the interests of men and women in forest resources (FAO, 1983). Men are more likely to be interested in forest products for commercial sale and in products with end-uses farther from home. Women collect fuelwood as well as food for both humans and animals from forests and individual trees. They are knowledgeable about the burning characteristics of various species and about species that have food values. Both men and women make medicine from forest products, but for different purposes. Women also use forest products for purposes like basket-making and dyeing. It might be expected, therefore, that women would have a more detailed knowledge of trees and their uses, and indeed Hoskins (1982a) found in Sierra Leone that women could list 31 products that were
harvested or produced in nearby bushes and trees, while men could list only 8.
Women's intimate involvement with forest products and agricultural production often results in their having a greater knowledge of environmental problems than men. For example, the implementors of a soil and water conservation project in Mali discovered that local women had already undertaken conservation efforts without which the fruits of the project would have been destroyed by the new project (Hoskins, 1982b). Wiff describes a reforestation and soil conservation project in which women were deliberately denied access to credit and technical support (FAO, 1977). Nevertheless, in places where women could work even without access to credit, they led conservation efforts.
EXTENSION WORKER IN ACTION a rob where more women are needed
Thus, the presumption that it is only men who are involved in forestry is often totally wrong. In the case of fuelwood and minor forest products, it is often only women who are involved. It is women who know what is needed; who know which trees are suitable and which are not; and who will use the final product. And often they are directly responsible as well for the production and management of the crops and trees.
3. Men as heads of households
A third myth is that every woman has a husband or is a member of a male-headed household. In fact, increasing numbers of women head their own households. Sometimes this is by choice. Sometimes it is the result of personal events such as death of a spouse, divorce, desertion or abandonment, or of social trends such as male outmigration.
Whatever the cause, woman-headed households are found in substantial numbers in every region of the world. It has been estimated that between 25 and 33 percent of all households in the world (emphasis in the original) are de facto headed by women (Buvinic and Youssef, 1978). In a study of 73 developing countries, the lowest percentage of households found to be headed by women was 10.1 percent in Kuwait. The highest was in Panama, with 40 percent. Twenty-seven percent of the countries had between 10 and 14 percent woman-headed households; 43 percent had 15-19 percent; 23 percent had 20-24 percent; and 7 percent of the countries had over 25 percent woman headed households. The percentages in specific countries and specific areas within countries can be quite high. For example, in Botswana the average proportion of households headed by women in the rural areas is 30 percent, running as high as 43 percent in some places (Fortmann, 1981).
In short, the woman-headed household is an increasingly common social unit. And, as a result of heading their own households, women have assumed new roles. A historical process of women undertaking "male" tasks and working in "male" sectors in the absence of men has been reported for a number of societies (Allen, 1965; Cliffe, 1975; Kuper et al., 1954).
4. Women as passive community members
A fourth myth is that women are passive members of communities in which public influence and public action is a sphere restricted to men. March and Taqqu (1982) have documented the important influence of women's informal associations in both the private and the public sphere. Within the domestic sphere, women exercise influence on public events through their information links, which are based on lineage ties, and on their ability to withhold goods (food, beer) necessary for men's public participation.
Women's solidarity groups may take a very active stance in defending their own interests. For example, in the famous Nigerian "Women's War" of 1929, women, incensed over the rumour that an ongoing census meant that they were about to be taxed, refused to allow census takers to count them or their property. Women organized confrontations with the colonial administration that at times led to the use of armed force (March and Taqqu, 1982).
Women can gain leverage in the economic sphere through work and credit associations. They may influence events through their roles as healers or religious figures. They also participate in leadership roles in formal institutions. In Botswana they are generally the mainstay of social welfare organizations and even hold positions of authority in "male" organizations such as farmers' committees (Fortmann, 1983).
The influence of women and women's groups is demonstrated by a project in the Republic of Cameroon. Here, the men, fearing that the Government was trying to seize their land by planting trees, tore down a protective fence around the nursery. It was the women, recognizing the need for fuelwood, who persuaded them to rebuild it (Hoskins, 1982b).
Women, then, both individually and in groups, have private influence on public action by men and undertake public action themselves. The potential for women's public action in areas such as reforestation and soil and water conservation is especially high because they are the principal sufferers from environmental degradation (Fouad, 1982). It is they who must walk farther for water, fuelwood and fodder. It is they who must produce subsistence crops on increasingly degraded soils. It is they who often are both able and likely to organize the community for action.
A case study: The Dominican Republic
A case study of the Plan Sierra Development Project in the Dominican Republic can be used to examine women's involvement in different aspects of agroforestry. Plan Sierra is an integrated rural development project with strong agroforestry and reforestation components. During its first three years (1979-81) Plan Sierra developed innovative approaches to agroforestry, soil conservation, and forestry training and extension. While women were consciously included in some aspects of these programmes, their interests in "invisible" subsistence activities were nonetheless overlooked. Securing women's participation and serving women's interests were sometimes confounded. Both the successes and the failures of Plan Sierra's early years exemplify many of the key issues for women in agroforestry development projects.
Sierra production systems. The Sierra is a rugged, relatively isolated region in the Central Mountains of the Dominican Republic. Household income, health status and educational level of residents are well below national averages. The economy has suffered from boom-bust cycles in mining and lumbering. Out-migration has been high, particularly among men 20-40 years of age. The area has been largely deforested through commercial timber exploitation and the practice of shifting cultivation, which continues on the forest fringes. Soil degradation and erosion are widespread, and the region's hydrologic balance has been severely disrupted (Santos, 1981; Antonini et al., 1975).
Most agricultural production is nested within agroforestry systems based on mixtures of field crops, coffee, pasture, and forest. These are combined in simultaneous intercropping mixtures as well as in rotations over time. Most farm families manage such diverse holdings for both subsistence and commercial ends.
Coffee and cattle are the major commercial enterprises among large landowners, while smallholders sell coffee or annual crops for cash. Most smallholder households are also heavily dependent on off-farm employment. Fuelwood and water are usually also gathered off-farm. Subsistence and cash crops alike are inter-cropped. Even pastures are usually studded with multi-purpose palm trees. Local cottage industries include furniture-making, food-processing (cassava bread, cheese, candy) and production of palm-fibre containers for sale to the tobacco industry and for local use with pack animals (Rocheleau, 1984).
Women's participation. Women share with men the harvesting of annual crops and the coffee harvest (as owners and/or as hired farmworkers). Women raise the small animals (hogs and chickens) for meat and egg production, they usually milk the cows (for home consumption) and they tend patio (dooryard) gardens with vegetables, bananas and herbs. Responsibility for fuelwood- and water-gathering falls mostly on the women, with some help from the children.
As in many similar projects in Latin America, local women's participation in Plan Sierra was initially limited to health services, home hygiene and home economics.
Cheese-, candy- and cassava-processing are almost entirely women's enterprises. Palm-fibre containers are produced and sold by women with help from children and elderly family members. Women artisans also weave the palm-fibre seats and backs onto locally manufactured wooden chair frames. The weaving is subcontracted as piece-work from men's woodworking shops.
Programmes. Plan Sierra was designed as an integrated rural development project to serve a 2500-km² area. It included strong agricultural, reforestation and soil conservation components from the outset. The programme of work was divided among the technical unit (agriculture, forestry), health, education and rural organization; surveying, engineering and construction; and marketing and rural industry.
Agroforestry and forest production were included in the programmes of the technical unit. Agroforestry initiatives emphasized coffee systems. Farmers (mostly smallholders) received subsidized credit and intensive training courses to facilitate the establishment of multi-purpose shaded coffee stands. Credit and technical assistance were also provided for the establishment or improvement of fruit orchards, often inter-cropped with annual food crops (Santos, 1981, 1983).
Aside from the planting of coffee and fruit trees, tree-planting on small farms was not treated separately from the reforestation of large-scale state and private holdings. Reforestation efforts focused on indigenous and exotic pine trees for watershed management or timber. These pine species were unsuited for small-farm use, given the historical circumstances of the Sierra, where the prohibition against cutting trees (regardless of land title) has been most strongly enforced in the case of pines and other timber species. Thus, most small farmers were unwilling to plant them on their own property (Rocheleau, 1984).
Support services for agroforestry and reforestation included soil conservation, nursery development, employee training and community education programmes. Hundreds of local men were hired to construct nurseries and to engage in soil conservation and forestry training, extension, and construction activities throughout the 2500-km² project area. Technical unit personnel also promoted agroforestry and reforestation through teacher training courses in local ecology, reforestation and sustainable production systems. The teachers were later enlisted as participants and promoters in community tree-planting campaigns.
Women's role in agroforestry. As in many similar projects in Latin America (FAO, 1977), local women's participation in Plan Sierra was initially limited to health services, home hygiene and home economics (Safe and Gladwin, 1981). Women professionals were concentrated primarily in health, education and rural organization. The maturation of Plan Sierra programmes and their respective inclusion or exclusion of women provide some insight into issues that need to be addressed in future agroforestry and development projects in Latin America. The key concerns identified include access to employment, training, credit, land and appropriate technical assistance (M. Fernandes, personal communication, 1981).
Local women were initially hired as home economists, secretaries, cooks and cleaners. Eventually some of the nurseries hired women to water seedlings and to fill polyethylene bags with potting soil. Nursery supervisors considered women to be more efficient and patient at this tedious task.
Some women, who began working only reluctantly with plant propagation techniques, later acquired an active interest in such work. Plan Sierra administrators and some technical staff encouraged this trend. They trained a group of paratechnical women horticulturists who became known as the "budders and grafters". The job attained a high status and was accepted as a women's task, setting a precedent for the inclusion of more women in technical nursery work. As in many other, similar projects, sexual harassment by a few co-workers and managers made work difficult for some women employees, but administrators eventually ousted the offenders.
Home-made products from the forest in China
Home-made products from the forest in Turkey
Women began to request specific assignment to the nurseries, and a few expressed interest in conducting forestry or soil conservation fieldwork with visiting women researchers. Some of the "budders and grafters" talked of investing part of their earnings in land or small citrus groves, an option they would not have considered previously.
Technical assistance and training. Despite a high incidence of women heads of household, women were rarely direct beneficiaries of community or farm-level tree-planting. They were actively sought as volunteer labourers and promoters for community reforestation and also became involved in technical training and project implementation through the teachers' training courses. About half the teachers in the Sierra are women, and all teachers attend the same training sessions, regardless of individual specialization or prior training.
Women were seldom direct beneficiaries of technical programmes - not by design but by default. Since poor farm women were not consulted on technical project design, their concerns and needs were not adequately addressed in the technical programmes. When consulted during a mid-project evaluation of women's needs, women requested assistance with the development of water supplies, fuelwood supplies, patio gardens and cottage industries such as weaving and food-processing. Here, both fuelwood and cottage industry issues fell within the domain of agroforestry (Chancy and Lewis, 1980; Rocheleau, 1984; Safa and Gladwin, 1981).
Some of the women who produced woven containers complained of a lack of access, or dwindling, insecure supplies of palm fibre (E. Geoges, personal communication). The palms (Sabal umbraculifera Martius and others) are also important sources of wood, food and animal feed, and they are often located in pastures or fallow land owned by neighbours or relatives. The women have free access (an apparent advantage) but no guarantee of future access and no control over cutting and replacement. The palm-frond supply is both free and unreliable. Supplies in some instances were threatened by the felling of palms for cheap construction material. Many local men decided to use the trees for construction or cash income after their hog-feed value was undermined by a swine-fever epidemic and a subsequent embargo on hog-raising (Rocheleau, 1984).
The management and improvement of this disrupted multiple-use agroforestry system were not integrated into either the pasture management or the rural industry programmes. The marketing of the finished products, however, was addressed by Plan Sierra (marketing and rural industry unit), with the farm-gate price of containers nearly doubling. Neglect of the technical and management aspects of this enterprise may have been conditioned, in part, by the low cash income from (and low priority given to) such enterprises as coffee. However, the importance of this cottage industry to rural women (especially the poor) lies in the fact that it requires neither land nor capital and that work can be performed by women, children and the elderly.
The fuelwood shortage also had the greatest impact on poor families with smallholdings. Some women had closed down their cassava-bread-processing operation because of the lack of fuelwood nearby and the high cost of purchased fuelwood. Others commented on the increasing time and effort (and trespass) required to secure the same quantity of fuel for home use.
Gathering, selection, consumption and the potential for subsistence production of fuelwood in rural farms or towns were not directly addressed in any of the programmes. Research on commercial charcoal production in dry forests had been conducted in the region but these studies were not utilized during this period (Jennings and Ferreiras, 1979; Mercedes, 1980). Some trials of exotic species, including fuelwood species, were initiated in 1981 (V. Montero, personal communication, 1981), but no experiments or farm trials were conducted with proven indigenous fuelwood trees.
The fuelwood problem was not initially recognized as a high-priority issue. When the issue did arise, there was a lack of training and experience among technical staff in the choice, propagation, management and promotion of fuelwood species, particularly those suitable for planting on the farm. Nor were there any women foresters (or agroforesters) available within the country. Thus, a major opportunity to involve and serve local women in agroforestry and reforestation was lost.
Women were likely to benefit directly from the technical assistance when their cash income or food sources coincided with those most often managed by men. For example, those who had (or wished to establish) coffee holdings, as heads of household or as spouses of owners or managers, were invited to attend training courses for improved agroforestry systems based on coffee. Women were consciously included, although they were not considered to be the main clients of this training/extension/credit programme. They were, in effect, given equal access to training and equal formal commitments for technical assistance in a field considered to be a man's domain.
Obtaining credit proved to be more difficult, and depended chiefly upon marital status. Some subsidized credit and land reform programmes were included within the overall project, but lack of access to credit and land constituted a serious obstacle to the implementation of on-farm or community tree-planting projects by and for women. Credit was particularly difficult to obtain for women settled in small towns, on non-titled land or on the property of absentee husbands.
Lessons. Plan Sierra illustrates both the possibility for the employment and training of women and the need for further utilizing their experience in project definition, technology design, and extension and implementation. It demonstrates that even in regions where women do not traditionally till the soil, they can and should still be offered employment and training in nursery and horticultural techniques, some of which can be identified as "women's occupations".
The experience of Plan Sierra also indicates the need for prior consultation with women clients of agroforestry development projects about issues of immediate concern to them and about potential action to solve problems or otherwise improve their lot. This would, in many cases, imply a reordering of priorities in project identification, technology design and species selection criteria to better meet the needs of rural women, especially the poor and heads of households. The employment and training of women in fields already recognized as important (but not exclusively defined as men's work) could then be extended to the training of women personnel for more flexible roles in agroforestry extension programmes for rural families, including subsistence farmers and smallholders.
AT WORK IN CHINA tree cultivation supports agriculture
Implications for the future
The women who worked as "budders and grafters" - as well as tree planters - in Plan Sierra benefited in terms of wages and knowledge, which they could transfer to their own private economic activity. However, the number of such women was, of necessity, limited by the size of the project. The project, however, did not address two of the issues most important to rural farm women: fibre for handicrafts and fuelwood. Unless care is taken, such women's participation in a project through their labour may give them relatively little return if their needs are not considered.
The division of labour in agriculture has often resulted in men's involvement with export cash crops and women's involvement in the subsistence sector. Thus, Plan Sierra focused on the men's export crop of coffee while the women's non-export cash enterprises and subsistence activities received lower priorities. There is a clear need to establish who uses what trees for what purposes before planning a project.
Lack of access to credit and land constituted a serious obstacle to the implementation of on-farm or community tree-planting projects by and for women.
Agroforestry projects that involve fodder trees, the servicing of crops by trees, or intercropping of crops and trees must include women.
Project design must take into consideration what resources women actually have to work with. Either resource constraints must be alleviated or a project must be geared to the resources women actually control. Failure to do this will result in an exclusion of women from project benefits. In terms of contact with extension workers, the case has been made again and again for female extension workers to work with women. This strategy not only avoids the difficulties of trying to restrict male-female interaction but is likely to facilitate communication between the female farmer and the extension worker. Alternatively, reluctance on the part of the male forestry officials or extension staff to work with women can be overcome by requiring them to report their visits with women (Spring, 1983).
The nature of women's participation in agriculture has been shown to differ with their social class and control of resources (Deere, 1982; Fortmann, 1979, 1981; and Sharma, 1980). Just as the priorities of men and women may differ, the priorities of rich and poor may differ. This point is especially important to remember when women's organizations (formal or informal) are involved in promoting or utilizing agroforestry. It is often the case that only wealthier, better-educated women have the leisure time to spend in formal organizations or in training to obtain skilled employment. Such women also often capture the leadership of both formal and informal organizations. While there is a great deal to be said for utilizing the organizational capacity of women's organizations and associations, care must be taken that the poor are not excluded. Associations should be identified that are "structured so as to redistribute introduced resources equitably" and in which "all members
participate equally in or have equal access to group decision-making procedures and avenues of redress" (March and Taqqu, 1982).
Women are traditionally the prime participants in both the agricultural and the forestry components of agroforestry production systems. They are also private and public participants in community life and decision-making. The failure to include them in agroforestry projects has several detrimental effects. It excludes from project benefits the increasing proportion of rural households headed by women. It may prevent project designers from benefiting from women's special knowledge. It may exclude (or even harm) activities and commodities such as fuelwood, basket-making and minor forest products, which are part of women's economic sphere. The participation of women is essential for the success of agroforestry projects, but such participation may, in the long run, also require changes both in approach and in the nature of personnel in forestry and extension departments. Only after prevailing myths about men and women are cleared away, and after the concrete results of specific
projects like Plan Sierra in the Dominican Republic are studied, can serious changes begin to be implemented.
Bibliography
ACHARYA, M. & BENNETT, L. 1981. The rural women of Nepal. Vol. 2, part 9, of The status of women in Nepal. Kathmandu, Centre for Economic Development and Administration.
ALBERTI, A. n.d. Some observations of the productive role of women and development efforts in the Andes. (Unpublished manuscript.)
ALLAN, W. 1965. The African husbandman. Edinburgh, Oliver & Boyd.
ANTONINI, G., EVEL, K. & TOPPER, H. 1975. Population and energy: a systems analysts of resource utilization in the Dominican Republic. Gainesville Fla., University of Florida Press.
BENNETT, L. The Parbatiya women of Bakandal. 1981. Vol. 2, part 7, of The status of women in Nepal. Kathmandu, Centre for Economic Development and Administration.
BOSERUP, E. 1970. Women's role in economic development. New York, St Martin.
BRYSON, J.C. 1981. Women and agriculture in sub-Saharan Africa: implications for development (an explanatory study). J. Dev. Stud., 17 (3): 28-45.
BUVINIC, M. & YOUSSEF, N.H. 1978. Women-headed households: the ignored factor in development planning. Washington, D.C., International Center for Research on Women.
CHANEY, E. & LEWIS, M. 1980. Planning a family food production program: some alternatives and suggestions for Plan Sierra. San José de las Matas, Dominican Republic Plan Sierra.
CLIFFE, L. 1975. Labor migration and peasant differentiation: Zambian experiences. J. Peasant Stud., 5(3): 326-346.
COLFER, C.J.P. 1981. Women, men and time in the forests of East Kalimantan. Borneo Res. Bull. (Sept.): 75-85.
DEERE, C.D. 1982. The division of labor by sex in agriculture: a Peruvian case study. Econ. Dev. & Cult. Change, 30 (4): 795-811.
DIXON, R. 1983. Land, labour and the sex composition of the agricultural labour force: an international comparison. Dev. & Change, 14(3): 347-372.
ESCAP. 1980. Report of the expert group meeting on women and forest industries. Bangkok.
FAO. 1977. La mujer en el desarrollo agroforestal en América Central, by M. Wiff. Annex to the report on the FAO/SIDA seminar on the role of silviculture in rural development in Latin America. Rome.
FAO. 1982. Follow-up to WCARRD: the role of women in agricultural production. Rome, FAO Committee on Agriculture.
FAO. 1983. Rural women, forest out puts and forestry projects, by M. Hoskins. Rome.
FORTMANN, L. 1979. Women and agricultural development. In Kim, K.S. Mabele, R. & Schultheis, M.J., eds. Papers on the political economy of Tanzania. Nairobi, Heinemann Ed.
FORTMANN, L. 1981. Women's agriculture in a cattle economy. Gaborone, Rural Sociology Unit, Ministry of Agriculture.
FORTMANN, L. 1983. The role of local institutions in communal area development. Gaborone, Applied Research Unit, Ministry of Local Government and Lands.
FOUAD, I. 1982. The role of women peasants in the process of desertification in western Sudan. Geojournal, 6 (1): 25-30.
HOSKINS, M. 1982.a Observations on indigenous and modern agroforestry activities in West Africa. Paper presented at UN University workshop on problems of agroforestry, University of Freiburg.
HOSKINS, M. 1982.b Social forestry in West Africa: myths and realities. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Washington, D. C.
JENNINGS, P. & FERREIRAS, B. 1979. Recursos energéticos de bosques secos en la República Dominicana. Santiago, Dominican Republic, Centro de Investigaciones Económicas y Alimenticias, Instituto Superior de Agricultural.
KI-ZERBO, J. 1981. Women and the energy crisis in the Sahel. Unasylva (FAO), 33 (133): 5-10.
KUPER, H., HUGHES, A.J.B. & VELSON, J. 1954. The Shona and Ndebele of Southern Rhodesia, London International African Institute.
MARCH, K. & TAQQU, R. 1982. Women's informal associations and the organizational capacity for development. Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Rural Development Committee.
MAZUMDAR, V. 1982. Another development with women: a view from Asia. Dev. Dialogue, 1982. (1-2): 65-73.
MERCEDES, 1980. J. Estudios pare el diseño de un sistema de manejo integrado en áreas de bosque seco en la República Dominicana. Ag. Eng. thesis, Instituto Superior de Agricultura, Universidad Católica Madre y Maestra, Santiago, Dominican Republic.
MOLNAR, A. 1981. The Kham Magar women of Thabang. Vol. 2, part 2, of The status of women in Nepal. Kathmandu Centre for Economic Development and Administration.
PRADHAN, B. 1981. The Newar women of Bulu. Vol. 2, part 6, of The status of women in Nepal. Kathmandu, Centre for Economic Development and Administration.
RAJAURE, D. 1981. The Tharu women of Sakhwar. Vol. 2, part 3, of The status of women in Nepal. Kathmandu, Centre for Economic Development and Administration.
ROCHELEAU, D. 1984. An ecological analysis of soil and water conservation in hillslope farming systems: Plan Sierra, Dominican Republic. Gainesville, Fla., Department of Geography, University of Florida.
SAFA, H. & GLADWIN, C. 1981. Designing a women's component for Plan Sierra. Gainesville, Fla., Centre for Latin American Studies, University of Florida.
SANTOS, B. 1981. El Plan Sierra: una experiencia de desarrollo rural en las moñtanas de la República Dominicana. In Novaa A. and Posner J., eds. Agricultura de ladera en América Tropical. Turrialba, Costa Rica, Centro Agronómica Tropical de Investigación y Enseñanza.
SANTOS, B. 1983. Foresta: un problema social. Paper presented at seminar "Foresta - alternativa de desarrollo", Santiago, Dominican Republic, 30 September.
SHARMA, R. 1981. Greening the countryside. New Delhi Information Service on Science and Society. Related Issues, Centre for Science and Environment, 1-4.
SHARMA, U. 1980. Women, work and property in north-west India. London, Tavistock.
SPRING, A. 1983. Extension services in Malawi. Paper presented at the 11th International Congress of Anthropological and Ethnographic Sciences, Vancouver.
WOOD, D.H. 1980. et al. The socio-economic context of firewood use in small rural communities. Washington, D.C., US Agency for International Development.
WORLD BANK. 1980. Forestry projects and women, by G. Scott. Washington, D.C.
<section>3</section>
Standing up for trees: Women's role in the Chipko Movement
Shobita Jain
Shobita Jain is a professor in the Department of Sociology of the University of the West Indies in Saint Augustine, Trinidad. She was formerly a research associate at Jawaharlal Nehru University in New Delhi. India.
The Chipko Movement has attracted world-wide attention. The image of poor, rural women in the hills of northern India standing with their arms around trees to prevent them being cut down is a romantic and compelling one. The reality, in many ways, fits the image: the Chipko Movement can indeed be considered an important success story in the fight to secure women's rights, in the process of local community development through forestry and in environmental protection. But there are more complicated implications as well. It is important to understand the history of Chipko and the context in which it arose - and is still evolving.
· Since no society is found in a state of perfect structural equilibrium, there are always situations of conflict. Each society, moreover, has institutionalized ways and means of articulating and resolving such conflicts. If a need is felt for altering or transforming structures in a certain fashion, some form of collective mobilization of people and their resources is resorted to; such an activity is given the name of "social movement". By contrast, there is also sometimes collective resistance to social change. Social movements, in short, can aim at either changing or preserving the way things are - or both.
In the case of women's role in the Chipko Movement, it is both. (Chipko, a Hindi word meaning "hugging", is used to describe the movement because local village women literally "hugged" trees, interposing their bodies between the trees and the loggers to prevent their being cut down.) The Chipko Movement is an ecological movement, concerned with the preservation of forests and thereby with the maintenance of the traditional ecological balance in the sub-Himalayan region, where hill people have traditionally enjoyed a positive relationship with their environment. Thus, it strives to maintain the traditional status quo between the people and the environment. Its proponents have tried to demonstrate that the past and present forest policies of the Indian Government have negatively affected the ecological balance of the area and caused the uprooting of indigenous people who previously depended on forest for their survival and who preserved the forest by maintaining a strong bond
of veneration and love toward it.
The Chipko Movement, which has now spread from one end of the Himalayas in Kashmir to the other in Arunachal Pradesh, is endeavouring to alter the Government's forest policy by insisting on maintenance of the traditional status quo in the Himalayan and other forest regions of India. In this sense, there is resistance to change and to an opening up of the area for technological development.
The collective mobilization of women for the cause of preserving forests has brought about a situation of conflict regarding their own status in society. Women have demanded to share in the decision-making process along with men; hence, there has been opposition by men to women's involvement in the Chipko Movement. Women are, on the one hand, seeking alterations in their position in society and, on the other hand, supporting a social movement that is resisting change. To understand this, it is crucial to ask why women support the movement, what the extent of their awareness is, and how many women in the hill areas are actually participating in the movement.
Women and Chipko. Leaders of the Indian independence movement at one stage decided to seek women's participation, and Mahatma Gandhi gave a call to Indian women to come out of their homes to work for the cause. In the Chipko Movement, women became involved through a different process. There was a sustained dialogue between the Chipko workers (originally', men) and the victims of the environmental disasters in the hill areas of Garhwal (chiefly women). Women, being solely in charge of cultivation, livestock and children, lost all they had because of recurring floods and landslides. The message of the Chipko workers made a direct appeal to them. They were able to perceive the link between their victimization and the denuding of mountain slopes by commercial interests. Thus, sheer survival made women support the movement.
Why men did not see these connections and women did has to do with the way the subsistence economy is organized in this area. It is also related to the way men perceive the Chipko Movement as a "back-to-nature" strategy and to their preference for a traditional type of economic development that takes place around them.
However, whether the Chipko workers realized it or not - or intended it or not - the women who participated in the Chipko meetings, processions and other programmes have become aware of their potentialities and are now demanding a share in the decision-making process at the community level.
FORESTERS ARE LISTENING TO HER Chipko has depended upon women and girls
The social setting
The Garhwal division of Uttar Pradesh (one of India's northern states) comprises the four districts of Uttarkashi, Chamoli, Tehri and Pauri and covers a total area of 27 002 km², with a population of more than 70 0000 persons, less than 1 percent of the total population of the state. Uttarkashi and Chamoli, both border districts having the Indo-Tibetan boundary to the north, are the least-populated districts of the state.
The Indian Social Institute of New Delhi financed a two-month study visit to the Chamoli district by a group including the author in September-October 1982. Chamoli was selected as our unit of investigation because the Chipko Movement, initiated by a group of Sarvodaya workers (followers of Mahatma Gandhi's disciple Vinoba Bhave), originated here. The total area of the Chamoli district is 9 125 km². Ninety-six percent of the district population lives in villages. There are 1649 villages in all, and of these 1488 are inhabited. Of the total population, 58 percent are gainfully employed. Sixty percent of the total female population of the district are "working" while only 55 percent of the men in the district work. Further, 97 percent of working women are engaged in cultivation, as compared with only 72 percent of the men.
Not only do females in the Chamoli district outnumber males by four percentage points, but the single-member female households outnumber single-member male households. The majority in these single-member households belong to the 50-plus age group. Male migration from the hill areas to find work in the armed services and other jobs in the plains is fairly common, with women left to look after land, livestock and families.
Subsistence. A visit to the area makes one realize that topographic and climatic conditions require special adaptation by people who have to work extra hard to survive. During the 1982 field trip, seven villages were visited and open-ended interviews held with rural women and men. Unlike that of the villages in the Indo-Gangetic plains, the rural population of this area depends on land as well as forest for its subsistence and other survival requirements. Such dependence makes the character of social life in this region significantly different from that of the rural population in the plains. Nearly every family in the village owns land, usually less than half a hectare. Annual crops grown here are wheat, paddy, pulses and oil seeds. Farming is mainly dependent on monsoon rains rather than irrigation channels.
In general, subsistence farming by an average family of five members is possible for three to six months per year. For the rest of the year, villagers have to look for other sources of subsistence. The nearest source is the forest around them. Thus, settled agriculture is coupled with the foraging of minor forest produce. The villagers also use wood from the forest for various purposes, such as agricultural tools, dwellings, cooking fuel and fodder for grazing cattle. The use of forest products is expected to increase.
The women who participated in the Chipko Movement have become aware of their potentialities and are now demanding a share in the decision-making process at the community level.
They asked the women to confine themselves to their fields and homes and simultaneously issued a written warning to Bhatt that if he tried to agitate or organize the village women, he would be killed.
People generally had free access to the forest until 1821, when there began a process of gradual control over the forest area by the Government. Among some nomadic tribal groups, control over territories holding strategic food resources was specified in terms of customary laws, but government policy specified their dissociation "from the management and exploitation of the forest wealth" (Joshi, 1981).
In terms of day-to-day life, the basis for sex-role differentiation and the types of relationship between the sexes are linked with the pattern of cultivation and exploitation of forest wealth. Women's position in the society is governed by the norms of a patriarchal system of social organization. Typically, men must prepare the land for cultivation because there are taboos associated with women operating the plough. Thus, women are never themselves able to initiate the process of cultivating; they must depend on men. Men also own the land, as property among the Hindus of Garhwal is transmitted patrilineally. The labour required to raise crops is, however, almost entirely supplied by women. Women do the planting, weeding and harvesting. There are no "prestige crops", raised exclusively by either sex. Most staple crops are raised by women, provided that men prepare the land by ploughing it for two days in each cropping season.
Government programmes. In almost all the villages, we were told that the various development plans and tribal welfare schemes introduced by the Government have failed to make an impact either on the low standard of living in general or on the worsening conditions of women's household drudgery in particular. On the other hand, there are very visible signs of government-initiated development programmes such as those for road construction and the increased number of educational, medical and housing facilities.
In Chamoli district alone, there are 66 government intermediate colleges and three postgraduate colleges. The district registered an increase of 52 percent in literacy in the decade between 1961 and 1971. Although education has begun to have an impact in this region, one old woman in Dewara Kharora village requested me to stop its spread. Because of it, she said, all the educated boys of the village want to leave, leaving women to cope with the harsh life in the hills.
Conversations with local teachers and students gave the impression that development in the forms of roads, schools, hospitals, hotels, shops, cinemas, radio and libraries had ensured increased participation on the part of the Garhwal region in the mainstream of national development. One old man stated in a calm voice: "Whether we like it or not, the government is opening up this area. For sure, the government is only working in its own selfish interests, and it has no aim of benefiting the people. All the same, it is up to us to benefit from the new developments, and if we want to take advantage of the new schemes we must prepare our selves to come forward and push the outsiders out."
Origins of the Chipko Movement
The Chipko is one of many "people's" ecological movements that have sprung into being over the past 10 to 20 years. These movements are fundamentally different from ecological movements in the industrialized world. There, industrial pollution and even "development" are seen as threats, but threats primarily to present lifestyles. In the Chipko Movement, however, the basic concern is the very survival of the people in the hill areas. Rather than using the media to try to influence government policies, the people here have had to resort to a popular struggle.
The DGSM. Although the Chipko Movement was officially begun on 24 April 1973 by some Sarvodaya workers (all male) at Mandal, Chamoli district, the organizers had already been active in the field of social reconstruction for the previous 13 years.
One of the movement's leaders, C.P. Bhatt, and his co-workers, who belong to Chamoli district and who had worked for increased employment for local people, believe in the ideology of non-violence as propagated by Mahatma Gandhi and Vinoba Bhave. In 1960, they founded a workers' cooperative which organized unskilled and semi-skilled construction workers. For some time, they worked successfully in this field. One of their schemes, begun in 1964, aimed at creating more employment through the exploitation of the forests. The group established the Dasholi Gram Swarajya Mandal (DGSM) workers' cooperative and entered the market by buying forest rights through auctions to supply its small workshop making farm tools for local use. After initial success, however, the group was out-maneuvered by other, richer contractors.
One Chipko leader said that, at present, 90 percent of the women are with him while 90 percent of the men oppose him.
In the meantime, the DGSM thought of starting a new enterprise - the collection of roots and herbs from the forest. In this activity, the cooperative gave employment to about 1000 persons between 1969 and 1972. In 1971 it opened up a small processing plant in Gopeshwar, which manufactured turpentine and resin from pine sap. Again the DGSM had difficulties, this time because the Forest Department did not allot adequate supplies of pine sap even when the price paid for it was higher than that paid by a partly state-owned producer in the plains. For eight months in 1971-72, the plant had to be closed down for lack of raw material. The plant therefore worked for a total of only four months. The Sarvodaya workers thus faced difficulties with government policies in each of their enterprises.
Demonstrations. On 22 October 1971, villagers from nearby areas demonstrated in Gopeshwar against government forest policy. Meanwhile, the Forest Department, which had earlier refused the DGSM's annual request for 10 ash trees for its farm-tools workshop, allotted 300 ash trees to the Simon Company, a sporting-goods manufacturer from the plains, thus putting tennis rackets before the plough. In March 1973, the agents of the Simon Company arrived in Gopeshwar to supervise the cutting of the trees. There also arrived the Chipko Movement.
On 27 March 1973 at a meeting in Gopeshwar, local people decided not to allow a single tree to be felled by the Simon Company. A month later, DGSM workers and villagers from nearby areas marched out of Gopeshwar to Mandal, beating the drum and singing traditional songs. It was a rally of about 100 persons. The Simon Company agents and their men retreated from Mandal without felling a single tree. This event had an impact on the Forest Department, which now offered to let the DGSM have one ash tree if it allowed the Simon Company its full quota. The DGSM refused and the Forest Department increased its offer to two, then three, five and ten trees - the DGSM's original request. Finally, the Forest Department had to cancel the Simon Company's permit and the trees were assigned to the DGSM instead.
The Forest Department also ended the ban on pine sap supplies, but at the same time it allotted the Simon Company a new set of ash trees in the Phata forest in another part of the district. On 20 June 1973, a local leader joined hands with the Savodaya workers and organized a Chipko demonstration in Phata, 80 km away from Gopeshwar. Villagers of Phata and Tarsali kept a vigil on their trees until December, thus starting the long story of the Chipko Movement.
Monsoon erosion. Thus far the movement had confined itself to the problems of unemployment among the local people. Earlier, the Sarvodaya workers had organized them in several enterprises. Among these activities was a 1970 relief operation, started when monsoon rains flooded the Alaknanda river and swept away hundreds of homes. During the operation, the workers realized that the chief cause of the flood was soil erosion from the clear-cutting of mountain slopes by the lumber companies. Despite the Forest Department's policy of planting cleared slopes, the base slopes remained bare. Overgrazing and gathering by villagers also caused the baring of many slopes. Another cause of landslides, the DGSM workers pointed out, was road-building.
In 1973, monsoon rains again brought a spate of floods in the area. By this time, the DGSM had fairly well spelt out its interconnected goals of raising local people's consciousness about the Government's forest policy, about their rights to use the local forest and about their responsibility to preserve the environment through a programme of afforestation. During the 1973 flood-relief operations, the DGSM workers observed the sad plight of the women who had lost their houses, farm and cattle in floods. The series of recurring landslides that followed (1977, 1978, 1979) caused severe damage to life and property, making villagers almost paupers. Working in areas affected by floods and landslides, C.P. Bhatt and his companions heard long stories of suffering by women. This experience gave them both an insight into women's problems and an unprecedented direct contact with them.
The two branches of Chipko
As the years have gone by, the Chipko Movement itself has acquired two distinct streams of thought, personified by its two leaders, C.P. Bhatt from Gopeshwar, who pioneered the movement, and Sundarlal Bahuguna from Silyara in the Tehri region. The operational style of these leaders is totally different. While Bhatt is a grass-roots worker and believes mainly in organizing the people, Bahuguna a journalist, is a publicist par excellence. Though Bahuguna has also organized some protest activities in his region - for instance, Chipko activists in Henwal Ghati once went to the forest to bandage wounded trees with mud and sacking to protest against the indiscriminate tapping of pine trees - his main focus has been on spreading the message of Chipko far and wide. In 1981, Bahuguna started on a foot march from Kashmir to Kohima to campaign against deforestation.
Bhatt, on the other hand, has dug deep roots in the Chamoli region. He is, as a result, far less well known than Bahuguna. Bhatt has realized that it the local village communities have the right to control their surrounding resources, they must also undertake to conserve and develop those resources. So he has organized the country's largest voluntary afforestation programme through eco-development camps. These camps bring together local villagers, students and social workers who have planted over a million trees. The survival rate of these Chipko plantations has been an astonishing 85 to 90 percent in most cases. Bahuguna, however, tends to dismiss this activity as irrelevant at this stage of the movement, concentrating all his writing and speaking power against the forest departments.
The two leaders differ not just In their operational styles but also in their philosophy with respect to the use of forests. Bahuguna is fiercely ecological in approach. The re-greening of forests is the top priority - a matter of national defence - for him. For instance, he argues that the main objective of forest management in Himachal Pradesh should be soil and water conservation: forests, he says, do not produce timber, resin and foreign exchange but soil, water and pure air. The self-sufficiency of the hill people in food, clothing and shelter is important to Bahuguna but secondary to the major ecological objectives.
For Bhatt, however, the search for a new eco-development process for the region and the involvement of the local people are primary issues. "Saving the trees is only the first step in the Chipko Movement," says Bhatt. "Saving ourselves is the real goal. Our future is tied up with them."
Bhatt, therefore, wants forest resources to be used in a manner that is both environmentally and developmentally sound - in other words, while the environment is preserved, the benefits of the controlled exploitation accrue to the local people, a process in which decentralized economic growth and ecological conservation go hand in hand.
Notwithstanding the divergent opinions of these leaders, the real strength of the movement is the women of the region. Except for a few "organized" events, the Chipko Movement essentially consists of a string of spontaneous confrontations in which none of the so-called leaders is present.
The Chipko Movement is thus very much a feminist movement. It not only has brought forth in a dramatic manner a greatly increased understanding of the divergent interests of local communities and state bureaucracies in the management of local resources; it is now finding that the interests of men and women within the same community can differ greatly. As long as the leadership of the Chipko Movement remains sensitive to this learning process, it is bound to grow in strength. The latest demand to emerge from the women of Chamoli is that it is they who should be elected to the Forest Panchayats and not their men.
From 1982 citizens' report on the state of India's environment.
INDIAN VILLAGE WOMEN AT WORK is there time left for politics?
Confrontation. When the Forest Department announced an auction of almost 2500 trees in the Reni forest overlooking the Alaknanda river, which had flooded in 1970, Bhatt reminded the villagers of the earlier flood and warned of more landslides and more floods if the remaining forests were cut down. He suggested that they hug the trees as a tactic to save them.
Who listened to him? As subsequent events showed, it was women rather than men who got his message. One woman, Gaura Devi, organized the women of her village, Lata, and faced down the workmen of the company that had won the auction for felling the trees. It was a situation that almost forced women to take action - which they did with firmness and unyielding courage. Gaura Devi later described the encounter in graphic detail, commenting on the rude behaviour of some of the men and on how she pushed herself forward in front of the gun of one of these labourers. She challenged the man to shoot her instead of cutting down the trees, comparing the forest with her mother's home (maika). Eventually, she and her companions forced the men to retreat.
Following this demonstration of strength by women, the Uttar Pradesh Government decided to set up a committee of experts to investigate the situation, and the lumber company withdrew its men from Reni to wait for the committee's decision. The committee, after two years, reported that the Reni forest was an ecologically sensitive area and that no trees should be cut in this region. The Government placed a 10-year ban on all tree-felling in an area of over 1 150 km². This event blazed a trail: at Gopeshwar in June 1975, at Bhyndar valley ("valley of flowers") in January 1978, at Parsari (Joshimath) in August 1979, and at Dongri Paintoli in February 1980, women took the lead in Chipko demonstrations and saved forests from felling. After the Reni success, Bhatt and his workers began to address themselves to women and found them very sensitive and responsive to ecological problems. Women who were never before seen in any of the village meetings were asked to attend. They welcomed
this opportunity and turned out in great numbers.
Implications for society
Political involvement. The events at Dongri Paintoli village, according to Bhatt, indicated a new development in the movement. During a meeting between the members (all male) of the village council and the officials of the Horticulture Department, it was decided that the oak forest near the village would be given to the Horticulture Department for felling. The department, in turn, would provide the villagers with a cement road, a secondary school, a new hospital and electricity for their village. Some DGSM workers, together with Bhatt, tried to explain the implications of development and the importance of conservation. However, the village men, especially the members of the village council, did not agree. They maintained that a school, a hospital, a road and electricity were far more important for the village than a few hundred trees.
Yet the efforts of Bhatt and others did not go to waste on the local women, who decided to hold a Chipko demonstration if anyone tried to fell the trees. They even asked Bhatt and his men to help them. On hearing about this, the members and president of the village council became infuriated at the "outrageous" behaviour of their women. They asked the women to confine themselves to their fields and homes and simultaneously issued a written warning to Bhatt that if he tried to agitate or organize the village women, he would be killed upon arrival at the village.
All this did not deter the women of Dongri Paintoli, and on 9 February 1980 they did not even wait for Bhatt to arrive but turned out in large numbers, held a Chipko demonstration and prevented any tree-felling. Nine days later, the Government ordered the forest-felling in that area stopped, and within a month a ban on any further cutting was effected. Subsequently, women leaders in the village were defamed and asked not to attend further meetings. The women in Reni took action only because there were no men in the village around to do so. Their "action" was to ask the tree fellers to wait until their men returned so that some discussion could take place between the two sides (of men) as equals. Women took charge of the scene only in the absence of men, but once they did take charge, they succeeded.
In Dongri Paintoli, by contrast, rather than merely taking a decision in the absence of men, the women stood up against decisions made by their own men. Although they faced opposition from men, they held to their conviction. This certainly marked a major step forward in terms of women's role in the Chipko Movement.
In Gopeshwar, women have now formed a cooperative of their own, the Mahila Mandal, to ensure protection of the forest around the town. Its work is carried out regularly by watchwomen, who receive regular wages. Under their supervision, the extraction of forest produce for daily necessities is accomplished in a regulated manner, so as not to harm the trees. Women or men violating these rules are fined, and these fines are deposited in a common fund. Those who do not obey the rules face the punishment of having their tools confiscated. In addition, more and more of the DGSM educational camps are now attended by women, who come despite their busy routines. They take part in discussions and become articulate in expressing their views through this mode of informal education. Their programme, of course, is only in its initial stages. In most villages, women were found to be too busy in their day-to-day tasks to have time for the Chipko meetings and camps.
It can only be said that the cases of Reni and Dongri Paintoli and the organization of women into the Mahila Mandal at Gopeshwar are indicative of the latent potentialities in the organization and mobilization of resources by women whose consciousness has been raised. A situational analysis of the crisis periods shows how village women work in handling their problems: when new ideas and methods of handling problems are introduced by leaders, they are quick to act.
Disagreement on development. The situational conflicts in Chamoli district arose because of the different meanings attached to the word "development" by different groups of people. Men, who sit on village councils and other village bodies and head their families, view the government officials with a great deal of respect and fear. They dare not oppose them. Women, on the other hand, who have never had any contact with government officials or other outsiders, have no model of interaction to follow with them. The Chamoli women understood only that the felling of trees is harmful to their well-being, and they simply acted according to that belief. On the basis of their past interaction with government officials, men are convinced of the great powers of the Government. They consider it wrong to oppose its policies.
We have a situation where female energy - at least up until now - is concentrated in the subsistence, reproductive and nurturing spheres and male energy is concentrated in public power and authority. Now, with more paid jobs available to men in construction and other labouring sectors, they are not so dependent upon women for their subsistence needs. These changes are causing a reformulation of traditional relationships between the sexes in these villages.
Women's participation in the Chipko Movement, however limited in numbers or in its impact on the general way of life, has implications for possible changes in gender relationships in the Garhwali society. One Chipko village leader summarized the present situation of the movement by saying that, at present, 90 percent of women and 10 percent of men are with him while 90 percent of men and 10 percent of women oppose him. He considers that only through non-violent methods will the movement win over the other men.
What we read about women's participation in the movement and what its leaders talk about are simplified and idealized images of reality. This idealization has, in turn, led to an unrealistic belief that the participation of women in the development process can be achieved by a mere ideological commitment and a few organizational devices. The account given here demonstrates that the release of spontaneity and creativity on the part of rural women in Garhwal is chiefly a byproduct of actions initiated at the grass-roots level by the Sarvodaya workers to increase people's awareness about the environment. At present, these workers and their leaders face the problem of handling an unforeseen release of womanpower in this area.
Ecological balance is an important aspect of new approaches to development, and women's concern with local ecological problems is vital. In a majority of existing programmes for women's development, the top-down approach is used. Decision-making, evaluation and control rest at the top with planners and policy makers, while participants lack the scope to develop their own skills or to have any political say in deciding their own affairs. If we aspire to change in the social and political situation of women, we have to look at alternative approaches to replace the traditional power structure; hence the need to study women's participation in social movements.
Even the supporters of the Chipko Movement and its leaders are not free from traditional constraints. In home and family situations, egalitarianism is almost absent and there are invariably tensions and inequalities which have implications for the stratification system of the society as a whole. The relevant questions are:
· Is it possible that only a few instances of the successful exercise of power by women can lead to further demands for sharing power in both public and private?
· Are women able to face opposition from men, and for how long?
· Does coercion by men alienate women from their families, or does there come about another pattern of relationship between the sexes?
These questions cannot be answered right now. As the Chipko Movement is still in its infancy, we have to observe further developments and observe what happens to the role of women within it.
Bibliography
JOSHI, G. 1981. Forest policy and tribal development. Social Action. 31: 446-468.
LANCASTER, C.S. 1976. Women, horticulture and society in sub-Saharan Africa. Am. Anthrop., 1978: 539-564.
MIDDLETON. C. 1971. Sexual inequality and stratification theory. In F. Parkin, ed. The social analysis of class structure. London. Tavistock, p. 179-203.
MINAULT, G. 1981. The extended family: women and political participation in India and Pakistan. Delhi, Chanakya Publications.
MITRA, S. 1982. Ecology as science and science fiction. Econ. & Political Wkly. 17: 147-152.
SEACOMBE. W. 1971. The housewife and her labour under capitalism. New Left Rev., 83: 3-24.
<section>4</section>
Honduras: Women make a start in agroforestry
Mercedes Wiff
Mercedes Wiff is a specialist in community development who has worked on FAO forestry projects in El Salvador and Honduras.
DONA MARIA IN HONDURAS confident that women could succeed
A prologue
It was during the meeting of the Women's Committee for Communal Development that the Chairwoman, Dona Maria, announced to the other farm women that if the COHDEFOR technicians did not keep their promises to provide work incentives, she herself would undertake to pay them for the days they worked.
COHDEFOR is the Honduras Forestry Development Corporation, whose promoter had recently presented the farmers with a new system to be used in working the very eroded and, in some cases, bare highlands of the settlement. The help he had offered consisted mainly of cereals for food, and farm implements for the construction of terraces and the reforestation of some areas. The men of the settlement had not shown any interest, since they were busy working the valley lands and were distrustful of anything new. Despite this, they agreed to give a plot of land to each woman to try.
María and nine of the other farm women knew that these very steep lands would be hard to till in the manner they were used to. They also knew that every day firewood was becoming scarcer and more expensive. But they decided to try, first on Doña María's land and later on that of the others. This, then, was the reason for her insisting on paying them herself if the technicians did not do so: she was perfectly aware of the greater possibilities of this new way of working. It was, besides, a challenge to show that women could accomplish something different from their household duties.
Settlers practicing traditional farming had no option but to destroy the forest to meet one of their basic needs: feeding themselves.
Background of the project
COHDEFOR's interest in the construction of terraces and in reforestation sprang from the extensive damage caused by Hurricane Fifi, which hit the northern coast of Honduras in 1974. This disaster gave rise to a study of the threat represented by irrational land use, destruction of the woodlands, and accelerated soil erosion caused by shifting cultivation. In 1976, with aid from UNDP and FAO, the Corporation drew up a project to plan and execute the improvement of the watersheds affected by Hurricane Fifi in the Sierra de Omoa, a mountain chain in the northeast of the country, covering an area of 720 km². In 1978, the project was extended to an area in the Lake Yojoa basin, the largest in the country, and in 1980 to a new region, Macuelizo-Pinalejo.
The three project areas have similar social and topographical features: high population density, with 100 inhabitants per km²; the highest population growth rate in the country, 4.8 percent (1961-74); and an average of 5.6 inhabitants per dwelling, with 85 percent of dwellings using firewood or coal for fuel. There is no distinct land tenancy system, since the mountainous areas usually belong to the state or the municipalities. Nevertheless, there are some rural settlements which, having no legal title to ownership, are in possession of a document that validates their right to occupy the land. These are lands suitable for forestry, with steep slopes - in places, having gradients of even more than 60 percent - on which the farmers grow migratory crops: they fell and burn the forest to farm the slopes (growing maize and beans), and after two or three years are compelled to seek another area, each time higher up, because the soil is "worn out". Again they endeavour to fell the
trees, to burn them and to cultivate the land. This uncontrolled system of burning down and cropping impoverished both the soil and the farmers themselves and is the reason why COHDEFOR has promoted the construction of terraces aimed at protecting the forest resource and at teaching farmers a new system for conserving their natural heritage.
COHDEFOR saw that settlers practicing traditional farming had no option but to destroy the forest to meet, in part, one of their basic needs: feeding themselves. Nevertheless, the farmers recognized that the forest was moving farther away from them every day, and with it the possibilities of obtaining firewood and timber.
Beginnings. The first activities implemented by the project were in the Sierra de Omoa, in the upper part of the industrial town of San Pedro Sula. Two hundred rural families living in the valleys were rehoused and three groups of day-workers composed of the same rehoused farmers were formed. These groups worked maintaining roads, constructing terraces and reforesting the valley lands where the potable water intake structures for San Pedro Sula are sited. During this period, the project identified the need for these lands to be cultivated by their owners rather than by hired day-workers, since this would lead to improved conditions of maintenance and use.
The men looked at the women's work with suspicion - above all, at the terraces, whose purpose and use they questioned.
The interest of the project was directed toward promoting the participation of farmers who could work their own land, either in groups or singly. The effort to promote participation made no distinction between men and women; it only invited farmers to take part in activities for soil conservation, for terrace farming with the application of adequate techniques, for reforestation and for forestry protection.
VILLAGE FUEL WOOD COLLECTION an early appreciation for the forest
The first response to the social promoter's intensive action came from the Women's Committee, made up of women living in Choloma, one of the villages most seriously damaged by the hurricane, in the "11 April" settlement. These 10 women started the construction of bench terraces for vegetable-growing. The same group had previously cultivated small plots of land in traditional ways. This had not earned them large profits but just enough to keep them at the same tasks every day. They knew very little or almost nothing about productive work. Their husbands were the ones who tilled the land on a larger scale, harvesting and marketing the produce grown in the valley.
At the beginning, the work of the women's group was very irregular, since they could only avail themselves of the times when they were free from housework. As they did not all perform the same activities, not all of them had the same amount of time at their disposal. On many occasions this gave rise to problems in work relations, since some women worked for longer periods than others. On the other hand, the male farmers looked at the women's farm-work with suspicion - above all, at the terraces, whose purpose and use they questioned. They believed that the women would tire quickly and give up. However, they were wrong. The project, with the assistance of the social promoter and the field technicians, motivated the women to organize their work-time better, both in the home and in soil-conservation activities; and later in growing, harvesting and marketing. For example, work schedules were laid down and observed. The women were taught to understand more fully the adequate use
of implements for the construction of the terraces, and they were trained to use better techniques for sowing vegetables and planting orchards.
MAKING TERRACES TO CONTROL EROSION most women were between 30 and 45
The effective participation of the women in these activities gave them self-confidence; this, in turn, influenced the decisions of the others. Their effort was rewarded by the fact that 14 other women and 10 men from the same settlement joined them. Some months later, three groups of men and women from the same settlement could see for themselves the immediate benefits stemming from working with the new system. Jointly, the three groups dedicated themselves to the reforestation of the settlement's highlands, which were not suitable for the construction of terraces but were adequate for planting forest trees. Forty hectares were reforested with timber trees. The villagers built two irrigation dams and established a nursery for fruit trees, not only for their own use in planting in their soil conservation efforts but also for use by the other groups who were starting on the same project.
The success of the initial effort made by Doña María and her group was reflected in the acceptance of the new techniques by farmers in other areas. After four years of work, 78 villages had participated, with the involvement of 1834 farmers of whom 590 were women.
The women who usually participated were between 30 and 45, an age when they had already produced their "quota" of children.
Women themselves were, on many occasions, the hardest obstacles to be overcome.
Observations
It may be said that, initially, the factor that led to the participation of so many women in this project (32 percent) was the men's rejection of the new activities until their satisfactory performance had been proved. The project promoter knew how to profit from the situation and transform the interest of the Women's Committee members into active participation. Although this was not explicitly planned, the project opened up the possibility for it, encouraging and supporting the initiatives needed through all the stages during the four years' activities.
However, it was not as simple as might be believed. There were problems both at farmer level and at field-personnel level. The field personnel, in addition to their lack of field experience, had no confidence in the participation of women, and only the experience of working together managed to change their attitude to an appreciation of the efficiency of women's work.
Problems at the farmer level were of a socio-cultural, training and service nature:
· Tradition has maintained, especially in the rural areas, that the role of the woman is exclusively to be a mother - to give birth and to raise and feed her children. In addition, she must busy herself with preparing meals for the family, draw water, collect firewood, look after the elderly, keep a small area of crops around the house and raise some farmyard animals. In these tasks she is helped by her daughters who, when still young, look after their even younger brothers and sisters and especially carry water and firewood. In these circumstances, women themselves were, on many occasions, some of the hardest obstacles to be overcome, considering that the housework seemed to them more than sufficient without adding further work, such as going up to work on the uplands.
· The women who usually participated were between 30 and 45 years of age, an age at which they had already produced their "quota" of children and the mother role had ceased to have the importance of earlier years. They were women whose children were old enough to help with the housework; they had a certain degree of independence; and many were leaders or participants in community groups. Thus, they could decide to participate themselves and support the participation of their companions in activities that were different from those prescribed by their role as women, without receiving negative and ostracizing criticism from their communities.
· In the farming family, it is the man who works and brings in the money to keep the household. The fact that his wife works is considered a disgrace to him and makes him appear incapable of providing for his home. This was the situation of many women who, although wanting to participate, did not obtain their husbands' permission to do so. Only a small percentage of the men accepted that their wives should work and considered it a means for their personal fulfillment.
· The training and service problems generally stem from this last problem. The farm woman, for example, leaves school at an early age to help with the housework or to be married. The little education she has received is forgotten through disuse. Besides, she has no time to attend night-school, not only through lack of interest but also because of the arrival of children; her duty as mother and wife is more important.
· Men and women with adequate education and training could cooperate effectively in the progress of their families and communities. However, training is received mainly by men. The same training and educational opportunities must be offered to women to facilitate the performance of productive work.
· It is a fact that despite all the legal provisions and guarantees of the Agrarian Reform, few women fully benefit from it.
· If a woman tries to work on a farmstead, she lacks the credit needed to develop it because she does not have a title or land-ownership deed to back her. This problem also arises with men; however, it is less frequent.
NICARAGUAN WOMEN WATCHING FORESTRY FILM could what worked in Honduras work here?
On some occasions, several women have joined together to obtain a plot of land on loan from the community or settlement, often with the risk of having it taken from them when conservation and planting works have been initiated.
This notwithstanding, experience has proved the worthiness of women's contribution to soil conservation and reforestation. However, it will be necessary to make some modification in the planning and implementation of the projects to ensure women's participation in future programmes:
· Programmes must be drawn up that foresee women's participation and in which men and women enjoy the same opportunities. The proportion of women participants will need to be established.
· Personnel, promoters and field technicians must be trained to organize activities for an adequate programme involving the effective participation of both men and women.
· The legal or interpretative obstacles regarding land tenancy must be examined and a way found to correct them so as to obtain greater participation on the part of women in productive activities.
· Effective training systems must be made available to women, keeping in mind the other activities they must perform daily, and offering the right training for the change in activities they will have to undertake, involving simple programmes which will progressively improve their education. Thus, they will be able to apply the new techniques in a more knowledgeable way.
· The programmes must be based on appropriate technology with easily applicable practices and methods. The adoption of implements normally employed and easy to use (hoes, spades, rakes, machetes), which the women can also buy with their own earnings or through specific programmes, is recommended.
· If women are allowed to benefit from education and training, the justification for their existence will not be motherhood alone - often viewed as a kind of "pension" (more children, more hands for the work, higher income); they will also play a more productive social and economic role. Planting trees could be one of the best ways to ensure one's pension; indeed, in the words of one participant: "I'll work while I can, so as to be able to benefit from my trees afterwards."
The suggestions made here will not be able to bear fruit unless there is a real interest in changing, and unless men are associated with all the activities that involve women. On mutual understanding and accord may depend the transformations necessary for truly effective participation.
The changes can be implemented gradually, in pace with the rhythm of each community, taking the local customs into consideration. The methods of promotion and the participation of the family and communities are other very important factors.
Above all, account must be taken of the fact that if women are unaware of their own ability to cooperate in development, their participation may be very limited or not amount to anything at all; and if their participation is not considered, we shall be losing half our human resources.
<section>5</section>
Perspectives
Pia Bergman, Gloria L. Scott, Augusta Molnar, Paula J. Williams, Carol J. Pierce Colfer
A multi-purpose species: Woman
Pia Bergman is a forester working for the International Rural Development Centre at the Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences in Uppsala.
· Foresters, like doctors of medicine, prefer speaking Latin, and classify their surroundings according to shallow or deep root systems, nitrogen-fixing ability, yield capacity and multi-purpose use. Because of the wood energy crisis, foresters today give special attention to species that generate easily on low-nutrient soils and that survive in difficult environments. Unconventional scientific research in this field has recently identified a species that might be a key factor in combating the energy crisis: woman.
Applied research shows that this species has an outstanding ability to adapt well to different sites and that it establishes easily, requires little care, is renewable when properly treated and has a high potential to enhance economic development. Further, the species is native to almost all parts of the world, with no known fixed environmental requirements. Yield varies according to region and soil fertility but, generally, woman must be regarded as ideal in areas of low fertility suffering energy shortages.
It seems that the plant has been known locally for a very long time, but, being used only for domestic purposes, it has not gained any wider reputation. Laboratory tests, however, indicate that it is a multipurpose species highly useful in several sectors, particularly forestry. This fact has already been discussed in several symposia. While the present underutilization of the species is therefore almost scandalous, it can probably be explained by territorial jealousies or discord among experts.
Some attempts have also been made to introduce woman into forestry departments in developing countries. The response so far is polite, but a trifle sceptical as to the purpose of such an exercise. The existing flora is considered sufficient to safeguard the vegetative equilibrium. Introducing a new component would uproot traditional management systems as well as requiring a botanical inventory and later the establishment of special nurseries to raise woman seedlings. Such an enterprise is considered both too revolutionary and far too costly.
It should not be denied that highly qualified foresters with international experience share such fears and apprehensions. Because of its genetic structure, woman can be both aggressive and quick-growing and should be cultivated only in areas of extreme energy shortages, particularly where climates and soil conditions are harsh. In more hospitable environments, where no acute shortages exist, such potentially invasive plants should be introduced only with great care. The threat of their weediness is too great.
Nevertheless, donor nations seem to ignore the reluctance in certain quarters and are now frequently including woman in project proposals in order to support alternative, low-cost energy systems.
As a gesture to compensate traditional foresters for this unorthodox matchmaking, it has been suggested that Latin should be used as a mode of communication at the field level.
Seeing women benefit from forestry
Gloria Scott is a Jamaican national and Adviser on Women in Development for the World Bank.
· In my view the forestry sector reflects very well the changed trend in lending toward people-oriented projects. Several factors worked together to bring about this change. Important among these was the recognition that world deforestation was reaching alarming proportions, that people's behaviour was aggravating it, and that women's roles were significant in the introduction of any changes.
· Who was spending hours ingesting acrid smoke from the burning of fuelwood and other vegetable matter in open hearths for cooking, heating and lighting?
Women.
· Who was spending hours having to go farther and farther away from home to gather fuelwood?
Again, women - along with children (mostly girls).
· Who was taking animals to graze already denuded or overgrazed lands and breaking off young succulent branches to take home as fodder for other animals?
Yet again, women - often with their daughters.
Thus, World Bank lending for social forestry projects, which have become increasingly popular in recent years, has been providing stoves with improved thermal efficiency and less-noxious emissions; plantations on road and canal banks; village and community woodlots; trees for school and household gardens; and fast-growing fuel, fruit and fodder trees, some of which can also be used for building-poles.
The planting and maintenance of these reforested areas are providing considerable seasonal employment to the landless and the very poor, many women among them. The projects also include provisions for socioeconomic studies to help identify key intervention strategies and communication techniques to reinforce community interest in reforestation. Especially important in this context is information for extension workers who have previously had little contact with women and now have responsibility for helping to design and promote trials and adaptation of the improved stoves.
While these projects are making only a small dent in the problem, and not all project interventions are working well, it is gratifying to have been able to witness some of the successes and the satisfaction of the women involved: the great pride with which a very poor woman shows off the smokeless stove in a corner of the house; the gratitude felt by a woman who, because she now spends so much less time gathering fuelwood, now has time to make rope from local grasses; the happiness in the face of a woman who has earned enough money to feed her family.
But the greatest promise comes from the school-children planting trees. When I was at school, we planted a tree only to mark some significant event such as a royal visit or a historical anniversary - solely a ritualistic act. In eight years of boarding school, I never knew one tree to survive. Today, visiting schools, I see tree-planting being taken seriously and children being taught the importance of protecting forests. I would like to see more made of forestry as a tool for global education. As with other forms of environmental degradation, destruction of our forests affects the air we ourselves breathe, our climate, rainfall and the crops we can grow. It has the same effects on our neighbours' lives and is no respecter of national boundaries. Equally critical, it can take generations to remedy.
Involving women in forestry projects
Augusta Molnar is an anthropologist who has worked on forestry projects in India and Nepal.
· In reviewing my own experiences as a forestry consultant, I find that the subject of women does not separate itself from general information-gathering and design considerations that are part of any project design or review. Certainly sociology consultants for forestry projects deal with a wealth of issues concerning the incorporation of women, but the frustrations or satisfactions are not related to the fact that I am a woman consultant working with foresters. The problems that I note are of a more general nature.
For instance, one area of frustration in working with foresters is that there is a tendency for them, like other technical personnel, to misjudge the length and quality of time required to gather usable and reliable information on rural women that can be a basis for planning. Foresters do see the need to incorporate women, but lack an orientation to the ways to accomplish this or to the complexity of the problem. It is usually difficult initially for the forester to understand that, however qualified the social scientist in the planning team, adequate information cannot be collected about incorporating women in a project's activities or goals simply by asking about it during short field visits.
Forestry projects for women only?
Generally speaking, it has proved difficult to attract funds for activities designed specifically for women. However, studies show that when planners do not distinguish women's separate needs and roles in the project design, women are apt either not to benefit or to be actually disadvantaged. The ideal in many cases is to have village or family efforts but with the needs and activities of all members (men, women and young people) distinguished and considered. Women, in this case, must be involved in the planning so as to express their own situations.
There are circumstances in which activities might be best designed for the participation of women only. These have been identified as follows:
1. When local cultural values strongly resist the association in public of unrelated males and females.
2. When girls and women need special programmes to overcome past discrimination and help them catch up with men - for example, in training for skills and professions previously closed to them.
3. When women represent a high percentage of de facto heads of households because of high rates of marital instability, widowhood or male emigration.
4. When women, in the prevailing sexual division of labour, specialize in certain tasks, such as the production of food, the raising of small animals or the marketing of vegetables, that could benefit from assistance aimed at increasing their productivity and the returns of their labour.
5. When men are otherwise likely to receive the returns of women's labour - for example, by selling the goods that women produce or by becoming, as household heads, the formal members of cooperatives based on women's work.
6. When women want their own activities, such as revolving credit clubs or marketing associations, in order to achieve a measure of self-reliance or to avoid conflict or competition with men.
Where women are already burdened with work, the community may be better served if the activity is carried out by the men, who have more time. In the Niger, several communities opted for the men to raise wood-lots, with the fuel going for family cooking needs. In yet other cases, women may want integrated activities. In Guinea, women suggested that a woman's wood-lot would be difficult to plant, as men would be angry if their wives were preoccupied with a project or if the dinner was delayed. The men would, they reasoned, appreciate their input better if the wood-lot were a communal project with everyone working together.
Adapted from World Food Programme, 1980. "The contribution of the World Food Programme to the United Nations Decade for Women". Paper presented by the United Nations/FAO World Food Programme to the World Conference of the UN Decade for Women, Copenhagen, July 1980.
This is not a "women-related" problem but, rather, a social science problem: socio-cultural considerations are more vague and harder to quantify than information on species choice, the source of seed or labour for nurseries. The problem of collecting information on women may be more marked than other socio-economic topics because women tend to be less open and more uncomfortable around strangers, whether male or female strangers. However, this is not always the case. In my last consultancy, assessing project success among Indian tribal farmers, I found the farmers as hard to assess during a short visit as I have ever found rural women to be.
A crucial point, which has been emphasized by other women forestry workers I have talked to, is that one should not automatically assume that women foresters or other technical personnel are more interested - because of their sex - in problems of rural women than in community members in general. The dangers of such an assumption are twofold. First, projects may assume that hiring women to work in a forestry project means that the project is adequately designed to reach rural women. Hiring women technical staff may help orient a project to rural women, but it does not by itself ensure that women will benefit.
Second, there is a danger that the women hired in a project will be forced into jobs that deal mainly with the "women's issue", whether or not they are interested in this. Merely having a woman in a technical role such as that of forester improves the chances that rural women's felt needs will become known, since women foresters are less threatening or strange to rural women. There is no need, therefore, to risk scaring away women who want to work as technical foresters, but who are not interested particularly in problems faced by women, by requiring that they concentrate on women specifically. The most important value of female foresters is that they provide a needed role model to other women and demonstrate that forestry is an appropriate area for women.
In the course of my last World Bank consultancy - eight weeks reviewing the progress of state-level agricultural extension projects and their success with tribal farmers - I found considerable variation in different parts of India regarding women professionals. For example, in the south, in Karnataka State, without special attention having been paid to the issue, a sizeable proportion of the extension agents are women. In the north, the number is negligible. A study of trained women coming out of agricultural, courses revealed that most graduates had focused upon home economics and showed no desire to act as field personnel. While, in the south, training more women will increase the number of effective female extension agents, women professionals in the north will probably be more effective if they are higher-level employees. In Nepal, by contrast, although there is no tested evidence to prove it, it is quite possible that women would be willing to do extension work as long
as they were not required to stay outside their own or their relatives' homes overnight.
These points by no means exhaust the issues involved, but they emphasize how complex the incorporation of women professionals into project activities actually is. Unless planners realize before they design a project that this issue is complex, no adequate preparation will be made, either before and during design stages or during implementation of follow-up projects, to create a viable staff of women professionals.
Integrating women into forestry development
Paula J. Williams is a forester working as a Forest and Society fellow for the Institute of Current World Affairs in Ouagadougou.
· I think the situation for women in forestry is very much like that faced in other fields dominated by men. Until there is a large number of women in policy-making positions or teaching and research positions, women will face a number of structural problems - being relatively isolated from one another, having to work harder than the men to "prove" themselves, etc.
The problem that most concerns me at the moment is how to truly integrate women into forestry and forestry development. If women are not explicitly considered, they tend to be overlooked. However, when women are considered, only token efforts seem to be made. Thus, an organization will make an effort to hire a few women professionals or to set up a few forestry projects (or project components) for women. Having made these token efforts, they feel they have addressed "the women question" and feel no need to do anything further. The far-reaching implications of fully integrating women into the profession or into development projects are not addressed.
The Eighth World Forestry Congress had only one session out of 30 that considered the question of women in forestry. Although many of the other sessions touched on topics that concern women - such as firewood, food, rural development, quality of life - women were never mentioned. Many of the Congress participants expressed the belief that since more women are studying forestry now than previously, women are becoming integrated into the field, and thus at the next World Forestry Congress there would be no need to have any special sessions on women.
I would suggest, however, that women will not automatically be included in discussions at the next World Forestry Congress unless specific efforts are made. Most of the international forestry experts are men, who tend not to mention women unless specifically asked about them. They also tend to think of males when considering whom to invite to present papers.
The question of fully integrating women into forestry and making forestry cognizant of women's activities and needs is a difficult one, which needs to be addressed on several fronts. The situation for women in the forestry profession and related jobs needs to be empirically examined and analysed: how forestry projects of all sorts - not just community forestry projects but also industrial projects and other forestry management activities - need to be evaluated for their inclusion of and impact upon women. The concern with women is not one of women per se, but part of a larger issue of forestry's responsiveness to questions of social equity.
Effects of scarcity upon women
When the household and economic activities that rural women perform are examined, it is obvious that women throughout the world rely heavily on forestry products and tree-related resources for the well-being of themselves and their families. However, when resources become progressively scarce, they all begin making changes in their way of living. Often the pattern involves a series of changes, and the severity of scarcity can be evaluated by observing what changes have taken place.
1. Women spend more time and energy walking farther to collect, harvest and plant, or in cultivating larger areas because of poorer soil.
2. When time and energy constraints become too great, many women report asking daughters and other family members for added help. Some reports describe daughters being taken from schools, or family size increasing when more children are needed.
3. Life-styles or basic resource use begin to change: substitute foods appear and others are seen less often; foods formerly cooked are eaten raw or fewer meals are served. Dung may be substituted for fuelwood instead of being applied as manure. Small animals no longer have forage within access of the village and women give up raising ruminants. Women have less money, as they have fewer resources and less time for producing surplus items for sale or trade. Many family members search for off-season employment.
4. When some resources are very scarce, basic items are purchased and the woman has little possibility to earn money selling surpluses. In some societies, the men leave home even during farming season in search of work and the women continue to provide what they can, but farms produce less because of labour shortages.
Adapted from FAO, 1983. Rural women, forest outputs end forestry projects, by Marilyn Hoskins.
A journal about women in forestry
Since spring 1983, the College of Forestry, Wildlife, and Range Sciences and the Laboratory of Anthropology of the University of Idaho (United States) have been publishing a journal entitled Women in Forestry: A Journal for Professionals in the Natural and Related Cultural Resource Fields. The journal, which appears four times a year, is a revival of an earlier publication which appeared eight times between 1979 and 1982.
The aim, the editors write, is "to provide information and ideas for, from and about women on topics related to (1) the natural resource professions and associated social science fields, (2) the use and conservation of natural and cultural resources, and (3) issues of administration and personnel of special interest to women in natural resources. We want to serve as a source of ideas contacts and support, to help women in the natural resources reach their professional goals".
Although the focus of the journal is predominantly American, each issue contains a section on international news and a number of internationally focused feature articles. Recent article titles include "Forestry in West Africa", "Forest product use in Mauritania's Brakna region", "Getting started in international work" and "The first foreigner visits Wuyi Natural Reserve".
Although a number of articles deal with strictly women-focused or feminist issues ("How to have your baby and keep your job"; "Guidelines for dual career couples and managers"; "Employer liability for sexual harassment in the marketplace"), the editors (Molly Stock and Dixie Ehrenreich) foresee the journal slowly becoming a more strictly forestry and natural resources publication.
"We see Women in Forestry", they write in an editorial, "eventually evolving into a journal that deals less with women-focused issues and more with concerns common to both men and women. Along with this change of perspective will come, quite likely and naturally, a change of title. We hope that Women in Forestry, as well as other women's professional magazines, will soon become irrelevant sexist anachronisms. But in this transition period, we believe it necessary to focus on gender issues, on the special concerns of working women and particularly on women in our traditionally and still predominantly male profession."
Subscriptions are US$15 a year for non-students and $10 a year for students. All editorial communications should be addressed to: The Editor, Women in Forestry, Department of Forest Resources, University of Idaho, Moscow, Idaho 83843, USA.
An anthropologist among foresters
Carol J. Pierce Colfer is an anthropologist and acting team leader of the Topsoils Project on Soil Management in Sitiung, Indonesia.
· My experience is not as a professional forester, but rather as an anthropologist who has worked with professional foresters and with women in the forest.
I have had long-term encounters with foresters and people of the forest in two settings: the Pacific Northwest (United States) and the interior of East Kalimantan (Indonesian Borneo). There are loggers and American logging equipment in both areas; there are foresters and community members in both areas; and there are large forests in both areas - but perhaps these exhaust the similarities. The one broad thread that unites these two locations is economic dependence on forest products.
Forestry, in the Pacific Northwest, represents a very constraining environment in terms of the roles available to women. The US Forest Service, a major employer in the community where I worked during the 1970s, had only two full-time female employees locally, and they were both secretaries. The prevailing expectations and behaviour were extremely sex-stereotyped, with any deviations from the "man at work; woman at home" pattern subject to rather extreme, though informal, social sanctions. In the local community, this was intensified by the mystique and danger associated with logging as the most masculine of professions. East Kalimantan, by way of contrast, was quite the opposite, representing the loosest division of labour by sex that I have ever encountered; and the dangers associated with logging were feared rather than valued.
Traditionally, the forestry establishment has paid little attention to people - and particularly to women. The field of "community forestry" is a welcome recent attempt to rectify this problem. In Kalimantan, I found that the major human activity in the forest was shifting cultivation of rice for human consumption and for sale. It was men who cut down the large trees; but women participated in all other activities related to rice-growing, including felling brush and small trees-in their ricefields. Although men were involved in agricultural production, rice was considered the special domain of women. Women's concern to supply their families with sufficient rice for subsistence was a major factor in family decisions about how much forest to clear each year. Yet the idea that women's views and activities might be of relevance was alien indeed to the foresters I encountered.
There is a tendency for some foresters (and many environmentalists as well) to lump all shifting cultivators into a category of "evil people", bent on destroying the environment. A recent article in Asiaweek, for instance, discussing the huge burns in East Kalimantan in 1983, laid much of the blame on shifting cultivators who reportedly began burning their fields in the midst of the drought. My experience in the area suggests that this is decidedly unlikely. Shifting cultivators are quite aware of the relationship between dry weather and thorough burns (or drought and uncontrolled fire), and their practice is to burn in late August anyway; not in March, when the fires began!
Truly destructive shifting cultivators exist in places; but my year of residence among shifting cultivators in East Kalimantan (within the borders of a major multinational timber concession) suggested to me that the damage done to the forest by the people was decidedly marginal when contrasted with the large-scale activities of commercial timber companies. Certainly in areas where there is greater population pressure, the damage done by such farmers is greater. But many foresters and policy makers have a tendency to lump all shifting cultivators together; and timber dollars surely contribute to the comparatively pristine reputations of the logging companies.
How endangered are the world's tropical forests?
What can be done to save them?
FAO's answers are here, in two widely quoted recent books on tropical forest resources
Tropical forest resources
FAO FORESTRY PAPER, No. 30 (1982), (available in English, French and Spanish)
Conservation and development of tropical forest resources
FAO FORESTRY PAPER, No. 37 (1982), (available in English and Spanish)
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS
Although the world's attention has now been drawn to the fuelwood crisis in the developing world, the rural poor themselves and especially rural women - do not regard it as an isolated problem. For a woman, the need to walk long distances to collect fuelwood is only one part of the heavy burden of work she must bear. Her desire to plant trees springs as much from a need to supply products such as fodder, food and poles as it does from a need to supply fuelwood; moreover, she sees the fuelwood crisis in the context of endemic poverty and sexual inequality.
CARRYING FUELWOOD IN AFRICA newer and closer sources must be found
<section>6</section>
Women, wood and work: In Kenya and beyond
Lori-Ann Thrupp
Lori-Ann Thrupp, formerly associated with the Institute of Development Studies, University of Sussex, UK, is now doing rural forestry work with the Costa Rica Expedition. This article is based upon field-project work she did in Kenya in 1982.
Fuelwood projects, the author argues, have failed both to involve women and to see the fuelwood crisis in this larger context. In Kenya, however, women did something about it - and on their own.
· When referring to wood scarcity problems and the Third World "energy crisis", it is first important to realize that fuelwood collection is only part of a larger burden of work and strenuous labour. Perhaps the most valuable and scarce resource in the world is human energy. Poor people in developing countries - both men and women - should be viewed in relation to this larger energy burden, for generally they have to work very long hours for very little return.
Most of the tasks done for survival are outside the cash economy; furthermore, in many societies they are done primarily by women. Women shoulder the labour for tasks vital for the provision of basic needs, including fetching water, collecting fuelwood and gathering and grinding food, as well as, in many cases, the numerous tasks involved in subsistence agriculture.
The simultaneous demands for satisfaction of different needs can produce conflicts or competition for a woman's time and energy. How she uses and allocates her time and expends her energy affects the very welfare and nutrition of the household members (Wiener, 1981; Tinker, 1982). Furthermore, throughout the world, increasing numbers of women have become heads of households, meaning that their subsistence work and their cash-earning activities are less often shared with men.
It should be understood that, from the perspective of poor people at the local level, "wood scarcity" and "fuelwood shortages" are very seldom seen as an isolated problem (Juma, 1982; Wisner, 1981; Hayes, 1981; Thrupp, 1982b, 1983). This is only one of many tasks creating an overall human energy burden. In fact, the wood scarcity problem is a manifestation of much broader, deeper-rooted problems of poverty, such as the maldistribution of income and land, and structural inequalities. In the same sense, deforestation is a result of a number of wood-use, land-use and land-tenure factors, including clearance for agriculture, settlement and commercial timber purposes. In the context of these broader dimensions, the issues of tree availability or household energy wastage may tend to seem minor. And, with recognition of these structural factors, it cannot be assumed that commonly recommended solutions such as agroforestry or community woodlot schemes, even if widely diffused, will
necessarily provide solutions for reducing women's burdens, for alleviating their oppressed conditions or for redressing macro-level deforestation problems (Foley and Moss, 1983).
Nevertheless, the recognition of these deeper, more intractable dimensions does not mean that project interventions have no benefits or potential. However, it does suggest an urgent need to clarify and fully recognize the limitations as well as the possible promises of such projects.
With the impact of development programmes and the introduction of new technologies, further inequities and negative factors have affected women, intensifying their work burdens and preventing them from contributing to development. Some project efforts have supposedly been oriented especially toward women, but they tend to be superficial and marginal, often confined to such tasks as sewing, menu-preparing and child-care. Such a trend may, in fact, hamper women's integration into broader development processes. Even the newer "appropriate technology" projects, which often contain sincere efforts to include women's participatory action, have not avoided some of the traditional biases and problems, and still tend to perpetuate male-oriented dependency relationships, patriarchal organizations and technocratic approaches (Hoskins, 1979, 1981; Carr, 1982; O'Kelly, 1978).
It cannot be assumed that commonly recommended solutions such as agroforestry or communal woodlot schemes will necessarily provide solutions for reducing women's burdens.
Women's efforts do not necessarily provide answers for overcoming deeper injustices and inequalities, nor can anyone pretend that their forestry projects alone will reverse the trend of diminishing wood resources.
Case study: Kenya
Such historical and conceptual discussions reveal many problems and stress the urgent need to overcome past problems and inequalities. Through the Kenyan case study, some promising aspects and opportunities can be examined through the actions of women's groups. The Kenyan example provides further justification for women's control, but it also illustrates a number of limitations on it. Finally, it also suggests some redirections that should be taken to ensure full success.
In Kenya, both government and non-government programmes have been implemented in the attempt to help alleviate what is seen as the "fuelwood crisis" and the problems associated with increasing rates of deforestation. Such efforts have emerged partly in response to the national and international attention being given to this issue, including the widespread publicity from the 1981 UN Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy, held in Nairobi. These various programmes are directed toward (1) production/supply of wood, i.e., reforestation, tree nurseries, agroforestry, community woodlots, etc.; and (2) consumption/demand mitigation, i.e., improved fuel-efficient wood-burning stoves, more efficient wood-to-charcoal conversion, alternative sources of energy development, etc.
Among the various efforts in this area, considerable promise has emerged through the activities of women's groups. Kenya's women's organizations have been relatively successful and show promising potential for the future, especially when compared with other efforts which, even though they are well funded and on a rather large scale, tend to be less successful and are often characterized by the basic problems that have been discussed.
But before an evaluation and comparison of the success of these projects, the meaning of "success" must be clarified. For this analysis, the main criteria of success are not associated with quantifiable measures such as numbers of trees planted, rates of return, or numbers of stoves produced - that is, with "supply-side" factors. Nor is success related to the overly ambitious goal of halting deforestation or dramatically cutting national energy consumption by a certain number of British thermal units. Rather, the criteria of "success" are related to end-use, to distribution, and to the impact of the benefits; that is, to the effectiveness of projects not only in diffusing the innovations but in meeting the needs of those who bear the heaviest burdens (women, in particular) and in enabling those people to acquire benefits.
Promises and problems
Women in Kenya have a strong basis of organization, both in formal groups and in an informal sense through spontaneous "self-help" work teams. Kenya's national network of women's organizations is quite unique, and it is stronger than women's networks in other countries. It has historical roots, emerging partly as an outgrowth of the mutual aid harambee ("let us pull together") movement, which is strongly supported in Kenya as a basis for cooperation and to promote solidarity.
WOMEN WORKERS IN ETHIOPIA members of a producers' cooperative
Women's clubs, which started during the colonial era, were originally elitist, and some groups have still carried on class restrictions and biases. However, most have changed their early orientations and now usually promote the involvement of women at all socioeconomic levels, in addition to being involved in a diversity of projects and activities. In 1978, the women's organizations involved over 500 000 women, including 500 different local groups, and they have expanded greatly since then. Funding for the organizations comes from membership fees, contributions, occasional appropriations from local government committees, and various private grants and institutions. The women sometimes organize in a manner parallel to local government structures, but they are not part of the bureaucracy.
Tree-planting. The National Council of Women of Kenya is one of the major networks, and it has developed a particularly strong and active tree-planting programme, begun in 1977. Its objectives are not only fuelwood-related; they are intended also for conservation and for multipurpose use of trees, including commercial wood, poles, fruits and ornamentals, and for averting the desertification process more broadly.
The programme has two major components: the Green Belt movement and tree nursery development. Both are carried out through local women's groups and are overseen by the central Nairobi office. Both are administered on a request basis, whereby local groups send in application forms for tree seedlings and simple tools. The central office then responds to requests, distributes seedlings, maintains central seed nurseries and keeps remarkably well-organized records and follow-up reports on the activities of the local groups. It is also directed by strong and charismatic leaders.
Of the two components, the Green Belt project is of less significance in the context of this article. It involves the planting of a small number of demonstration trees, primarily for publicizing conservation and environmental improvement, particularly for commemorations or special celebrations. It tends to be an "awareness-raising" activity without direct social benefits. The local women's groups sponsor these events, and large audiences often attend the ceremonial plantings, but women themselves may not even be directly involved in planting and maintaining the trees. This component, however, has served its purpose of attracting attention and popularity: as of 1982, there were approximately 200 Green Belts in Kenya.
The tree nursery component, on the other hand, is of particular interest, being a "social forestry" project. It involves the full participation and active work of women members, who care for the nurseries, which are often on communal plots of land. It incorporates a larger number of trees per project and provides a system of cash-incentive contracts with the women for tree-raising. In cases where a communal plot is not available, women may raise seedlings on their independent farms. When seedlings are mature, the central office of the National Council of Women of Kenya (NCW) purchases the seedlings from the women for about US$0.50 per seedling, so that each woman receives cash payment for her labour and her product. The local groups also place requests for a certain number and type of seedlings desired for a particular location to be re-allocated to women members. The central office attempts to fulfill these requests and redistributes the trees to rural areas, giving
priority to particularly needy areas. As of August 1982, there were over 50 of these NCW nurseries, and this programme has also been steadily expanding.
PREPARING SAPLINGS IN GHANA
The tree nursery component is promising and "successful" in several ways. Not only are women producing large numbers of healthy tree seedlings with high survival rates but, even more important, local women themselves are fully involved: they receive the direct benefits and also have strong potential for improving their own welfare. They get immediate returns from the cash-payment system, and they also have an interest in the long-term returns when the trees are mature. Furthermore, consideration is being given to the end-use and distribution in at least attempting to provide the trees to the most deforested areas and the neediest women. These projects contribute both to the broader aims of the women's organizations and to the reforestation needs of the nation.
Visiting such nurseries, any observer is immediately struck by the impressive managerial and "technical" capabilities of the women, the well-maintained trees and nursery grounds, and the enthusiasm and commitment of the women involved. This success has been possible largely because of the role that women themselves are playing. They are in control of the projects, including the management, the decision-making, the physical work and the end-use. Also, the women see the benefits of adopting this innovation, as it will potentially ease their own burden in such activities as collecting fuelwood and selling fence-poles. Finally, the social aspect of group harambee builds enthusiasm and a sense of pride.
Weaknesses. When interviewed, the local women did not perceive many problems in developing and expanding nurseries. Needed inputs, such as shovels and watering-cans, are generally well provided, and technical advice is occasionally sought through the Forest Department, with the women remaining in control. The participants expressed interest in the project for multiple use of trees beyond just fuelwood.
PREPARING SAPLINGS IN GHANA AND IN LEBANON in Kenya, it is organized on a national scale
There are, however, several limitations and problems in the actual effectiveness of these efforts to relieve women's burdens. Many of the problems stem from the nature of the women's groups in a broad sense. In general, four basic areas of weakness were detected by the author:
· The groups rarely reach or involve the very poorest and most-burdened women. This may be due to membership restrictions, location of activities, lack of access to information, lack of time and energy, work demands or other constraints.
· There are some questions about various features of the tree nursery projects. For example, although they are locally based, management is perhaps over-centralized, creating a reliance on the central office for ensuring that the payment and distribution/allocation aspects are carried out. Moreover, the cash payment itself may distract attention away from the value of the trees in themselves, and it is conceivable that a system of paying labour on a time basis rather than for the "product" would be preferable.
· The existence of charismatic central leadership creates a situation in which the perpetuation of the programme depends to a large degree on the president and her promotion efforts. This puts great demands on the leader and raises some questions about the sustainability of the project after she leaves.
· Although their projects may be constrained owing to lack of resources such as land or water, women often do not confront these deeper socio-economic or political conditions; nor do they generally try to dispute legal structures in instances when they lack land or water rights. Yet these kinds of barriers may pose strong limitations on what the women can actually achieve in developing their forestry and nursery projects.
EGYPTIAN WOMAN COOKING A MEAL improved wood stoves are needed
Suggested future actions
In assessing the overall significance and contribution of the women's groups, a great deal can be learned that can be applied to future actions and to other developing countries. The Kenya case is just one among many that show the potential of such groups. There are a number of project-level strategies and steps that can be taken to strengthen capacities and potential.
· Women's groups should formulate their own project designs, organizations, decisions and objectives in relation to their needs, priorities and specific socio-economic, cultural and resource constraints. In wood-related activities, as shown here, they are in a particularly good position to make decisions.
· "Time-budget" surveys done by planners are sometimes recommended in efforts to measure and assess women's tasks; however, these surveys are not generally sufficient for understanding the women's time and work burdens, and they do not reflect the intensity and nature of work burdens. Women are in the best position to know which problems and time constraints are most important.
· Women's groups such as those in Kenya should share their experiences and strengthen one another in such activities. They should also learn from each other's strengths and weaknesses. Also, successful groups should approach government officials at all levels of planning to explain the importance of their efforts, provide evidence of progress, establish legitimacy and, if necessary, acquire government support and inputs. Women who are experienced in such projects, regardless of whether they have "professional" credentials, should offer to be chief advisers to government planners for community forestry or nursery projects.
As well as for the promotion of initiatives among women, changes must be made from the point of view of politicians, planners and government agencies. Breaking down traditional patterns and biases is not easy, but project officers and foresters, as well as planners in aid and donor institutions, must give women full responsibility and support. The task of changing "conventional" orientations will become increasingly easier as male directors and planners come to appreciate and understand the important roles that women can have, and to recognize that women's efforts will contribute to the larger objectives of the society as well.
Hopes should not be exaggerated in this context: women's efforts do not necessarily provide answers for overcoming deeper injustices and inequalities, nor can anyone pretend that their forestry projects alone will reverse the trend of diminishing wood resources. However, if oriented in the ways that have been discussed in this article, these projects can help lead in successful directions.
Finally, apart from "strategy" issues, there is another important lesson that can be discerned from this study, namely that women's groups should be encouraged to address power relations and political issues and that they should not be co-opted into existing structures that mute their potential contribution. Women's efforts will not have full impact if they remain mere depoliticized "pawns" or peripheral actors in other people's development schemes. Rather, they need autonomy, visibility and decision-making centrality, as well as political and economic power in this area they know intimately.
In this sense, then, "women would work". And they must be given a chance. With appropriate orientations, they can make clear contributions toward relieving their own burdens, averting wood-scarcity problems, building socially beneficial resource projects and promoting the broader goals of development.
Bibliography
ABBOTT, SUSAN. 1975. Women's importance for Kenyan rural development. Community Development Journal, 10 (3).
ARNOLD, J.E.M. 1979. Wood energy and rural communities. Nat. Resources Forum (3)
BOSERUP, ESTER. 1970. Women's Role in Economic Development. New York, St Martin.
BROKENSHA, DAVID & RILEY, BERNARD. 1978. Forest, foraging, fences and fuel in a marginal area of Kenya. Santa Barbara. Calif., Social Process Research Institute, University of California.
CARR, MARILYN. 1982. Appropriate technology for women: two essays. London, Intermediate Technology Development Group.
ENVIRONMENT LIAISON CENTRE. 1981. Directory of Kenya non-government organizations working in the field of renewable energy. Nairobi.
FOLEY, GERALD & Moss. PATRICIA. 1983. Improved cooking stoves in developing countries. London, Earthscan Energy Information Programme. (Draft report.)
GANAPATHY, R.S. 1981. Rural energy and development: a strategic planning analysis. In Reddy, et al., eds. Southern perspectives on the rural energy crisis. Bolinas, Calif., Nautilis.
GERMAIN, ADRIENNE. 1976-77. Poor rural women: a policy perspective. J. of Int. Affairs, 30 (2, fall/winter).
HAYES, PETER. 1981. Social structure and rural energy technologies. In Reddy et al., eds. Southern perspectives on the rural energy crisis. Bolinas. Calif., Nautilis.
HERRERA, A.O. 1981. The generation of technologies in rural areas. Wld Dev., 9 (1).
HOSKINS, MARILYN. 1979. Women in forestry for local community development. Washington, D.C., US Agency for International Development. Office of Women in Development.
HOSKINS, MARILYN. 1981. Household level appropriate technologies for women. Washington, D.C.. US Agency for International Development. Office of Women in Development.
INTERNATIONAL CENTER FOR RESEARCH ON WOMEN. 1980a. Limits for productivity: improving women's access to technology and credit, prepared by I. Schumacher et al. Washington, D.C., US Agency for International Development, Office of Women in Development.
INTERNATIONAL CENTER FOR RESEARCH ON WOMEN. 1980b. Productivity of women in developing countries: measurement issues and recommendations. Washington, D.C., US Agency for International Development. Office of Women in Development.
INTERNATIONAL CENTER FOR RESEARCH ON WOMEN. 1980c. Keeping women out: a structural analysis of women's employment in developing countries. Washington, D.C., US Agency for International Development. Office of Women in Development.
INTERNATIONAL LABOUR OFFICE. 1979. A conceptual framework for the analysis of the effects of technological change on rural women, by Ann Whitehead. Geneva. International Labour Office World Employment Programme. Working Paper 79.
JUMA, CALESTOUS. 1982. Limits to diffusion: renewable energy and social change. Nairobi, Environment Liaison Centre.
KI-ZERBO, J. & DE LEPELIÈRE, J. 1980. Nouveaux foyers au Sahel. Dakar, African Institute for Economic Development and Planning, Environment Training Programme. Environnement Africain, étude 55.
NASH, JUNE. 1977. Women in development: dependency and exploitation. Development and Change (8).
NATIONAL COUNCIL OF WOMEN OF KENYA. 1982. Information brochure and pamphlet on tree-planting programmes. P.O. Box 43741, Nairobi.
O'KELLY, ELIZABETH. 1978. Rural women: their integration in development programmes and how simple intermediate technologies can help them. London.
PALA, ACHOLA. 1976. African women in rural development: research trends and priorities. Nairobi, American Council on Education, Overseas Liaison Committee, Institute of Development Studies.
PALA, ACHOLA. 1978. Women power in Kenya. Ceres (FAO), 11(2): 43-46.
TAU, AMBASSADOR MILDREN MALINEO. 1981. Women in Africa. Africa Rep. (March-April).
THRUPP, LORI-ANN. 1982a. Averting the fuelwood crisis? Programs for tree-planting and wood stove development in Kenya. University of Sussex Institute of Development Studies.
THRUPP, LORI-ANN. 1982b. How appropriate is appropriate technology for self-reliant rural development schemes? University of Sussex, Institute of Development Studies.
THRUPP, LORI-ANN. 1983. Improved charcoal-burning stoves in Kenya: the choice of technology. University of Sussex, Institute of Development Studies.
TINKER, IRENE. 1981a. Policy strategies for women in the 1980s. Africa Rep. (March-April).
TINKER, IRENE. 1982. Women, energy and development. Washington, D.C., Equity Policy Center.
WISNER, BEN. 1981. Social factors affecting fuelwood planning in Kenya: basic needs in conflict. Nairobi, Beijer (Ministry of Energy Fuelwood Project).
ZEIDENSSEIN, GEORGE. 1978. Including women in development efforts. Wld Dev., 6 (7/8).
<section>7</section>
Women's progress in forestry: Examples from the Philippines and the United States
1. Filipino women in forestry
Cerenilla A. Cruz
Cerenilla A. Cruz is a teacher and researcher in the College of Forestry, Department of Forest Resources Management. University of the Philippines at Los Baños.
· The possibility that now exists for women to participate in forestry activities is largely a result of the various forestry development programmes of the Philippine Government. Opportunities for women in the forestry profession occur in at least three categories: instruction, research and extension.
My first taste of the forestry profession dates back to February 1967, when I was employed as a research assistant in the Department of Forest Resources Management (FRM) of the College of Forestry at the University of the Philippines at Los Baños (UPLB). In 1971, I became the first female member of the teaching staff of FRM. I was assigned to teach courses in forestry economics and related fields. Today, the department has four female faculty members. Since these courses do not require fieldwork, we have not had any physical difficulties in teaching them. However, our physical stamina has been tested in separate summer sessions during which we oversee a course involving forest mensuration work.
As of 1984, 16 of the 70 members of the faculty of the college were women. Aside from those in FRM, women are also teaching in the departments of Forest Biological Sciences, Wood Science and Technology, Silviculture and Forest Biological Sciences, Wood Science and Technology, Silviculture and Forest Influences, and Social Forestry. There are other female staff in the college who are not members of the faculty but are involved in forestry extension work and in training programmes. Most of the faculty have advanced degrees in forestry, and this is partly due to the privilege given by the UPLB to its staff to pursue matters or doctoral programmes in the university on a part-time basis and at reduced fees. I finished my Ph.D. degree in forestry in this way.
As a teacher and researcher, I feel a great sense of satisfaction when I hear that my former students have passed the board examination for foresters or that a former graduate-student advisee is doing a good job in his or her own fire of work; or when my research results interest other researchers, students, and colleagues in the profession. Among the other sources of satisfaction I have had are participating and presenting papers in local and international symposia, seminars and work shops; being invited to act as resource person in two training courses whose participants came from the Southeast Asian region; and participating in a training course in forestry projects that was sponsored by the World Bank.
CAN SHE BECOME A FORESTER? in the past she only carried fuelwood
Until the late 1960s, only a few Filipino women chose forestry as a career. Now, however, the increasing interest of women in the forestry profession can be observed from enrolment trends. In the college, 72 of the 134 new students who enrolled in 1982-83 were females; of these, 8 were pursuing a forestry curriculum, while 4 were studying forest products engineering. The rest were enrolled in the forest ranger curriculum. As of 1980, the college had graduated 148 women in its forest ranger curriculum and 89 in its Bachelor's degree programme. The total number of Filipino women in forestry is much higher, since there are more than 25 other schools directly involved in forestry training.
Besides being employed in the forestry profession, Filipino women are involved in forestry-related activities. The implementation of forest development projects in particular has greatly increased the involvement of rural women in forestry work. In the past, nursery activities were performed by men, but women now take part in such activities as filling plastic bags with soil for the sowing of seeds, potting seedlings, watering, and fertilizing nursery plants. It is interesting to note that these women are paid the same wages as the male workers. In tree farming, where farm business is considered a family affair, women work hand in hand with their male counterparts. Rural women are also involved in the gathering and drying of Leucaena leucocephala leaves for leaf-meal production. In the wood industries, some jobs that used to be done only by men are now also done by women. Some wood-processing firms are employing women to work in their research departments and to do finishing
jobs in plywood manufacturing.
The participation of Filipino women in forestry activities is by now a recognized fact. Their involvement is sure to increase even more as new development programmes, whether private or public, are undertaken in the country.
2. Women in the USDA Forest Service
Mary H. Albertson
Mary H. Albertson is Federal Women's Programme Manager, USDA Forest Service, Portland, Oregon. USA. This article was previously published in the journal Women in Forestry Vol. 6. No. 1.
· Although the Federal Women's Program (FWP) in the United States is 16 years old, I am still often asked, "What is it? What can it do for me?" The Federal Women's Program is part of a federal-government-wide effort to increase employment and advancement opportunities for women. It was established as a result of an executive order issued by the President of the United States, who mandated the programme because of a recognition that women face special problems in employment and career advancement as a result of role stereotypes and myths about women. Unlike ethnic minority groups, women have traditionally been employed by the Forest Service, although they have typically occupied the lower pay levels and dead-end jobs.
The purpose of the FWP is straightforward. It aims to increase employment and advancement opportunities for women so that they will be fairly represented at all organizational and pay levels and in all job categories in the federal workforce. For the USDA Forest Service, this means that some day there should be significant numbers of women who are District Rangers, Forest Supervisors, Overhead Fire Team Bosses, Directors and Regional Foresters.
Although the FWP started in 1967, it did not take hold in most federal agencies, including the Forest Service, until the early 1970s. The first few years of the decade were concentrated in increasing awareness among male managers and male and female employees, dispelling myths about working women, encouraging women to reach their full potential and encouraging the agency to provide career counselling, assertiveness training and the like to women. All along, two priorities for the FWP have been placing women in nontraditional jobs, and assessing organizational barriers and recommending methods and alternatives for dealing with institutionalized procedures and policies that hamper the advancement of women.
Seven years in the USDA Forest Service
June 1976
June 1983
Women as percentage of total workforce
Women as percentage of professional work force
Women as percentage of administrative/technical workforce
Women as percentage of total workforce in pay grades GS-11 end above
Women District Rangers
Women Staff Directors
Women Deputy Forest Supervisors
ADAPTING TO DIFFICULT CONDITIONS forest work is not just for men
The FWP operates as a multi-pronged effort to try to reach the long-term goals described here.
Some of the key facets are:
· Emphasizing outreach to and recruitment, at the entry level, of women in professional occupations (e.g., foresters and engineers).
· Encouraging a strong upward-mobility programme geared toward employees at low pay levels and in dead-end jobs to allow them to move into better-paid, more-challenging occupations.
· Working with managers to stress the placement of women in line positions and other management jobs.
· Analysing factors that hinder the movement of women into top-level jobs and recommending action to mitigate these barriers.
· Encouraging managers to include women in visibility-producing assignments such as special ad hoc committees, study teams, formalized training opportunities, and fire-overhead teams.
The FWP manager does not take each woman by the hand. Rather, she is a manager, a change agent, a catalyst. She recommends systems and processes for integrating the employment, training, advancement and involvement of women into every facet of the organization so that the managers - who are, after all, the ones who can hire, train and promote - do in fact hire, train and promote women. For example, an FWP manager might recommend that managers' performance standards include an element on the employment and advancement of women. If this is approved, it becomes part of an organizational process and an accepted way of doing business.
A key function of the programme is identifying problems and assessing barriers - such as lack of mentors, problems of dual-career families, and absence of developmental and visibility-producing assignments - and recommending alternative solutions to management. The programme has had a significant degree of success in the Forest Service (see table).
For the most part, entry-level barriers have been broken. As can be readily seen in the table, the current and future challenge is the movement of women into line and other management jobs. There is some resistance, but a number of managers throughout the Forest Service are demonstrating positive results in this area.
<section>8</section>
The world of forestry
COFO looks beyond 2000
Latin American forestry policy
Peasant forest plantations in Cuzco
A glance at the Brutia pine
Deforestation in the Dominican Republic
The forests of Japan
Progress made in watershed management
Fire-fighting success
New forest research project
COFO looks beyond 2000
Focusing on the theme of "Forestry 2000", the Seventh Session of the Committee on Forestry of the FAO Council (COFO) met at FAO headquarters in Rome between 7 and 11 May 1984.
The 197 participants in the meeting included delegations from 83 member countries, four non-member countries, the Holy See and seven UN bodies and specialized agencies, as well as five other international organizations. The session was opened by FAO Director-General Edouard Saouma, and the Committee then unanimously elected G. D. Holmes (UK) chairman and C. L. Bhatia (India) first vice-chairman.
The Committee after reviewing four background documents prepared by FAO, debated the policy theme "Forestry beyond 2000 - potentials, problems and prospects, with special emphasis on forest policies for the temperate, tropical and arid regions and at the global level". In these discussions, the Committee identified conservation of the forest resource as a major concern. For the humid tropics, the major forest conservation problems were considered to be forest degradation and depletion; for the Mediterranean anti arid regions, fire and desertification; and for the temperate industrial regions, acid rain.
In light of these concerns, the Committee recommended that all countries accelerate the process of heightening political awareness of the critical importance of the world's forest resources for the future of humankind. FAO, the Committee recommended, should maintain a full programme of information and assessment of the outlook for the forestry sector.
The fundamental importance of forests to food security was stressed by the Committee, which recommended the closer integration of forestry with agricultural and pastoral uses through the fuller participation of local people.
Since future deliveries of forest goods and services depend upon adequate funding and investment, the Committee recommended that funding sources other than government finance he mobilized to support forestry development programmes. Stressing FAO's important role in world forestry development, the Committee appealed to donor governments and agencies to increase their contribution to FAO's extra-budgetary resources for forestry field programmes.
Turning from policy matters to FAO forestry programmes, the Committee endorsed FAO's long-term strategies, with their emphasis upon greater participation by people in the benefits to he gained from forestry development This point was underscored by M. A Flores Rodas, Assistant Director-General, FAO Forestry Department, who told the participants that forestry has a social mission and should make a strong contribution to the process of development, the central challenge of which was to achieve social justice and an equitable distribution of social benefits. Forestry requires a holistic approach, he said, one that recognizes the multiple outputs of the forest and the overriding need to involve people in the decision-making process. In supporting this emphasis, the Committee declared that the human dimension in forestry had not yet been sufficiently stressed.
LOOKING AT FORESTRY'S FUTURE COFO emphasizes forest conservation
The Committee several other recommendations regarding FAO programmes:
· That FAO's priorities focus on action needed to meet the principal problems and challenges to forestry identified in the "Forestry beyond 2000" documents for the temperate, tropical and arid regions and at the global level
· That the highest priorities be given to strengthening the contribution of forestry to rural development to tree breeding anti genetics for energy production and desertification control; and to education, training and the development of national forestry institutions
· That FAO prepare a study on the interrelationship between forestry and food security for the attention of the Committee on Food Security, the Committee on Agriculture and other appropriate FAO bodies
Other items reviewed by the Committee included decisions of relevance made by FAO governing bodies: items referred to COFO by Regional Forestry Commissions and other FAO statutory bodies: implementation of the "Forestry for Development" strategy adopted by COFO at its Fifth Session (1980); follow-up to recommendations made by COFO at its Sixth Session (1982); and FAO's programme of work for the forestry sector
The Committee heard a report presented by the Mexican delegation regarding plans for the Ninth World Forestry Congress in Mexico City in July 1985 It also adopted a resolution proposed by the Austrian delegation that 1985 he proclaimed the "International Year of the Forest".
SAWMILL WORKERS IN IBADAN
Latin American forestry policy
Even though Latin America possesses a great wealth of forest resources, much of it is inaccessible A significant proportion of what is accessible is not exploited, since the continent has only a small number of commercial species It is easy, then, to understand the importance of afforestation and reforestation in all regions with species that combine ecological and economic values.
Almost all the countries of Latin America are currently engaged in afforestation and reforestation According to a 1983 study by Dr Misael Acosta-Solís, President of the Instituto Ecuatoriano de Ciencias Naturales, entitled "Política forestal y reforestación nacional", the leading countries in terms of reforestation are Argentina, with Salicaceae and pine; Brazil, with eucalyptus and pine; Chile, with radiate pine; Colombia, with various forest-tree classes; Ecuador and Peru, with eucalyptus and radiate pine; and Uruguay, with eucalyptus and pine The countries with the most extensive experience in forestry activities in general are Brazil, Argentina, Chile and Uruguay. All of them are quite interested in reforestation with conifers, particularly pulp producers, who find them suitable for the manufacture of a variety of papers in order to avoid foreign currency debts incurred in importing forest products.
The forestry prospects for Latin America are bright. Forest plantations have produced promising results, even though only small-scale operations have been conducted so far Consequently, as the natural forest is prudently exploited, it is imperative to increase forest plantations, not only to replace felled natural forest but also to provide lumber, cellulose for paper, and numerous other forest products that the economy of each country may need.
SAWMILL WORKERS IN AND IN KABUL bringing forestry's benefits to people
The forestry programmes of each nation, Acosta-Solís argues, should conform to the conditions indicated by studies carried out on each geographic area, marking out zones that need to be rehabilitated ecologically, zones for economic reforestation, zones for commercial reforestation and zones restricted by the state to small-scale enterprise.
To achieve such goals, the forestry departments of each country need to be strengthened. Similarly, educational institutes specifically concerned with forest industry education need more support in order to train forestry personnel in increased numbers. Governments must provide incentive systems and extensive lines of credit for the forest industry. In short, once an appropriate forestry policy is drawn up and defined, each country must also develop the infrastructure needed for implementation.
For more information, contact Publicaciones Científicas Más, Apartado 408. Quito, Ecuador.
María Gutiérrez Rome
TRANSPLANTING SEEDLINGS IN JAPAN a country with a "wood culture"
Peasant forest plantations in Cuzco
Representatives from FAO and several other international organizations recently met with Mr Simón Morales Tejada, director of Cenfor IX Cuzco, the regional office of Peru's National Forest and Wildlife Institute. The meeting occurred at the forest plantation of Chacán, Cuzco, which is managed and owned by a peasant community.
Mr Simón Morales said that the reforestation started in Cuzco in 1973, and that these peasant forest plantations ranked among the best in the whole country, thanks not only to favourable climate and soil conditions but also to the wide incorporation of peasants in the operation. "Reforestation cannot be allowed to stagnate," he stressed. "Forests must be exploited according to the resources of peasant enterprises and the needs of the region's population. We have borne this in mind, as well as industry and marketing."
Mr Simón Morales listed the different problems of the peasant communities, such as high interest rates on forest loans and lack of technical assistance. "Forest activity", he said, "must be developed to benefit the peasant communities and the country as a whole."
Mr Kenny-Jordan, an FAO project manager in Peru, speaking on behalf of all the representatives, expressed keen interest in such plantations and spoke of a desire for exchange and collaboration with them to promote such activities in other countries. The president of the peasant community thanked him and stressed the economic importance of forest plantation development for peasants.
Sylva 2000, December 1983
A glance at the Brutia pine
The first part of a monograph devoted to the Brutia pine, written by Prof. Ibrahim Nahal of the Faculty of Agronomy, Aleppo University. Syrian Arab Republic, has been published in Forêt méditerranéenne (December 1983).
Prof. Nahal presents the Brutia pine as a complex species containing numerous subspecies. Until very recently, says, this tree was confused with its cousin, the Aleppo pine. However, it has been identified since 1811, when it was catalogued by the celebrated Neapolitan botanist Tenore, who named it after Bruttium, the ancient name for the Calabria region - though the author says that the species has never been found in Italy, so the description was probably based on specimens imported from the Near East.
Prof. Nahal is particularly interested in the subspecies Pinus brutia var. brutia. He lists its geographical sources of supply as Greece, Turkey, the Syrian Arab Republic. Lebanon, Iraq and Cyprus. The tree attains a height of 35 m and has a lifespan of 150 years. The author describes its morphological characteristics and its qualities as a forest tree, highlighting its great adaptability to a variety of climate and soil conditions, characteristics that make the species eminently suitable for reforestation projects. For this purpose. Nahal recommends the exclusive use of seeds collected in the area's pine-woods at each bioclimatic stage. The Brutia pine can he used for a wide range of products and processes: lumber, veneer manufacture, packaging, carpentry, paper manufacture, etc.
This first part of the monograph is accompanied by an impressive bibliography and many photographs of great interest.
Deforestation in the Dominican Republic
More trees have been cut down in the past 20 years than in the whole previous history of the Dominican Republic, according to Dr Abelardo Jiménez Lambertus, president of the Instituto Dominicano de Bioconservación. At this rate all the country's forests will be destroyed in only another 10 years. A major cause is illicit tree-cutting.
Dr Jiménez Lambertus says that the Crónicas de las Indias mentioned that Santo Domingo had abundant vegetation, and that as late as 1910 the forest area constituted about 50 percent of the country's territory. By 1967 that area had already decreased to about 11.5 percent. The urgently necessary solution, he says, is to cease deforestation immediately and start massive, high-quality afforestation.
Dr Antonio Thomen, a Dominican expert in ecology, says that, unfortunately, the Dominican Republic does not have a cohesive policy in the forest sector. Dr Thomen proposes, among other solutions, the establishment of a national council for the defence of the environment, the prohibition of tree-cutting, the urgent implementation of a broad reforestation and national tree-repopulation programme, and the establishment of community forests and energy resource farms, to prevent total destruction of the environment in the Dominican Republic and save its endangered forest resources.
El Caribe, 27 May 1982
The forests of Japan
A special issue of Revue forestière française (1983) is devoted entirely to the forests and woods of Japan. The articles deal with various significant Japanese achievements in the fields of research, education and silviculture and in the timber industry. The authors, a team of French foresters, had the opportunity to examine these achievements at first hand during the Seventeenth World Congress of the International Union of Forestry Research Organizations (IUFRO), held in Kyoto in 1981.
As Haruo Oyama, Professor of Agronomy at Meiji University, stresses in his preface, Japanese culture is "a wood culture, symbolized by the eternal nature of wood itself". In a concrete and iron culture like that of the modern industrialized world, using exhaustible, nonrenewable resources - which we shall run out of one day, he prophesies - we must find a way to enhance the value of wood, which will "give a new dimension to our civilization".
The articles that follow consider, among a variety of forestry topics, Japanese forests and their management; the silviculture and production of sugi (the Japanese cedar), Japan's "king tree" and the focus of extensive afforestation since 1600; the production of ceremonial alcove posts (the result of a process of artificially shaping the bole of the growing sugi, a practice described by the chairman of the congress as "perverse"); the cultivation in Japan of the shitake, a ligniferous mushroom increasingly important as a basic foodstuff; the national parks which articulate the very special Japanese perception of nature; and other forestry questions.
One article concentrates on the use of timber for housing and in the construction of religious temples and imperial buildings. Many other aspects of the Japanese forest industry are covered. They all emphasize the gap between Japan and France, indeed between Japan and Europe, in matters pertaining to how wood and forests are used.
The problems themselves are similar: the outdated forest ownership patterns inherent in peasant societies; the plywood industry's crisis; the worker shortage in forestry; and the complexity of forest administration and policies.
Recent activities in Chile
ANTI-EROSION EXPERIMENT IN CHILE funded by FAO and WFP
Progress made in watershed management
During a recent visit to Chile, Luis Santiago Botero, chief of FAO's Forest Conservation and Wildlands Branch, highlighted the progress achieved by Chile in watershed management programmes. These programmes were launched between 1973 and 1977. As Botero explained, watershed management consists in securing an integrated and balanced system incorporating water, soil and vegetation, so that productivity is improved and at the same time the environment is protected. Chile has achieved a high standard in these complex tasks, he said, and its endeavours should prove significant even on a worldwide scale, since it has already provided technical assistance to several nations in South America.
Botero also praised the accomplishments of the Corporación Nacional Forestal de Chile (CONAF) in developing utilization of the country's dry and semi-arid northern areas. He participated with CONAF experts in the analysis required to initiate a programme financed by UNDP aimed at systematizing all the research completed on Chile's dry and semi-arid zones. The programme is scheduled to be launched early in 1984. Great satisfaction was expressed over the project, which has the potential to transform the economy of Chile's northern sector and may provide an example for countries with similar physical conditions.
Chile Forestal, October 1983
Fire-fighting success
Chile is in the vanguard of the fight against forest fire, according to Hugo Knockaert, chief of the fire management programme of Chile's national forest corporation (CONAF). In an interview with Chile Forestal after the completion of an advanced course in forest fire control organized by the USDA Forest Service. Knockaert said, "Chile leads the Latin American countries in the fight against forest fires."
He gave three reasons for this: (1) Chile possesses reliable statistics, something that (he claimed) no other Latin American country has: (2) the structure of Chile's programme is unique, since it Consists of a state regulating organization; and (3) there is complete coordination between the national programme and the private sector. Moreover, Chile has the fire corps, with responsibility for problems in the rural-urban sector, and the forest police, in charge of investigation in cases of damage.
As a result of these policies, Knockaert said, the problem of forest fires is under control. "The average number of forest fires is very low, proportionally even better than in developed countries such as the United States. "
The progress achieved in the use of fire itself as a weapon to fight forest fires in the United States was the most interesting topic in the training course. Knockaert said. Although the ways of applying it in Chile are different, he agrees on the value of the technique, hut says that Chile still has a long way to go in this field.
Lastly, he set two goals for the Chilean programme: the wider inclusion of private agencies in forest fire prevention; and a inroad, long-term project aimed at establishing a new forest fire risk indicator which will make it possible to "understand fire behaviour patterns according to different types of fuel".
Chile Forestal, December 1983
New forest research project
The main objective of the new joint project between the Chilean national forest corporation CONAF, UNDP and FAO, which began in April 1984 and will have a duration of three years, is to incorporate in the national economy 24 million ha in the north of the country which are now unproductive and severely eroded.
It is calculated that 78 000 new ha could he planted, which would mean an output of half a million dollars in forest products and an increase of 395 000 visitors to protected natural areas.
This new research programme represents an investment of US$856 000, of which $646 000 are being contributed by UNDP. CONAF will he the coordinating agency between Chilean national institutions such as universities and research institutes, which will execute the programme. The respective centres are ready for the first activities, which will include an evaluation of the programmer carried out so far for introduction of species, a study of carob diseases and their biological control, and approaches to the management sclerophyllous (drought resistant) forests.
Chile Forestal, May 1984
BURNT FOREST NEAR RIO TENO Chile cites advances in fire-fighting
<section>9</section>
Books
Two very different forest inventories
Forest ecosystems in Africa
An international glossary of tropical woods
Using bibliographical data banks
Bamboos in Ecuador
Rwanda's woods
Forest ecology research
A North American itinerary
Silviculture and rural development
Classifying Peru's trees
Wood transport
Sixty important species
Forest bibliography of Peru
Costs of roundwood extraction and transport
Afforestation needs incentives
Two very different forest inventories
Inventario forestale nazionale italiano. Trento. Italian Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry. 1983. 2 vols. 444 p. (In Italian.)
Haute-Volta inventaire forestier national. Prepared by FAO on the basis of the work of A. G. Cameratti. Rome. 1983. 187 p. (In French.)
We have here two national forest inventories: one, not yet finished, from Italy: the other, completed, from Burkina Faso, formerly the Upper Volta. These two inventories reflect two highly divergent countries in terms of historical, cultural and ethnic background as well as from the bio-climatic, ecological and phytogeographic points of view. Italy is an industrialized Mediterranean country with a highly institutionalized administration. Burkina Faso, on the other hand, is a developing Sahel country with barely 25 years' independence, an inexperienced administration and heavily rural traditions.
Yet each of these countries has felt the need to draw up its very first national inventory of forest resources.
The Italian project, carried out by a commission appointed by the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, is a highly methodological study, based on a systematic sampling procedure already successfully tested in other European countries. Primarily, the assessment made use of ground surveys, but 1:25 000 scale maps and aerial photographs were also employed to pinpoint wooded areas. The project document includes instructions for the practical organization of census procedures, together with a handbook for field teams.
The Burkina Faso inventory, prepared by the Government in collaboration with a team of FAO foresters, includes an assessment of the woody vegetation and identifies wooded areas with potential for productive development. The survey covered the whole country, examining the current forest resource situation in each administrative area. The recently installed remote-sensing centre in Ouagadougou made it possible to map forest areas from Landsat satellite pictures. This could be the most significant inventory ever made in the Sahel.
The Director of FAO's Forest Resources Division, Mr J. P. Lanly said in an interview. "Each of these studies has a simple but sound approach, spurred by the need to obtain immediate overall results." He went on to say that the objective in each case is the same: to assess national forest resources with a view to improving production. In the case of Italy, however this refers to construction wood for industry, whereas in Burkina Faso the main preoccupation is to meet the rural population's daily fuelwood needs.
MAKING A FOREST INVENTORY IN ECUADOR easier said than done
The differing problems in compiling these two inventories, Lanly said, derive mainly from the administrative structures of the two countries. In Italy, for example, this kind of undertaking is faced with the problem of strong regional autonomy, with each region acting as an independent administrative entity. Thus, a single methodology that meets every exigency is by no means easy to devise.
In Burkina Faso, this kind of problem does not arise. Whereas the Italian inventory has access to numerous existing dendrographic studies and, therefore, ipso facto, to reliable data, Burkina Faso has no forestry tradition or training experience.
As for forest resources in each country. Mr Lanly said that in Burkina Faso there is considerable degradation and deforestation. This is caused mainly by brush fires which devastate the woods each year, but overcutting for fuelwood, land-clearing for shifting cultivation, and, finally, overgrazing are also common. Fires are common in Italy, and yet only a small part of the total plant cover is destroyed by fire each year. The problem lies elsewhere: deforestation is often caused by uncontrolled urban expansion.
Mr Lanly concluded by pointing to the need for "integrated" resource monitoring. This would take into account the exploitation of forest resources for production and would also include data on wildlife, soil, water, pollution level and degradation of the forest areas which constitute such an important part of a country's natural heritage.
Fay Banoun, Rome
Forest ecosystems in Africa
Ecosystèmes forestiers tropicaux d'Afrique. Prepared and published by ORSTOM-Unesco. Paris. 1983. 473 p. (In French.)
This work is the product of a report prepared and published by Unesco and UNEP in 1979 to take stock of world knowledge on the tropical forest ecosystems. The voluminous documentation assembled enabled the Office of Overseas Scientific and Technical Research (ORSTOM), in collaboration with Unesco, to prepare this second publication.
The purpose of the work is to give a clear summary of what is known about the structure, workings and evolution of the tropical forest ecosystems of Africa. These represent the typical natural vegetation of the humid and sub-humid tropics and are of primary importance in meeting the requirements of the people living in the forests for wood and food products.
The publication is divided into two parts. The first, consisting of 14 chapters, studies the structure, workings and evolution of forest ecosystems. Particularly interesting is chapter 8, which deals with the natural forest and, more precisely, with the biology and regeneration of equatorial forests and forests with a contrasting climate - an analysis that also extends to the growth of the trees. Other chapters give comparable data on the agro-ecosystems and plantations that have replaced the forests in many lowland regions.
The second part deals with the biology and characteristics of the human populations living in the forest ecosystems and with the interactions between them and the forest ecosystems. Its five chapters investigate demographic trends, food habits and the extent to which people living in tropical forest environments adapt to these environments and, in turn, are affected by them. They analyse the movements of these populations, their civilizations, social organization and traditional ways of using the natural resources; and also the possibilities of transforming the ecosystems in order to increase the quantity of goods and services available for industrial and commercial purposes. They also point out the ecological consequences of the environment, such as the pollution caused by the pulp and paper industries and the deforestation resulting from mining, road construction and the establishment of human settlements. Part two ends with a chapter devoted to conservation and
development in terms of policies for the preservation, protection, management and utilization of the tropical forests.
The various chapters of this are impressive work differ considerably in detail, length and content. However, all of them culminate in a brief conclusion, recommendations regarding the research to be undertaken, and a selective bibliography. Numerous and often highly technical figures and tables illustrate the text and guide the reader toward a more comprehensive knowledge of Africa's tropical forest ecosystems.
This is an important work which can be of assistance to all those responsible for the planning of research and management at national and international levels.
An international glossary of tropical woods
General terminology of tropical woods. Nogent-sur-Marne, France, International Technical Tropical Timber Association. 1982. 213 p.
This is the fifth edition of the International Technical Tropical Timber Association's General Terminology of Tropical Woods, the fourth having appeared in 1979, and it presented a good opportunity to update the information: the South and Central American section has been rewritten, the African and Asian sections amended.
As the chairman of ITTTA stresses in his preface, however, while many data are included, an inventory cannot hope to cover the complete range of useful woods. The authors have therefore been obliged to select and, consequently, to exclude information. The same applies for the selection of common and commercial names and the adoption of an overall "pilot-term". An explanatory note in six languages (French, English, German, Spanish, Portuguese and Italian) states that the common and commercial names for the different woods listed in the tables are those officially used by the exporting countries. The pilot-term is that most likely to be internationally recognized. In choosing this term, the authors took into account both the producer country and the country where the wood is in common use. There follows a list of the scientific names of the tropical woods.
The most important part of this work is obviously the terminology itself, which is divided into three different colours and sections: Africa. Asia-Pacific-Australia, and South and Central America. There are twelve columns for each wood entered, listing pilot-term, scientific name and originator, country of origin, production level, weight with bark, density, diameter, bole length, colour, appearance, uses and, lastly, quality assessment.
The work ends with a glossary of the woods classified according to use, a multilingual lexicon of the terminology employed in the tables, and an extensive bibliography of the major tropical wood publications in each of the six languages.
This terminology will undoubtedly be of interest to non-specialists in tropical woods, like botanists and naturalists, since the information provided, in addition to being scientific, is of a practical nature. There is, finally, one further noteworthy attraction of this publication: its elegant presentation, particularly the choice of natural "autumn leaf" colours for the three sections of the glossary, making the work both aesthetically and intellectually pleasing.
Fay Banoun, Rome
New approaches to the Sahel
Fay Banonn
1. Woody vegetation in the Sahel
Arbres et arbustes du Sahel - leurs caractéristiques et leurs utilisations. H.J. von Maydell. Esborn, Federal Republic of Germany, German Agency for Technical Co-operation (GTZ). 1983. 531 p., numerous colour photographs. (In French.)
Combating desertification, providing fuelwood, feeding both people and livestock, supplying construction wood and medicine - trees and shrubs play a vital role in the Sahel.
However, owing to the growing needs of a rapidly expanding population, devastation by recent droughts and frequent irrational land use, many hitherto thick forest stands have become degraded and impoverished. Often little is left but sparse, stunted plant cover.
This remarkable book, which covers over 100 species, makes an appeal to "Sahel foresters" to combine their expertise and focus their efforts on re-establishing the natural functions of the forest. The author urges them to implement the essential measures needed to ensure a constant supply of quality trees and shrubs for year-round use.
The first part is of a general botanical nature. The second focuses briefly on the geographical distribution of the trees and shrubs described and, with this in mind, questions the wisdom of introducing new non-essential species into a "stress" area such as the Sahel which "reacts violently and often permanently to human intervention and especially to environmental changes". Growing species successfully away from their natural habitat depends largely, von Maydell argues, on their suitability for local conditions, both economic and natural.
The third section deals with propagation and planting, about which there is only sporadic information, as, according to the author, trees and shrubs are not planted systematically in the Sahel. Detailed research is therefore an essential pre-condition to large-scale reforestation projects. It is also important to realize that successful experiments often only apply to specific sites and not necessarily everywhere. However, where stands are in sufficiently good condition, natural regeneration by stump shoots or seedfall has a good chance of succeeding. Von Maydell also offers practical advice on seeds, cultivation methods, and stand management and conservation techniques.
A fourth section analyses the usefulness and end-uses of the trees and shrubs, with tables to indicate the different end-uses of each species.
Section five, by far the most important, lists the various trees and shrubs in alphabetical order, stating their characteristics, reproductive and cultivation methods, and uses. The colour photographs are impressive.
Included in the appendix are a list of names and botanical synonyms, an index of tree and shrub families and genera, a lexicon of the main dialect and local language names, a French-German-English botanical lexicon, an illustrated seed terminology, a list of parasites and other enemies of Sahelian species and, finally, a detailed bibliography of French, English and German publications.
2. Can the Sahel recover its history?
Le Sahel demain: catastrophe ou renaissance? Jacques Giri. Paris, Karthala. 1983. 325 p. (In French.)
The southern Sahara has not always been the parched, arid region we know today. Over the centuries, a long succession of rich and powerful empires ruled in the Sahel. Gold was plentiful, the land was fertile and cities such as Djenné and Timbuktu were bustling, renowned trading centres. What, then, are the climatic, cultural or other factors behind the now-chronic Sahel crisis? This is the question Jacques Giri sets out to answer in this nonconformist, penetrating, and sometimes argumentative work, which clearly shows the author's considerable experience in the countries described.
During the last century, General Faidherbe and his troops had to hack their way through dense thorn-bush thickets up the Senegal River valley. In this same spot, today, nothing is left but sparse savannah consisting of a few stunted trees. Deforestation has continued relentlessly over the past few decades, despite occasional and often unsuccessful reforestation attempts on the part of the newly independent countries. It was only in the 1970s, however, that the experts began to draw world attention to the Sahel and the alarming disappearance of its forests.
In his chapter on deforestation, Giri identifies the main causes: above all, drought, which killed many trees and prevented stand regeneration; bush fires, which destroyed the young shoots; the increase in grazing herds, which intensified the need for more leaves and branches for forage; greater demand by a growing population for construction wood and fuelwood; and, finally, the expansion of cropland as fallow periods continued to shrink.
What conclusions can be drawn for the future? It would appear undeniable that if present conditions prevail, the only possible outcome is that deforestation will grow and spread, particularly in outlying urban areas and on the fringes of the desert. What can be done to reverse this trend? "If the worst is to be avoided," Giri recommends, "the Sahel should choose a 'self-reliant' pattern of development and not wait for the coming of a New International Economic Order."
PALM AFFOFESTATION PROJECT trying to reforest the Sahel
Using bibliographical data banks
Sources d'informations bibliographiques dans le domaine de la biomasse forestière. F. Cupi. Versailles. France. Institut national de la recherche agronomique (INRA). 1982. 108 p. (In French. )
With an eye to solving the scientists, problem of getting the information they need, the author of this relatively brief work proposes a comparative study of the information obtained by traditional bibliographical research methods and the data provided by automated retrieval systems. She focuses on the specific task of a research team collaborating on the subject of forest biomass. She describes how new sources of data that can he queried by computer have become increasingly available over the past 10 years. There is now a real need to appraise such systems and identify those most appropriate for a given subject.
In the first part of this three-part book Cupi analyses the results of three distinct methodologies: direct contact with other scientists; consulting library index cards; and querying a data bank. Utilizing various tables and graphs, she attempts to establish comparable categories files based on set criteria.
Part two traces the trends in the growth of row data from 1950 to 1978 The author shows how on-line files (files retrievable from a computer terminal ) have evolved in a manner quite unlike the traditional file-card systems. The traditional system could still supply more information than on-line files before the year 1975 at which date the older system was rendered obsolete.
The "forest biomass" file, therefore, consists of the combined references gleaned from on-line computer queries, library card files and contacts with other scientists. In the third part of the book. Cupi shows how all these references can he utilized to set up an index of genera and species for easier access to the definitive file.
Bamboos in Ecuador
Bambúes y pseudobambúes del Ecuador Dr Misael Acosta-Solís Guayaquil, Ecuador. Publicaciones Científicas Más. 1982 (In Spanish.)
Bamboos and wood grasses constitute a leading economic group in botany. To provide knowledge of Ecuador's main species, Dr Misael Acosta-Solís, forest geobotanist and conservationist Loci director of the Instituto Ecuatoriano de Ciencias Naturales. Here gives a general description of the country's bamboo and pseudo-bamboo species with their respective local or traditional uses.
The book is divided into two parts. The first deals with plant geography of bamboos and pseudo-bamboos and their local uses. The second and shorter part discusses their anatomy.
According to Dr Acosta-Solís, bamboos and pseudo-bamboos play a major role in Ecuador as a raw material for the paper pulp industry and the construction of tropical houses, enclosures and scaffolding.
The hook contains some photographs and an extensive bibliography by the author.
Rwanda's woods
Flore des plantes ligneuses du Rwanda. G. Troupin, with the collaboration of Diane M. Bridson of the Royal Botanical Gardens, Kew, London. Tervuren. Belgium. Musée royal de l'Afrique centrale. 1982. 747 p. ( In French )
Trees are an integral part of Rwanda's traditions and folklore. "Sacred woods" mark the tombs of dignitaries and powerful figures of the past: while today, hospitable, welcoming trees offer shade to the walker exhausted by the heat of the sun and shelter under their foliage the games of the village children.
But over and above these ritual and recreational functions, trees constitute a precious natural resource in Rwanda, all the more so because much of this largely pastoral country consists of rangeland. Closed, timber-producing forest is represented only by a few limited, often degraded formations. It is therefore important that research be conducted to identify the species composing these formations and acquire better knowledge of the plant and animal life they shelter, so that more rational use may be made of the natural resources so necessary to the country's social life and economic development.
The author of this book traversed Rwanda's woods on many occasions, studying the vegetation and flora on the spot, before undertaking his impressive inventory.
In preparing his systematic and descriptive text, he was guided by two criteria: (1) the work must be easy to consult so that it can be used in the, field; and (2) it must give exhaustive information on the nature of each entry. In; pursuit of these aims, he sets out the families, genera and species in alphabetical order: uses a simplified botanical vocabulary; provides striking iconographic coverage in the form of 245 plates of remarkable drawings: and gives a concise description of every entry, or "taxon", accompanied by information on its habitat and geographical distribution.
Finally - and this is worth emphasizing - the work gives the Kinyarwanda names of more than a thousand species. This will certainly facilitate the task of botanists engaged in studying Rwanda's flora and make it possible to update the knowledge of tropical African plants.
Fay Banoun, Rome
Forest ecology research
Actualités d'écologie forestière - sol, flore faune. Prepared by the Institut National Agronomique. Paris. Gauthier-Villars. 1980. 517 p. (In French.)
This collective work, prepared with the collaboration of 22 authors, is the result of a series of lectures organized by the French National Agronomy Institute and is intended to give up-to-date information on research in forest ecology.
The work is divided into three sections, dealing as the title indicates, with soils, flora and fauna. The authors - botanists, microbiologists, soil scientists, geologists, zoologists and ecologists - are all research workers who know each other well and often work together.
Particularly interesting in the first part is the article by P. Duchaufour, "Ecologie de l'humification et pédogénèse des sols forestiers", in which the author examines the action of ecological factors, particularly soil climate, vegetation and minerals, on humus formation. He compares the general bioclimatic factors that play a determining role in countries that cover several latitudes and where the forest is only slightly disturbed by human action.
A HIGHWAY IN OREGON travelling through North American forests
In the second part, an interesting article by P. Quezel, "Biogéographic et écologie des conifères sur le pourtour méditerranéen", deals with the coniferous forests in the Maghreb, the Near East and the mountainous regions of eastern Spain, Greece, Provence and Liguria. Quezel refers to the problems of restoring forests decimated by fires and observes that, to some extent, forest fires encourage the spread of conifers, particularly the Aleppo pine.
The third section, devoted to wildlife, investigates the predatory species. In his article "Les reptiles en forêt et leur rôle dans la prédation", H. Saint-Giron compares the "forest edge" reptiles of the temperate forests with the burrowing and tree-inhabiting species of the tropical forests, in this case those of Southeast Asia.
A North American itinerary
Prom'nons-nous dans les bois... de l'Amérique du Nord. M.M. Versepuy. Limited edition, printed by L'Imprimerie Moderne USHA, Aurillac, France. 1983. 550 p., numerous photographs. (In French.)
Writer, poet, historian, but most of all "forester-emeritus", Michel Versepuy is the author of several books: an illustrated nomenclature of the principal gymnosperms; Itinéraire en Calabre - forêt privée; and a soon-to-be-published illustrated nomenclature of the principal eucalyptus species.
This book reads like a novel and makes the history of North America come to life, as Versepuy simply takes us for a walk among the trees. He describes the trees competently, enthusiastically, even delightfully, endowing them with human qualities and presenting them as old friends. But this does not deter him from devoting a sizeable portion of the book's 550 pages to various tables, classified lists of the species and his own photographs of the "giants of the New World".
Versepuy leads the reader through all 50 of the United States, lingering over the forestry aspects of each one and describing their immense national parks which are covered by millions of hectares of valuable timber. The walk continues northwards into Canada, sparsely populated but opulent in its more than 3 million km² of forest, its forest products potential of 303 million m³, and its role as the world's primary supplier of pulp.
Turning south, the journey takes us into Mexico. The author parades before us that country's 70 different pines as well as the 50 other coniferous and 220 broadleaf varieties that form Mexico's wood population.
The work concludes with an imposing alphabetical nomenclature of Mexican pines according to their geographical distribution, a list of the principal cactus varieties and a list of authors.
Recent books on Peru
María Gutiérrez
Silviculture and rural development
La contribución forestal al desarrollo rural en el Perú. Mario Loayza V. Project UNDP/FAO/PER/81/002. Working document 4. Lima, Peru. 1982. (In Spanish.)
This detailed study focuses on the significant contribution forest resources can make to the socioeconomic development of Peru's depressed rural sector.
The author, Mario Loayza of Peru's Dirección General Forestal, presents an ecological and historical overview of current conditions in rural Peru. The book contains three chapters covering the specific issues of socioeconomic development in Peru. The first covers the various functions of plantation forestry: as a source of energy and food; as a provider of direct employment; and as a spur to such profitable sidelines as the production of prickly pear and carmine cochineal pigments. Plantations also help check soil erosion.
The second chapter deals with game, which plays a fundamental role in the rural diet. Loayza describes how wildlife can also become an important factor in intensifying such activities as forestry, livestock production and agriculture.
The final chapter outlines a new development plan for the virgin areas of coastal Peru and the Peruvian Amazon region. The plan calls for integrated, state-supported rural settlements in which peasants are to be installed on land previously evaluated as part of an integrated approach to the use of natural resources. Forestry, agriculture and livestock production as well as fish and game-related activities will all be developed on these settlements in harmony with existing natural resources and ecosystems.
The report contains a clear summary of the project's conclusions and recommendations and includes a comprehensive bibliography. Even though this report deals only with Peru, it can easily be applied to other countries, especially those countries of Latin America that have similar physical features.
Classifying Peru's trees
Nomenclatura de las especies forestales en el Perú. Filomeno Encarnación. Project UNDP/FAO/PER/81/002. Working document 7. Lima, Peru. 1983. (In Spanish.)
The main purpose of this study, written by a biologist at the University of San Marcos in Peru, is to present a clear and systematic nomenclature of the common forest species of Peru. In this context, the author has updated the scientific names of 303 species, compiled their common names and established the differences and equivalences between their Latin and common names.
In the introduction and general framework, the work points out the lack of scientific rigour, the oversimplified criteria and the wide gaps in classification, systematics and nomenclature prevailing in Peru, a wood-producing country with over 2 500 forest species. The author clarifies the basic concepts of botanical nomenclature and stresses the importance of both using botanical names and establishing new and better national plant collections to the promotion of the rational development of forest resources.
Each forest species nomenclature entry consists of the Latin name of the species, the name of the person who first identified the plant as a new species, its common name, a brief dendrologic description, its uses, habitat and distribution, and references, concluding with commentaries and plant collection material.
Wood transport
El transporte terrestre de madera en la Selva Central. Emilio David. Project UNDP/FAO/PER/81/002. Working document 8. Lima, Peru. 1983. (In Spanish.)
According to Emilio David, Senior Professor in the Forestry Sciences Academic Programme of La Molina Agricultural University in Peru, development and improvement of land transport is the fundamental condition for incorporating the considerable potential of the Selva Central's forestry resources into Peru's economy.
The primary purpose of this book is to make a systematic technical and economic analysis of the main parameters and factors influencing land transport in the Selva Central and their effects on the production and marketing of forest products.
After describing the general characteristics of this region of Peru (geographic area, forest resources and industries, road infrastructure), David gives a detailed analysis of the present round-wood and sawnwood transport situation, from its organization and costs to the types of vehicles used, distances, loading and unloading operations, freight rates and public and forest road conditions. Extensive statistical tables and figures illustrate clearly all aspects of the work.
In his conclusions and recommendations, David points out the shortcomings of the present transport system and suggests specific improvements for all the aspects of land transport of wood in this area of Peru.
FOREST VILLAGE OF PISAC rural development is critical
FORESTRY STUDENTS NEAR IQUITOS learning about Peru's 2 500 tree species
Sixty important species
Recopilación y análisis de estudios tecnológicos de maderas peruanas. Project UNDP/FAO/PER/81/002. Working document 2. Lima, Peru. 1982. (In Spanish.)
Peru's natural forests cover an area representing 60 percent of the country's territory and are composed of about 2 500 species. The purpose of this study is to make a compilation and a technical analysis of 60 species selected for their abundance, commercial value and accessibility in order to promote their potential end-uses.
The book offers a brief description of each species with its main characteristics and properties. The numerical values of their physical and mechanical properties as well as anatomical characteristics, workability and end-uses are analysed and evaluated, and these are presented in summary tables which afford an overall view. The main aspects of technical research on Peruvian woods and its implications for the use of new forest species are also included.
The book contains a very full bibliography and specific and detailed recommendations.
Forest bibliography of Peru
Bibliografía forestal del Perú. Napoleon E. Castro Rodriguez. Project UNDP/FAO/PER/81/002. Working document 10. Lima. Peru. 1982. (In Spanish.)
Peru has a great abundance and diversity of forest resources but a scarcity of properly inventoried and organized bibliographical data. This book provides a classified and organized bibliography of all the documents connected with resources and activities in Peru. The bibliographical references are presented according to the standards established by the Inter-American Institute of Agricultural Sciences of the Organization of American States, and are arranged by the author in alphabetical order. At the end of each, a code for one or more libraries where the document can be found is given. The work also includes an index of main and secondary subjects.
In the introduction to this exhaustive bibliography, the author makes a number of useful recommendations for the improvement and development of forest bibliographical data in Peru.
LANDSLIDE-BLOCKED TRAFFIC IN PERU new roads needed for wood transport
Costs of roundwood extraction and transport
Estructura de los costos de extracción y transporte de madera rolliza en la Selva Baja. René Campos. Project UNDP/FAO/PER/81/002. Working document 6. Lima, Peru. 1983. (In Spanish.)
In its effort to help to improve roundwood extraction and transport activities in Peru, the joint UNDP/FAO project considered the execution of this study to be of major importance. Its purpose is to provide clear and detailed information on the cost structure of mechanized roundwood extraction and transport operations.
The work analyses the different operations involved in the extraction and transport processes both separately and together, evaluating their productivity and costs on the basis of average parameters in the large Peruvian Selva Baja area where the country's main wood industry is located. The author, a forestry engineer, after describing the characteristics of the area, examines working methods in forest extraction; extraction and transport costs; and the structure of those costs. He also lists detailed costs of mechanization in abundant appendixes.
In his conclusions and recommendations, Campos clearly points out shortcomings in roundwood supply at present and suggests possible Improvements, from personnel training to mechanization of the activity.
Afforestation needs incentives
La forestación en el Perú y en algunos países de América Latina. Marco Romero Pastor. Project UNDP/FAO/PER/81/002. Working document 9. Lima, Peru. 1983. (In Spanish.)
This study analyses, first of all, the present situation of afforestation in Peru and the prospects for its development. It also gives a comparative description of the actual state of afforestation in Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Chile, Mexico and Venezuela.
Concerning Peru, the author, in his recommendations, shows the need for a structured and specific state afforestation development policy. He also argues for the creation of favourable economic incentives and a fund for afforestation in the agricultural bank of Peru. He concludes that better coordination of the state and private sectors, with the Government maintaining its dominant role, would result in more fruitful development of the country's afforestation.
As for the other countries Brazil, Chile and Argentina have achieved the most spectacular results in recent years, thanks to economic, fiscal and credit incentive policies, which are nonexistent or scarce in Mexico and Peru.
The book contains numerous tables and figures with abundant information and useful details.
TENDING A TREE NURSERY Peru needs afforestation incentives
<section>a</section>
Environment
FAO assists Laos
A conservation NGO in China
New magazine about acidification
Peru opens conservation data centre
Protecting the flamingo in Chile
FAO assists Laos
FAO is assisting the Lao People's Democratic Republic in determining conservation priorities and in selecting potential areas for protection. Laos did not have a national nature conservation programme until 1983, when it established a National Environmental Protection Office and a National Hunting and Fishing Office. The Government has already proposed to establish a national park at Houei Nhang in Vientiane province.
Tigerpaper, 10 (3)
A conservation NGO in China
China's first voluntary conservation organization, the China Wildlife Conservation Association (CWCA), is currently raising money to prevent the starvation of giant pandas, who are suffering because their primary food, bamboo, is dying off in massive quantities.
The new organization will also be involved in conservation, education and research, as well as fundraising to preserve China's 100 endangered species, 20 of which are near extinction.
World Wildlife Fund News (27)
New magazine about acidification
The National Swedish Environment Protection Board has begun publication (in English) of Acid Magazine, a twice-a-year journal whose purpose is "to share Sweden's experience of acidification and air pollution effects on man and the environment". The first issue contains articles on forest damage in Sweden, the new EEC proposal that member countries agree to reduce their sulphur discharges by 30 percent, and a controversial £5 million sterling donation from UK power companies to Norway and Sweden for a research project on surface water acidification.
Subscriptions are available free of charge from: National Swedish Environment Protection Board, Information Section, Box 1302, S-171 25 Solna, Sweden.
Peru opens conservation data centre
Peru has established its own national conservation data centre at the University of La Molina, with support from the Nature Conservancy of Peru. The centre will assemble a programme of monitoring of the Peruvian natural heritage and is seeking bibliographic help from other organizations that have catalogued literature on natural resources research in Peru. If you can help, please contact the Director, Centro de Datos pare la Conservación, Departamento de Manejo Forestal, Universidad Agraria, Apartado 456, La Molina, Lima, Peru.
Protecting the flamingo in Chile
A programme for conservation of the flamingo has been set in motion by an agreement signed between the Chilean national forest corporation (CONAF) and the New York Zoological Society. The Society has contributed US$26 000 and valuable observation equipment to CONAF, which will study at close quarters the nesting habits of the flamingo in the salt-lake areas of Surire and Atacama. The flamingo in this area is considered extremely vulnerable, particularly to attacks by the large fox (Canis culpaeus) and the mountain cat (Felis jacobita).
Chilean Forestry News, February 1984
CAN ACID RAIN BE CURTAILED? New Swedish magazine tries to find out
<section>b</section>
FAO forestry papers
Fuelwood supplies in the developing countries
42 (1983), FAO's pioneering study of the world, fuelwood crisis, (available in English, French and Spanish)
Forest revenue systems in developing countries
43 (1983), a practical guide to forest fees and charges in developing countries and in tropical forests in general (available only in English)
Food and fruit-bearing, forest species, 1: Examples from Eastern Africa
44/1 (1983), 40 SPECIES MONOGRAPHS, information on: ecology, distribution, main uses, cultivation, collection periods, nutritional value, propagation, marketing (available in English, French and Spanish)
Practical forestry manuals from FAO
More than 250 helpful photos, drawings and diagrams
Frame saw manual
39 (1982), (available only in English)
Circular saw manual
40 (1983), (available only in English)
The only international forestry magazine
Unasylva
4 issues per year
Unasylva - an international Journal of forestry and forest industries
ORDER FORM to be mailed to:
Distribution and Sales Section
FAO - Via delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome - Italy
or to any of the FAO Sales Agents listed on the Inside black cover.
Please enter my subscription to Unasylva for a period of one year (Price: $10.00 *)
* For subscription rates in your currency check with your local FAO Sales Agent.
Name ______________________Street _____________________________
Occupation _________________City __________Country ______________
Edition required:
English
French
Spanish
Form of payment:
Cheque enclosed
Bank order
Unesco coupons
On receipt of invoice
<section>c</section>
Where to purchase FAO publications locally - Points de vente des publications de la FAO - Puntos de venta de publicaciones de la FAO
· ANGOLA
Empresa Nacional do Disco e de Publicações, ENDIPU-U.E.E.
Rua Cirilo da Conceição Silva, N° 7
C.P. N° 1314-C, Luanda
· ARGENTINA
Librería Agropecuaria
Pasteur 743, 1028 Buenos Aires
Oficina del Libro Internacional
Av. Córdoba 1877, 1120 Buenos Aires
E-mail: olilibro@satlink.com
· AUSTRALIA
Hunter Publications
P.O. Box 404, Abbotsford, Vic. 3067
Tel.:(03) 9417 5361
Fax: (03) 914 7154
E-mail: jpdavies@ozemail.com.au
· AUSTRIA
Gerold Buch & Co.
Weihburggasse 26, 1010 Vienna
· BANGLADESH
Association of Development Agencies in Bangladesh
House No. 1/3, Block F,
Lalmatia, Dhaka 1207
· BELGIQUE
M.J. De Lannoy
202, avenue du Roi, 1060 Bruxelles
CCP 000-0808993-13
E-mail: jean.de.lannoy@infoboard.be
· BOLIVIA
Los Amigos del Libro
Av. Heroínas 311, Casilla 450
Cochabamba;
Mercado 1315, La Paz
· BOTSWANA
Botsalo Books (Pty) Ltd
P.O. Box 1532, Gaborone
· BRAZIL
Fundação Getúlio Vargas
Praia do Botafogo 190, C.P. 9052
Rio de Janeiro
E-mail: valeria@sede.fgvrj.br
Núcleo Editora da Universidade Federal Fluminense
Rua Miguel de Frias 9
Icaraí-Niterói 24
220-000 Rio de Janeiro
Fundação da Universidade Federal do Paraná - FUNPAR
Rua Alfredo Bufrem 140, 30° andar
80020-240 Curitiba
· CAMEROON
CADDES
Centre Africain de Diffusion et
Développement Social
B.P. 7317 Douala Bassa
Tel.: (237) 43 37 83
Fax: (237) 42 77 03
· CANADA
Renouf Publishing
5369 chemin Canotek Road, Unit 1
Ottawa, Ontario K1J 9J3
Tel.: (613) 745-2665
Fax: (613) 745 7660
Website: www.renoufbooks.com
E-mail: renouf@fox.nstn.ca
· CHILE
Librería - Oficina Regional FAO
c/o FAO Officina Regional para América
Latina y el Caribe (RLC)
Avda. Dag Hammarskjold, 3241
Vitacura, Santiago
Tel.: 33 72 314
Fax: 696 1121/696 1124
E-mail: german.rojas@field.fao.org
Universitaria Textolibros Ltda.
Avda. L. Bernardo O'Higgins 1050
Santiago
· CHINA
China National Publications Import & Export Corporation
16 Gongti East Road, Beijing 100020
Tel.: 6506 30 70
Fax: 6506 3101
E-mail: cnpiec@public.3.bta.net.cn
· COLOMBIA
Banco Ganadero
Vicepresidencia de Fomento
Carrera 9^a N° 72-21, Piso 5
Bogotá D.E.
Tel.: 217 0100
· CONGO
Office national des librairies populaires
B.P. 577, Brazzaville
· COSTA RICA
Librería Lehmann S.A.
Av. Central, Apartado 10011
1000 San José
CINDE
Coalición Costarricense de Iniciativas de Desarrollo
Apdo 7170, 1000 San José
E-mail: rtacinde@sol.rassa.co.cr
· CÔTE D'IVOIRE
CEDA
04 B.P. 541, Abidjan 04
Tel.: 22 20 55
Fax: 21 72 62
· CUBA
Ediciones Cubanas Empresa de Comercio Exterior de Publicaciones
Obispo 461, Apartado 605, La Habana
· CZECH REPUBLIC
Artia Pegas Press Ltd Import of Periodicals
Palác Metro, P.O. Box 825
Národní 25, 111 21 Praha 1
· DENMARK
Munksgaard, Book and Subscription Service
P.O. Box 2148
DK 1016 Copenhagen K.
Tel.: 4533128570
Fax: 4533129387
Website: www.munksgaard.dk;
E-mail: subscription.service@mail.munksgaard.dk
· DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
CUESTA - Centro del libro
Av. 27 de Febrero, esq. A. Lincoln
Centro Comercial Nacional
Apartado 1241, Santo Domingo
· ECUADOR
Libri Mundi, Librería Internacional
Juan León Mera 851
Apartado Postal 3029, Quito
E-mail: librimul@librimundi.com.ec
Universidad agraria del Ecuador Centro de Información Agraria
Av. 23 de Julio, Apdo 09-01-1248
Guayaquil
Librería Española
Murgeón 364 y Ulloa, Quito
· EGYPT
The Middle East Observer
41 Sherif Street, Cairo
Tel.: 393 97 2
Fax.: 360 68 04
E-mail: fouda@soficom.com.eg
· ESPAÑA
Librería Agrícola
Fernando VI 2, 28004 Madrid
Librería de la Generalitat de Catalunya
Rambla dels Estudis 118 (Palau Moja)
08002 Barcelona
Tel.: (93) 302 6462
Fax: (93) 302 1299
Mundi Prensa Libros S.A.
Castelló 37, 28001 Madrid
Tel.: 914 36 37 00
Fax: 915 75 39 98
Website: www.tsai.es/MPRENSA
E-mail: mundiprensa@tsai.es
Mundi Prensa - Barcelona
Consejo de Ciento 391,
08009 Barcelona
Tel.: 301 8615
Fax: 317 0141
· FINLAND
Aketeeminen Kirjakauppa Subscription Services
P.O. Box 23, FIN-00371 Helsinki
Tel.: (358) 0121 4416
Fax.: (358) 0121 4450
· FRANCE
Editions A. Pedone
13, rue Soufflot, 75005 Paris
Lavoisier Tec & Doc
14, rue de Provigny
94236 Cachan Cedex
Website: www.lavoisier.fr
E-mail: livres@lavoisier.fr
Librairie du Commerce International
10, avenue d'Iéna
75783 Paris Cedex 16
Website: www.cfce.fr
E-mail: pl@net-export.fr
WORLD DATA
10, rue Nicolas Flamand
75004 Paris
Tel.: (01) 4278 0578
Fax: (01) 4278 1472
· GERMANY
Alexander Horn Internationale Buchhandlung
Friedrichstrasse 34
D-65185 Wiesbaden
Tel.: 37 42 12
S. Toeche-Mittler GmbH Versandbuchhandlung
Hindenburgstrasse 33
D-64295 Darmstadt
Tel.: 6151 336 65
Fax: 6151 314 048
Website: www. booksell.com/triops
E-mail: triops@booksell.com
Uno Verlag
Poppelsdorfer Allee 55
D-53115 Bonn 1
Tel.: 49 (0) 228 94 90 20
Fax: 49 (0) 228 21 74 92
Website: www.uno-verlag.de
E-mail: unoverlag@aol.com
· GHANA
SEDCO Publishing Ltd
Sedco House, Tabon Street
Off Ring Road Central, North Ridge
P.O. Box 2051, Accra
· GREECE
Papasotiriou S.A.
35 Stournara Str., 10682 Athens
Tel.: +301 3302 980
Fax: +301 3648254
· GUYANA
Guyana National Trading Corporation Ltd
45-47 Water Street, P.O. Box 308
Georgetown
· HAÏTI
Librairie «A la Caravelle»
26, rue Bonne Foi
B.P. 111, Port-au-Prince
· HONDURAS
Escuela Agrícola Panamericana Librería RTAC
El Zamorano, Apartado 93, Tegucigalpa
Oficina de la Escuela Agrícola Panamericana en Tegucigalpa
Blvd. Morazán, Apts. Glapson
Apartado 93, Tegucigalpa
· HUNGARY
Librotrade Kft.
P.O. Box 126, H-1656 Budapest
Tel.: 256 1672
Fax: 256 8727
· INDIA
EWP Affiliated East-West Press PVT, Ltd
G-I/16, Ansari Road, Darya Gany
New Delhi 110 002
Tel.: 32 64 180
Fax: 32 60 538
Oxford Book and Stationery Co.
Scindia House
New Delhi 110 001
Tel.: 91 11 331 5310
Fax: 91 11 371 3275
Oxford Subscription Agency
Institute for Development Education
1 Anasuya Ave., Kilpauk
Madras 600 010
Periodical Expert Book Agency
D-42, Vivek Vihar, Delhi 110095
Bookwell
Head Office:
2/72, Nirankari Colony, New Delhi - 110009
Tel.: 725 1283
Fax: 91-11-328 13 15
Sales Office:
24/4800, Ansari Road
Darya Ganj, New Delhi - 110002
Tel.: 326 8786, 325 7264
E-mail: bkwell@nde.vsnl.net.in
· IRAN
The FAO Bureau, International and Regional Specialized Organizations Affairs
Ministry of Agriculture of the Islamic Republic of Iran
Keshavarz Bld, M.O.A., 17th floor
Teheran
· IRELAND
Office of Public Work
4-5 Harcourt Road, Dublin 2
· ISRAEL
R.O.Y. International
P.O. Box 13056, Tel Aviv 61130
E-mail: royil@netvision.net.il
· ITALY
FAO Bookshop
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Roma
Tel.: 06 57055688
Fax: 06 57055155
E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org
Librería Commissionaria Sansoni S.p.A. - Licosa
Via Duca di Calabria 1/1
50125 Firenze
Tel.: 055 64 54 15
Fax: 055 64 12 57
E-mail: licosa@ftbcc.it
Libreria Scientifica Dott. Lucio de Biasio "Aeiou"
Via Coronelli 6, 20146 Milano
· JAPAN
Far Eastern Booksellers (Kyokuto Shoten Ltd.)
12 Kanda-Jimbocho 2 chome
Chiyoda-ku - P.O. Box 72
Tokyo 101-91
Tel.: 03 3265 7531
Fax: 03 3265 4656
Maruzen Company Ltd.
P.O. Box 5050
Tokyo International 100-31
Tel.: 81 3 3278 1894
Fax: 81 3 3278 1895
E-mail: h_sugiyama@maruzen.co.jp
· KENYA
Text Book Centre Ltd.
Kijabe Street
P.O. Box 47540, Nairobi
Tel.: 330 342
Fax: 22 57 79
Inter Africa Book Distribution
Kencom House, Moi Avenue
P.O. Box 73580, Nairobi
Tel.: 21 11 84
Fax: 254 2 22 35 70
· LUXEMBOURG
M. J. De Lannoy
202, avenue du Roi
1060 Bruxelles (Belgique)
E-mail: jean.de.lannoy@infoboard.be
· MADAGASCAR
Centre d'information et de Documentation Scientifique et Technique
Ministère de la recherche appliquée au développement
B.P 6224 Tsimbazaza, Antanarivo
· MALAYSIA
Electronic products only:
Southbound Sendirian Berhad Publishers
9 College Square, 01250 Penang
· MALI
Librairie Traore
Rue Soundiata Keita X 115
B.P. 3243, Bamako
· MAROC
La Librairie Internationale
70 Rue T'ssoule
PO. Box 302 (RP), Rabat
Tel./Fax: 212 7 75 01 83
· MEXICO
Librería, Universidad Autónoma de Chapingo
56230 Chapingo
Libros y Editoriales S.A.
Av. Progreso N° 202-1° Piso A
Apdo. Postal 18922
Col. Escandón, 11800 México D.F.
Mundi Prensa Mexico, S.A.
Rió Pánuco, 141 Col. Cuauhtémoc
C.P. 06500, México, DF
Tel.: 533-5658 al 60
Fax: 514-6799
E-mail: 1015452361@compuserve.com
· NETHERLANDS
Roodveldt Import b.v.
Brouwersgracht 288
1013 HG Amsterdam
E-mail: roodboek@euronet.nl
Tel.: 622 8035
Fax: 625 5493
Swets & Zeitlinger b.v.
P.O. Box 830, 2160 Lisse
Heereweg 347 B, 2161 CA Lisse
E-mail: infono@swets.nl
Website: www.swets.nl
· NEW ZEALAND
Legislation Services
P.O. Box 12418
Thorndon, Wellington
E-mail: gppmjxf@gp.co.nz
Oasis Official
P.O. Box 3627, Wellington
Tel.: (+64) 4 499 1551
Fax: (+64) 4 499 1972
E-mail: oasis@clear.net.nz
Website: www.oasisbooks.co.nzl
· NICARAGUA
Librería HISPAMER
Costado Este Univ. Centroamericana
Apdo. Postal A-221, Managua
· NIGERIA
University Bookshop (Nigeria) Ltd.
University of Ibadan, Ibadan
· NORWAY
Swets Norge AS
P.O. Box 6512, Etterstad
N-0606 Oslo
Tel.: (+47) 2297 4500
Fax: (+47) 2297 4545
E-mail: nicagen@swets.nl
· PAKISTAN
Mirza Book Agency
65 Shahrah-e-Quaid-e-Azam
P.O. Box 729, Lahore 3
· PARAGUAY
Librería Intercontinental Editora e Impresora S.R.L.
Caballero 270 c/Mcal Estigarribia
Asunción
· PERU
INDEAR
Jirón Apurimac 375, Casilla 4937
Lima 1
Universidad Nacional "Pedro Ruiz Gallo"
Facultad de Agronomía, A.P. 795
Lambayeque (Chiclayo)
· PHILIPPINES
International Booksource Center, Inc.
Room 720, Cityland 10 Tower 2
H.V. de la Costa, Cor. Valero St
Makati, Metro Manila
Tel.: 817 9676
Fax: 817 1741
· POLAND
Ars Polona
Krakowskie Przedmiescie 7
00-950 Warsaw
· PORTUGAL
Livraria Portugal, Dias e Andrade Ltda.
Rua do Carmo 70-74
Apartado 2681, 1200 Lisboa Codex
· SINGAPORE
Select Books Pte Ltd.
03-15 Tanglin Shopping Centre
19 Tanglin Road, Singapore 1024
Tel.: 732 1515
Fax: 736 0855
· SLOVAK REPUBLIC
Institute of Scientific and Technical Information for Agriculture
Samova 9, 950 10 Nitra
Tel.: +42 87 522 185
Fax: +42 87 525 275
E-mail: uvtip @ nr.sanet.sk
· SOMALIA
Samater
P.O. Box 936, Mogadishu
· SOUTH AFRICA
David Philip Publishers (Pty) Ltd.
P.O. Box 23408, Claremont 7735
Tel.: Cape Town (021) 64-4136
Fax: Cape Town (021) 64-3358
E-mail: dpp@iafrica.com
Website: www.twisted.co.za
· SRI LANKA
M.D. Gunasena & Co. Ltd.
217 Olcott Mawatha, P.O. Box 246
Colombo 11
· SUISSE
Buchhandlung und Antiquariat Heinimann & Co.
Kirchgasse 17, 8001 Zurich
UN Bookshop
Palais des Nations
CH-1211 Genève 1
Website: www.un.org
Van Diermen Editions Techniques ADECO
41 Lacuez, CH-1807 Blonzy
· SURINAME
Vaco n.v. in Suriname
Domineestraat 26, P.O. Box 1841
Paramaribo
· SWEDEN
Wennergren Williams AB
P.O. Box 1305, S-171 25 Solna
Tel.: 46 8 705 9750
Fax: 46 8 27 00 71
E-mail: mail@wwi.se
Bokdistributören
P.O. Box 301 61, S-104 25 Stockholm
Tel.: 46 8 728 2500
Fax: 46 8 31 30 44
E-mail: lis.ledin @ hk.akademibokhandeln.se
· THAILAND
Suksapan Panit
Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue
Bangkok
· TOGO
Librairie du Bon Pasteur
B.P. 1164, Lomé
· TUNISIE
Société tunisienne de diffusion
5, avenue de Carthage, Tunis
· TURKEY
DUNYA INFOTEL
100. Yil Mahallesi
34440 Bagcilar, Istanbul
Tel.: 0212 629 08 08
Fax: 0212 629 46 89
E-mail: dunya@dunya-gazete.com.tr
Website: http://www.dunya.com
· UNITED KINGDOM
The Stationery Office
51 Nine Elms Lane
London SW8 5DR
Tel.: (0171) 873 9090 (orders)
(0171) 873 0011 (inquiries)
Fax: (0171) 873 8463
and through The Stationery Office Bookshops
E-mail: postmaster@theso.co.uk
Website: www.the-stationery-office.co.uk
Electronic products only:
Microinfo Ltd.
P.O. Box 3, Omega Road
Alton, Hampshire GU34 2PG
Tel.: (01420) 86848
Fax: (01420) 89889
Website: www.microinfo.co.uk
E-mail: emedia@microinfo.co.uk
· UNITED STATES
Publications:
BERNAN Associates (ex UNIPUB)
4611/F Assembly Drive
Lanham, MD 20706-4391
Toll-free 1-800-274-4447
Fax: 301-459-0056
Website: www.bernan.com
E-mail: info@bernan.com
UN Bookshop
The United Nations Bookshop
General Assembly Building Room 32
New York, N.Y. 10017
Tel.: 212 963 7680
Fax: 212 963 4910
Website: www.un.org
E-mail: bookshop@un.org
Periodicals:
Ebsco Subscription Services
P.O. Box 1943
Birmingham, AL 35201 -1943
Tel.: (205) 991-6600
Telex: 78-2661
Fax: (205) 991-1449
The Faxon Company Inc.
15 Southwest Park
Westwood, MA 02090
Tel.: 6117-329-3350
Telex: 95-1980
Cable: FW Faxon Wood
· URUGUAY
Librería Agropecuaria S.R.L.
Buenos Aires 335, Casilla 1755
Montevideo C.P. 11000
· VENEZUELA
Fundación La Era Agrícola
Calle 31 Junin Qta Coromoto 5-49
Apartado 456, Mérida
Fundación para la Investigación Agrícola
San Javier
Estado Yaracuy, A.P. 182, San Felipe
Fax: 054 44210
E-mail: damac@diero.conicit.ve
Fudeco, Librería
Avenida Libertador-Este
Ed. Fudeco, Apartado 254
Barquisimeto C.P. 3002, Ed. Lara
Tel.: (051) 538 022
Fax: (051) 544 394
Telex: (051) 513 14 FUDEC VC
Librería FAGRO
Universidad Central de Venezuela (UCV)
Maracay
Librería Universitaria, C.A.
Av. 3, entre 29 y 30
N° 29-25 Edif. EVA, Mérida
Fax: 074 52 09 56
Tamanaco Libros Técnicos S.R.L.
Centro Comercial Ciudad Tamanaco
Nivel C-2, Caracas
Tel.: 261 3344/261 3335/959 0016
Tecni-Ciencia Libros S.A.
Torre Phelps-Mezzanina
Plaza Venezuela
A.P. 20.315, 1020 Caracas
Tel.: 782 8697/781 9945/781 9954
E-mail: tchlibros@ibm.net
Tecni-Ciencia Libros, S.A.
Centro Comercial
Av. Andrés Eloy, Urb. El Prebo
Valencia, Ed. Carabobo
Tel.: 222 724
· ZIMBABWE
Grassroots Books
The Book Café
Fife Avenue, Harare;
61 a Fort Street, Bulawayo
Tel.: 79 31 82
Fax: 70 21 29
· Other countries/Autres pays/Otros países
Sales and Marketing Group
Information Division, FAO
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy
Tel.: (39) 06 57051
Fax: (39) 06 57053360
Telex: 625852/625853/610181 FAO I
E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org
