<title>Unasylva - No. 147 - IX World Forestry Congress Mexico 1985</title>
<section>1</section>
Editorial
Mexico 1985: The Ninth World Forestry Congress
A World Forestry Congress is a relatively rare event. The Congress hosted by Mexico City this year from 1 to 12 July will be only the ninth: the first Congress was held as long ago as 1926, in Rome. Ten years elapsed before the second, held in Budapest in 1936. The third Congress, delayed by the Second World War, took place in Helsinki in 1949. Since then. Congresses have occurred very nearly once every six years: in Dehra Dun in 1954, in Seattle in 1960, in Madrid in 1966, in Buenos Aires in 1972, in Jakarta in 1978 and now in Mexico City in 1985.
The long interlude between one World Forestry Congress and the next has given the event a character and an importance it would not have if it were held every year or every two years. It permits time for reflection and time to implement and evaluate the recommendations emanating from the previous Congress.
An interlude of six or seven years also brings, inevitably, significant changes in the outside world which affect the world forestry picture. The 2000 participants from 104 countries and 17 international organizations who assembled in Jakarta seven years ago held their discussions in a context of high oil prices, energy shortages and a major international banking crisis over how to recycle petrodollars. Now, only seven years later the situation has very nearly reversed itself. Oil prices have fallen, the energy supply picture - with the notable exception of fuelwood - has stabilized, and the successful recycling of petrodollars through international loans has brought a new banking crisis: the possibility that several heavily indebted nations may go bankrupt.
The theme of the Ninth World Forestry Congress - "Forest Resources in the Integral Development of Society" - emphasizes the need for foresters to look beyond their own resource base to consider how forest policies can be formulated in the light of such global events as an international banking crisis. The purpose of the Congress is to develop clear lines of action that can serve as guidelines for (a) formulating national policies; (b) providing incentives and guidance to the private and government sectors; and (c) promoting international cooperation in forestry.
Toward this end, the Government of Mexico has put together an impressive programme for the 2500 participants expected at the Congress. In addition to the general sessions, plenary sessions and meetings of the technical commissions, the Mexican Government will be sponsoring secondary meetings, expositions, demonstrations and contests. There will also be study tours to Central America, Cuba and the United States. The Government and the Organizing Committee deserve great thanks for literally years of work put into planning and preparation.
The present issue of Unasylva is intended as a preview to the Congress. It does not contain papers that will be presented in Mexico City. Instead, it includes an interview with FAO Director-General Edouard Saouma, and five articles which, it is hoped, will provide a backdrop for Congress activities. The subjects covered by these articles - forestry beyond 2000, shifting cultivation, agroforestry, community forestry and the social dimension of forest concession agreements - do not by any means represent all of the many topics that will be covered in Mexico City. Rather, they are intended to bring forward a body of objective, state-of-the-art information on certain critical topics.
The next issue of Unasylva (Vol. 37, No. 148) will feature FAO's fortieth anniversary and will include an interview with Mr Eduardo Pesqueira Olea, Mexico's Secretary of Agriculture and Hydrological Resources. Unasylva will also, in future issues, be reporting on what happened at the Congress.
In the preparation and planning for the World Forestry Congress, FAO has played an advisory role to the Government of Mexico. The event thus has great importance for FAO. It is the only truly international forestry event which brings together individuals, companies, NGOs and governments in one place to discuss and debate forestry questions of international significance. The impact of the Congress will be a long-lasting one.
<section>2</section>
Forestry: Essential for development
An interview with FAO Director-General Edouard Saouma
FAO Director-General Edouard Saouma
Unasylva: Mr Director-General, the year 1985 has been declared "International Year of the Forest" by the FAO Council. This year also marks FAO's fortieth anniversary, as well as the occasion of the Ninth World Forestry Congress in Mexico City. In view of these important events, Unasylva would very much appreciate your thoughts on the world forestry situation in general and on FAO's forestry programmes in particular.
Mr Saouma: I wish to emphasize right away that I consider forests to be very important for the environmental stability of our planet and the quality of life on it. First, because of their very scale. Forests cover one-third of the world's land surface. Literally half of the world's population lives in areas directly affected by forested watersheds. Forest products account for US$55000 million in world trade, making them one of the world's most important commodities. Five hundred million people are practicing some form of shifting cultivation or long-fallow agriculture on what are, essentially, forest lands. Second, forests are important because they are a source of so many goods and services. Forests provide wood for construction timber, veneers, pulp and paper, plywood and many other products; they provide fuelwood for 2000 million People; they provide fodder for animals. But their most important contribution is to agricultural production, by protecting soils, conserving
water and ameliorating micro-climate. Forests are also a storehouse for a large number of the world's plant genetic resources, including wild relatives of our major crops. Forests also provide habitat for wildlife, and grounds for recreation.
Unasylva: You have said on many occasions that forestry has a major role to play in rural development. Would you like to elaborate on this?
Mr Saouma: The World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development, hosted by FAO in 1979, underscored the fact that without rural development, there can be no national development. Without rural development, the massive migrations of the rural poor to the cities would continue. This migratory process is abetted by population growth which, despite encouraging progress, is still proceeding much too rapidly in many countries. The cities alone, like the rural areas, offer far too few opportunities for employment and a better life. The migrating rural poor soon become part of the vast ocean of urban poor. The cities, when filled with hundreds of thousands of rural poor, become breeding grounds for social, economic and political chaos. So it is imperative that we speed of rural development. As a minimum, this means meeting the subsistence needs of rural people. More broadly, it means providing Increased employment, income, services and opportunities for economic growth. And
this is where forestry comes in, because forests and woodlands are in rural areas and could be utilized in such a way as to provide more benefits to the rural people. In this respect, I think we have already seen the beginnings of an important shift in forestry policy and practice. Foresters have, traditionally, been concerned with the productive and protective roles of the forest. Now they are also beginning to concentrate upon the social dimension of forestry, and particularly upon forestry's role in rural development. This is a policy shift of considerable importance. We can see it reflected in the fact that the theme of the Jakarta World Congress was "Forests for People" while the theme selected for the Mexico City World Congress is "Forestry in the Integral Development of Society". These themes demonstrate that foresters themselves are becoming more aware of forestry's social role and that they are ready to ensure that a greater share of the benefits from forestry
reaches the rural people.
Unasylva: But what are these benefits that forestry could bring to rural people?
Mr Saouma: To answer this question better, perhaps we should distinguish between those cases where natural forests already exist and those areas where reforestation or afforestation is needed. While it is true that existing tropical forests are being depleted at an alarming rate - 11 million hectares world wide every year - the fact remains that there still are large areas left. Some areas should be designated as natural areas or national parks. However, most of the existing forest land could, and should, be opened up to development and brought under rational management, to increase and diversify production and spur the creation of new industries or the expansion of existing ones to provide off-farm employment and incomes for rural communities. By "industries" here, I mean everything from the harvesting of raw materials to processing, and from fully integrated pulp and paper plants to small, local businesses making such products as furniture, charcoal or rattan baskets.
Benefits from natural forests also include the production, at the community level, of various non-industrial products such as food, fodder, fuelwood, rosin, poles and thatch. Thus, appropriate forest industries contribute to economic growth over and above traditional community benefits. The benefits of forestry are greater and more spectacular where tree planting is used as a means of halting the advance of desertification, which results in environmental disasters and human tragedy, and not just in the Sahel - where its devastating effects have been well publicized but also in other parts of the world. Tree-planting in these areas can restore soil fertility, protect against wind and erosion, enhance water supplies and pave the way for the reestablishment of sustainable crop and livestock production. The planting of multi-purpose, fast-growing trees in arid and semiarid areas can provide fuelwood and fodder, apart from shelter and protection. At the level of the individual
farm, the correct Integration of trees enhances agricultural production and food security. The late Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, in her McDougall Lecture to the FAO Conference in 1981, said that the second Green Revolution would come when small farmers around the world systematically planted trees on their land.
Unasylva: You have referred to the role of forests and trees in food production. This is something not well understood by the general public. Could you elaborate?
Mr Saouma: Although precise statistics and records do not exist, we all know that forests provide habitat for wildlife and for fish, which are direct sources of food in both the developing and the Industrialized world. In many countries, meat from forest animals and fish comprises a major source of protein. Forests also supply such commodities as mushrooms, oils, nuts, fruits and honey, and many edible plants. But more important is the indirect role of forests in food production and food security. In fact, in many localities, agriculture simply could not exist without forests, woodlands and trees. Without good soils, adequate water supplies and climatic amelioration, agriculture would be impossible. And it is precisely these considerations that make watershed management in the upper catchment areas so important in order to prevent both flooding and drought in the lower elevations and the valleys below.
"Prime Minister Gandhi said that the second Green Revolution would come when small farmers around the world systematically planted trees on their land."
Unasylva: In the past, forestry and agriculture were regarded as separate, sometimes even antagonistic, disciplines. How true is this today?
Mr Saouma: Although forestry and agriculture have a common scientific basis, they are two separate disciplines. However, the era when foresters and agriculturalists regarded each other as potential threats is over. Both professions have realized that the two sectors are intimately and permanently interrelated. At FAO, the role of forestry in food security and in human nutrition, particularly through fuelwood, is fully recognized by the foresters. On the other hand, the agronomists now appreciate the role of trees both in increasing productivity and in diversifying incomes from the farm. Both sides fully recognize that efforts must now be directed toward achieving "vertical" rather than "horizontal" expansion in agricultural as well as forestry production; that is, to increase the per-hectare output of crops or wood, thereby lessening the competition for land between the two land users. If each hectare of agricultural land can produce more crops and can Yield more meat and
other products, then there is less need to convert more forest land to agricultural use. Similarly, if the yield of forest products per hectare of forest land is increased, then more of the fertile, lowland forest areas can be used for food production in response to the growing food needs of increasing populations.
Unasylva: Recently, grave concern was expressed by several governments and at various international forums about forest destruction and the need for international action in forest conservation and protection. What are the threats faced by the forests?
Mr Saouma: Forests are indeed facing a multitude of very serious threats, the magnitude of which should not be underestimated. However, we still have ample time to correct the situation and reverse the present trend. Naturally, this requires coordinated planning and a global outpouring of money and effort. It is precisely for this reason that the Fourteenth FAO Regional Conference for Europe resolved that the forest be duly recognized during 1985 as a global concern and that the FAO Council, at its Eighty-sixth Session, declared the year 1985 the International Year of the Forest. A major forum for discussion of this topic will be the Ninth World Forestry Congress in Mexico City. In tropical countries, FAO's own studies have conclusively shown that agricultural expansion, shifting cultivation and, to a lesser extent, excessive logging are removing ten times as much forest as is currently being put back through reforestation. To change this, we must step up the rate of
reforestation dramatically and at the same time reduce the rate of forest clearance. However, it is important to note that threats to the forest exist not only in tropical countries. Temperate forests in industrialized countries, which had remained relatively stable over the past several decades, are now being threatened by a combination of add rain and other environmental factors. Solving this problem will require more research and more international cooperation. In arid zones, a combination of overgrazing and excessive fuelwood cueing and gathering is endangering the survival of entire forest and woodland areas. Here, as I said earlier, we need to do everything possible to plant multipurpose, fast-growing trees.
"At FAO, the role of forestry in food security and in human nutrition is fully recognized."
"FAO's own studies have conclusively shown that agricultural expansion, shifting cultivation and excessive logging are removing ten times as much forest as is currently being put back through reforestation."
Unasylva: You mentioned the collecting and gathering of fuelwood. FAO has recently played a very significant role in making the world aware of the vast dimensions of the fuelwood crisis. Is this crisis getting better, or is it worsening?
Mr Saouma: The extent of the fuelwood crisis is truly staggering. According to FAO estimates, 1000 million people in developing countries are facing fuelwood shortages. This number could easily rise to 2000 million by the end of the century, if present trends continue. I have said on other occasions that it is of little value to provide food for the hungry of the world if they lack the means by which to cook it. Some three-quarters of the people in developing countries depend upon wood as their sole source of energy for cooking and heating. And this situation is unlikely to change markedly in the near future. Developing countries are generally lacking in the necessary facilities and infrastructure to use other forms of energy, such as coal, oil or gas, or solar, nuclear or hydro energy, even if these were available at low prices. The stories in the press of the industrialized world claiming that the recent drop In oil prices has ended the energy crisis are misleading. For at
least half of humankind, the energy crisis is not over. It is still very much alive. In terms of total money spent and total power generated, wood can seem like a very minor source of energy. But in terms of human beings - and It is they that matter moat - wood remains the world's most important energy source.
Unasylva: If fuelwood collection by individuals - usually women - In rural areas represents one end of the forestry spectrum, perhaps we can put forest industries at the other end. What policies and programmes is FAO following with regard to forest industries?
Mr Saouma: We are emphasizing the expansion and diversification of forest industries in the developing world, which possesses one-half of the planet's forest resources but produces only 20 percent of the total forest products. This situation needs to change. Eighty percent of the wood used in developing countries goes for fuelwood and charcoal. The remaining 20 percent accounts for all other domestic consumption and for exports. But half of the exports are still in the form of logs, which are converted in other countries. Developing countries import 20 percent more processed higher-value products such as sawnwood, plywood and veneer from industrialized countries than they export to them. This means a net loss in foreign exchange of more than $800 million per year. So, much of our effort is directed toward improving the capacities of industries in developing countries to produce higher-value wood products.
Unasylva: How is this being done? And what is me focus of FAO's programmes for forest industries?
Mr Saouma: In the past, FAO has worked with equipment manufacturers to develop a portfolio of plans and designs covering a wide range of small-scale forest: industries. In many countries, such small-scale enterprises were thought to represent the best way to utilize the forest resource. FAO has also assisted in feasibility studies and the installation of large-scale forest-industrial complexes, of pulp and paper mills costing hundreds of millions of dollars. In some cases, large-scale enterprises were considered to be the best solution for a country seeking to develop its forest industry. Now the emphasis is on appropriate industries. This concept implies that the industry is deliberately designed to match more closely the extent and nature of its forest resources to the available management and technical capabilities, as well as to the relative skill of its work-force and the financing it can bring to bear on new forestry projects. Above ail, we are trying to emphasize that
local people should be included in the decision-making process and that some of the benefits of whatever forest industries are developed should be returned to them.
Unasylva: A number of problems, such as rural poverty, the fuelwood shortage, shifting cultivation and tropical deforestation, acid rain, desertification and underdeveloped forest industries, have been mentioned as requiring urgent solutions. Are you optimistic or pessimistic that such problems can be solved?
Mr Saouma: I am optimistic, and I believe my optimism is fully justified. People throughout the world, in both developing and industrialized countries, as well as many governments and organizations, have expressed great concern over the fate of the forests. This is underscored by the amount of media attention given to the subject, which in itself is a hopeful sign for the future. Over the past two decades, we have witnessed the growth of literally hundreds of non-governmental organizations concerned with some aspect of forest development or the forest environment. There are groups concerned with wildlife, groups concerned with fuelwood, groups concerned with environmental protection, groups concerned with promoting rural development. We have today in the world a critical mass of energy - human energy ready to be converted into a chain reaction of concrete actions to protect our forests and to stimulate the whole process of development. There are also clear signs that
governments are ready to take separate or collective action. In fact, considerable progress has already been made in some regions. On the technical side, organizations like FAO stand ready to provide assistance. We in FAO are continuously striving to improve the quality of our field projects and to make them fully responsive to the pragmatic needs of our member countries. With the growing understanding of and support to forestry that are now evident worldwide, among people and their political leaders alike, I am confident we shall succeed in resolving these problems.
Unasylva: Thank you, Mr Director-General.
FAO, Rome
<section>3</section>
A world perspective: Forestry beyond 2000
This paper was prepared by staff of FAO's Forestry Department for the discussion of future perspectives in forestry at the Seventh Session of the FAO Committee on Forestry (COFO) in Rome, 7-11 May 1984. The work was coordinated by P.A. Wardle, Senior Officer (Economics) Policy and Planning Service.
FORESTRY IN ECUADOR, 1966 what changes are foreseen after 2000?
The forests of the world provide a renewable source of materials, energy and services for nations and communities, contributing to their social and economic well-being and forming a vital component of their environment. In all these functions they are of major importance.
Four thousand million hectares, one-third of the world's land area, are under forest, constituting a major proportion of the environment in many regions. The annual production of wood from the forests is some 3000 million m^3. Nearly half of this is raw material for mechanical wood products or for paper. These products are vital materials for housing, construction, furniture, packaging and communications. Somewhat more than half of the wood is used directly for energy. Other forest products include fruits, gums or resins, fodder and the meat of wild animals. These are of vital importance to rural communities in many parts of the world and also form the basis of significant industries.
The importance of forest products can also be measured by the involvement of people - the people employed in the harvesting, manufacture and delivery of the products, and those who depend on the products for a part of their material well-being. Some 1-2 percent of total economic activity in most countries is contributed by the forest and forest industries sector, while in countries with a heavy dependence on wood in production or energy supply this figure may rise to 5 percent or higher.
The number of people with direct dependence on forest products can be illustrated by the 2000 million rural people who depend on wood supplies for their domestic energy and the more than 200 million living in the forests. There are also the vast populations of agriculturists downstream whose lives are affected by flood and siltation of rivers and reservoirs as a result of treatment of mountain forests. Similarly, the lives of farmers in arid zones and their ability to produce are determined by the treatment of the fragile woodland ecology that prevents erosion and controls the advance of the desert.
A perspective In the short term, because of the extensive nature of forests, the impact of activities altering their condition is not immediately apparent. The forest is too often perceived as a stock resource, a free good, with the land as something freely available for conversion to other uses without recognition of the consequences for the production, service and environmental roles of the forest. Definitive action, particularly investment in forestry, has a long gestation period. For these reasons, perspectives of the contribution of forests to society and the economy have to be projected for long periods into the future to provide a basis for policy makers to formulate appropriate reaction to emerging trends.
In the 1950s and 1960s, identification of the trend to rapid growth in consumption of forest products in Europe, North America and Japan assisted the forest authorities in developing programmes of reinvestment and built up confidence in industry to invest. It required the oil shock of 1973 to force recognition of the importance of forests as a source of energy to rural communities. Even had low energy prices persisted, there would have been little possibility for these communities of substituting commercial energy alternatives. The world community is still in the process of recognizing institutional constraints in many regions that force the profligate destruction of forest without securing a compensatory, sound, productive use either of the wood or of the land.
The forests of the world constitute a vital source of material, of energy and of other goods. They form an essential component of the environment of people and their agriculture. Beyond the year 2000, the pressures of population and urbanization and a limited land resource present an immense challenge. To meet the increasing need for the products of the forest and to secure its service - in conserving soil and water and natural communities - require the utilization of people to pursue these objectives, the development of skills and the evolution of an appropriate institutional environment for the effective operation of forests and forest industries. This article deals with the global perspective in that light.
The setting
The world's population is expected to increase from 4400 million in 1980 to around 6100 million by the year 2000. UN projections indicate a range of possible levels of stabilization of population, with a low variant of 8000 million by 2040, a medium variant of 10500 million by 2110 and a high variant of 14200 million by 2130. A feature of projected population to the year 2000 is the higher rate of growth of urban than of rural population. Thus, up to the year 2000, half the increase of population in developing countries will occur in urban areas.
The economic scenarios put forward by international agencies indicate an annual economic growth of developing countries in the range of 5 to 6 percent over the period toward 2000, with growth in industrial countries ranging between 2.5 and 5 percent, and a central case of 3.5 percent. With these assumptions, one-fifth of the people of developing countries will be living below the poverty line in the year 2000, unless the pattern of growth is modified to place more emphasis on poverty alleviation. More ambitious scenarios are also put forward which would go further toward alleviating the deprivation of the least privileged communities.
In these scenarios, world consumption of commercial energy is projected to increase by some 2 percent per year, combined with a I long-run trend in real price increases of about 1.5 percent per annum. The proportion of petroleum in the total falls while natural gas, solid fuels and electricity all increase.
Studies of the population-supporting capacities of land indicate that pressures on land will increase in many areas. Though the world as a whole should have enough cultivable land to feed more than the maximum population it is ever likely to have to support with the application of present technology, the land resources are very unevenly distributed in relation to population. It also has to be borne in mind that the provision of land to grow wood for fuel is essential to meet the basic needs of the population in many regions of the world, since food must be cooked as well as grown. Achievement of the higher agricultural production needed will be attained through higher yields per unit of land in some areas, but it will also involve considerable expansion of arable land in others, at the expense of other land uses. This expansion will be greater with lower levels of technology and with associated losses of cropland and production through land degradation. At high levels of
technology, the additional land area required would be less and the losses through land degradation would be more contained. The achievement of high levels of technology would be associated with more ambitious scenarios of economic development and access to institutions, infrastructure, training and capital.
Products of the forest
The driving force behind the consumption of the products of the forest is provided by human needs, wants and desires for goods and services, and by people's preferences among those available under the constraints of the limited resources at their disposal. The products of the forest may be divided between those of the traditional sector - fuelwood, wood for charcoal, poles, posts, fodder, fruits and extractives used by local communities without industrial processing - and the modern sector manufactures such as sawnwood, panels, paper and energy for industry.
Demand from subsistence farmers and rural communities operating outside the traditional market economy for traditional subsistence products will continue and almost certainly grow. This consumption tends to be dependent on virtually free availability of the forest supply, involving only the cost of household labour in its collection and use. Maintenance of supplies for the future increasingly depends on the ability to maintain forest production locally within the context of the traditional economy of the community.
Demand for forest products has been predicted to increase proportionally with population growth, but, in practice, consumption will be limited by the availability of supplies, as these are exhausted if collection and exploitation occur without renewal of the tree resource. Thus, the annual minimum need for fuelwood by the year 2000 has been estimated at 2600 million m^3, while the supply capacity, taking account of population distribution, is put at 1500 million m^3. This will result either in lower levels of per caput consumption of energy or in energy needs being met with alternative fuels. A similar maldistribution of supply would apply to wood as a material and to the other products of the forest for local subsistence use.
The issue beyond 2000 is whether the best solution for these communities is the massive harnessing of their resources in order to renew local forest supplies, or whether the effort should be focused upon securing access to alternative sources of energy and materials. Present indicators of future prospects for international energy suggest that the renewal of forest supplies should be given urgent priority in many regions.
Diversity The diversity of products other than wood has a potential to enrich the lives of rural communities, by contributing to basic food supply and nutritional standards, and to supply materials for a wide range of local industries. The development and use of these products provide opportunities for useful employment and economic production with little dependence on external inputs, while the production of the raw material is largely complementary to agricultural production and the production of wood in the forest.
Considering modern sector products, the perspective of the FAO study Agriculture: toward 2000 indicates continued growth in world demand at rates of 1.5 percent for sawnwood and 4 to 5 percent for panels and paper. Growth is put at substantially higher rates for developing countries.
The main features of the development of technology have been increased use of wood in a reconstituted form - in panels, for example - as against simply processed sawnwood; expansion of the use of wood in paper manufacture; increased efficiency in the utilization of raw material through the use of residuals from one process as raw material for other products as well as for energy generation; and recycling of used products such as waste paper. An area with notable potential for improved utilization efficiency is the use of wood as domestic fuel. The indications are that wood is a very resilient source of raw material for a wide range of products. It has the advantage of relatively low energy requirements for the production of structural components in comparison with other materials such as aluminium, and considerable flexibility in the development of new forms of products, an example being the development of particle board since the 1950s. It is thus a raw material that is
well able to compete with other basic materials.
With continuing economic expansion, the expectation is for continued growth in the demand for modern-sector forest products. It is likely that the rate of expansion will be greater in developing countries than in industrialized countries, mainly because of the rapid growth in their urban population.
Services of the forest
TERRACING FOR REFORESTATION WORK the global need for new trees is monumental
Certain features have particular relevance to the service functions of forests. Population increase, the increased economic well-being of that population, and urbanization are accompanied by increases in the demand for various types of services.
There will, for example, be concern that there should be improved control of water resources: greater output, better regulation of water flow in river basins, better control of damaging siltation, and increased demand for protection of agricultural production capability. Population and economic trends generate directly conflicting forces - the need for conversion of forest land to use for agricultural production, which leads to the continuation, under low-technology agriculture, of land-use practices directly damaging to the conservation of soil and water. This, in turn, reduces the forest's capability to regulate and control erosion, an important factor in maintaining agricultural production.
The environmental aspects of forestry will no doubt receive greater attention from local populations and decision makers alike in view of the derived benefits of and greater requirements for "clean" air and water. With increasingly numerous erosion hazards, particularly on steep slopes and marginal lands, the contribution of forestry to erosion control, soil conservation, watershed protection, stream flow regulation and dune fixation increases in importance.
GOVERNMENT SAWMILL IN NEW ZEALAND how many are needed In the developing world?
The need for appropriately managed, naturally woody vegetation types - shelterbelts and windbreaks, woodlots and other forest plantations on agricultural and pasture lands will be increasingly recognized as an essential basis for increasing soil productivity and thereby improving food supply and agricultural employment and income. At the same time, there will be more need for forestry measures in the protection of public facilities. The protection of roads in mountainous areas affected by landslides and gully erosion, the prevention of silting in canals and reservoirs, and the protection of human settlements against floods through river control will require greater inputs from forestry.
Certain major environmental issues relate to atmospheric pollution and the increasing concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. The burning of forests no doubt contributes to the second, though the main source of both effects is the use of fossil fuels by industry. Growing forests contribute to the reduction of atmospheric carbon dioxide and may have a significant in forming absorptive barriers to atmospheric pollutants.
A current issue is the damaging effect of air-borne pollutants on the growth of existing forests. It is unclear whether, with appropriate forest management, these will remain significant for the performance of the various roles of the forest.
The maintenance of natural flora and fauna is dependent upon the conservation and management of adequate and representative samples of ecosystems, which will essentially ensure in situ conservation of genetic resources, for both plant and animal species. Forestry species are generally "stored" in living collections, both in situ and ex situ (complementary, whenever possible). Forestry works with "wild" species and aims at keeping the genetic base as broad as possible; selection or genetic improvement is always done in populations specially created for this purpose, leaving the conservation and base populations with maximum variation. Thus, new material can be injected into the breeding populations in the future to meet changing needs. It is important to increase investments in collection, exploration and evaluation work on naturally occurring forest species.
Wildlife and wildlands management and conservation are expected to receive greater attention as effective means for the rehabilitation of degraded habitats, and as essential contributions to food security and to the provision of outdoor recreation. With the trend toward increased availability of leisure time in the industrial countries, and toward greater requirement of recreation on the part of the world population as a whole, there will be a high claim on forestry to provide recreational services. The worldwide urbanization process will lead to a focus on the use of trees and forests for their amenity value and landscape management. While the immediate requirements for action seem to lie more in the northern hemisphere of the world, there is no doubt that the need for action and decision-making is also growing in certain parts of Latin America, Asia and Africa.
A major question for forestry beyond 2000 is whether plantation forestry increasingly replace natural forests as the source of raw material.
There appears to be a substantial movement toward the decentralization of decision-making relative to operational activity in the forest.
The forest resource
The 4000 million ha of forests are distributed among the temperate zone, with 2050 million ha, of which about 1650 million are closed forests; the tropical zone, which has some 1200 million ha of closed forests and 550 million ha of open woodland; and the arid zone, which contains some 300 million ha of forests, mainly open woodland. There are, in addition, around 1000 million ha classified under other uses than forest with some shrubs or woody vegetation.
The forest area in the temperate zone is more or less stable, with a relatively high rate of renewal through afforestation and reforestation. The forest area in tropical and arid regions, on the other hand, is subject to considerable human pressure and is diminishing at a rate that has been estimated to be on average about 0.6 percent per annum. Afforestation and reforestation proceed at a rate around one-tenth that of deforestation.
A major question for forestry beyond 2000 is whether plantation forestry will increasingly replace natural forests as the source of raw material. A second fundamental question concerns the role of community, household and farm-tree growing as sources of fuelwood and industrial wood raw material.
The projected increase in demand for forest products would place considerable pressure on the remaining forest resources by the year 2000 and is likely to result in an increased cost of supply in both tropical and temperate regions, providing both a challenge and an opportunity for forestry.
To meet the long-term growth in demand, very considerable investment in tree-growing is necessary. To be economically efficient, this requires accompanying improvement in the genetic composition of the trees planted and improvement in the silvicultural techniques, investment needs to be matched not only to the variety of growing environments as determined by soil and climate but also to the different management situations dedicated plantations or forestry integrated with agriculture and other functions - as well as to the ultimate end-use: timber, woody biomass, fodder or service functions.
The forest resource
Supplies for industry
The demand for industrial wood products is expected to grow as economies grow, and the rate of growth is likely to be greatest in developing countries.
The ability to supply the products to meet this demand has to be seen in relation to the constraints on supply. First among these are those imposed by features of the forest resource. In the temperate zone, where there is a tendency toward increased supply cost, the forest resource is increasingly yielding raw material with smaller sizes, less attractive species, more distant supply areas and areas with more difficult working conditions. An increasing proportion of raw material is derived from plantations involving investment of resources in growing the timber. This tendency to increased cost may be partially offset by improved harvesting, transport and processing technology and fuller utilization of raw material.
The rising real cost of energy has several implications for the wood manufacturing industry. First, the demand for wood as a source of energy increases competition for I wood supplies. Second, it increases the cost of production of wood products, leading to consideration of ways of economizing in energy consumption in production, including the recycling of process residues to generate energy. Third, it will enhance the competitiveness of wood as a material in so far as the energy cost of production is relatively low. High energy costs may favour location of processing plants near to the raw material source in order to benefit from economies in transport costs, particularly if wood itself is a viable source of energy for the industry.
Technology is already available for the extraction of fuels and wood chemicals, either directly from wood raw material or from by-products of wood manufacturing. Expected advances in biotechnology should greatly enhance the competitive position of wood cellulose as a base for the production of liquid and gas fuels.
The sawnwood and plywood industries are capable of reasonable efficiency over a wide range of scale of operation, with increasing scale and capital intensity being related to increasing labour costs and larger markets. These industries can operate competitively on a small scale where markets are small, or they can seek products that may be supplied individually or in small production runs. They are therefore the first to develop in the rural areas of most countries.
Industries involving reconstitution of the wood raw material - particle board, fibreboard and pulp and paper - tend to be capital-intensive and relatively sophisticated in the technological sense. They place heavier demands on infrastructure and benefit from concentration to support maintenance and the supply of complex equipment and specialized material inputs. They will tend to succeed where the domestic market for their products is reasonably large and where the specialized inputs on which they depend are available at reasonable prices.
There is a place for small-scale pulp and paper manufacture, but with existing technology it will tend to be based on the less complex processing required in utilizing waste paper and various agricultural residues rather than wood. Such manufacturing plants will tend to be urban or in agricultural centres.
The substantial capital investment involved in the development of efficient large-scale processing requires a stable market for the products and a regular supply of inputs, both wood raw material and other materials. Given these preconditions, there remain the risks arising from the coincidence of startup problems and economic recession. This reinforces the consideration that large-scale operations will be most appropriate where they are supported by an adequate domestic market, both to absorb production and to carry the costs of financing.
Forest industries have environmental impacts ranging from the disturbance of ecological balance and soil stability through harvesting operations and road construction to the environmental problems of effluents and emissions. Failure to meet high environmental standards may have harmful effects downstream and across international boundaries. These can be reduced by sound management and good design, but acceptable levels of control will usually require substantial investment in special facilities and technology, adding to the cost of the end-products. High standards of control are equally appropriate in countries at every stage of development.
To maintain the competitive position of the forest products industries in the face of increasing supply costs, and to meet both the growing aspirations of those employed and competition from other materials or operational methods, will require continuous development at all stages of production and product development to adjust to market requirements. This means an adequate investment in research and development. Because of the predominance of small firms, present levels of research input throughout the forest products industry are relatively low and the industry is characterized by a marked degree of conservatism.
In the developing countries, there are the additional problems of building up a technically competent work-force at all levels and the accumulation of experience. A major problem is to identify a means to accelerate the process of acquiring the technological, managerial and entrepreneurial competence and to channel it into effective production. Choices will have to be made from among several different ways of achieving this end: learning by experience, training or education; bringing in technical expertise; setting up joint venture operations; or the involvement of firms bringing the needed technology from abroad.
Table 1. Forest products consumption, 1980 and 2000 (Wood: millions of m^3; paper: millions of tonnes)
Developing countries
Developed countries
World
Low
High
Low
High
Low
High
Fuelwood
Industrial roundwood
Sawnwood
Panels
Paper
Table 2. Imports and exports of forest products, 1980 (in millions of US dollars)
Imports
Exports
Europe
North America
Japan
USSR
Far East developing countries
African developing countries
Latin America
All developed countries
All developing countries
World
Trade and markets
Trade is a major component in the activity of the forest sector, and forest products are important in international trade, constituting 2.5 percent of world trade, 20 percent of the total agricultural products trade and 10 percent of the agricultural exports of developing countries. The real growth of trade in forest products over the past two decades has been at the average annual rate of about 6 percent, while developing country exports have grown at 7 percent. Developing countries have moved from the position of net importers of forest products to a position where their total trade is in balance or slightly positive.
The principal trade flows are the internal ones within Europe and Japan and the flows of exports from Canada to the United States. Major flows from the developing countries are the exports of logs from the Far East to Japan and other East Asian countries and from Africa to Europe, and the exports of sawnwood and plywood from Far Eastern countries to the United States and Europe There has been a significant flow of logs in recent years from the USSR and North America to Japan, while the log exports of Far East producers have diminished.
The composition of exports on a world basis has remained broadly constant, with trade in roundwood making up about 15 percent of total export value. The value of developing countries, unprocessed roundwood exports has moved from 55 percent of their total wood product exports in 1960 to around 45 percent in 1980. Though the general level of forest product prices in real terms has fluctuated around a constant base, the real price of tropical products in international trade has risen appreciably over the last decade.
With the growth in demand for forest products, it is to be expected that the volume of trade will expand further. There will be a tendency for increased interdependence between countries and regions, certain regions becoming increasingly dependent on trade to meet deficits in resource capacity.
The historical tendency has been for resource-rich countries initially to export unprocessed roundwood but then to move upmarket through the development of a processing industry to serve both domestic and export markets. It is to be expected that this tendency will continue, with countries taking restrictive measures on roundwood outflows in order to secure the availability of raw material for the expansion of domestic industry.
The movement toward a greater proportion of trade being in manufactured products, and toward further processing and the manufacture of tertiary products, requires a supporting advance in infrastructure This means improved transport networks permitting the easy transport of inputs to the industry and finished products to the consumer It will involve improved communications to permit the efficient transfer of information, the development of marketing information networks and marketing organizations, and the establishment of reliable linking networks between the producers and the consumers.
A NEPALESE NURSERY growing trees for the twenty-first century
The full participation of developing countries in international trade is dependent on their ability to develop appropriate industrial capacity. This will be easiest where there is a strong domestic market. It will be facilitated by the absence of restrictive measures depressing their ability to compete in the international market and would further benefit from mechanisms to limit sharp fluctuations through intervention by external suppliers in their domestic markets. The effective protection provided by tariffs and quotas on manufactured wood products remains at highly restrictive levels in many major markets. The increasing dependence of major market areas on external supplies would seem to favour reduction of trade barriers rather than the continued protection of an industry made less viable by its lack of opportunity to expand.
Forestry and people
Forestry is for people. It must determine what their needs are and how people move toward the fulfilment of these needs. A first concern is the correct identification of matters of real priority. These are not necessarily those generated by the conventional wisdom prevailing at any one time. Next comes the need to obtain people's recognition that laissez-faire may be inadequate in securing the fulfillment of their needs.
In many countries, a major issue threatening the ability of the forest sector to contribute in any of its several roles is the problem of ownership of the forest. Historically, forest ownership was frequently vested in the state, creating a form of residual land use. With the passage of time, the growth of population pressure and changes of regime, there has developed a tendency to regard such land as a form of common property and to regard the custodians of the forest as the guardians of an alien and obsolete regime. This sometimes has the consequence that the forest is simply occupied and transformed into de facto private property through another, usually agricultural, use. In other cases the forest degenerates into a degraded common, with all users removing what they can but no one caring for future production. This is a problem that can be solved only by a major reconstruction of relevant arrangements, involving both the local community and the central agencies of
government charged with responsibility for the forest.
There appears to be a substantial movement toward the decentralization of decision-making relative to operational activity in the forest, whether to local community organizations or to local private ownership. It has to be recognized, however, that the performance of certain functions of the forest may not be in the immediate interest of a local owner; watershed protection, wildlife preservation and investment in reforestation are examples. Thus, an essential corollary of devolution is the formation of clear policy objectives and of supporting legislation to ensure that local entities contribute toward the general good as well as to their own needs.
The effective performance of the forestry sector's functions requires a technical capability to carry them out. This requires an infrastructure of education and training, including forest worker training and vocational training. In the case of developing countries, this calls for massive investment in institutions and people. For education to be fully effective, whether in developed or developing countries, there is a need for revision and extension of curricula to focus on the priority needs of the sector. The dynamic development of technical competence to carry out the needed forestry activities requires investment in forestry research, in- forest industry methods and products, in service functions and in the social area.
Major issues and implications
The problem of ensuring the protection of agricultural land provided by the forests will become increasingly critical beyond the year 2000 as pressures on the land base continue to grow. It has to be expected that some forest land will continue to be transferred to agricultural use to meet the needs for increased agricultural production. It is essential to ensure that this transfer is treated in such a way as to ensure the most efficient combination of agricultural production and forestry for production and protection. This involves technical inputs of monitoring and land evaluation and the development of joint forestry and agricultural utilization of the land.
There is likely to be a larger population in the twenty-first century than at present, as well as a still large population of rural poor, for many of whom the most likely economic source of energy will be tree biomass and crop wastes. A major concern in the light of present depletion is to ensure the necessary organization and investment of land and effort in tree-growing programmes to meet the needs of these people.
Conservation of flora and fauna and of genetic resources becomes a matter of policy and management as the pressure on limited forest and land resources increases. The protective, conservation and service functions of the forest will increasingly be matters for careful management and investment as the greater demand for such benefits impinges on a decreasing area of forest.
Success in meeting the demand for products will depend on the capability of forest industries to continue the extended utilization of diverse forms of wood raw material. Productive efficiency will have to improve in order to overcome increased supply costs of raw material and energy, and flexibility in the development of products will be required to meet changing needs and competition from other types of material.
Industrial development will have to meet social requirements about location and appropriate technology in support of local economies, and to meet environmental standards in respect of its products and operations.
A major effort of investment in infrastructure, education and training will be involved in building up the level of forest industry required to meet the needs of developing countries. A major investment in marketing infrastructure, communications and skills will also be involved in the expansion of the role of the forestry sector.
Perhaps the aspect of greatest importance in fostering this long-term activity is the institutional one, establishing a perception of the urgency of the need for action and convincing people to act. With this goes the enormous effort required to develop a feasible institutional environment for effective forestry, and then to build up the trained personnel to invest, operate and manage the forests and forest industries.
<section>4</section>
Defining and measuring shifting cultivation
J.P. Lanly
J.P. Lanly is Director, Forest Resources Division, Forestry Department, FAO Rome. This article is based upon work conducted by FAO under the genera/heading "Alternatives to Shifting Cultivation in the Use of Forest Land". A major part of this effort has consisted of case-studies - all in Africa - which have been conducted by the Overseas Development Institute (United Kingdom), the Department of Forestry of Wageningen Agricultural University (the Netherlands), the Institut de recherches d'agronomie tropicale et de cultures vivrires (Paris), the Forest Division of the Silviculture Research Station (Dar es Salaam) and the Forest Products Research Institute (Kumasi, Ghana).
SHIFTING CULTIVATION IN SUMATRA forest-burning planting and abandonment
What is shifting cultivation? How much area does it cover? How many people are involved? These questions are addressed here in an attempt to bring some clarity and precision to the subject of shifting cultivation and long-fallow agriculture, one of the most widely discussed topics in forestry today.
In the literature referring to shifting cultivation, either the term is not clearly defined or its definition varies greatly from one author to another. These differences can be attributed but only in part - to the diversity of countries, areas, or communities being studied. In a regional or global review of the subject, it is more useful to contrast shifting cultivation with other systems of cultivation, by using the tangible easily identifiable factors defined by the following questions (FAO, 1983):
 Is cultivation permanent, or is it interrupted by a period of ley or natural fallow?
 In the latter case, how long are the fallow and cultivation periods, and what is the ratio of the lengths of these two periods?
 What types of vegetation grow in the fallow?
 Is the fallow period long enough to restore soil fertility, or is it too short?
 What is the population density?
 Is housing permanent or transient, or a combination of both (i.e., temporary housing near the fields and permanent housing in the village)?
All possible combinations of replies to these questions determine a continuum of a very large number of cultivation systems, which can be divided and classified in many ways.
There is, however, general agreement that the element contained in the second question the relation between the cultivation period and the fallow period - is essential for the definition of shifting cultivation. It was probably for this reason that the 1982 FAO/University of Ibadan Workshop on Shifting Cultivation and Extension, in Ibadan, recommended "the adoption of an operational definition of shifting cultivation to refer to a system in which relatively short periods of continuing cultivation are followed by relatively long periods of fallow" (author's emphasis).
Although this definition may be considered somewhat imprecise, it reflects well the very nature of shifting cultivation and has been adopted by the FAO Forestry Department.
AERIAL VIEW Of FOREST-CLEARING trying to measure its global extent
A formula for shifting cultivation
The term "long-fallow agriculture" is sometimes used to define systems where the length of the fallow period is more than double the length of the cropping period. Long-fallow agriculture can be accepted as synonymous with shifting cultivation, and must be clearly separated from "short-fallow agriculture" - or "semi-permanent cultivation" or "stationary cultivation with fallowing" - which characterizes farming systems.
To measure the relation between the cultivation period and the fallow period, several authors use the following equation (Joosten, 1962; Ruthenberg, 1980). The ratio R (a percentage) is expressed by the length of the cultivation period C times 100 divided by the total length of the cycle of land utilization, which is C plus the length of the fallow period F, or:
Thus, if the cultivation period were 5 years and the fallow period were 15 years - in other words, shifting cultivation - then R would equal 25 (5 x 100, or 500, divided by 5 + 15, or 20). If, instead, the cultivation period were 4 years and the fallow period only 1 year permanent cultivation - then R would equal 80 (4 x 100, or 400, divided by 4 + 1, or 5). With R used as a yardstick, it can be said, by way of definition, that (1) when R is less than 33, the corresponding system is shifting cultivation or long-fallow agriculture; (2) when R is between 33 and 66, there is short-fallow agriculture, semi-permanent cultivation or stationary cultivation with fallowing; and (3) when R is greater than 66, there is permanent cultivation with either single cropping or various degrees of multiple cropping. (Note that when multiple cropping is being practiced, the above formula is still applicable, but in a more complicated way.)
However, the meaning of the term "shifting cultivation" tends, in practice, to be broadened in two ways. First, some documents and reports extend it to include short-fallow agriculture systems. In one recent meeting on the subject, for example, some participants used the expression "shifting cultivation and related fallow systems" and mentioned that the fallow period could be reduced to less than two years. Second, others include under shifting cultivation all types of encroachment by cultivation on forest land. However, as will be seen, there is no cycle of land utilization in some forms of expansion of cultivation on tropical forests and woodlands. Although such extensions of the definition are not uncommon, it is suggested that the definition as indicated here above be used.
In 1980, 500 million people may have been dependent upon shifting cultivation and long-fallow agriculture in the 90 countries covered by the FAO/UNEP study, out of a total agricultural population of 1200 million.
HMONG VILLAGE IN NORTHERN THAILAND a classic example of shifting cultivation
Extent of shifting cultivation
Because of the diversity of definitions or, in some cases, lack of any definition, figures on the extent of shifting cultivation are highly variable. Moreover, the absence of a systematic global survey did not, until recently, permit an assessment of it with any degree of reliability. The situation in this respect has now improved, thanks to the findings of the recently completed FAO/UNEP Tropical Forest Resources Assessment Project (FAO/UNEP, 1982). The main objective of this project was to assess the present state of closed tropical forests and woodlands and the rate and pattern of their depletion and degradation. The various forms of agriculture being by far the main causes of deforestation in the tropics, the study could not but evaluate, inter alia, the extent and development of shifting cultivation at the expense of forest areas.
Methodology The study covers 90 tropical countries, representing more than 99 percent of the total area of those countries in America, Africa, and Asia and the Pacific located in the tropical belt (or subject to tropical climatic influences) in their totality or larger part. The assessment has been made country by country and! when deemed necessary, by regions within countries.
The study makes an important distinction between (a) closed tree formations (or closed forests) essentially broad-leaved - which cover a large part of the ground or all of it with their different strata and undergrowth and do not have! in general, a continuous herbaceous stratum, most of which are within the high forests of the humid tropics (coniferous forests represent less than 3 percent of the closed forests of the tropical countries) and (b) open tree formations (or open forests), whose canopy is generally not closed and which are essentially the mixed broad-leaved forest-grassland formations of the semi-humid and dry tropics: Brazilian cerrado, chaco woodlands of Bolivia and Paraguay, African woodlands, wooded and tree savannahs, Asian dry deciduous forests.
For each of these two categories, the study distinguishes the forests proper, which have not been altered recently by agriculture, from the forest fallows. The latter correspond to the complexes of woody vegetation deriving from the clearing by shifting cultivation (or long-fallow agriculture) of the closed or open forests and constituted by a mosaic of various forest reconstitution facies ("secondary bush", "young secondary forests", "secondary growth"). The mosaics include patches of uncleared forests and also fields of annual crops that cannot be accounted for separately in the interpretation of small-scale aerial photographs and of satellite and radar imagery.
The study distinguishes between fallows of closed forests and fallows of open forests. For the most part their area at a given time has been estimated through interpretation of contemporaneous remote-sensing imagery carried out within the framework of the study itself or by various national or international institutions.
The annual increase of forest fallow areas within each country and the updating of baseline area estimates to the same reference time (the end of 1980) are determined in most countries either by the comparison of imagery at two recent dates or by the analysis of agricultural censuses and statistics of the various crops of different dates.
Forest fallow areas do not include the following:
1. Land left behind by "pioneer fronts" and not utilized as fallow in a rotational agricultural system. This occurs frequently in the tropics, under various circumstances, the most common being:
 pioneer subsistence agriculture opening up forest land for cattle ranching activities (central and southern tropical America);
 migration of subsistence farmers on unfavourable terrain (hilly or mounValoare a indentului diferita de cele prezente in lista actualatainous) where clearing for agriculture leads rapidly to a degradation of the site (erosion) which does not allow a forest regrowth. This is, in particular, the case of those farmers proceeding downwards along the eastern slopes of the Andes to the Amazonian lowlands, or of the "squatters" of the Philippines and of northeastern India, moving upwards from the overpopulated plains to the forested hills.
2. Fallow land without woody vegetation in short-fallow agricultural systems.
Roughly speaking, forest fallow areas as defined in the FAO/UNEP study correspond to the land occupied by shifting cultivation and long-fallow agricultural systems. This equivalence is, of course, at least as approximate as the limit between long-fallow and short-fallow agriculture. It is also more valid in closed forest areas where height and density limits of the various types of land cover are sharper, on remote-sensing imagery, than in the open forest areas. In open forests, the overlapping of cropping and grazing activities has sometimes resulted in confusion between open forest fallows and degraded open forests long abandoned by agriculture or natural shrub formations. It must be pointed out, finally, that no attempt has been made to estimate fallow areas corresponding to shifting cultivation and long-fallow agriculture in those drier zones where shrub formations constitute the natural vegetation cover. Although this latter case is not widely represented, it may have
caused an underestimation of areas under shifting cultivation.
Estimates With all that has been said above, the estimates of forest fallow areas given in Table 1 indicate the extent of shifting cultivation and long-fallow agriculture at the end of 1980 that is, the total area covered by the fields and by the corresponding fallows at that time.
Table 1. Estimated forest fallows in late 1980
Region, subregion
Fallows of closed forests
Fallows of open forests
Proportion of total land area
(thousands of ha)
(percentage)
Tropical America
Central America and Mexico
CARICOM
Other Caribbean
Tropical South Latin America
Totals
Tropical Africa
Northern savannah regions
West Africa
Central Africa
East Africa and Madagascar
Tropical southern Africa
African islands
Totals
Tropical Asia-Oceania
South Asia
* ^a
Continental Southeast Asia
* ^a
Insular Southeast Asia
Centrally planned tropical Asia
Tropical Oceania
Totals
Tropical world
* = Small area
^a Forest fallows in open dry deciduous forest areas included wrongly in fallows of closed forests
Approximately 400 million ha of tropical lands are occupied by shifting cultivation and long-fallow agriculture, representing 8.3 percent of the total land area. This percentage is particularly low in overpopulated areas (South Asia, Caribbean countries and African islands) and also in those sub-regions that are predominantly dry (the northern savannah region and southern parts of tropical Africa). The low percentage in the Caribbean is mostly due to the relatively large undisturbed forest area of the three Guyanas. The same applies to tropical Oceania.
The percentage of forest fallow area is highest in the nine countries of West Africa (Guinea-Bissau, Guinea. Sierra Leone, Liberia, the Ivory Coast, Ghana, Togo, Benin and Nigeria, from west to east) and in the five countries of continental Southeast Asia (Burma, Thailand, Democratic Kampuchea, Laos and Viet Nam), where shifting cultivation and long-fallow agriculture are the dominant agricultural systems of hill communities.
Table 2 gives estimates of increases in forest fallow areas in 1980 for the same subregions. Forest fallow areas were then increasing world-wide by 1.25 percent annually, and by between 1.1 and 1.4 percent for the three main tropical regions. Except in tropical America, where the relative abundance of accessible forest land allows an easy expansion of long-fallow agriculture, these rates are smaller than the rates of growth of agricultural population (equal to 0.9, 2.1, 1.5 and 1.6 percent respectively in tropical America, Africa and Asia and the tropical world).
Table 2. Rates of increase of forest fallow areas, 1980
Region/subregion
Increase (in thousands of ha)
Increase as proportion of 1980 area (percentage)
of closed forests
of open forests
Tropical America
Central America and Mexico
CARICOM
Other Caribbean
Tropical South Latin America
Totals
Tropical Africa
Northern savannah regions
West Africa
Central Africa
East Africa and Madagascar
Tropical southern Africa
African islands
Totals
Tropical Asia-Oceania
South Asia
* ^a
Continental Southeast Asia
* ^a
Insular Southeast Asia
Centrally planned tropical Asia
Tropical Oceania
Totals
Tropical world
* = Small area
^a See Table 1
Only a rough estimate of the total population involved in shifting cultivation and long-fallow agriculture can be derived from the area of forest fallows. Assuming as a rule of thumb an average ratio R equal to 20 from the formula previously discussed and an average family size of six persons, there would in 1980 have been some 500 million people involved in shifting cultivation in the 90 countries covered by the FAO/UNEP study, out of a total agricultural population of 1200 million for these same countries at that date. A more precise estimation would require an assessment on a country-by-country basis, taking into account the corresponding national averages of R value and family size.
The forester's contribution
Shifting cultivation and long-fallow agriculture, and their degraded forms, are a major feature of rural life in most developing countries. They involve, as has been seen, about 500 million people and affect 240 million ha of closed forests and 170 million ha of open forests, or about 8.3 percent of the world's total tropical land area (and about 21 percent of the total tropical forest area). Moreover, shifting cultivation is increasing at an average annual rate of about 1.25 percent, with more than 5 million ha of new forest fallow being created annually. In most tropical areas it undergoes a negative evolution characterized by shorter fallow periods resulting from increased population pressure. Modifications and alternatives that are at the same time socially acceptable and technically valid have in most cases still to be conceived and implemented. In this, forestry and foresters can provide a useful and significant contribution.
Bibliography
FAO. 1956, L'agriculture nomade. vol. I. Congo belge, Cte-d'Ivoire. FAO Forestry Development Paper 9. Rome. (In French.)
FAO. 1957, Hanuno agriculture: a report on an integral system of shifting cultivation in the Philippines, by H.C. Conklin. FAO Forestry Development Paper 12. Rome. (Reprinted in 1975.)
FAO. 1971, Shifting cultivation in Latin America, by R.F. Watters. FAO Forestry Development Paper 17. Rome.
FAO. 1983, Unpublished document on shifting cultivation in Africa, by C. Oxby. Rome.
FAO. 1985, Changes in shifting cultivation in Africa. FAO Forestry Paper 50. Rome.
FAO/UNEP. 1982, Tropical forest resources, by Jean-Paul Lanly. FAO Forestry Paper 30. Rome.
JOOSTEN, J.H.L. 1962, Wirtschaftliche und agrarpolitische Aspekte tropischer Landbausysteme. Gttingen. Federal Republic of Germany, Institut fr landwirtschaftliche Betriebslehre.
RUTHENBERG. H. 1980, Farming systems in the tropics. 3rd ed. Oxford. Clarendon Press.
<section>5</section>
Agroforestry systems: A primer
Napoleon T. Vergara
Classical forestry's failure to win the support of rural communities poses a serious economic and environmental threat. Napoleon T. Vergara proposes a classification of the various subsystems of agroforestry as a step toward a new kind of community forestry.
Napoleon T. Vergara is a Research Associate, Environment and Policy Institute, East-West Center, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA.
Among Third World countries, there is a rising tide of concern that the practice of classical forestry - i.e., the raising and management of long-term forestry crops on a massive scale to produce large-dimension timber for commercial or industrial purposes - only increases the disparity in the distribution of wealth. Classical forestry, it is believed, makes a few wealthy individuals richer and the great number of rural poor worse off than ever before.
There is likewise increasing evidence to show that despite the long-term nature of these forestry activities, there is minimal beneficial socio-economic impact upon the rural populations in terms of economic opportunities and community stability; and that very little of the wealth extracted from the forests filters down to and remains in the rural communities. It is no wonder, therefore, that rural inhabitants find very little motivation to support government forestry conservation and restoration programmes.
Their lukewarm attitude toward forestry means that, given a range of prospective uses of upland or hilly land, farmers relegate forestry use to the lowest priority and elevate intensive cropping with annual food crops to the highest. The consequences of this land-use decision upon fragile uplands are well known: general site degradation through soil and nutrient loss, and serious downstream impacts in the form of sedimentation, water pollution, adversely altered hydrologic character, and overall reduction in productivity and sustainability.
Many observers believe that it is both necessary and possible to alter the nature of forestry practice in developing countries in the following ways: (1) make forestry smaller in scale (village rather than industrial); (2) make forest resources (land and vegetation) accessible for use by rural populations rather than keeping them as the monopolistic domains of industrial firms; and (3) integrate forestry more closely with farm operations in order to involve the farmers more intimately and enable their food crops to benefit from the supportive role of inter-cropped trees. In short, forestry practice should be converted from industrial forestry to village or community forestry.
Besides down-scaling, the other important result of conversion from classical to community forestry would be a widened range of cropping systems. No longer would forestry remain pure forest cropping; it could range from pure forestry at one extreme to the integration of tree crops and annual food crops and livestock at the other. This means the inclusion of agroforestry, a land-use technique that falls under the umbrella of community forestry.
Agroforestry systems Agroforestry has been loosely defined as "trees plus any other crop", or as "combining trees with food crops", but the most objective and comprehensive definition advanced so far is as follows:
Agroforestry is a system of land use where woody perennials are deliberately used on the same land-management unit as annual agricultural crops and/or animals either sequentially or simultaneously, with the aim of obtaining greater outputs on a sustained basis. (ICRAF, 1983)
This definition has generated some degree of disagreement. Central to the debate is the nature of the perennial crop component of this system. "Perennial woody crops" could embrace fruit trees as well as timber-bearing or forest trees, and using this general term rather than specifying "forest crops", as implied in the name "agroforestry", has caused foresters to fear that the system may be used as a devious way of converting forests into orchards. Those with the opposite view argue, however, that this cannot happen over all forest lands, that such physical factors as soil quality, topography, elevation and accessibility, acting in concert with socio-economic factors, will serve to limit the conversion of forest lands to other uses.
INTERPLANTING ON A CHINESE COMMUNE Cunninghamia (Chinese fir) and vegetables
Classification
Some confusion about what agroforestry really is has arisen because of the profusion of names and terms contrived and used by various researchers in different regions (Combe and Budowski, 1979). To be sure, many of these terms are not interchangeable, and the confusion becomes more serious when users, unaware of the slight shades of variation in meaning and coverage, use them indiscriminately. It is necessary to bring some order through classification and appropriate nomenclature.
The first task is to find major systems of agroforestry under which the various types or subsystems could be grouped. The above definition of agroforestry shows that the component crops are arranged either temporally or spatially; thus, these two crop arrangements can serve as principal categories, as follows:
Crop rotation system (based on temporal arrangement of crops). As the name implies, this system includes all agroforestry types in which the annual food or cash crops are alternated with tree crops over time. There are in this category two types of crop rotation (see Fig. 1):
 Swidden or shifting cultivation is the oldest known agroforestry practice, dating back to the beginnings of the human transition from the hunting and gathering phase to the plant domestication and cultivation system of livelihood (Myers, 1980). The forest Is cut, dried and burnt to clear the land for planting and to return the nutrients trapped in the forest biomass to the soil to be used by the food crops. Cropping lasts for about two to three years, after which the land is left over a longer period (eight to ten years) to forest fallow in order to rejuvenate the soil (Fig. 1a) and to prepare it for the next cycle of burning and cropping (Sanga, 1978).
 Taungya, which had its origins in Burma in the mid-1880s, was the first "modern" (as opposed to "traditional", as in swiddening) agroforestry practice, it was designed as a low-cost governmental approach to the reforestation of open lands. Farmers are temporarily allotted government lands and contracted to plant desired tree species. While the trees are young and before the canopies close (one to three years, depending on the initial spacing and the inherent crown structure of the tree species), the farmers are allowed to plant food crops whose yields become theirs entirely and are regarded as their compensation for planting the trees. When food cropping is no longer possible, because of shading, the farmers are transferred to another open area where they repeat the process. Meanwhile, the "abandoned" area is by then a well-established forest and will not be cultivated for annual food crops again until the planted trees reach maturity and are harvested.
The rotation between trees and annuals under the taungya system is slightly different from that in swiddening in the sense that there is a temporal overlap between the crops (Figs. 1b and 1c). Another difference is that the tree crop during the fallow consists of systematically spaced and selected tree species rather than those that are randomly capable of natural regenerating or sprouting in an abandoned swidden.
Figure 1: Agroforestry crop rotation system
Intercropping system (based on the spatial arrangement of crops). Under this system, the annual and perennial crop components are simultaneously present on site but are spaced in such a manner that they became mutually supportive rather than competing. Under such circumstances, they may jointly yield higher outputs per hectare per year. Four subsystems are found under this type (see Fig. 2):
 Border tree planting (Fig. 2a) is often found where farmers use lines of trees specifically as boundary markers, live fences, wind-breaks or fire-breaks. These functions complement their services in protecting or stabilizing the site, in producing green manure as organic fertilizer, in producing fodder for farm animals and in producing fuelwood.
 Alternate rows (Fig. 2b) and alternate strips (Fig. 2c) are referred to in the literature as "alley", "avenue", "corridor", "zonal", or "hedgerow" cropping (a "strip" differs from a row in that it is composed of two or more rows). When positioned across the slopes or along the contours, they are found most effective for erosion control and slope stabilization.
 Random mix (Fig. 2d) is a subsystem that displays no specific or orderly placement of the component crops. While the arrangement appears chaotic, the plants actually occupy their own special ecological niches and are able to coexist very well. Many of the home gardens of Indonesia and the Philippines are of this type (Christianty et al., 1982).
Figure 2a: Intercropping system
Figure 2b: Intercropping system
Figure 2c: Intercropping system
Figure 2d: Intercropping system
There is still another group of names that need to be classified. The term "agrosilviculture", for instance, is often seen in many publications and has come to be regarded mainly as a synonym for the broad term "agroforestry". However, in reality, it has a different and more precise meaning than similar compound-word terms such as "silvi-agriculture", "silvipastoral" and "agrosilvipastoral". A closer scrutiny of these terms reveals that the hierarchical order of the component crops in the compound names indicates an order of dominance among those crops. For instance, "agrosilviculture" implies that agricultural crops dominate over forest trees, while "silvi-agriculture" indicates that forest crops dominate. This order of dominance is illustrated in a graph (Fig. 3), where cropping systems are shown as a continuum over which appears a range of varying crop combinations.
Because of the competition for space between the major crops, forestry and agriculture, an increase in area allocated to one of them automatically results in a reduction of the area allocated to the other - provided, of course, that the entire area is always the sum of the two allocations. In Fig. 3, for instance, point A, at the extreme left, shows that 100 percent of the area is allocated to agriculture. Similarly, on the right (point E), the area is wholly assigned to forestry. At any point between these two extremes will be found agroforestry systems with varying ratios of land allocation. At point B, for example, agriculture dominates, so the system is "agrosilviculture". At point D, on the other hand, forestry is the dominant crop, so the system may be properly termed "silvi-agriculture". A situation can arise, as shown in point C, where the crops get an equal share of the land. In that case, either of I the two terms could be used.
Figure 3: Allocation of crop components in agroforestry
The problem with the use of this graph, which attempts to show the integration of the component crops, is that it is only two-dimensional. It is thus difficult to use in multi-component agroforestry, such as when the livestock element is added. To remedy that weakness, another graphical presentation can be used (Fig. 4). While this new graph is able to show more than two elements or components, it is incapable of showing the degree of dominance of the elements involved. The choice of either Fig. 3 or Fig. 4 as a means for classification would depend on what the user wants to illustrate or emphasize.
Figure 4: Three types of agroforestry
Current tropical agroforestry systems
Swiddening as a form of crop-rotation agroforestry is, as indicated earlier, the oldest of the agroforestry systems. In the recent past, when population pressures were low, its practice was tolerated, since the fallow periods between food cropping are sufficiently long to enable the sites to regain their productive capacities, thus making the system sustainable. As pressures mounted, displaced lowland farmers brought and used lowland techniques on hilly lands and drastically shortened or even eliminated forest fallows. The sustainable nature of swiddening was thus lost, with the result that ecological degradation has accelerated both on-site and downstream. Swiddening has thus become a problem of immense magnitude. Almost all tropical countries are now united in condemning and campaigning against environmentally destructive forms of shifting agriculture. Forest policies and enabling legislations and regulations are directed against the forest farmer. Despite these
regulations, however, the farmers persist in practicing swiddening, for want of a more suitable and more acceptable alternative for survival, so the problem has remained.
Taungya, which originated in Asia, achieved some degree of success at the start and was adopted by governments of other countries in equatorial Africa and Latin America. Of late, however, farmers have grown wary of the system because it grants no guarantees of tenure over land, and participants usually have to shift from one location to another every three years. Thus, there has been a decline in the number of participant farmers. The irony is that the more successful the cooperating farmers are in establishing the tree crop, the sooner they will be transferred by the government to another open site. Consequently, some of them are motivated to "fail", and they deliberately cause failures by killing young trees.
Another reason for the decline of taungya is the growing realization among farmers that their "compensation", solely in terms of the yields of their food crops, is less than those of other reforestation workers under normal wage arrangements. Consequently, government projects now have to supplement the "wage in kind" with cash wages. The only exception to this is in places where population pressures are great: here, taungya rights are frequently auctioned.
One important result of conversion from classical to community forestry would be a widened range of cropping systems.
Under taungya systems, the irony is that the more successful farmers are, the sooner they are transferred to another site.
Border tree-planting On good, level lands, where farmers are not beset by extreme problems of site degradation through erosion and runoff and therefore do not require the protective role of trees, the motivation to intercrop with perennials is low, and the desire to use every square metre of good land for food crops is great. Thus, it is normal to find vast areas of level crop-lands almost treeless.
However, border tree-planting as a form of agroforestry on lowland areas is gaining adherents for several reasons. With the rising prices of energy, including biomass energy, farmers are increasingly producing fuelwood for their own use and for sale instead of being dependent on kerosene or other non-wood fuels. Fast-growing, multipurpose trees are planted along property borders; they are lopped off periodically for fuelwood and their leaves are also harvested and used as fodder or as green manure. In addition, normal litter-fall serves as added green fertilizer for the food crops.
Another frequent reason for border planting is the need for permanent fence posts around the farms or home gardens. Live trees used as posts do not require frequent replacements like the untreated cut poles that decay rapidly under humid tropical conditions. And if prices of wire fences that need to be strung between posts become prohibitive, farmers can plan closely spaced trees that themselves serve as a fence or hedgerow.
Alternate rows and alternate strips Because most areas occupied by migrant farmers and earmarked for government agroforestry programmes are "problem" areas in the sense that they are on sloping, degradation-prone lands which need either conservation or rehabilitation, the most favoured agroforestry systems have become the alternate-rows or alternate-strips systems, otherwise known as "alley cropping". The reason is that, as indicated earlier, rows or strips of trees planted close together to form contour hedgerows are the most effective vegetative means to stabilize and conserve soils on slopes. This is almost as effective as terracing, and yet it is much easier and less laborious to undertake. Moreover, if the trees selected are capable of fixing nitrogen and are able to regenerate by coppicing, they could serve as a steady source of organic fertilizer to rehabilitate a degraded site.
Random mix remains to this day the mainstay of the traditional smallholder polyculture systems in much of Asia, particularly in the case of the well-known Javanese home gardens and the coconut-based Philippine polyculture. The multi-tiered crowns of the integrated plants, ranging from root crops through grain crops and small fruit trees (cacao, Lansium) to the dominant coconuts, are close replicas of a multi-level tropical rain forest and represent highly efficient utilization of soil surface, vertical space, nutrients, moisture and solar energy. It is probably for this reason that the system has persisted and remained sustainable in these countries over many decades.
On small landholdings that have not been severely degraded, the random mix system could be introduced and maintained, as in the example of the Javanese home gardens, where farmer plots are often just a fraction of a hectare.
However, for rehabilitating and maintaining wide areas of badly eroded and depleted lands, random mix may not be as effective as, say, contour hedging or alley cropping.
Prospects for a sustainable agroforestry
Both scientific and empirical sources of information have advanced the reasons for the greater stability and higher level of productivity of agroforestry in comparison with monocrops. Using these same scientific bases, modified and improved agroforestry systems can be designed and disseminated among traditional farmers for possible adoption. For instance, random mix home gardens can be modified into contour hedges or alternate rows or alley cropping for better site protection and, eventually, for greater and more steady productivity. Provided that farmers are enabled to participate actively in the conceptualization, planning and development of the agroforestry projects and programmes, they will become more readily inclined to adopt the system and thus move closer toward achievement of ecological stabilization and sustained yields in agroforestry.
WIND-BREAK ON AFGHANISTAN FARM trees bring benefits - but also birds
Bibliography
BENE, J.G. et al. 1977, Trees, food and people: land management in the tropics. Ottawa, IDRC.
CHRISTIANTY. L. et al. 1982, Soil fertility and nutrient cycling in traditional agricultural systems in west Java. Honolulu. Hawaii, East-West Center.
COMBE. J. & BUDOWSKI, G. 1979, Classification of agroforestry techniques. Workshop on Agroforestry Systems in Latin America. Turrialba, Costa Rica, CATIE.
ICRAF. 1983, An environmental database for agroforestry, by Anthony Young. Working Paper 5. Nairobi. International Council for Research in Agroforestry.
KING. K.F.S. 1979, Agroforestry and fragile ecosystems: soil research in agroforestry. Kenya, ICRAF.
MYERS, N. 1980, Conversion of tropical moist forests. Washington, D.C., US National Academy of Sciences.
SANGA, SABHASRI. 1978, Effects of forest fallow cultivation on forest production and soil. In Farmers of the forest. Honolulu. Hawaii, East-West Center.
US NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES. 1982, Ecological aspects of development in the humid tropics. Washington, D.C.
ZAMER-LINDER. M. 1979, Village forestry - a new concept in development aid.
<section>6</section>
Community forestry: Building success through people's participation
Y.S. Rao
Y.S. Rao is Regional Forestry Economist for the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific in Bangkok. This article is adapted from a paper presented at the Regional Workshop on Community Forestry in Korat, Thailand, from 22 to 29 August 1983 and published jointly in 1984 in the proceedings of the Workshop by FAO, UNDP and the Environment and Policy Institute of the East-West Center, Honolulu, Hawaii USA, under the title Community forestry: some aspects.
Forestry management in the past considered only the protective and productive roles of the forest. Now, largely through the birth of the concept of "community" or "social" forestry, it is seriously beginning to consider the forest's social role as well. In this article, Y.S. Rao provides a succinct and clear definition of community forestry, outlines what is needed to make it succeed, and discusses the constraints under which it operates at present. Implementing community forestry, he argues, will require nothing less than a radical restructuring of forestry's traditional policies, practices and institutions.
Forests have historically constituted one of humankind's most important sources of renewable wealth. They perform the indispensable role of maintaining an ecological balance between soil, water, flora and fauna on which life as we conceive it depends. This role that nature ascribes to the forest is often referred to as the protective role.
Forests also provide timber, for a variety of industrial activities essential for human economic survival. They have been exploited and utilized by governments over the years to boost domestic revenues or earn foreign exchange. These aspects represent the productive role of forests.
Traditionally, forestry management practices were based on developing an understanding of the protective and productive aspects of natural forests. Biological, technical and macro-economic considerations received an overriding priority. As a result, forestry management practices generally concentrated on the following:
 Establishing a "legal curtain" between people and forests, with policing the forest estate an abiding obsession.
 Fixing targets for the commercial production of logs and increasing
the forestry output without reference to such questions as who benefited.
 Earning revenues (despite lip-service paid to concepts like sustained-yield production), which resulted in gradual erosion of the resource base itself.
 Practising forestry on government-owned lands exclusively through strategies and programmes developed by government functionaries without consulting "the people".
 Using people only as wage labourers and ignoring their role in safeguarding the resource.
These practices no doubt served a purpose during times when population pressure was low, when society's perception of equity and justice was still unformed, and when biological systems dominated people and society instead of the other way around. But, as the resources diminished and local populations traditionally dependent on natural forests for a wide range of goods grew, forest management practices of the past started losing their relevance. Continued adherence to them resulted in the people living near and around the forests feeling alienated. They could not see how forestry programmes were beneficial to them. Day after day, trucks went past their villages loaded with logs for consumption in urban areas or abroad, no doubt for a good economic reason, but what was left for them to cope with in daily life was a resource that was vastly reduced and a forest that could no longer support their agriculture or provide their daily needs for survival.
In recent years, both internationally and, more particularly, in the Asia-Pacific region, the importance of the social rote of forests and forestry, together with their protection and production roles, has received considerable attention. The need for developing holistic approaches that integrate the protective, productive and social roles of forestry has been recognized. The concept of forestry for development is now widely accepted.
The activities encompassed by community forestry are potentially compatible with all types of landownership.
The assumption that technological progress would automatically "trickle down" to even the poorest rural sections did not prove valid in reality.
The concept of community forestry
Several governments of the Asia-Pacific region have attempted, particularly over the last decade, to crystallize programmes that can loosely be described as "community forestry" or "forestry for local community development" or "social forestry". FAO in 1978 provided a definition of this developing concept of community forestry: Community forestry includes any situation that intimately involves local people in a forestry activity. It embraces a spectrum of situations ranging from woodlots in areas short of wood and other forest products for local needs to the growing of trees at the farm level. It includes the processing of forest products at the household, artisan or small industry level to generate income, and the activities of forest-dwelling communities. It excludes large-scale industrial forestry and any other form of forestry that contributes to community development solely through employment and wages, but it does include activities of forest industry enterprises and
public forestry activities at the community level. The activities encompassed by community forestry are potentially compatible with all types of landownership.
Over the years, the range of activities falling within community forestry has widened considerably. Recent years have seen foresters coming out of "reserved forests" and attempting to bring forests and woodlots to places where there is hunger for wood and other forest products. Foresters "intrude" into the traditional agricultural belts and seek to make space for trees alongside crops. They invade town centres and cities and plant trees in vacant spaces, seeking to create an "urban-rural interface". Foresters are trying to intermingle trees with people. They are practicing their profession, to a greater degree than ever before, in areas close to where the vast majority of people live.
Requisites for success
Community forestry is practiced in widely different settings. An analysis of these situations suggests a number of conditions necessary for its successful implementation, and a number of constraints. Forestry systems for rural communities will seldom succeed unless the people concerned are persuaded of the systems, usefulness. It must be apparent to the people that the benefits to be obtained are relevant to them and are sufficient to justify their participation. Some of the important requisites include:
 political commitment;
 an assessment of rural needs;
 appropriate technical solutions;
 a system of incentives;
 suitable rural institutions;
 supportive organization;
 an extension network;
 research support.
Political commitment Forestry for rural community development will vary enormously between countries, depending on the ideologies and resources of governments, the type of society and the locality. Certain considerations, however, are likely to apply to most countries. First, there must be a commitment by government to the development of the rural sector, and especially to those parts where the poorest people live. As emphasized by FAO's World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development (1979), this may require the redistribution of resources in favour of rural areas. Second, some restrictions of landownership may be necessary, involving legislation relating to land tenure. Third, it is essential that forest development take place with the full involvement and participation of the rural people, with programmes emanating from the bottom up rather than being imposed from the top down. Finally, because forestry is usually a long-term process, it requires a long-term
commitment.
WORKERS ON A COMMUNITY FORESTRY PROJECT a need to involve people at all stages
Assessment of rural needs The first necessity is to identify the needs of the community through consultation with the people themselves, and to decide on the possibilities that exist, taking into account the environmental conditions. Needs should be met in a way that will bring maximum benefit to the greatest number of people.
A survey will be required within the area under consideration. The area should be something well defined, such as a watershed or a group of villages. The survey should focus on the physical and biological environment - climate, soil, vegetation, land use; on the existing forest and forest-related resources; on wood use, wood needs and market prospects; and on the community itself, including social systems, land tenure and feeding habits. The people should be involved as much as possible in the survey.
As fuelwood is an important item in the requirements of rural communities, it should be a major constituent of the survey. A further need is to find out what uses the rural population makes of forest produce other than wood - for example, fruits, seeds, nuts, edible products from palms, fungi, honey, bush meat or fodder for livestock. Information will also be required on any forest activities that provide employment or are income-earning - for example, resin-tapping, harvesting fusser-silk, collecting seeds, pods or bark for tannin, or collecting those parts of plants that are used for medicinal or economic purposes.
Appropriate technical solutions In some ways, conventional forestry solutions suffer from orthodoxy. They are conceived by technicians and imposed dictatorially or conferred paternalistically upon people.
What is often forgotten by professionals is that people who are living in rural environments have a good understanding of the complexity of their problems. They may think in a more interdisciplinary way than many scientists, although not in a purely scientific manner. Therefore, it is appropriate that technical solutions are worked out with the people and not for them.
The principle should be to modify normal land-use practice as little as possible and to manage land for the production of various combinations of crops, including both trees and food crops. A significant example of early experiments in community forestry is the work of Perum Perhutani in Java, where new and intensive land-use practices have made an important contribution to land management. It has been demonstrated that it is possible to successfully combine systems of agriculture and forestry: producing fodder crops within forests for cattle, or growing fuelwood while simultaneously rearing silkworm and providing nectar sources for bees to make honey and wax.
The major guidelines for finding appropriate technical solutions in the practice of community forestry can be summarized as follows.
1. When there is competition for forest land:
 intercrop trees and crops;
 allocate forest land rationally between trees and crops;
 improve non-food benefits to forest communities - forest and forest industries employment, secondary forest product income, etc.
2. When there is competition for crop or grazing land to afforest:
 plant trees on roadsides, riverbanks, field boundaries and other unused areas marginal to crop production, or on erodible areas unsuitable for crop production or grazing;
 improve productivity on the more arable areas in order to release land for tree-growing:
 plant multi-purpose species or mixtures of species to increase productivity;
 intercrop trees with other crops or combine with grazing;
 introduce additional sources of income (e.g., bee-keeping).
3. When the output from trees will not meet immediate needs:
 plant multi-purpose species, or mixtures of species, that give some early returns;
 provide financial support during the establishment periods - low-interest loans, grants, subsidies, wage employment, etc.;
 introduce or expand complementary non-forestry sources of income;
 adopt forestry systems that do not compete with peak demands for labour.
4. When there is no forestry tradition or an unfamiliarity with the necessary techniques:
 provide guidance and support through extension services, education, technical advice and inputs, grass-roots training, and demonstration projects.
A system of incentives The overriding need for income to meet everyday needs means that rural people cannot afford to invest in activities from which the returns would accrue only after an interval of some years. Therefore, some way must be found to provide the community with income until the trees are harvestable. This may be achieved by external support during this period in the form of wages or some other type of cash payment (as in Gujarat, India). Alternatively, it may be achieved through growing multipurpose species or mixtures of species that, in the form of fodder or fruits, produce some saleable produce from the first year onwards.
Another alternative is to introduce additional sources of income to the community at the same time as forestry activities are introduced. Direct credit is another means of financial support. But most developing countries have their experience in rural credit linked directly with cash-crop and food-crop cultivation, and there is no experience in organizing credit for such "non-traditional" activities as tree-crop cultivation. There is a need to devise mechanisms for accelerating the flow of credit to tree farmers.
Subsidies and grants given at the initial stages of raising a plantation provide inducement for small farmers to cover the cost of land-clearing and land preparation. Exemption from forest charges, land tax, irrigation rates and revenue tax can also be operated as incentives. Tax concessions can also be provided for diverting the investment resources to rural areas, thereby enlarging employment opportunities in the rural sector.
A further incentive is that of crop-sharing, whereby the community provides the land and the necessary labour while the forest services or a private company provide the seedlings, fertilizers and technical assistance. When the crop is harvested, the net profit is shared in proportion to the inputs.
Other incentives include the free supply of seeds and seedlings, including transport costs; the provision of hand tools for planting, or fertilizer or food aid (such as the World Food Programme is providing in many countries); and free medical services, water-supply systems or building materials.
Besides these direct inputs relating to tree-planting, social inputs are also necessary to help tree farmers living in areas far removed from the traditional village environment. The construction of village roads and the provision of irrigation, schools, cooperatives and dispensaries are some of the inputs that can be considered. The improvement or establishment of these social inputs not only benefits tree farmers in their efforts but also assists in integrating community forestry with the development taking place in other sectors. The promotion of cottage industries directly linked to tree-farming, agriculture and sericulture is another example of specific programmes being combined to increase rural income and employment opportunities for community prosperity.
Marketing based on demand and supply may not be very effective in a rural situation, because of the nature of consumption patterns in rural societies. Thus, fuelwood, trees, fodder, fruits and grass that are gathered free of cost from community forests and consumed or used locally may not be offered for sale even if there is demand elsewhere. It is essential to devise alternative marketing mechanisms to enable villagers to sell surplus products at remunerative prices.
Suitable rural institutions It is now well recognized that the "acceptance" and "spread" of technical innovation take place in a structural context about which too little is known. The assumption that technological progress would automatically spread or "trickle down" to even the poorest rural sections did not prove valid in reality.
Though the approach to local development must involve existing institutions, such structures can at the same time constitute an impediment to change. They may reflect the interests of the rich rather than the poor members of the community. Therefore, the formation of new local organizations should be encouraged. Farmer associations (like those in the Republic of Korea) and non-governmental organizations could play an important role, and their involvement should be sought at an early stage.
The possible contribution of forest industries to community forestry should not be forgotten. Where forestry can be introduced as an income-generating activity, industry can contribute directly to local forestry programmes through assuring markets and providing technical support (as happens in the Philippines). Tax exemptions or loans could serve as an incentive.
The relationship of local people to the surrounding forests and to community forestry will certainly be influenced considerably by the prevailing form of land tenure. It may be necessary to re-examine and change existing forest tenure in order to encourage local people to have greater involvement in the management and utilization of the forests. Communal and cooperative ownership of forests seeks to resolve the problem of the restricted availability of land for community forestry. In a sense, the Chinese tenurial system followed by the communes, production brigades and production teams contains the essential ingredients of a communal and cooperative ownership system that ensures that the productivity of the land and the returns made on the land are equally shared by the society.
Forest cooperatives could be organized at the level of a village or group of villages or at that of groups of settlers and forest owners. They may be concerned primarily with planting trees and harvesting the available forest produce, but they could also expand to processing and marketing to ensure maximum benefit to the community.
There must be a commitment by government to the development of the rural sector, and especially to those parts where the poorest people live.
Supportive organization
Supportive organization Fundamental changes will be needed in attitudes, in training methods and in the structure of forest services in order to orient activity more toward the needs and aspirations of rural communities. A special branch concerned with community forestry, extension and training may have to be created at various levels within the forest services, and additional staff are likely to be required so that frequent contact can be maintained at the village level. Staffing requirements, which may include specialists in disciplines other than forestry (social scientists, for example), will have to be assessed carefully. It has to be borne in mind that "bringing forestry to the aid of rural communities" is not so much a technical problem as an institution al, social and political one. Therefore, changing the attitudes of government officials through training and education and providing an appropriate institutional and organizational structure to foster communication
with rural people is of prime importance for the promotion of community forestry.
Existing institutional and administrative structures have been found to be inadequate to achieve these new objectives. Forestry education systems have by and large produced some excellent technicians. But to provide leadership in adopting a socio-technical approach, forestry as a technical science should be combined with the social sciences.
Given the magnitude of community forestry programme required to meet rural needs, part of the responsibilities for management should eventually be transferred from the government to the rural communities. To this end, key persons in rural communities should receive training in essential aspects of social forestry through programmes that make use of training methods such as short courses, field visits, practical demonstrations and carefully prepared documents.
An extension network The skills and requirements of community forestry staff, especially field staff, are narrower than those of conventional foresters in fields such as silviculture and engineering but much broader in subjects such as sociology and extension. Therefore, the bulk of community forestry staff need not have received the conventional forestry training. Rather, forester positions should be filled by extension workers familiar with rural society. They may be given short courses in plantation establishment before they are assigned to community forestry. Extension workers are supposed to act as messengers who both carry innovation to the farmers and bring farmers, problems back to the researchers.
CHILDREN IN A THAI FOREST VILLAGE forestry can bring a better future
A community forestry programme should also be concerned with the development of supporting materials for extension workers, provide them with information about relevant species, equipment and techniques, and develop new information where this is needed.
Research support In a programme like community forestry, which is constantly evolving and adapting itself to differing needs, perceptions and situations, the scope for research support is enormous. Areas of research likely to be relevant to community forestry include sociology, species introduction, soil improvement, farming and silvicultural systems, systems for combined agriculture and forestry on a long-term basis, joint forestry and grazing, product utilization, identification of new sources of income, development of technology, economics of production, and soil and water conservation.
Constraints
The most obvious constraint is that the time-scale of forestry is bound to conflict with the priorities of the rural poor, which are logically focused on meeting basic present needs. Land, labour and other resources that could be devoted to providing the food, fuel and income needed today cannot easily be diverted to the production of wood that will be available only many years hence. Forestry can continue to exist or be introduced at the community level only if it allows for the real present needs of the rural poor.
In several countries, forestry is still awaiting a berth in integrated rural development programmes and in community development projects. Forests and their benign influence on the improvement of the environment are often taken for granted, and conscious efforts are not made to develop forestry as a "land use" to benefit local communities. Most land-use systems in operation today have their thrust toward food production only. Mono-crop cultivation for food and cash requirements becomes the rule. Lands that are not suited for cash-crop or food-crop cultivation and that cannot be provided with irrigation facilities come to be identified as suitable for forestry development. Such lands awaiting development are far away from the normal settled village environment and devoid of institutional and social infrastructure. Public and local institutions servicing these development efforts cannot easily be persuaded to shift or enlarge the area of their operations to bring forestry into
their sphere of activity.
CHILDREN IN A THAI FOREST VILLAGE forestry can bring a better future
Security of tenure of land is another important constraint. Unless the farmers (or community) are assured that the trees will remain theirs at the time of harvesting, they are unlikely to cooperate. In many situations, therefore, it may be difficult to insert forestry before a more far-reaching reform of land tenure or change in land use is effected.
The lack of a tradition of managed forestry in most developing countries contrasts with the strong tradition of agriculture. Even when such essential items as fuelwood or building poles are scarce, hostility may still persist to forests and trees as harbourers of birds and other wildlife that damage crops. The attitude, based on the past abundance from the forest, tends to be inimical to managed forestry. It is difficult for rural populations to appreciate the results of forest destruction until actual hardships develop. To persuade them of the beneficial effects of managed forestry will be equally difficult and will often require a profound change in attitudes and behaviour.
Any voluntary solution presupposes confidence on the part of the population and imaginative sympathy for the local way of life on the part of the instigators of development. There are other constraints that arise from the bureaucratic structures associated with the process of change, such as rigid procedures, strict interpretation of rules, arrogance of petty officials and inadequate training at lower levels. There is also the tendency for the responsibility for the rural development effort to become fragmented, with lack of coordination among different bodies.
The traditional preoccupation of forestry with conservation and with management objectives focused on the production of wood for industry has little relevance to the needs of the rural people. This bias is reflected in the structure, staffing and budgetary priorities of forest administrations and in the training of foresters. If forestry is to contribute to the bettering of the conditions of the rural poor, a radical reorientation, extending from policy to the very technical foundations of the discipline, will be needed.
<section>7</section>
Logging and people: The social dimension of forest utilization agreements
Richard D. Pardo
Richard D. Pardo is a specialist in forestry legislation and policy in the Forest Resources Branch of the Forestry Department, FAO, Rome.
FLOATING CHINESE LOGS TO MARKET can some benefits be returned to locale?
In the past, foreign logging companies often entered a forested area in a developing country, removed the timber and left. The local people got very little, if anything; in fact, they sometimes lost much of what they originally had. Now, however, governments are increasingly handling contracts with foreign and domestic logging firms in a way that will benefit local people. This article reviews relevant recent legislation in developing countries and outlines the elements that should be present in any logging agreement.
In many developing countries, especially those in which forest land is primarily owned or controlled by the government, forest harvesting is accomplished through utilization contracts in the form of concessions, logging permits and similar contractual agreements between the government and the logging company.
In the early stages of forest development, governments frequently disposed of timber on vast tracts of public lands through unsophisticated legal instruments that granted seemingly unlimited harvesting rights to foreign logging companies in return for revenues that were far lower than the value of the timber being logged, and with only minimal consideration of impacts on the rural people (Leslie, 1980). This was partly a result of colonialist exploitation policies and partly due to a lack of capital, expertise and experience on the part of the governments themselves.
Times are changing Governments are becoming more experienced and more sophisticated in the way in which they use forest utilization contracts. Many countries either have developed or are in the process of developing modern timber-concession laws, regulations and agreements that are positive instruments of social and economic development instead of merely being contracts to "mine" timber for what looks like a quick profit.
A common feature of most of these new measures is a recognition of the needs of the rural people living in or near concession areas - people who depend on the forest for products and services and whose very way of life may be intimately linked to the forest environment. In the past, their interests were often either ignored or treated superficially, on the theory that benefits would automatically flow to them from economic utilization of the timber. In too many cases, the actual economic benefits that did reach the people were far outweighed by the loss of more intangible benefits connected with customary rights of forest usage, traditional ways of life, and opportunities for local utilization of resources.
If forest harvesting policy is truly to enhance the lives of the rural population, five basic factors must be considered in the granting and supervision of concession agreements:
 The provision of such infrastructure for local populations as schools, roads, water supply and health facilities.
 Recognition and protection of customary rights of forest usage.
 Involvement of the rural people in forestry enterprises.
 Follow-up land-use programmes (agriculture, reforestation, grazing, etc.).
 Participation of the people in the planning of forest development schemes affecting their lives.
This article reviews some recent trends in legislation, regulations and practices in these five important areas of forestry concession and utilization.
Provision of infrastructure
Roads One of the most direct means of improving the conditions of people living in or near large concession areas is by providing services or facilities that may be lacking.
Often the area in question is un-roaded or served by a primitive and frequently impassable road system. Timber utilization requires a dependable road system capable of moving logs to the market. At the same time, these roads can provide access to markets previously beyond the reach of isolated villages and populations, enabling the people to develop new outlets for their crops and handicrafts and other forest products such as honey, mushrooms and fuelwood.
Roads may also improve opportunities for off-farm employment, thereby helping to alleviate growing problems of rural unemployment. For many rural families, even those with access to farmland, additional income is needed to maintain an adequate standard of living. Development planners now realize that the provision of non-farm employment in rural industries (including forestry enterprises) is a necessary component of rural development. Roads make access to such jobs possible for many people.
Whether or not the roads are intended primarily for use by the local people, they will be used by the people in any event. This fact should be incorporated in the planning for the road system design, and, to the extent feasible, the road network should be planned to serve the needs of the people as well as the needs of the logging contractor. For example, if two equally feasible alternative access routes to the concession area are possible, the one that best also serves the needs of the people should be selected, other things being equal.
Conditions under which roads are to be open to public use should be stipulated in the concession agreement, following consultation between the government, the grantee and the people involved. Active logging roads may have to be closed to public access for safety reasons during certain periods. Compliance with such closures will be more likely if the local people are consulted and know they are being considered in the road planning.
Provision can also be made to favour local road users. A typical concession agreement in Fiji, for example, provides that charges may be made for road use by heavy commercial vehicles "except those transporting any produce of the land within the concession area", thereby providing free use to local growers moving their products to the market.
Logging roads are notorious as attractive places for landless farmers and shifting cultivators to clear roadside plots for crops. This must be planned for in advance, and, before the concession is granted, decisions must be made about how to deal with the problem. If the land is reserved forest, encroachment is probably illegal under most existing forestry laws. But building the road creates an inviting opportunity of which land-hungry farmers will quickly take advantage, in spite of the law. In fact, it is not uncommon for land-seekers to follow forest road survey crews in order to scout out the best potential crop-land in advance. If serious encroachment is expected, then the need for land is obviously serious. In that case, it may be best to accept this need and accommodate it, even to the extent of allocating usage rights to predetermined areas suitable for agricultural crops rather than attempting to prohibit encroachment. This may require an amendment in the basic
forest-reserve law.
Many countries are developing modern timber-concession laws that are positive instruments of social and economic development instead of merely being contracts to "mine" timber for what looks like a quick profit.
Man at work
Services A safe and adequate water supply is also a top priority for many rural villages, as are health facilities and schools. More and more countries are requiring the grantees of larger industrial concessions to provide these types of facilities as a condition of the concession agreement.
In some cases, the grantee itself is responsible for building the required facilities, with the services to be provided by the appropriate government agencies dealing with education, health, sanitation and so forth. In other cases, the grantee is required to pay a fee - usually based on the volume of timber involved which is then used by the national or local government to provide the facilities and services.
For example, a standard contract agreement used in Indonesia for large-scale concessions requires the grantee to establish a place for worship, provide communications facilities for use by the regional government, make electricity available to the community, participate in site development and low-cost housing construction, provide medical services for employees and make them available to others in the community at low cost, and provide educational facilities.
In the Republic of Cameroon, licences for logging must by law include a clause providing a contribution for social services and facilities. The fee is fixed annually by the finance law and accrues entirely to the area's local governing council. Use of the funds for other purposes is prohibited.
Equatorial Guinea also includes a requirement for the building of services and facilities. The Central African Republic requires grantees to build roads and set up schools and health facilities for the local populations.
No matter who builds the facilities, local officials and the rural people themselves should be involved in the planning, siting and construction of the facilities to ensure that what is provided is what the people need and will use.
Facilities may be built at existing village sites, or where populations are scattered. The siting of roads, water supply and schools can be used to establish a new village as a first step in concentrating scattered encroachments into an organized community. Community meeting halls for social and religious purposes, adult classes and similar purposes may also be included when a new village is established or if such facilities are needed in existing villages.
ALPINE LOGGING it could fill many local needs
The forest village concept has been widely used in Thailand as a means of stabilizing populations and improving farming practices while at the same time providing off-farm work in afforestation and reforestation programmes of the Forestry Department and the Forest Industry Organization. While these programmes are not directly related to the granting of timber-harvesting concessions, the concept of forming villages to improve living standards and reduce shifting forest encroachment can also be applied in the case of large timber concessions, since the ultimate object is the same: to provide services to the local people in an area where sustainable production of food and forest resources is the aim.
The forest village concept was first used in Thailand by the government-owned Forest Industry Organization, in conjunction with the establishment and maintenance of commercial forestry plantations. The idea was subsequently adopted by the Royal Forestry Department as a means of rehabilitating reserved forest areas that had been heavily encroached upon by landless farmers. Rather than being evicted, and driven to clear additional forest land illegally, the farmers are given the opportunity to join newly established villages. Land is allocated to each family for a house and a home garden and for food production. The remaining area is then rehabilitated as productive forest, villagers being employed in the reforestation programme.
The same concept may be applicable in the case of forest concessions where serious encroachment is anticipated. Lands appropriate for agriculture can be identified in advance, villages established and rural people made a part of the post-logging land use by design rather than by uncontrolled encroachment.
Protection of customary rights
In many cases, a forest concession will include areas in which local people have traditionally exercised certain customary usage rights, such as the right to collect fuelwood or to harvest domestic building materials, fodder and non-wood products for personal use, free of charge. These may be unwritten traditional rights or well-established written rights contained in the laws of the country.
Consideration of these rights and the protection of them, to the fullest extent compatible with timber-harvesting and management plans, should be a component of any basic forest-utilization legislation and a requirement of the concession agreement.
In many developing countries, ownership of the land itself is held under customary law, so that the people who occupy the land are also the landowners. Where this is the case, the basic forestry laws usually recognize and protect these rights as a matter of course, even though the administration of the land may be vested by the same law in the government, acting as trustee or agent for the customary owners.
In other cases, the ownership of the land is vested in the government, but people living in or near the forest may have been treating the forest as their own for the purposes of gathering fuelwood, cutting small poles for domestic use, grazing cattle, hunting, fishing or gathering non-wood produce and materials for tools, utensils, etc. Whether these rights are exercised as a right or simply because they have been tolerated, they are rights the loss of which could have serious negative impact on rural ways of living. If timber utilization is to benefit the local people, it must be managed in such a way as to allow the continuation and perhaps even the intensification of these rights. To simply extinguish them because a timber concession has been granted is to ignore one of the principal benefits of forest to the local people.
Therefore, before a concession is granted, the rights of usage must be identified in cooperation with the local people, and an acceptable plan for maintaining and protecting - even enhancing - these rights must be developed.
Enhancement can be accomplished by such means as providing easier access to the forest, furnishing information on minor forest products and improved production and, where opportunities exist, helping to set up marketing mechanisms for cash-income sales of suitable non-wood products.
Administration of usage rights should be a cooperative effort between the forestry department, the representatives of the local people and the grantee. The grantee's role would be relatively passive in the enforcement and supervision of the rights, but the grantee must be involved in the planning of the programme in order to be fully aware of its own responsibilities and the rights of the people, which must be respected during the logging operation. There should be no opportunity for the grantee to abuse the rights by claiming ignorance.
In the drafting of an agreement, the specific rights, the area in which they are allowed and the people to whom they apply should be clearly defined. Forest uses such as gathering fuelwood, fodder, wildlife and minor and non-wood products are often compatible with timber management programmes, and need not be restricted except where safety may require limited access to active logging areas. Eligibility to exercise the rights can be monitored through the issuing to eligible individuals of free identification cards or tags things that can be carried easily and spot-checked by those supervising the forestry operations. The objective is not to prohibit all unauthorized exercise of usage rights, which would be impractical if not impossible, but rather to give the local people a means of asserting their rights if a question arises.
If shifting cultivation has been practiced in an area that has been designated for reforestation or continued management of the secondary forest, these rights may have to be compensated for, either by assigning other suitable lands for cultivation or by awarding monetary compensation for the extinguished rights. Forest grazing is another commonly practiced customary right that may have to be limited or prohibited in an area designated for continued forest production. Here again, compensatory measures must be provided.
Current laws recognize customary rights in a number of ways:
 Cameroonian law provides that the holder of a forest exploitation licence may not prevent the exploitation of produce that is collected in the traditional manner.
 The forestry law of Peru provides that subsistence uses of the forest are generally admitted free of charge, while industrial and commercial uses are subject to a system of contracts and permits.
 In Indonesia, grantees must recognize traditional land rights and privileges, particularly people's right of entry to collect certain species for their own purposes and to exploit minor forest products.
Involvement in forest enterprises
The employment of local people in woods operations, in processing facilities and in various aspects of reforestation, such as nursery work and tree-planting, is a standard requirement in most concession agreements, along with a requirement for the training of nationals in at least basic skills to make them employable in the logging operations.
In Indonesia, for example, the standard concession agreement requires the grantee to employ nationals to the extent that qualified people are willing and available; and to conduct vigorous recruiting and training programmes for nationals.
These requirements need to be carefully assessed, in fairness to both the grantee and the potential employees. If the labour force is simply not available, or is limited or constrained by other commitments, such as family obligations or seasonal farm work, this should be determined before building unrealistic requirements into a concession agreement.
If these employment obligations impose a financial burden on the grantee that might not otherwise exist, this should be recognized and appropriate compensatory incentives provided to ease any substantial added costs imposed on the grantee.
Employment and training requirements are also often written into concession agreements where the building and operation of domestic processing facilities are a condition of the concession. Domestic processing agreements serve three purposes: they provide employment opportunities for nationals; they encourage the development of a sustainable domestic processing capability; and they increase the value the host country gains through log-processing rather than log export. Again, before the granting of the contract, a survey of personnel and training needs must be conducted by the government, the grantee and local people in order to determine accurately the requirements - or at least general principles - for employment and training in processing. It should not automatically be assumed that local people will be willing or able to take a new and unfamiliar job just because it is available.
Beyond these basic employment and training considerations, there is also a need to provide opportunities for local people and other nationals! to become involved themselves in forest utilization enterprises. This is being done in a number of ways, primarily through the setting aside of small areas for small-scale operations that can be worked by local loggers, but also by providing access to credit for the purchase of simple sawmilling and logging equipment.
In the Congo, harvesting contracts used in the case of nationals with limited financial means simply require that the operator have a mobile sawmill with which to process the timber.
In Equatorial Guinea, the Government designates "communal forests" within reserved forest areas, to be used under customary rights by forest-dwelling populations. The area reserved is limited to four hectares per person. Eight percent of the wood harvested for the communal forests must be used locally; the other 20 percent can be removed and used outside.
In Gabon, special permits are issued for harvesting for local consumption. Other small-scale permits are issued to families or reserved for nationals with financial means to develop the area. Larger concessions are issued for industrial logging, but 75 percent of the timber must be processed locally.
In encouraging such activities, care must be taken to avoid poor logging and sawmilling practices, leading to soil and timber damage or underutilization of timber.
To ensure that local processors have adequate supplies of desirable species, a number of countries place high export taxes on logs of certain high-value species in order to encourage domestic processing.
Local lumber needs can be met in another way. Concession agreements used by the Native Land Trust Board (NLTB) in Fiji, which operates as agent for the landowning units of nationals, require that up to 25 percent of the sawn lumber processed from a concession on lands owned by nationals be sold, if requested, to members of the landowning unit for domestic use. NLTB logging permits, used for small-scale harvesting operations, provide that a variable amount of sawnwood may have to be provided free of charge to landowners, although the amount is negotiable.
Another way in which timber-harvesting and forest-utilization agreements and arrangements can contribute to the development of rural areas is through the establishment of logging companies and processing plants in which the majority of the equity financing comes from the government and from private national investors.
Normally such operations will be relatively small-scale and devoted mainly to providing products for the domestic market, since large integrated operations normally require more capital than is available through government or private national financing.
Papua New Guinea has used this approach in establishing Forest Development Corporations in which 75 percent of the equity is held by the Government and nationals and the other 25 percent is held by an outside investor-management company which actually operates the timber-harvesting and processing.
In Fiji, the Fiji Pine Commission (FPC) operates as a Government-financed forest development corporation, growing and harvesting pine crops on land leased from customary local landowners. As the landowners begin to receive income from the processing of the timber, the hope is that they will gradually invest it in the purchase of FPC shares, so that eventually the corporation will be wholly owned by the landowners themselves.
Follow-up land use
Forest harvesting that is not followed up by planned land use of some sort, or that is not part of a comprehensive forest management plan, is little more than timber-mining. The negative impact is felt most directly in those cases where the forest is held under some form of customary or communal ownership for the benefit of local groups, who may find themselves left with nothing but a degraded forest. But, even where the land in question is totally under central or provincial government ownership, to fail to provide for adequate land management after harvesting is to deprive future generations of resource production and use.
If follow-up actions are to be effective, the planning must be done before the concession is let, for two reasons. First, if planning shows that follow-up activities are not likely to happen, for economic, political, social or other reasons, there is time to defer the harvesting until such time as reforestation or other land management techniques can be applied. Second, unless the planning is done before harvesting, it may never get done. After the timber has been cut and removed, it is difficult to bring much leverage to bear on the company or agency responsible for the follow-up activities. This can best be done, and commitments obtained, before the concession is granted. This is especially true where the government is negotiating a concession agreement with a large and experienced company. The government is frequently in a weaker bargaining position than the company (less expertise, less experience, political pressure to deal with, etc.). Being able to withhold permission
to harvest while the all-important question of responsibilities for follow-up land treatment is worked out is one of the government's most effective negotiating tools.
HIMALAYAN VILLAGE IN PAKISTAN It owns 60 percent of the forest
Reforestation is one of the most obvious follow-up activities. Here one of the major questions is: Who will be responsible for reforestation - the grantee, or the government? Many early utilization contracts placed the responsibility on the grantee, usually because the forest department in many developing countries had neither the staffing levels nor the expertise to carry out reforestation. Trusting the grantees proved risky in many cases, and often resulted in a minimal effort at best or - in many cases - total failure. For this reason, the trend in more recent years has been to place the responsibility with government, either in a unit of the forestry department or, in a number of cases, in separately established government reforestation agencies, such as those in the Republic of Cameroon, the Congo and the Ivory Coast, to cite several recent examples.
Reforestation programmes are commonly funded by a specific reforestation tax levied on the concessionaire. The reforestation tax should be set on the basis of reforestation costs, rather than being tied to product prices, otherwise reforestation will be ignored or jeopardized when timber prices are low. Just how much of the anticipated cost of the new timber crop should be charged to the harvested timber is a difficult question. Certainly, at least the initial cost of growing the seedlings, preparing the site and planting the trees should be a direct cost against the harvested timber, or subsidized to the extent that there are sufficient funds to establish the new tree crop under favourable conditions for survival. Otherwise, the land is merely being mined.
Reforestation may not be the appropriate use for land following harvest. This will be revealed in land-use planning prior to granting the concession. Some areas may be best suited for agricultural uses, including settlement schemes or agroforestry and agrosilvipastoral programmes. Funding should be established for these activities, as well, before the concession is logged.
People's participation
People's participation has become a key component of most rural development programmes. Experience has shown that unless people are involved in planning new practices for introducting new technologies, they are seldom motivated to adapt new ways as their own in a way that will last. The results of failure to involve the local people from the beginning are often the waste of time and money on the part of the government and development agencies, and a rural population no better off than before.
Where timber utilization programmes are concerned, public participation takes on added significance. Failure to protect the interests of rural people likely to be affected by timber-harvesting can leave them worse off than before, create confrontation and mistrust between local people and concessionaires, and generally disrupt hopes of optimizing benefits for all concerned - government, concessionaires and local people (De'Ath, 1980).
The degree to which the interests of governments, concessionaires and local people can be harmonized will vary from case to case. But if the interests of the rural people are to be fully considered, mechanisms and procedures must be established to give representatives of the local people a voice in timber development planning from the earliest stages. This can be through village or tribal institutions or through special advisory committees established for each specific project. The exact method to be used will vary from country to country, depending on the particular social, political and legal structures of the country.
Whatever the procedure chosen, it should seek to provide a meeting ground for the government, the grantee and the local people to work together in the planning of the utilization programme. Otherwise, the most carefully worded concession agreement will have little real value as an instrument of rural development in its full sense.
AMAZON FOREST DWELLER a need to protect indigenous rights
Conclusion
In many developing countries, utilization agreements between government and private investors will continue to be one of the primary methods of timber-harvesting and processing. In many cases, timber development and forest management will have a direct impact on the lives of the rural people living in or near the forest areas. If these people are truly to benefit from the utilization of the forests, steps must be taken to consider their needs and interests in the execution of forest concessions. In this regard, many developing countries are modernizing their forestry legislation, regulations and agreements to provide for the provision of socioeconomic infrastructure, protection of traditional usage, involvement in forest enterprises, follow-up land use programmes and people's participation in project planning and administration.
Finally, it must be recognized that legislation and regulations are only one component of the complex rural development process. The rural development "landscape" is littered with the wreckage of projects that have failed to live up to expectations or to meet the needs of the people, for a variety of reasons.
Legislation must be backed by strong government institutions that have well-trained field personnel able to deliver technical services to the people when and where needed. Local organizations representing the target population to be served must be organized and assisted in their role in the political and social give-and-take of the development process. Planning systems must be developed that will integrate competing land-use demands and mitigate conflicts. Methods must be devised to balance short-term needs with long-term goals. And, not least of all, forestry must make a sustainable economic difference to the rural communities - either directly, through appropriate forestry enterprises, or by increasing the productivity of the land for food crops, livestock and other necessities.
Sustaining the people who depend on forests cannot be separated from sustaining the forest resource itself.
References
DE'ATH, C., 1980, The throwaway people: social impact of the Gogil Timber Project, Madang Province. Boroko, Papua New Guinea, Institute of Applied Social and Economic Research.
LESLIE, A.J. 1980, Logging concessions: how to stop losing money. Unasylva (FAO), 32 (129): 2-7.
<section>8</section>
The world of forestry
Forestry filmstrips from FAO
Teak improvement in Indonesia
A Philippine forestry journal
USA burns more wood at home
Chile's forest economy
New forest film
The world of forestry
Forestry filmstrips from FAO
FAO, in cooperation with ministries of agriculture and forestry and field projects in several regions of the world, has produced more than 150 educational filmstrips to date, including 38 in the area of community forestry and conservation. All filmstrips can be ordered from Distribution and Sales Section. FAO. Via delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy. A catalogue describing the filmstrips available can be obtained from the same address.
The filmstrips, some in colour and some in black and white, sell for US$8.00. This price includes a printed commentary. A filmstrip with a recorded commentary (where available) costs $12.00. Extra copies of the printed commentary arc $1.00 each.
Filmstrips are either single frame (18 x 24 mm), which are projected vertically, or double frame (24 x 36 mm), which are projected horizontally. (Automatic filmstrip projectors can utilize only single frame, whereas manually operated slide projectors, most of which are equipped with detachable filmstrip carriers, can take either.)
VILLAGERS SHARING THE WORK a potential audience for FAO filmstrips
The 38 filmstrips available under the heading of "community forestry and conservation" include 13 on watershed management and upland conservation, 5 each on conservation techniques and community forestry, 4 on fodder species. 3 on useful tree species and 8 on soil improvement and organic recycling.
Filmstrips on watershed management and upland conservation include the following:
1. The chief's message, produced in northern Ghana (3 parts, single frame [SF]. 62 minutes, in English).
2. Comment conserver sa terre, produced in Haiti (SF, c. 15 min., in French).
3. Erosion en Tunisie (SF. c. 10 min., Fr.).
4. A good land forever, produced in Honduras (SF, 26 min., Eng./Fr./Spanish).
5. Gracias a la tierra, produced in Honduras (SF, 20 min., Sp.).
6. If the land dies, produced world-wide (2 parts. SF. 34 min., Eng./Fr./Sp.).
7. Integrated watershed management, produced worldwide (SF, 21 min., Eng./Fr./Sp.).
8. Mi aldea, ayer, hoy y maana, produced in Honduras (SF, 27 min., Sp.).
9. Nuestro bosque, produced in Honduras (SF, c. 21 min., Sp.).
10. Soil conservation: a hard lesson to teach, produced in Ethiopia (SF, 18 min., Eng./Fr.).
11. Una vida mejor, produced in Honduras (2 parts. SF, 52 min., Sp.).
12. Why the forests must be saved, produced in Ethiopia (SF. 14 min., Eng.).
13. Why the soil must be saved, produced in Ethiopia (SF. 15 min., Eng.).
The following are among the titles available on conservation techniques:
1. Brushwood check-dams, produced in Nepal (double frame [DF]. c. 10 min., Eng.).
2. Contour bunds, produced in Ethiopia (SF. 16 min., Eng./Fr.).
3. Protection des ravines par les seuils de pierres sches (SF. c. 10 min., Fr.).
4. Terracing (part one): terracing for better crops, produced in northern Thailand (DF. 13 min., Eng./Fr./Sp.).
5. Terracing (part two): constructing and maintaining terraces, also produced in northern Thailand (DF, 13 min., Eng./Sp./Fr.).
On community forestry, these filmstrips are available:
1. The buffalo must eat every day, produced in Nepal (SF. 20 min., Eng.).
2. Establishing a forest nursery, produced in Nepal (DF, c. 10 min., Eng.).
3. Extension in forestry for local community development, produced world-wide but emphasizing the Asia-Pacific region (SF, 21 min., Eng./Fr./Sp.).
4. Reboisement communautaire sur terrains privs, produced in Haiti (SF. 21 min., Fr.).
5. The women of Monte-alegre, produced in Honduras (2 parts. SF. 42 min., Eng./Sp.).
On the subject of fodder species, filmstrips available are as follows:
1. Fodder shrubs, produced in North Africa (DF, c. 15 min., Eng./Sp./Fr./Arabic).
2. Pigeon pea, rhodes grass and napier for soil conservation, produced in Ethiopia (SF. 17 min., Eng./Fr.).
3. Spineless cactus, produced in Tunisia (DF, c. 8 min., Eng./Fr./Sp./Arab.).
4. Tropical legumes and grasses, produced in northern Thailand (DF, c. 20 min., Eng./Fr./Sp.).
On useful tree species, there are these titles:
1. Bamboo, produced in China (SF. 15 min., Eng./Fr./Sp.).
2. Cunninghamia, produced in China (SF, 17 min., Eng./Fr./Sp.).
3. Leucaena, produced in the Philippines (SF, 21 min., Eng./Fr./Sp.).
On soil improvement and organic recycling, available are:
1. Biogas in China, produced in China (SF, 21 min., Eng./Fr./Sp.).
2. Biological nitrogen fixation, produced in Brazil (SF. 19 min., Eng./Fr./Sp.).
3. Coffee pulp: a good fertilizer, produced in Colombia (SF. 16 min., Eng./Fr./Sp.).
4. Compost (African version), produced in Zaire (DF. c. 5 min., Eng./Fr./Sp.).
5. Compost (Thai version), produced in northern Thailand (DF. 11 min., Eng./Fr./Sp.).
6. Lower costs, higher yields, produced in Brazil (SF, 16 min., Eng./Sp./Fr.).
7. Uses of coffee pulp, produced in Colombia and Costa Rica (SF, 30 min., Eng./Fr./Sp.).
PLANTING TEAK IN JAVA an effort to improve quality
Teak improvement in Indonesia
Indonesia is one of the few countries in the world possessing teak forests, and teak wood is the main product of Perum Perhutani, the state-owned timber company. About 500000 m^3 of timber is produced annually. Since 1978, the area exploited by Perum Perhutani for teak has been about 8000-10000 ha annually. Generally, the area consists of former clear-felled areas while, before 1978, teak cultivation was also carried out on bare-lands, so that the extent of annual cultivation was about twice that of the present.
Almost all of the teak wood production comes from plantation forests, while natural teak forests are decreasing from year to year as they are replaced by plantation forests.
Javanese teak wood from both natural and plantation forests has stems whose shape and quality are as good as those of Thailand or Burma teak. Teak wood obtained from plantation forests even tends to be smaller in diameter and less productive per hectare than that obtained from natural forests. In addition, the increasing population growth in Java causes increasing demands for agricultural land. The consequence is that the teak forests in Java are rapidly decreasing while people's wood demands are Increasing.
Thus, it is necessary to strive for increasing teak wood production per unit, improving its stem shape and quality and also enhancing its resistance to the attacks of pests and diseases. The way to include all these aspects is tree improvement.
A crucial factor in teak improvement is seed quality. Perum Perhutani, with this in mind, has established a clonal seed orchard. For this purpose it is necessary to select "plus-trees'', namely teak trees having superior characteristics. Although plus-trees can be found in natural and plantation forests. Perhutani selects only from plantation forests because of the certainty of establishing the age difference between the candidate trees and the average comparison trees. Age determination of each tree in natural forests cannot be done easily and quickly.
In 1981, an action programme was set up aiming at:
 assigning and then managing seed production areas in the right way;
 selecting at least 30 teak plus-trees;
 establishing clonal seed orchards which will shift the location of seed production areas in the future;
 more efficient use of seeds in cultivation.
Plus-trees can be found in natural as well as plantation forests, but, in order to facilitate the work, they will be sought in 15 year-old and older plantation forests. In selecting plus-trees by using the North Carolina State University system, the candidate plus-trees will be awarded a score against the five best surrounding trees. One of the conditions is that the age of the candidate plus-tree should not be more than three years greater than the average age of the comparison trees.
A clone bank has been established to store plus-tree genotypes. It is not used for obtaining seeds. Therefore, it is placed on visited locations that are level and safe, with an extent of about l-2 ha. Plant distance is 6 x 6 m, and each plus-tree is planted at least 10 times.
In the future, the clonal seed orchard will be the only seed source. It is estimated that the seeds can be taken after seven to ten years. To some extent, as the clonal seed orchard grows older, more seeds can be taken. According to one estimate, in the first year one seed orchard can produce only 1.3 kg of seeds per hectare per year, in the second. 4.5 kg, and after eight years. 35.7 kg.
Compared with other countries that have teak forests, Indonesia has been left behind in carrying out teak improvement. Considering that teak is Perum Perhutani's main income source and that the condition of its teak forests is threatened by the increasing population density on the island of Java, the execution of the teak improvement becomes more and more urgent.
Condensed from an article by Hartono Wirjodarmodjo and Petrus M. Soebroto which appeared in Duta Rimba. July-August 1983.
FILIPINO FORESTRY WORKERS a new magazine for them
A Philippine forestry journal
The Philippine Society of Foresters (formerly the Society of Filipino Foresters) has begun publication of a new quarterly forestry journal, entitled Tropical Forests. The first issue. 36 pages long with troth colour and black-and-white photographs, reprints the keynote address given by President Marcos at the First ASEAN Forestry Congress, held from 10 to 15 October 1983. Other articles include "Management of natural forests'', by Edmundo Cortes; "Industrial forest plantations: the future of ASEAN timber", by Dat Muhammad Jabil; "Forestry the Ifugao way", by Ramon Dacawi; "The Ikalahan experience: a forest-dwelling people's journey on the rugged terrain of development", by Delbert Rice; "What does more responsive forest research mean?", by Teodoro Q. Pea; and "Look again, forester, at this thing C they call social forestry, now", by Charlz P. Castro.
The announced goal of the new magazine is to carry "full-length and readable items written by ASEAN specialists on different topics of interest in forest management, social forestry, parks and wildlife, the wood industry, forest products, forestry education, tropical ecology, forest research, people participation in forestry and the conservation movement".
Accompanying the release of the new journal is the change in the name of the organization - from the Society of Filipino Foresters, Inc., to the Philippine Society of Foresters. Inc. This change, writes Society president Edmundo Cortes, was adopted so as not to "discriminate against foresters of neighbour countries who opt to associate with Filipino foresters". Another reason, he says, is "the common desire among Filipino foresters to be more active and relevant in international forestry circles''.
USA burns more wood at home
A USDA Forest Service survey confirms that stoves, fireplaces and furnaces in US homes now burn more wood than at any time since the Second World War. In 1981, residential wood-burning required 152.5 million m^3 (over 42.5 million standard US "cords"), which is four to five times the amount burned 10 years ago. This is about one-fourth of the quantity of wood used for all other wood products in the United States.
Approximately 5500 US households were surveyed to measure the recent increase in residential wood-burning and analyse sources of fuelwood.
The results show that one-fourth of all US households burned fuelwood in 1981 and that three-fourths of all the fuelwood was cut by home owners who find it within short distances of their homes.
Households that tended to burn large amounts of wood included those where the head of the household was between 35 and 44 years old, those with higher incomes (almost half of the households with an income of over US$40000 burn wood, primarily in fireplaces) and those living in rural areas.
Eight percent of all US households, or one-third of wood-burning households, used wood as their main heating fuel. They burned an average of 12 m^3 in one year and used about one-half of all fuelwood. Households using wood as a supplemental heat source burned about 3.6-5.5 m^3 each, and those burning wood in a fireplace mainly for enjoyment used about 1.8 m^3 each year.
If a single company were responsible for all fuelwood sales, it would rank among the 500 largest in the United States. Nationwide, the sales value of fuelwood was $620 million in 1981. It was purchased in amounts as small as an arm-load or as large as a 62 m^3 lorry-load. Prices per cubic metre ranged from about $110 for small amounts to $14 or less for loads larger than 10 m^3. The average cost of one delivered cubic metre was $19.56.
Wood-burning provided only 2 to 3 percent of the US home heating requirement in 1981. Although the energy contained in fuelwood was 9 percent of the level of energy contained in other heating fuels, only 30 percent of the energy in wood was converted to useful heat. The conversion rate is low, partly because much of the wood was burned in inefficient fireplaces. The result is that fuelwood displaced only 2 to 3 percent of other heating fuels.
Concern about the impact of harvesting so much fuelwood exists on the pulpwood markets. The survey results suggest that competition for the same resource is not strong in most areas and that three factors limit the effect of fuelwood on pulpwood markets.
First, only one-fourth of the fuelwood was actually purchased. The other three-fourths was cut at zero cost by individuals, half of whom found it within 10 km of their home. Second, more than three-fourths of the fuelwood came from trees that are seldom used for other products. Third, prices for large quantities of delivered fuelwood were not much higher than prices for similar quantities of delivered pulpwood. In addition, hardwoods make up 95 percent of the fuelwood in the eastern United States and 42 percent in the west, while softwoods are preferred for pulping. The complete survey is available from US Department of Commerce, NTIS, 5285 Port Royal Road. Springfield, VA 22151. The publication number is ADA 131724, and it costs $16.00 in hardback and $4.50 in microfiche.
Kenneth E. Skog
Madison, Wisconsin
RADIATA PINE PLANTATION IN CHILE a steady reforestation effort
Chile's forest economy
In the 20 years since its establishment, the Chilean Forest Institute (INFOR) has helped to develop a planted area of one million hectares, according to Executive Director Patricio Valenzuela (Chile Forestal, June 1984).
This means, he says, that the forest industry must have an annual growth rate of 12 percent. Such growth will entail more private investment in factories and more state investment in infrastructures. In addition, he says, "We shall have to seek markets for the new products being planned". To this end INFOR has made exhaustive studies intended to "improve economic information on forestry activity".
The first of these studies "enables us to know energy, infrastructure, population and other needs for different areas of the country", Valenzuela said. A second study, which grew out of the first one, was completed at the end of 1983. This study, concerning economic fulfilment of the forest potential, "not only analyses the investment needed to achieve utilization of all our forests but also discusses the respective infrastructure requirements that would be involved in transport, both internally and abroad".
Coordination of private and state investments, acquisition of foreign markets, and an improvement in product quality are the determining factors which. Mr Valenzuela said, can make Chile's forest sector "one of the pillars on which the country's development must rest".
New forest film
The Society of American Foresters (SAF) has written and produced a film for lay audiences, entitled To work with the forest. It is 14 minutes long and plays on a 16-mm projector. A non-technical film, it briefly introduces the audience to the work of a professional forester. Picturing foresters at work in various settings - government agencies, corporations, universities and private consultations. It also attempts to explain the rationale behind the land-management practices adopted by foresters.
To work with the forest can be purchased for US$125. It is available only in English but has already been purchased by government agencies and forestry organizations in such non-English-speaking countries as Mexico, the Federal Republic of Germany. Brazil and Japan. Nearly 400 copies of the film have been distributed, primarily to schools, colleges and civic organizations.
Those interested in purchasing the film should contact Philip V. Petersen, Director of Information, SAF, 5400 Grosvenor Lane, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.
<section>9</section>
Books
Looking in depth at agroforestry
Mapping Africa's vegetation
China takes stock of its land
A directory of forest history
Where in the world to find honey
Cataloguing protected areas in tropical America
A wealth of nuts
The future of the Paraguayan Chaco
Wood energy in Asia
Measuring African trees
Looking in depth at agroforestry
Plant research and agroforestry. Peter A. Huxley, ed. Proceedings of a consultative meeting held in Nairobi, 8-15 April 1981. Nairobi, International Council for Research in Agroforestry (ICRAF). 1983. 617 p.
"In agroforestry." writes Peter A. Huxley in the preface to this book. "the more complex plant associations, and the wide range of plant-environment interactions that are possible, make it essential that we understand how, and to what extent, the major growth and development processes will be modified by a change of species, climate, soil and management."
Plant research and agroforestry, which contains the proceedings of a meeting on this topic held in Nairobi, marks an effort to understand these "major growth and development processes". The result is an extensive collection of articles, 34 in all, ranging from the highly technical to the more general. The book is likely to become a standard reference for the specialist in the field - in part because of the considerable bibliographic material contained in the separate essays - but it can profitably be read selectively by the non-specialist as well.
Part 1, entitled "Plants and agroforestry: some examples", contains 12 articles, ranging from the highly regionalized (e.g., "An attempt to quantify some current agroforestry practices in Costa Rica", by G. Budowski) to the more generic (e.g., "The intercropping of grain legumes in agroforestry systems", by J.F. Redhead. J.E. Maghembe and B.J. Ndunguru). Part 2, "Understanding agroforestry systems'', contains 9 articles, including one by H.A. Steppler and J.B. Raintree which outlines the strategy adopted by ICRAF in relation to plant science research in agroforestry. Finally, part 3 brings together 13 different articles under the heading "Applications of plant science to agroforestry".
The volume also includes a list of participants, summary reports of the four working groups, an index of plant names and a subject index.
SUGAR CANE IN GABON a new map of Africa's vegetation
Mapping Africa's vegetation
Vegetation map of Africa/The vegetation of Africa. Three map sheets and one sheet for general legend, plus descriptive memoir by Frank White. Natural Resources Research Series, no. 20. Paris. Unesco. 1983. 356 p.
This new map prepared by Unesco is presented with a 350-page descriptive companion text. Map and text are designed to serve both as a lasting reference and as a research and teaching tool in biology, geography and related environmental fields.
Made up of three sheets - northeastern, northwestern, and southern Africa - the map is drawn to a scale of 1:5000000. A legend in English and French to the 80 major vegetation types and mosaics depicted is included.
The vegetation map of Africa was compiled by the Association pour l'tude taxonomique de la flore de l'Afrique tropicale (AETFAT), in collaboration with Unesco and the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office (UNSO).
Dr Frank White of the University of Oxford wrote the map's companion memoir, The vegetation of Africa. The volume's 22 chapters describe the vegetation of the main floristic regions of the African mainland as well as Madagascar and other offshore islands. Included are a bibliography of over 2400 items and an index of nearly 3500 plant species.
The preparation of the map with an accompanying memoir provides several valuable cross-reference advantages to the researcher, while preserving a unified, readable map presentation. The classification used for the vegetation map is based almost entirely on the physiognomy and floristic composition of the vegetation, while the text provides climatic maps for each of the major phytogeographic regions. Vegetation and climate are dealt with separately.
The two interconnecting and fully cross-referenced systems of classification can be used independently, or in tandem. In the legend the mapping units are grouped traditionally, according to physiognomy, while in the text they are grouped by the floristic regions in which they occur. The legend permits easy comparison of African vegetation with that of other continents, while the text deals effectively with complicated spatial and dynamic relationships.
The written account of African vegetation is introduced by brief chapters dealing with geology, climate, soils, animals, fire, and use and conservation. The vegetation of the main floristic regions is described individually. For each region, the salient features of the flora, geology and climate are described, and a black-and-white map is provided. These ancillary maps illustrate topographic features mentioned in the text and summarize the regional climate by means of climatic diagrams. For each of the main vegetation types, references to source materials and other important publications, published photographs and profile diagrams (if available), as well as major synonymy, are given.
The bibliography includes all works consulted during the compilation of the map and the writing of the descriptive memoir. The index gives the names of nearly 3500 plant species, together with their major synonyms. The index alone provides an introduction to ecological information on virtually all species playing an important part in African vegetation.
The map and book can be ordered from:
 Australia - Educational Supplies Pty. Ltd., Box 33 Post Office, Brookvale 2100, New South Wales (price Aus$60.00).
 Canada - Renouf Publishing Co., 2182 St. Catherine Street W., Montreal. Quebec H3H 1M7 (Can$95.00).
 United States - Unipub, 1180 Ave, of the Americas, New York, NY 10036 (US$92.00).
 United Kingdom - HMSO, P.O. Box 276. London SW8 5DT (37.50).
CALIFORNIA LOGGING OLD-STYLE a directory of forest history museums
China takes stock of its land
Land resources of the People's Republic of China. Kenneth Ruddle and Wu Chuanjun, eds. Resource Systems Theory and Methodology Series, no. 5. Tokyo, the United Nations University. 1983. 84 p. Numerous tables, maps, graphs, figures.
No complete, official land survey has yet been made for China's vast territory of 9.6 million km^2, although one is now under way under the auspices of the Institute of Geography of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. The present volume marks a point of critical evaluation and reconsideration along the road to completion of this enormous task.
It contains nine papers presented by the Chinese participants at the international conference on Land Use Evaluation and Classification, with Special Emphasis on Wetlands, sponsored jointly by the United Nations University and the Chinese Academy of Sciences and held in Beijing and Heilongjiang Province from 15 to 25 September 1980. The book is organized into two sections, the first containing six articles on land-use evaluation and classification and the second comprising three papers on the wetlands of Heilongjiang Province in northeast China.
"In many ways", the authors write in a preface, "this book may be regarded as a measure of current geographical research in the People's Republic of China, since it embraces the main themes emphasized at present, namely agricultural regionalization, land evaluation and classification, and physical geography. It is significant, too, that a large percentage of the contemporary national research effort has been directed at incorporating marginally productive and geographically peripheral areas more fully into the national economy, a direction exemplified here in all nine chapters, but particularly those dealing with northeast China."
Currently only 14.6 percent of China's land area is being cultivated, while 40.8 percent is being grazed, 8.6 percent is under forests, 7.0 percent is used for industry and urban purposes, 6.6 percent is for "other uses" and much of the remaining 22.4 percent is either high, barren desert or under permanent snowfields. Thus, of a present total of 1.4 thousand million ha cultivated, only 32 million ha - 2.3 percent - has been ploughed under since 1949, despite a strong government effort to increase the agricultural land base. An additional 43 million ha of land may be suitable for reclamation and farming, but this is probably far less than is needed.
Faced with such a situation, government planners need to move carefully to maximize what limited resources are available. To do this requires a thorough knowledge of the land; hence the national land survey - and this book.
A directory of forest history
Forest history museums of the world. Compiled by Kathryn A. Fahl. Guides to Forest and Conservation History of North America, no. 6. Santa Cruz, California, Forest History Society. 1983. 75 p. Price: US$7.50.
A total of 314 museums in 33 different countries are included in this illustrated directory devoted to the world's forest history museums. A forest history museum is defined as one "devoted wholly or in major part to the representation of man's historic use of the forest and its many products". This definition allows, for example, the Black Forest Museum in Lossburg in the Federal Republic of Germany, a regional museum featuring peasant culture in general, to qualify for inclusion in the directory. Roughly half of the museums listed are solely devoted to forestry, while the rest are multi-purpose museums.
Entries are arranged alphabetically by country, state or province, and city. Each entry is accompanied by collection descriptions as well as useful additional information regarding tours, publications, library and archival holdings, and other facilities. We learn, for instance, that India's Assam Forest Museum in Gauhati is "a science and technology museum featuring specimens of timber, bamboos, canes, agarwood, and their products. Examples of ivory and lacquer works, cane and bamboo carving, and plywood and composite wood are shown. Other exhibits include a medicinal herb collection, displays of resin and turpentine production, photographs of forests, and various charts and maps".
It is clear from this book, that forest history museums: are primarily a phenomenon of industrialized countries, particularly in North America. Nearly half of the listings (150) come from the United States and there are 45 from Canada. Among developing countries, India, with nine forest history museums, is far and away the leader; following it are Brazil with four, Burma and Pakistan with two each, and Argentina, China and Uganda with one each. Among industrialized countries outside North America, the Federal Republic of Germany leads with 20, followed by Austria and Japan with nine, Finland and the German Democratic Republic with six and Czechoslovakia and France with five.
A WORKER ON THE PRODUCTION LINE honey and beeswax generate income
Where in the world to find honey
APICULTURE CENTRE IN TUNISIA established with FAO assistance
Directory of important world honey sources. Eva Crane, Penelope Walker and Rosemary Day. London, International Bee Research Association (IBRA). 1984. 384 p. Price: 27.50 sty. or US$44.00 ( 19.50 and $31.25 to members of the International Bee Research Association).
Honey is a minor forest product with which virtually everyone is acquainted but about which there is relatively little systematic knowledge. Directory of important world honey sources is a book new in concept, in contents and in method of preparation. It identifies 467 plants - from a preliminary selection list of 2569 that are reported, somewhere in the world, to be a major source of the honey produced there. Some of the honey sources are geographically widespread, like lucerne (alfalfa) and many of the eucalypts; others are confined to a single area, like Plectranthus which grows only on certain slopes of the western Himalayas.
The major part of the directory consists of the main entries for the honey sources selected for inclusion: 452 nectar-producing plants and 15 honeydew-producing plants. For each honey source, details are given (as far as is known, and quantified where possible) of the plant, its economic uses, flowering period and nectar or honeydew flow, its honey and pollen production, and the honey's chemical composition and physical properties, including flavour, aroma and granulation. The directory also contains a list of "candidate plants", which might have been eligible for inclusion if more information were available about them.
This new reference book will be of special value all over the world to honey producers, traders and dealers; bee-keepers; nutritionists and sugar chemists; and scientists and other specialists in applied biology, horticulture, agriculture, agroforestry and environmental sciences.
The large amount of useful information presented in an accessible form in the directory should be especially effective in improving honey production in developing countries. It is hoped also that scientists and bee-keeping specialists will be prompted to obtain data that the directory shows is still lacking. IBRA will run further search programmes to compile satellite directories containing relevant information on special groups of plants. Practical ways are discussed in which additional material can be added to the data bank and made available to those who need it.
The directory includes a bibliography of 820 items, and three indexes to main entries: synonyms of plant names, the names of insects producing honeydew, and 1350 common names of plants.
The work has been funded by the International Development Research Centre, Ottawa. The book can be ordered from the International Bee Research Association, Hill House, Gerrards Cross. Bucks. SL9 ONR, UK.
COCONUT TREE IN SRI LANKA Investigating the world's edible nuts
Cataloguing protected areas in tropical America
The book of edible nuts
IUCN directory of neotropical protected areas. IUCN Commission on National Parks and Protected Areas (CNPPA). Dublin, Tycooly International. 1982. 434 p. Part of the book are in Spanish an/parts in English.
The IUCN directory of neotropical protected areas is a useful and interesting book. But it is a strange hybrid, lying somewhere between a computer-generated book of data and a full-fledged reference book. To use it effectively, one must possess good technical reading ability in both Spanish and English, as the descriptions of individual protected areas alternate irregularly and somewhat mysteriously from Spanish to English and back again. The title is misleading, since the book concerns only tropical areas in Latin America, the Caribbean and the United States. Only later, in the foreword - the title doesn't help us here - do we learn that this is the first in a series of directories which will be updated periodically. It is a book that cries out for maps but what few maps the book does contain are rather rudimentarily drawn.
Within these limits, however, the book will repay hours of browsing or serious study. It is clearly an indispensable reference for anyone interested in the subject of natural areas.
For each area, we are given a set of information in specifically delineated areas, beginning with each area's "management category" and "biogeographical province", terms which are amply explained in the introduction. There follows information on legal protection, date of establishment, geographical location, altitude, total area, land tenure, physical features, vegetation, noteworthy fauna, zoning, disturbances or deficiencies, scientific research, special scientific facilities, principal reference material, staff, budget, local park or reserve administration, the name of the coordinator for CNPPA (the Commission on National Parks and Protected Areas of the IUCN) and finally - and importantly - the exact date on which this information was gathered.
The entries are admirably brief and to the point. In describing the "disturbances or deficiencies" at the soon-to-be-established Rserve naturelle de Basse Mana in French Guiana, for instance, the authors write:
Traditional hunting would be allowed over all but 2000 ha of the reserve. There is some risk of disturbance from an agricultural project (rice). Natural sea erosion is lowering the turtle-nesting areas creating dangers from flooding, and consequent death of the eggs.
It is to be hoped that, over time, as subsequent volumes and revisions appear in what promises to be a long, ongoing cataloguing process, the deficiencies seen in the first volume will be corrected. The project is being funded by the World Wildlife Fund in cooperation with Unesco and UNEP, as a contribution to the Global Environmental Monitoring System (GEMS), and it certainly merits being continued.
Robert Wazeka, Rome
A wealth of nuts
The book of edible nuts. Frederic Rosengarten, Jr. New York, Walker and Co. 1984. 384 p., 370 photos and illustrations, 135 recipes. Price: US$35.00.
As increasing importance is placed upon the role of forests and trees in food production and food security, such "minor" forest products as nuts are beginning to assume more and more importance throughout the world. And, as a result, they are now being studied more carefully. This book is one example, as the vital role of nuts in the evolution of the world's food supply is outlined by Frederic Rosengarten, Jr, himself an experienced nut-grower.
Rosengarten discusses the botany, ecology and methods of cultivation for 12 major nuts: almonds, Brazil nuts, cashews, chestnuts, coconuts, filberts (hazelnuts), macadamia nuts, peanuts, pecans, pistachios, sunflower seeds and walnuts. A supplementary section discusses 30 other nuts, ranging from acorns to watermelon seeds, in more detail.
The book of edible nuts explains how nuts are grown, harvested and processed all around the world - although the emphasis is clearly upon the United States. It also contains nutritional information and 135 recipes for appetizers, main courses and desserts incorporating various types of nuts. Also included are a bibliography, recipe index, glossary and general index.
The future of the Paraguayan Chaco
El Chaco, gran desconocido de nuestro tiempo. Horacio S. Sosa. Asuncin, Ministry of National Defence. 1979.
Desarrollo regional del rea paraguaya del Proyecto Pilcomayo. Pilcomayo Project, final report, vol. 1. Asuncin, Government of the Republic of Paraguay/OAS. 1982.
Dr Horacio Sosa was the first to point out, as early as 1979, in El Chaco, gran desconocido de nuestro tiempo, the need for a social and economic development programme in the Chaco region of Paraguay. The author, who knows the region thoroughly, worked out a development plan based on the human factor and the land itself. He suggests that the Chaco first be divided into areas, and that specific objectives and priorities based on appropriate studies and investigations be established for each area. He also suggests that this development be based on a suitable social and physical infrastructure, which will need not only a legal and institutional framework but also corresponding assistance and planning.
Shortly afterwards, in 1980, the Government of Paraguay, in collaboration with the Organization of American States (OAS), established the Pilcomayo Project for the development of 40 percent of the western region on the left bank of the Pilcomayo River. The purpose of their report, published in 1982, is to formulate specific proposals for action. This first volume gives a summary of the results up to that time, consisting of a group of integrated sectorial actions covering the production, infrastructure and service sectors.
Lastly, in 1983, the first phase of the Project for Integrated Regional Development in the Paraguayan Chaco was completed. It was summarized in the document Desarrollo regional integrado del Chaco paraguayo, prepared by the Government of Paraguay and the Regional Development Department of OAS. The study describes the Chaco's natural and human resources and the infrastructure and services provided to the population and production there. To achieve the integrated socioeconomic development of the Chaco in Paraguay's national context, the study recommends an option that involves making use of the available resources according to the different sectorial components in the region. The second phase of this project will consist of formulating practical proposals for action in the future.
Wood energy in Asia
Wood energy development: Report of the FAO/ESCAP Regional Workshop in Bangkok, 13-16 December 1983. Bangkok, FAO/UNDP. 1984. 119 p., 8 colour photos.
This document is a report of the December 1983 Asia region workshop in Bangkok on wood energy development. Sponsored by FAO's Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific and the UN Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, the workshop produced a series of resolutions, reproduced in the report, on each of the seven discussion topics.
The volume also includes the background papers for the discussion topics, which included (1) the current situation and programme regarding fuelwood in the region, with special reports from Bangladesh. India, Indonesia, Nepal and Thailand; (2) management of existing fuelwood resources; (3) creation of new resources; (4) improvement of wood energy use, and problems and potentials in charcoal manufacture; (5) substitution possibilities; (6) research; and (7) regional cooperative measures.
Measuring African trees
Measuring African trees
Measuring trees and forests: a textbook written for students in Africa. Michael S. Philip. Morogoro, University of Dar es Salaam. 1983. 360 p., 64 figures. Price: 21.00 stg.
This book, published by the University of Dar es Salaam but printed by Aberdeen University Press (Scotland), is written specifically for students in Africa and uses, whenever feasible, examples from the tropics. It is designed to assist students in understanding the principles and mathematical procedures followed in making forest inventories. The book includes chapters on measurements, measuring single trees, measuring tree crops, forest inventory, statistical principles in forest inventory, site assessment and forest growth models.
<section>a</section>
Environment
New hope for the panda
Upgrading environmental journalism
Controlling dangerous chemicals
A register for consultants
Paraguay's national parks
Good news on desertification
Bad news on desertification
Environment
New hope for the panda
Giant pandas are surviving threats to their bamboo food supply far better than was expected a year ago, according to Dr George Schaller, co-director of the China-World Wildlife Fund panda research project in Sichuan Province.
When bamboo began to flower and die in 1984, scientists feared a recurrence of the bamboo die-off of 1974-76, when 138 of the 1000 pandas remaining in the wild starved to death. Last winter only about 20 pandas were found dead and not all died of starvation. New research has established that at least some bamboo species eaten by pandas were available in most areas, and that the pandas range farther in search of food than was thought. Agriculture and logging are cutting into panda habitats. The germination of bamboo is poor in logged areas. Some pandas are caught in snares set for musk deer. And many pandas live outside the protection of China's 12 panda reserves.
"Although the present bamboo die-off is turning out to be less serious than the last one, life for the panda is a continuing crisis." Dr Schaller said. "We are only beginning to collect reliable data on the feeding and breeding habits, nutritional levels and movement patterns of the panda. And we must develop a sound management plan for the pandas and their forest home. This work must be maintained and even strengthened for years to come."
A CHINESE PANDA IN WINTER an Improving food supply
Upgrading environmental journalism
In order to promote more and better environment and science journalism in developing countries, various agencies are involved in new publishing and training projects which aim at building awareness among the public and the media about the links between environment, resources and development.
Recent developments include the following:
 The Pan-African News Agency (PANA) will launch Science and Technology Bulletin. Cheick Ousmane Diallo, PANA's Director, made the announcement in Nairobi on 20 September 1984. The Bulletin will seek to inform "the people of Africa" on scientific and technological development, know-how and benefits.
 PANA, with sponsor IDRC (the International Development Research Centre), held a 10-day Science and Technology Reporting Workshop for 16 journalists from English-speaking Africa.
 Earlier this year. PANA held a similar workshop in Dakar, Senegal, for francophone African writers.
 Earthscan held a workshop for environmental journalists in mid-November 1984, also in Nairobi.
 Last year, UNEP provided 49 percent of the funding for a US$61000 Latin America/Caribbean regional information programme implemented by Inter Press Service, which operates the IPS Third World News Agency. That programme's objectives included the on-the-job training of 32 journalists and the production of 60 news and news feature articles by the 19 IPS bureaux in the region.
 On 18 September, IPS announced the launching of a two-year NGO Communications Project with the support of SIDA (the Swedish International Development Authority). The ultimate aim is to test the feasibility of the interconnection of world NGOs North and South and bring about "new flows of information and structures of communication".
Ecoforum News Alert
Controlling dangerous chemicals
The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) has adopted a global information scheme for all exports of banned or severely restricted chemicals. UNEP Executive Director Mostafa Tolba hailed the move as a significant step toward increased health and environmental safeguards in the Third World.
Implementation of the plan will depend upon the active participation of the UN International Register of Potential Toxic Chemicals (IRPTC), which will act on request as a broker of notification for exporting countries that wish to contact importing countries concerning the change in legal status of a particular chemical.
Global guidelines for the exchange of information on potentially harmful chemicals were discussed by a UNEP-sponsored experts, group at Noordwijkerhout, Netherlands, from 26 to 30 March 1984. UNEP sees the formation of these guidelines as a first step toward a full-fledged convention.
The 29 experts from both industrialized and developing countries attending the Noordwijkerhout meeting were particularly concerned that potentially dangerous chemicals, notably pesticides which may already be restricted in their countries of origin, are freely sold in other countries where there is a lack of awareness of their risks.
Three major issues emerged at the meeting:
 The scope of guidelines regarding the categories of chemicals that should be included.
 Whether the guidelines should, in any way, control trade.
 Whether the guidelines would, in fact, be redundant, because of the work already done by FAO (on an International Code of Conduct) or OECD (on information supplied on banned or restricted chemicals by OECD exporters to importing countries).
A register for consultants
A consultant register is being compiled by the International Institute for Environment and Development (IIED) and the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN). The list will be composed of individuals who wish to become involved in short- to medium-term technical assistance consultancies in developing countries.
The groups are soliciting resumes from qualified scientists with at least three years of postgraduate work. However, neither listing nor employment is guaranteed.
Those interested in being included may send a resume to Stephen Berwick. IIED. Suite 800. 1319 F St., NW. Washington, DC 20004. USA.
Paraguay's national parks
National parks are valuable for the protection of renewable natural resources, says Dr Rosa Villamayor in an article published in the Revista Forestal (October 1983), since they are areas containing unique characteristics of a country's biogeographic regions as well as being stores of genetic resources and places of special recreational and educational interest.
The conservation and protection of Paraguay's national parks receive support not only from state and private sources but also from many international organizations. The main national organizations concerned are the Ministry of Agriculture, the National University in Asuncin, and the Ministry of Defence, while the private sector includes such associations as the Boy Scouts and the indigenistas (groups concerned with the indigenous populations) of Paraguay. The leading international organizations that provide assistance are the UN and the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN).
Paraguay's parks, reserves and national forests cover an area of 1121441 hectares and include Tinfunqu National Park and Wildlife Reserve, 280000 ha; Ybycu National Park, 5000 ha; Defenders of Chaco National Park, 780000 ha; Cerro Cor National Park, 5538 ha; Jakui Protected Forest, 1000 ha; Nacunday Protected Forest, 1000 ha; Caaguaz National Park. 6000 ha; Saltos del Guair National Park, 900 ha; Kuriy National Reserve, 2000 ha; Cerro Lambar National Reserve Area, 3 ha; and Teniente Enciso National Park, 40000 ha. Each park has a specific purpose such as the protection of hydrographic basins, bird and mammal preservation and the conservation of ecosystems on plant protection.
Good news on desertification
Thousands of young Algerians between the ages of 19 and 21 are planting trees to help check desertification while simultaneously fulfilling part of their military service obligation. The success of the 10-year-old programme has caused other African countries to request information on how it works, according to Jean de la Gurivire in Le Monde (13-14 May 1984).
All Algerian men are required by law to devote two years to military service from the age of 19. The programme is divided into two parts: six months of basic military training, and 18 months of "national service activities", for which reforestation work is one option. The conscripts receive between 6 and 24 weeks of special training for the reforestation work and earn a diploma upon completion. The forestry activity has also proved popular with Algerians living abroad, who often choose to come home to complete their military service by doing reforestation work in Algeria - where they are taught Arabic as well as forestry skills.
Much of the reforestation takes the form of "green belts". Present work is focused on the region between Djelfa and Laghouat, where Aleppo pine (Pinus brutia) is the dominant tree being planted. Near Bou Saada, however, planting is being done with palm trees. While the programme has generally been successful, a few failures have been reported, owing primarily to bad species choice.
TREE-PLANTING IN ALGERIA assistance from the military
Bad news on desertification
The 1977 UN Conference on Desertification in Nairobi warned that poor irrigation was a major factor in desertification. A new report by Earthscan, however, charges that little corrective action has been taken in the eight years since the Conference, and that arable land is being lost at an even faster rate today than it was a decade ago.
The report, Cropland or wasteland: the problems and promises of irrigation, says that much irrigation being practiced in the world today is "bad irrigation" in that it wastes water, increases soil erosion, spreads Water-related diseases at a faster rate and encourages the overuse of pesticides. The result, the report claims, is that crop yields have been reduced on half of the world's land and that 25 million ha of irrigated land - about 12 percent of the world's present total of 215 million irrigated ha - has been taken out of production.
UNEP, according to the report, now admits that its goal of stopping desertification by the year 2000 is "unrealistic". Executive Director Mostafa Tolba calls the agency's own assessment of action against desertification since the 1977 Nairobi Conference "depressing reading".
The 97-page report, which includes three pages of references, is available from Earthscan, 10 Percy Street. London W1P ODR, UK.
IRRIGATION FOR EUCALYPTS difficulties in halting desertification
The only international forestry magazine: Unasylva 4 issues per year
Unasylva - an international Journal of forestry and forest industries
ORDER FORM to be mailed to:
Distribution and Sales Section
FAO - Via delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome - Italy
or to any of the FAO Sales Agents listed on the Inside black cover.
Please enter my subscription to Unasylva for a period of one year (Price: $10.00 *)
* For subscription rates in your currency check with your local FAO Sales Agent.
Name ______________________Street _____________________________
Occupation _________________City __________Country ______________
Edition required:
English
French
Spanish
Form of payment:
Cheque enclosed
Bank order
Unesco coupons
On receipt of invoice
Ninth World Forestry Congress, Mexico City, 1-12 July 1985
"Forest resources in the integral development of society"
Four study tours in Mexico
Extension tours to nearby countries
Forest International exhibition
For information write to:
IX CONGRESO FORESTAL MUNDIAL COMITE ORGANIZADOR
Progreso 5, Edificio 2
Mxico, D.F., 04110, MEXICO
or:
Associate Secretary-General
Ninth World Forestry Congress
FAO Forestry Department
Via delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy
<section>b</section>
Where to purchase FAO publications locally - Points de vente des publications de la FAO - Puntos de venta de publicaciones de la FAO
 ANGOLA
Empresa Nacional do Disco e de Publicaes, ENDIPU-U.E.E.
Rua Cirilo da Conceio Silva, N 7
C.P. N 1314-C, Luanda
 ARGENTINA
Librera Agropecuaria
Pasteur 743, 1028 Buenos Aires
Oficina del Libro Internacional
Av. Crdoba 1877, 1120 Buenos Aires
E-mail: olilibro@satlink.com
 AUSTRALIA
Hunter Publications
P.O. Box 404, Abbotsford, Vic. 3067
Tel.:(03) 9417 5361
Fax: (03) 914 7154
E-mail: jpdavies@ozemail.com.au
 AUSTRIA
Gerold Buch & Co.
Weihburggasse 26, 1010 Vienna
 BANGLADESH
Association of Development Agencies in Bangladesh
House No. 1/3, Block F,
Lalmatia, Dhaka 1207
 BELGIQUE
M.J. De Lannoy
202, avenue du Roi, 1060 Bruxelles
CCP 000-0808993-13
E-mail: jean.de.lannoy@infoboard.be
 BOLIVIA
Los Amigos del Libro
Av. Heronas 311, Casilla 450
Cochabamba;
Mercado 1315, La Paz
 BOTSWANA
Botsalo Books (Pty) Ltd
P.O. Box 1532, Gaborone
 BRAZIL
Fundao Getlio Vargas
Praia do Botafogo 190, C.P. 9052
Rio de Janeiro
E-mail: valeria@sede.fgvrj.br
Ncleo Editora da Universidade Federal Fluminense
Rua Miguel de Frias 9
Icara-Niteri 24
220-000 Rio de Janeiro
Fundao da Universidade Federal do Paran - FUNPAR
Rua Alfredo Bufrem 140, 30 andar
80020-240 Curitiba
 CAMEROON
CADDES
Centre Africain de Diffusion et
Dveloppement Social
B.P. 7317 Douala Bassa
Tel.: (237) 43 37 83
Fax: (237) 42 77 03
 CANADA
Renouf Publishing
5369 chemin Canotek Road, Unit 1
Ottawa, Ontario K1J 9J3
Tel.: (613) 745-2665
Fax: (613) 745 7660
Website: www.renoufbooks.com
E-mail: renouf@fox.nstn.ca
 CHILE
Librera - Oficina Regional FAO
c/o FAO Officina Regional para Amrica
Latina y el Caribe (RLC)
Avda. Dag Hammarskjold, 3241
Vitacura, Santiago
Tel.: 33 72 314
Fax: 696 1121/696 1124
E-mail: german.rojas@field.fao.org
Universitaria Textolibros Ltda.
Avda. L. Bernardo O'Higgins 1050
Santiago
 CHINA
China National Publications Import & Export Corporation
16 Gongti East Road, Beijing 100020
Tel.: 6506 30 70
Fax: 6506 3101
E-mail: cnpiec@public.3.bta.net.cn
 COLOMBIA
Banco Ganadero
Vicepresidencia de Fomento
Carrera 9^a N 72-21, Piso 5
Bogot D.E.
Tel.: 217 0100
 CONGO
Office national des librairies populaires
B.P. 577, Brazzaville
 COSTA RICA
Librera Lehmann S.A.
Av. Central, Apartado 10011
1000 San Jos
CINDE
Coalicin Costarricense de Iniciativas de Desarrollo
Apdo 7170, 1000 San Jos
E-mail: rtacinde@sol.rassa.co.cr
 CTE D'IVOIRE
CEDA
04 B.P. 541, Abidjan 04
Tel.: 22 20 55
Fax: 21 72 62
 CUBA
Ediciones Cubanas Empresa de Comercio Exterior de Publicaciones
Obispo 461, Apartado 605, La Habana
 CZECH REPUBLIC
Artia Pegas Press Ltd Import of Periodicals
Palc Metro, P.O. Box 825
Nrodn 25, 111 21 Praha 1
 DENMARK
Munksgaard, Book and Subscription Service
P.O. Box 2148
DK 1016 Copenhagen K.
Tel.: 4533128570
Fax: 4533129387
Website: www.munksgaard.dk;
E-mail: subscription.service@mail.munksgaard.dk
 DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
CUESTA - Centro del libro
Av. 27 de Febrero, esq. A. Lincoln
Centro Comercial Nacional
Apartado 1241, Santo Domingo
 ECUADOR
Libri Mundi, Librera Internacional
Juan Len Mera 851
Apartado Postal 3029, Quito
E-mail: librimul@librimundi.com.ec
Universidad agraria del Ecuador Centro de Informacin Agraria
Av. 23 de Julio, Apdo 09-01-1248
Guayaquil
Librera Espaola
Murgen 364 y Ulloa, Quito
 EGYPT
The Middle East Observer
41 Sherif Street, Cairo
Tel.: 393 97 2
Fax.: 360 68 04
E-mail: fouda@soficom.com.eg
 ESPAA
Librera Agrcola
Fernando VI 2, 28004 Madrid
Librera de la Generalitat de Catalunya
Rambla dels Estudis 118 (Palau Moja)
08002 Barcelona
Tel.: (93) 302 6462
Fax: (93) 302 1299
Mundi Prensa Libros S.A.
Castell 37, 28001 Madrid
Tel.: 914 36 37 00
Fax: 915 75 39 98
Website: www.tsai.es/MPRENSA
E-mail: mundiprensa@tsai.es
Mundi Prensa - Barcelona
Consejo de Ciento 391,
08009 Barcelona
Tel.: 301 8615
Fax: 317 0141
 FINLAND
Aketeeminen Kirjakauppa Subscription Services
P.O. Box 23, FIN-00371 Helsinki
Tel.: (358) 0121 4416
Fax.: (358) 0121 4450
 FRANCE
Editions A. Pedone
13, rue Soufflot, 75005 Paris
Lavoisier Tec & Doc
14, rue de Provigny
94236 Cachan Cedex
Website: www.lavoisier.fr
E-mail: livres@lavoisier.fr
Librairie du Commerce International
10, avenue d'Ina
75783 Paris Cedex 16
Website: www.cfce.fr
E-mail: pl@net-export.fr
WORLD DATA
10, rue Nicolas Flamand
75004 Paris
Tel.: (01) 4278 0578
Fax: (01) 4278 1472
 GERMANY
Alexander Horn Internationale Buchhandlung
Friedrichstrasse 34
D-65185 Wiesbaden
Tel.: 37 42 12
S. Toeche-Mittler GmbH Versandbuchhandlung
Hindenburgstrasse 33
D-64295 Darmstadt
Tel.: 6151 336 65
Fax: 6151 314 048
Website: www. booksell.com/triops
E-mail: triops@booksell.com
Uno Verlag
Poppelsdorfer Allee 55
D-53115 Bonn 1
Tel.: 49 (0) 228 94 90 20
Fax: 49 (0) 228 21 74 92
Website: www.uno-verlag.de
E-mail: unoverlag@aol.com
 GHANA
SEDCO Publishing Ltd
Sedco House, Tabon Street
Off Ring Road Central, North Ridge
P.O. Box 2051, Accra
 GREECE
Papasotiriou S.A.
35 Stournara Str., 10682 Athens
Tel.: +301 3302 980
Fax: +301 3648254
 GUYANA
Guyana National Trading Corporation Ltd
45-47 Water Street, P.O. Box 308
Georgetown
 HATI
Librairie A la Caravelle
26, rue Bonne Foi
B.P. 111, Port-au-Prince
 HONDURAS
Escuela Agrcola Panamericana Librera RTAC
El Zamorano, Apartado 93, Tegucigalpa
Oficina de la Escuela Agrcola Panamericana en Tegucigalpa
Blvd. Morazn, Apts. Glapson
Apartado 93, Tegucigalpa
 HUNGARY
Librotrade Kft.
P.O. Box 126, H-1656 Budapest
Tel.: 256 1672
Fax: 256 8727
 INDIA
EWP Affiliated East-West Press PVT, Ltd
G-I/16, Ansari Road, Darya Gany
New Delhi 110 002
Tel.: 32 64 180
Fax: 32 60 538
Oxford Book and Stationery Co.
Scindia House
New Delhi 110 001
Tel.: 91 11 331 5310
Fax: 91 11 371 3275
Oxford Subscription Agency
Institute for Development Education
1 Anasuya Ave., Kilpauk
Madras 600 010
Periodical Expert Book Agency
D-42, Vivek Vihar, Delhi 110095
Bookwell
Head Office:
2/72, Nirankari Colony, New Delhi - 110009
Tel.: 725 1283
Fax: 91-11-328 13 15
Sales Office:
24/4800, Ansari Road
Darya Ganj, New Delhi - 110002
Tel.: 326 8786, 325 7264
E-mail: bkwell@nde.vsnl.net.in
 IRAN
The FAO Bureau, International and Regional Specialized Organizations Affairs
Ministry of Agriculture of the Islamic Republic of Iran
Keshavarz Bld, M.O.A., 17th floor
Teheran
 IRELAND
Office of Public Work
4-5 Harcourt Road, Dublin 2
 ISRAEL
R.O.Y. International
P.O. Box 13056, Tel Aviv 61130
E-mail: royil@netvision.net.il
 ITALY
FAO Bookshop
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Roma
Tel.: 06 57055688
Fax: 06 57055155
E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org
Librera Commissionaria Sansoni S.p.A. - Licosa
Via Duca di Calabria 1/1
50125 Firenze
Tel.: 055 64 54 15
Fax: 055 64 12 57
E-mail: licosa@ftbcc.it
Libreria Scientifica Dott. Lucio de Biasio "Aeiou"
Via Coronelli 6, 20146 Milano
 JAPAN
Far Eastern Booksellers (Kyokuto Shoten Ltd.)
12 Kanda-Jimbocho 2 chome
Chiyoda-ku - P.O. Box 72
Tokyo 101-91
Tel.: 03 3265 7531
Fax: 03 3265 4656
Maruzen Company Ltd.
P.O. Box 5050
Tokyo International 100-31
Tel.: 81 3 3278 1894
Fax: 81 3 3278 1895
E-mail: h_sugiyama@maruzen.co.jp
 KENYA
Text Book Centre Ltd.
Kijabe Street
P.O. Box 47540, Nairobi
Tel.: 330 342
Fax: 22 57 79
Inter Africa Book Distribution
Kencom House, Moi Avenue
P.O. Box 73580, Nairobi
Tel.: 21 11 84
Fax: 254 2 22 35 70
 LUXEMBOURG
M. J. De Lannoy
202, avenue du Roi
1060 Bruxelles (Belgique)
E-mail: jean.de.lannoy@infoboard.be
 MADAGASCAR
Centre d'information et de Documentation Scientifique et Technique
Ministre de la recherche applique au dveloppement
B.P 6224 Tsimbazaza, Antanarivo
 MALAYSIA
Electronic products only:
Southbound Sendirian Berhad Publishers
9 College Square, 01250 Penang
 MALI
Librairie Traore
Rue Soundiata Keita X 115
B.P. 3243, Bamako
 MAROC
La Librairie Internationale
70 Rue T'ssoule
PO. Box 302 (RP), Rabat
Tel./Fax: 212 7 75 01 83
 MEXICO
Librera, Universidad Autnoma de Chapingo
56230 Chapingo
Libros y Editoriales S.A.
Av. Progreso N 202-1 Piso A
Apdo. Postal 18922
Col. Escandn, 11800 Mxico D.F.
Mundi Prensa Mexico, S.A.
Ri Pnuco, 141 Col. Cuauhtmoc
C.P. 06500, Mxico, DF
Tel.: 533-5658 al 60
Fax: 514-6799
E-mail: 1015452361@compuserve.com
 NETHERLANDS
Roodveldt Import b.v.
Brouwersgracht 288
1013 HG Amsterdam
E-mail: roodboek@euronet.nl
Tel.: 622 8035
Fax: 625 5493
Swets & Zeitlinger b.v.
P.O. Box 830, 2160 Lisse
Heereweg 347 B, 2161 CA Lisse
E-mail: infono@swets.nl
Website: www.swets.nl
 NEW ZEALAND
Legislation Services
P.O. Box 12418
Thorndon, Wellington
E-mail: gppmjxf@gp.co.nz
Oasis Official
P.O. Box 3627, Wellington
Tel.: (+64) 4 499 1551
Fax: (+64) 4 499 1972
E-mail: oasis@clear.net.nz
Website: www.oasisbooks.co.nzl
 NICARAGUA
Librera HISPAMER
Costado Este Univ. Centroamericana
Apdo. Postal A-221, Managua
 NIGERIA
University Bookshop (Nigeria) Ltd.
University of Ibadan, Ibadan
 NORWAY
Swets Norge AS
P.O. Box 6512, Etterstad
N-0606 Oslo
Tel.: (+47) 2297 4500
Fax: (+47) 2297 4545
E-mail: nicagen@swets.nl
 PAKISTAN
Mirza Book Agency
65 Shahrah-e-Quaid-e-Azam
P.O. Box 729, Lahore 3
 PARAGUAY
Librera Intercontinental Editora e Impresora S.R.L.
Caballero 270 c/Mcal Estigarribia
Asuncin
 PERU
INDEAR
Jirn Apurimac 375, Casilla 4937
Lima 1
Universidad Nacional "Pedro Ruiz Gallo"
Facultad de Agronoma, A.P. 795
Lambayeque (Chiclayo)
 PHILIPPINES
International Booksource Center, Inc.
Room 720, Cityland 10 Tower 2
H.V. de la Costa, Cor. Valero St
Makati, Metro Manila
Tel.: 817 9676
Fax: 817 1741
 POLAND
Ars Polona
Krakowskie Przedmiescie 7
00-950 Warsaw
 PORTUGAL
Livraria Portugal, Dias e Andrade Ltda.
Rua do Carmo 70-74
Apartado 2681, 1200 Lisboa Codex
 SINGAPORE
Select Books Pte Ltd.
03-15 Tanglin Shopping Centre
19 Tanglin Road, Singapore 1024
Tel.: 732 1515
Fax: 736 0855
 SLOVAK REPUBLIC
Institute of Scientific and Technical Information for Agriculture
Samova 9, 950 10 Nitra
Tel.: +42 87 522 185
Fax: +42 87 525 275
E-mail: uvtip @ nr.sanet.sk
 SOMALIA
Samater
P.O. Box 936, Mogadishu
 SOUTH AFRICA
David Philip Publishers (Pty) Ltd.
P.O. Box 23408, Claremont 7735
Tel.: Cape Town (021) 64-4136
Fax: Cape Town (021) 64-3358
E-mail: dpp@iafrica.com
Website: www.twisted.co.za
 SRI LANKA
M.D. Gunasena & Co. Ltd.
217 Olcott Mawatha, P.O. Box 246
Colombo 11
 SUISSE
Buchhandlung und Antiquariat Heinimann & Co.
Kirchgasse 17, 8001 Zurich
UN Bookshop
Palais des Nations
CH-1211 Genve 1
Website: www.un.org
Van Diermen Editions Techniques ADECO
41 Lacuez, CH-1807 Blonzy
 SURINAME
Vaco n.v. in Suriname
Domineestraat 26, P.O. Box 1841
Paramaribo
 SWEDEN
Wennergren Williams AB
P.O. Box 1305, S-171 25 Solna
Tel.: 46 8 705 9750
Fax: 46 8 27 00 71
E-mail: mail@wwi.se
Bokdistributren
P.O. Box 301 61, S-104 25 Stockholm
Tel.: 46 8 728 2500
Fax: 46 8 31 30 44
E-mail: lis.ledin @ hk.akademibokhandeln.se
 THAILAND
Suksapan Panit
Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue
Bangkok
 TOGO
Librairie du Bon Pasteur
B.P. 1164, Lom
 TUNISIE
Socit tunisienne de diffusion
5, avenue de Carthage, Tunis
 TURKEY
DUNYA INFOTEL
100. Yil Mahallesi
34440 Bagcilar, Istanbul
Tel.: 0212 629 08 08
Fax: 0212 629 46 89
E-mail: dunya@dunya-gazete.com.tr
Website: http://www.dunya.com
 UNITED KINGDOM
The Stationery Office
51 Nine Elms Lane
London SW8 5DR
Tel.: (0171) 873 9090 (orders)
(0171) 873 0011 (inquiries)
Fax: (0171) 873 8463
and through The Stationery Office Bookshops
E-mail: postmaster@theso.co.uk
Website: www.the-stationery-office.co.uk
Electronic products only:
Microinfo Ltd.
P.O. Box 3, Omega Road
Alton, Hampshire GU34 2PG
Tel.: (01420) 86848
Fax: (01420) 89889
Website: www.microinfo.co.uk
E-mail: emedia@microinfo.co.uk
 UNITED STATES
Publications:
BERNAN Associates (ex UNIPUB)
4611/F Assembly Drive
Lanham, MD 20706-4391
Toll-free 1-800-274-4447
Fax: 301-459-0056
Website: www.bernan.com
E-mail: info@bernan.com
UN Bookshop
The United Nations Bookshop
General Assembly Building Room 32
New York, N.Y. 10017
Tel.: 212 963 7680
Fax: 212 963 4910
Website: www.un.org
E-mail: bookshop@un.org
Periodicals:
Ebsco Subscription Services
P.O. Box 1943
Birmingham, AL 35201 -1943
Tel.: (205) 991-6600
Telex: 78-2661
Fax: (205) 991-1449
The Faxon Company Inc.
15 Southwest Park
Westwood, MA 02090
Tel.: 6117-329-3350
Telex: 95-1980
Cable: FW Faxon Wood
 URUGUAY
Librera Agropecuaria S.R.L.
Buenos Aires 335, Casilla 1755
Montevideo C.P. 11000
 VENEZUELA
Fundacin La Era Agrcola
Calle 31 Junin Qta Coromoto 5-49
Apartado 456, Mrida
Fundacin para la Investigacin Agrcola
San Javier
Estado Yaracuy, A.P. 182, San Felipe
Fax: 054 44210
E-mail: damac@diero.conicit.ve
Fudeco, Librera
Avenida Libertador-Este
Ed. Fudeco, Apartado 254
Barquisimeto C.P. 3002, Ed. Lara
Tel.: (051) 538 022
Fax: (051) 544 394
Telex: (051) 513 14 FUDEC VC
Librera FAGRO
Universidad Central de Venezuela (UCV)
Maracay
Librera Universitaria, C.A.
Av. 3, entre 29 y 30
N 29-25 Edif. EVA, Mrida
Fax: 074 52 09 56
Tamanaco Libros Tcnicos S.R.L.
Centro Comercial Ciudad Tamanaco
Nivel C-2, Caracas
Tel.: 261 3344/261 3335/959 0016
Tecni-Ciencia Libros S.A.
Torre Phelps-Mezzanina
Plaza Venezuela
A.P. 20.315, 1020 Caracas
Tel.: 782 8697/781 9945/781 9954
E-mail: tchlibros@ibm.net
Tecni-Ciencia Libros, S.A.
Centro Comercial
Av. Andrs Eloy, Urb. El Prebo
Valencia, Ed. Carabobo
Tel.: 222 724
 ZIMBABWE
Grassroots Books
The Book Caf
Fife Avenue, Harare;
61 a Fort Street, Bulawayo
Tel.: 79 31 82
Fax: 70 21 29
 Other countries/Autres pays/Otros pases
Sales and Marketing Group
Information Division, FAO
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy
Tel.: (39) 06 57051
Fax: (39) 06 57053360
Telex: 625852/625853/610181 FAO I
E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org
