<title>Unasylva - No. 148 - Forestry in FAO</title>
<section>1</section>
40 years of forestry at FAO: 1945-85
This issue of Unasylva focuses on the fortieth anniversary of FAO - -and, in particular, on 40 years of work by FAO's Forestry Department. The last issue (Vol. 37, No. 147) looked ahead to the World Forestry Congress, held in Mexico City from 1 to 12 July 1985 (and this issue carries that theme forward with an interview with the Mexican Secretary of Agriculture and Hydrologic Resources, Eduardo Pesqueira Olea). The next issue will highlight the International Year of the Forest, 1985, proclaimed by the FAO Council last November. It is clearly an important time for international forestry.
Here, and in the two issues that follow, we will, in addition to publishing articles on important forestry topics, be reprinting selected excerpts from early issues of Unasylva. This issue, for example, includes the major portion of an article from the very first Unasylva: "The disappearance of the tropical forests of Africa,'' by André Marie A. Aubréville, an article that, 38 years later, seems prophetic - especially during a year when FAO is making a major new effort to address the crisis in Africa.
Also included are a history of FAO's 40 years of forestry work by R.G. Fontaine, former Director of FAO's Forest Resources Division; excerpts from articles that trace the beginnings of international technical assistance in forestry, including a view from Brazil; a short statement on overall forestry policy from Marcel Leloup, the first Head of Forestry at FAO; and selections from an early paper prepared by FAO's forestry staff on an important issue for the future of forest policy: quality or quantity?
Looking back into the past can have various purposes: to provide an object lesson for the present and the future; to deepen our understanding and appreciation of our heritage; to show us, often to our great surprise, which things have changed and which things have not changed; or simply to provide entertainment.
It is hoped that this issue, and the two that follow, will do a little of all of these things.
<section>2</section>
One world - One forest
Sir John Boyd Orr
Unasylva's first issue appeared 38 years ago, in July 1947, two years after FAO's official birth. The organization then had 48 Member Nations, less than one-third of today's total. Decolonization and even the concept of a "Third World" were yet to come.
Some may find it difficult in 1985 to imagine how much the Second World War weighed then on the thinking of the new UN agencies. At UN headquarters in New York, and in every specialized agency! the question was the same: how to repair the damage suffered by nations involved in the war and how to avoid a third global conflict.
Not all of these preoccupations belong to the past. The same problems exist today, only on different scales, or in different parts of the world.
This is why the editorial in the first issue of Unasylva, written by FAO's first Director-General, Sir John Boyd Orr, is being reprinted in Unasylva 38 years later.
· The tie between forests and the good things of the earth runs back through history.
"The glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee, the fir tree, the pine tree and the box together," wrote the prophet Isaiah. Solomon the King sang of "a fountain of gardens, a well of living waters, and streams from Lebanon". There are in the Bible more than a hundred references to the cedars of Lebanon and countless other references to the richness of the land lying near them.
Today those forests have gone, and the once fruitful countryside is an arid waste. There is a story of the shocked surprise of the late President Roosevelt, flying to Tehran, upon realizing that the bare waste of rocks below his plane was all that remained of Lebanon's cedars and the one-time heart of the biblical land of milk and honey. The impression bit deep and was an added reason for the United States firm belief that the projected Food and Agriculture Organization should have a strong forestry division.
In recent months my own experience has underscored the link between forests and human well-being. On my last two trips through Europe, I saw on almost every hand what war had done to the people's homes. I became convinced that next to the great crisis in food, the housing problem is the most widespread and pressing emergency for cities and towns on the Continent and in the British Isles. The crying need is for lumber.
The recent timber conference in Czechoslovakia was an effort to speed and stimulate the great task of reconstruction that lies ahead. I am glad the delegates at that conference were able to agree on constructive plans for cooperation among governments to alleviate the timber shortage and for attention at the same time to longer-range problems of maintaining and restoring forests.
There are many other examples, but these two instances show the place of forestry in the work of FAO. In the long march of civilization man has always looked to the forest for many of his necessities and comforts. In our complex modern world, wood continues to stand first as a building material, is indispensable as fuel, and supplies practically all of the world's paper and a host of other essential industrial materials. Recent discoveries in ways of treating and using forest products may be bringing us to the threshold of a great new era in the use of wood. Moreover, forests are now universally recognized as guardians of soil and water, exerting a tremendous influence for good or evil over field agriculture in all parts of the world.
ONE WORLD - ONE FOREST the birth of Unasylva
Thus, forestry and the use of forest products are inevitably and inseparably a part of the work of FAO. The fundamental aims of FAO are set forth clearly in the Preamble to the Organization's Constitution. These aims are - first, raising levels of nutrition and standards of living of people everywhere; second, bringing about more efficient production and distribution of all food and agriculture products; third, bettering the condition of rural populations; and fourth, as the end result of these three great lines of effort, contributing toward an expanding world economy. FAO could not make a well-rounded effort to reach any of its major objectives without full attention to the forests and their problems.
In the fields of forestry and forest products the 48 nations working together through FAO are following a world policy with three main objectives - the conservation of all forests that perform useful social or protective functions; wise use of the world's forest soils for continuing an adequate production of raw materials; and new and better ways of processing and using forest products as a means of raising standards of living.
In forestry as in its other fields, FAO is not interested solely in studying and solving technical problems for their own sake. Instead, our work in forestry is part of the broader stream of FAO's work as a whole. The FAO Mission to Poland, for instance, will give attention to that country's forest resources and possibilities.
On a worldwide basis, the problems of forestry and forest products offer a great challenge. One set of problems concerns the present emergency arising from the devastation and disruption of war. At the very time when the need for lumber to repair war damage and for the building of millions of new homes and other structures is reaching its height, the capacity of the currently accessible forests has become insufficient to meet these extra demands. During the next few years, the increased cuttings from present commercial forest areas must be made with as much attention to long-range conservation as possible, and meanwhile, new forest areas not hitherto exploited must be brought into production.
The second and long-range world forest problem is that of keeping pace with growing demand for lumber and other forest products, and at the same time seeing to it that forests are in a condition to continue to produce. The world already has experienced far too much of wasteful and heedless forest exploitation. The depressing cut-over areas of both hemispheres are only one indication of the physical and social ills that follow upon this course.
Both the short-range and the long-range problems call for worldwide efforts. The tasks are too large for any one man or group of men, or any one nation or small group of nations. Already, what happens in Europe makes its effects felt in the forests of Siberia and of North and South America. Just as it is becoming clear that the diverse lands and peoples of this troubled planet form one world, both literally and figuratively, so it becomes clear that the world's forest areas are in reality one forest. FAO's part in the task that lies ahead is that of coordinating, stimulating, and guiding the work of public and private institutions in many lands. FAO, in turn, will be only one of many agencies cooperating in the work.
The name of FAO's new magazine, Unasylva, is well chosen - one world, one forest. This new review will attempt to shed light on all manner of problems in the fields of forestry and forest products, to compare methods that are being used in different countries, and to present the opinions and suggestions of experts in the various fields. I hope and believe it will be a keen new blade in the worldwide battle for freedom from want.
<section>3</section>
Forty years of forestry at FAO: Some personal reflections
R.G. Fontaine
R.G. Fontaine, former Director of FAO's Forest Resources Division, worked for the organization for 27 years, retiring in 1974.
Seated, at centre, is Marcel Leloup, first Director of FAO's Forestry Division. On the tar left is Leslie J. Vernell, Editor of Unasylva born 1947 to 1972. At the far right Is R.G. Fontaine, the author of this article. The year is 1947.
· When I was asked to write an article for Unasylva on 40 years of forestry at FAO, I felt interested and yet hesitant. I was interested because I think I can consider myself the actor who has played the longest part in the period involved; but hesitant because a presentation of this international body 's 40 years of activity - and to a certain extent, its logic - did not appear to me an easy task to undertake. However, I eventually accepted, my mind running back to those who had borne the responsibility of giving life to the Forestry Division at its very beginning, Marcel Leloup and Egon Glesinger, and who had drawn me into the exciting adventure of the international civil service.
I shall not stress the specific and somewhat incidental reasons that brought about the creation of a Forestry Division in FAO. These have been explained in a number of other articles and publications. I would, rather, like to recount, without claiming to be totally unbiased, how those who took part in these last 40 years of international forestry have lived them and understood them. However, for the account to be complete, brief mention is needed of the international activities that preceded the Second World War and the "heritage" FAO received which led the organization to develop certain activities rapidly in order to ensure continuity. It will also be necessary to talk about FAO's role in the organization of World Forestry Congresses. Then I propose to conclude with some reflections on international forestry cooperation.
Taken from Unasylva's tenth anniversary issue In 1957 (Vol. 11, No. 2), the chart illustrates the development of forestry activities during the first ten years of FAO.
International forestry before the Second World War
Foresters have, in a way, been pioneers in the field of international cooperation. As early as 1890, the International Union of Forestry Research Organizations (IUFRO) was founded, and later FAO was to help recommence its activities by assuming the responsibility for its secretariat from 1948 to 1955. At I the 1900 Universal Exposition in Paris, a report was presented highlighting the insufficiency of world timber supplies for industry. The report can be considered a first modest example of the kind of studies FAO was to carry out on wood production and consumption trends. In 1911, a forestry congress in Madrid adopted a resolution providing for the creation of a Mediterranean forest organization which, under the name of "Silva Mediterranea", came to be formally constituted in the early 1920s and remained active until 1935. It was reborn within FAO under the name of the Subcommittee for the Coordination of Mediterranean Forestry Activities, holding its first session in Rome
in 1949. In 1926, the First World Forestry Congress took place in Rome, at the International Institute for Agriculture (IIA), and proposed that forestry activities be developed within the Institute.
In 1936, the Second World Forestry Congress, which took place in Budapest, proposed the creation of an International Silviculture Centre (CIS). The Centre was set up in Berlin in 1939 and published an international forestry journal, Intersilva, a series of forestry studies, Sylvae Orbis, and forest bibliography studies. In 1946, the IIA and the CIS, together with their well-stocked libraries, were formally absorbed by FAO. Finally, in 1928, a non-governmental organization, the International Timber Committee (CIB), was founded in Vienna. Up until the Second World War, it published a number of statistics on international timber trade. Its experience was abundantly utilized by FAO, which recruited the Committee's secretary-general as soon as the Forestry Division was set up.
Forestry at FAO: Three periods
Three periods of forestry activity can, it seems to me, be distinguished, if it is kept in mind that the beginning and the end of each period are given here not in a strict sense but as a general indication, and that some overlapping may take place.
The first period (1945-59) was that of the return of peace, the re-gathering in many countries of foresters who had been separated by the war, and of great expectations. This period, rich in developments, was marked by the setting up of structures and institutions within FAO and, within them, the definition of important trends in world and regional forest policies, the attempt to achieve a fair distribution of resources according to needs, and the publication of inventories, statistics and studies.
The second period (1960-69) was the period of "decolonization", of FAO membership being extended to many developing countries, and of the expansion of field activities. It was also marked by the need to take stock of what was known in light of the information explosion and of the new awareness of environmental problems and of the limits of natural resources.
The third period (1970-85), which took in the founding of the Forestry Department - until then a Division - and its development, is rather harder to bring into focus since it is still in evolution and because of the lack of the necessary distance to identify its major trends. Besides traditional activities, this period has been characterized by the development of new, mostly inter-agency activities generated by the complexity of the problems involved and the diversity of the sources of finance. It has, however, also been marked by the crises affecting member countries (like oil shocks and rising unemployment), by somewhat arbitrary prophecies regarding the extinction of resources and the increase of pollution (Club of Rome, 1974-75), and by the "ageing" of organizations (Colloque de Lausanne, November 1984) that require reshaping and new structures. I will come back to this in my conclusions.
The period 1945 to 1959. The first task was to set up the Division with its two branches (Forests, and Forest Products), which became three in 1951 (Forest Policies, Forest Production, and Forest Economics). Advisory committees including well-known experts from outside FAO were established, notably in the fields of education, research and - jointly with IUFRO - bibliography. Finally, regional forestry offices were set up in Europe (Geneva), Latin America (Rio de Janeiro, then Santiago), the Far East (Bangkok) and the Near East (Cairo).
While the forestry problems and programmes of the Division were discussed globally in a forestry committee that was part of each FAO Conference, regional forestry conferences were also organized. These eventually led to the setting up of forestry commissions, which meet periodically and have established working groups according to the needs of each region. A sub-commission for the coordination of Mediterranean forestry matters, grouping the countries of the Mediterranean basin and working under the three regional forestry commissions (for Europe, the Near East and Africa), was founded. Finally, close relations were established in each region with the UN regional economic commissions to deal with problems relating to wood and wood products marketing. One of the major achievements of these activities during that period was "The principles of forest policy". On the basis of a document prepared by the secretariat and submitted to the regional commissions for discussion and
amendments, a final text was drawn up and approved by the 1951 FAO Conference. This declaration indicates the central themes of a forest policy in terms of administration, management, research and education, and it received wide circulation through Unasylva.
As far as regional activities are concerned, it is necessary to recall the importance attached to forestry activities in Europe by the Geneva office, which played a pioneering role for the other offices. First of all, the FAO European Forestry Commission created after the 1947 Mariánské Lázne (Marienbad) conference worked very actively toward the reconstruction of Europe. It established working groups to deal with, for example, forest work and the training of forestry workers (jointly with ILO and the EEC), flood control and landslide prevention, and forestry statistics (again jointly with the EEC). Furthermore, an FAO/ECE (Economic Commission for Europe) Timber Committee was constituted in 1948 which took over the activities of the timber committee of the European Economic Emergency Commission (EECE) of London. It greatly facilitated the exchange of information on available industrial timber resources and their equitable distribution. Finally, in close collaboration with
the Timber Committee and the European Forestry Commission, which met in Geneva in October 1952, the secretariats of FAO and the ECE published in 1953 a study entitled Timber consumption, production and trade in Europe-trends and prospects. The study was based upon assumptions concerning the rate of economic development during the next ten years, the ratio between the price of timber and the prices of other competitive materials, and the creation of a dynamic forest policy. Its methodology sewed as a model for other, similar studies carried out in the other regions, with the exception of Africa, where greater attention was paid to household-level consumption.
It was during this period that the Division put special emphasis on forest inventories. As early as 1948, it had published a survey involving 97 countries and covering 62 percent of their land area. With the help of questionnaires sent to national forestry services, world forest inventories were drawn up in 1953, 1958 and 1963. However, differences in the definition of the concepts utilized from one inventory, to another made it difficult to assess with sufficient accuracy the evolution of forestry, resources, so that these five-year investigations, which had served their main purpose, were eventually abandoned.
It was also during this period that the Division published a number of international studies that received wide circulation among Member Nations and universities. Among these were Forest policies, legislation and management; Tropical silviculture (in two volumes); Shifting agriculture in Africa; Hanunóo agriculture in the Philippines; Forest influences; Eucalypts for wood production; and The poplar in forestry and land use.
On the basis of Unesco's major project in arid zones and under the aegis of the Mediterranean forest subcommittee, four FAO/Unesco experts (Gaussen, Einberger, Kassas and de Philippis) drew up a dry-season map and a map of the vegetation of the Mediterranean region, and these were published by Unesco. A joint FAO/Unesco study on the definition of an arid-zone forestry policy was also attempted (by Montjauze, MacGuinnis, Pereira and de Philippis).
Finally, in order to be complete, this account should mention the many ties the Division was to establish with other international organizations, both governmental and non-governmental, to ensure coherence in the activities carried out by each body. Among these should be mentioned Unesco and its major project on arid zones; ILO and its activities connected with professional training; the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) and its contributions in the field of national parks and species threatened with extinction; IUFRO and its forestry research activities; the Council of Europe and its commission on agriculture, which carried out a special study on Mediterranean forests; the European Confederation of Agriculture and its commission on private and farm forests; and the International Council for Game and Wildlife Conservation and its interest in pesticides. Finally, in 1958, the Treaty of Rome was signed, and shortly afterwards a
forestry office was set up within the European Economic Community.
Technical assistance was chiefly granted outside of bilateral aid through the Expanded Technical Assistance Programme (ETAP), which started operating at the end of the 1950s and which consisted of sending out experts either on forest policy and legislation or on very specific subjects.
FAO has made regular, systematic, in-depth analyses of past and prospective trends in world supply and demand for wood products.
The period 1960 to 1969 At the onset of the 1960s, the FAO Conference approved a reorganization of FAO's structure, creating large Departments for Administration and Budget, Development, and General Affairs and Information, while the technical divisions (Plant Production, Animal Production, Nutrition, Land and Water, Fisheries, and Forestry) were regrouped in a Technical Department. Moreover, a decision taken by the FAO Council entrusted the Forestry Division with the organization and secretariat of World Forestry Congresses, in liaison with the host country: this is how the Sixth World Forestry Congress, held in Madrid in 1966, was organized. A study was presented at this Congress designed to make available the findings of a series of major national and regional appraisals of wood resources and requirements. The complete study was published in a special double issue of Unasylva (Vol. 20, Nos 80-81, 1966). Since then, FAO has made regular, systematic, in-depth analyses of
past and prospective trends in world supply and demand for wood products.
During this second period, most of the regional and international activities developed during the first period continued, with wildlife and national parks coming under the broad heading "conservation". A fourth branch set up to deal with forest exploitation took over activities relating to harvesting techniques, professional training, and forest road transport, and added shipping and forest ergonomics, primarily in the tropics. Several activities were initiated in Africa, and a regional office was opened in Accra and the African Forestry Commission was constituted. The latter studied the region's specific forestry problems, especially laws relating to forest ownership and the different degrees of forest protection. It established a working group on wildlife and national parks, areas that had been hitherto neglected. The working group was particularly active in the fields of animal population inventory and dynamics, wildlife management and game farming, the role of animal
proteins in human nutrition, and education and research. In response to the problems generated by the exploitation of humid and dry tropical areas, a Committee on Forestry Development in the Tropics was established in 1965. It studied matters specifically relating to the management of natural forests (the Catinot-Dawkins Protocol), forestation techniques in different areas, and species selection. Finally, under the aegis of the Advisory Committee on Forestry Education, activities in this field concentrated on determining the needs for skilled labour and setting up teaching structures in order to meet them.
This period was also highlighted by two important international conferences at which the FAO secretariat presented some background documents. The first was the UN Conference on Science and Technology for Developing Countries (Geneva, 1963), marking the first Development Decade. The number of delegates and documents presented was impressive. Forestry and resources conservation were discussed in two special commissions.
The second event was the Unesco Conference on Man and the Biosphere, the purpose of which was to turn the International Biology Programme into an intergovernmental programme under the aegis of Unesco and other international organizations. FAO took an active part in the organization and the secretariat of the conference as well as in discussions during the meetings. This conference helped Unesco to develop a programme on Man and the Biosphere (MAB), whose activities within FAO will be discussed later.
Nevertheless, what in my opinion really characterized this period was the development of field activities, the need for which had been strongly felt at the end of the previous period. The development of these activities, financed by ETAP and UNDP, but for which FAO was the executing agency, was such as to justify a reorganization of the responsible services at the end of the decade. Special services were set up in each Division to manage the projects, while branches merely retained the technical supervision of the projects and related experts. These field activities, the merits of which are unquestionable, as much for the countries assisted as for the Division itself, toward which information and ideas flowed, greatly influenced the traditional activities and the public service tasks of the organization.
Field activities during the decade from 1960 to 1969 were characterized by a gradual shift away from one-way advisory assignments to operational (or small group) and project activities. Interrelationships were established with ETAP, which was gradually phased out, and with other development programmes: UNDP, created in 1959; bilateral aid agencies and trust fund programmes; the FAO/IBRD (precursor of the World Bank) cooperative programme (1964); the FAO industry cooperative programme (1965); the Freedom from Hunger Campaign (since 1960); and the UN FAO World Food Programme (since 1963). In the forestry domain, this period saw the formulation and implementation of important projects creating or expanding educational and training facilities at all levels, including schools, faculties, and training and demonstration centres. Other important features of this expansionary period were the creation of administrative structures, including parks and wildlife management, and the
development of forest resources and industries (including pulp and paper); resources surveys; national forest inventories and utilization and marketing studies; and pre-investment surveys.
There is a group of projects relating to Mediterranean development that deserves to be mentioned and whose history would like to recount very briefly. In 1954, the Economic Commission for Europe drew public attention to the danger of an excessive gap in levels of income and living standards between southern Europe and the rest of the continent. Later, the sub-commission on Mediterranean forestry, meeting in Nice in 1956, adopted a resolution inviting the Director-General of FAO and the executive secretary of the EEC to organize "a background study for the definition of a stronger and more coherent forestry policy, as the most important factor in the economic and social development of the Mediterranean basin". A definitive study was published by FAO in 1959. The report, after analysing the physical, economic and social situation of the region, placed particular emphasis on how to hasten growth, alter certain institutions to give greater flexibility to the economic and social
system, utilize external financial support, and target international technical assistance.
The creation of the United Nations Special Fund just before the publication of the report permitted the planning and execution, during the 1960s, of many integrated rural development projects in Algeria, Greece, Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, Tunisia and Turkey. In areas large enough to be representative of the country and to have an impact on its development, yet small enough for investments to be compatible with the country's means, these projects involved a series of actions well balanced in both temporal and spatial terms. Other priorities, and perhaps changes in personnel, did not allow for a timely and comprehensive assessment of the projects. This is indeed regrettable, for the large quantity of information and the number of experts involved would be difficult to reassemble today.
The period 1970 to 1985. The third period extends from the creation of the Forestry Department (together with the Fisheries Department) to the holding of the Ninth World Forestry Congress, in Mexico. I have already attempted to define its general characteristics. It must be stressed that at the beginning of the decade, the specialized committees of FAO's Conference were discontinued and committees meeting outside the Conference and reporting directly to the Council were set up. The Committee on Forestry, which had met every two years in Rome since 1972, thus became the body within which the programme and budget of the Department for each biennium were discussed.
This period was marked by many events and conferences that took place outside FAO, in 1972, a UN conference was held in Stockholm on Man and the Environment, at which the Forestry Department played a key role by presenting two documents, one on forests and the environment and the other on wildlife and national parks. These were prepared in cooperation with the agencies concerned. After the conference, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), with which the Forestry Department would later cooperate on many projects, was founded. In 1973-74, an exceptional drought generated a food crisis in the African Sahel, and an FAO mission headed by a forester was sent to the region at the end of 1974. An inter-state committee with headquarters in Ouagadougou was set up and forestry activities were developed. In 1978, the Eighth World Forestry Congress, held in Jakarta, prepared the Jakarta Declaration. This was discussed and adopted in 1979 by the FAO Conference, which considered
it a turning-point in the history of forestry and in the evolution of the role of forestry, in economic and social development in general and the welfare of rural populations in particular.
In 1979, the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development (WCARRD) was held in Rome. Forestry problems were emphasized, and a declaration of principles and a plan of action were approved. The result was a much stronger emphasis within the Forestry Department upon the social role of forestry and the central role that forestry can play in the process of development.
The Forestry Department continued its international civil service activities and field operations. These activities are very accurately described in the Committee on Forestry (COFO) reports of this period. Before describing in detail some of the major activities, however, I would like to draw attention to certain decisions made by COFO itself. First, during its fifth session (Rome, 1980), the Committee underlined the need for a forest strategy for development that would integrate the protective, productive and social functions of forests according to countries' specific conditions, in order to meet their present and future needs. Then, at its latest session (May 1984), the Committee discussed forestry problems beyond the year 2000 in temperate regions, the humid tropics, and arid and Mediterranean areas, as well as at the global level.
At its third session, in 1976, COFO, on the basis of proposals made by the secretariat, identified six areas on which attention should be concentrated: forestry development in the tropics; conservation; the development of forest industries; the promotion of tropical timber trade; forest institutions; and forest-policy planning, analysis and statistics. It is within this context that I have selected certain activities that, in my opinion, are of major importance.
After the preparation of the first forest inventory, described above, some regional and world syntheses - a few under the aegis of FAO were carried out. Nevertheless, as early as 1970-72, concern began to arise over the destruction of tropical forests, and questionable information began to circulate about them. In 1974, FAO and UNEP had set up a continuous Global Environmental Monitoring System (GEMS), initiated in a pilot project in three West African countries; but these countries would not be in a position right away to guarantee continuous monitoring of their forest cover. In 1978, FAO made a reassessment of the forestry resources of the majority of developing countries (including practically all tropical countries). The main issues of this study were published under the title Forest and plantation areas in the tropics - present situation and forecasts. Then, at the end of 1978, a project document was signed by FAO and UNEP for the reassessment of the situation and
evolution of tropical forestry resources. The work was completed three years later.
This work is now being pursued by means of lateral and multispectral high-definition remote-sensing photographs that will allow, in the near future, a jump from inventory to forest management. Forest management will assume a new dimension, no longer requiring previous land occupation and mapping.
FORTY YEARS AT FAO through a historical perspective
From the very beginning of the period, FAO - within the context of Unesco's programme on Man and the Biosphere - took part in the preparation of the Study on the state of information on tropical forest ecosystems, published in English in 1978. The Committee on Forestry Development in the Tropics, meanwhile, pursued its work actively. At its sixth session (Rome, 1982), the Committee on Forestry approved and supported the FAO/UNEP study on forestry resources and recommended that (1) the results of the study be constantly updated and improved; (2) FAO, as the main organization responsible for forests in the UN system, continue to coordinate its undertakings on tropical forests with those of UNEP, Unesco and other organizations; and (3) the Director-General consider the advantages of giving the Committee on Forestry Development in the Tropics additional means, the Committee being the best-qualified body to ensure such coordination and to report the results to the FAO Conference.
Activities in genetic resources and reforestation at FAO have since their inception been concerned with the procurement of tree seed, and forestation techniques. FAO published a study and organized the first World Symposium on Manmade Forests and Their Industrial Importance (Canberra, 1967). But it was only in 1968, with the creation of the FAO panel of experts on forest gene resources, that the programme assumed a special importance. The group was to help "plan and coordinate FAO's efforts to explore, utilize and conserve the gene resources of forest trees", and at its third session, held in Rome in 1974, it approved a global programme for the improved use of forest resources, proposed by the FAO secretariat. The aim of the genetic resources programme has been to strengthen national institutes in the developing countries, and to help make countries self sufficient in high-quality seed for forest plantation and tree-planting programmes.
Extensive inquiries into the productivity and cost of the exploitation and transport of wood products were carried out in many developing countries in order to provide data for the improvement of exploitation methods. These studies are also of great assistance in logging-appraisal projects and feasibility studies.
On the transfer of technology from developed to developing countries, many training courses, seminars and symposia were organized, covering logging, transport, forest roads, ergonomics, and the health and safety of forest workers, all taking into consideration the socioeconomic and environmental aspects.
In tropical-timber trade and marketing, FAO has had three objectives: to advance the efficient use and improved marketing of tropical forest products; to foster the diversification of tropical-timber trade in accordance with the wise utilization of forest resources; and to improve forest management practices to assure future wood supplies.
Regular Programme activities have included studies and meetings on (1) the properties and uses of tropical timbers in the light of national and international action for promoting lesser-known species; (2) product development and the choice and effective application of promotional measures to advance the wider use of products from the tropical moist forests; and (3) concepts and guidelines for the utilization and marketing of tropical timber in a situation of fluctuating supply and demand. FAO has closely collaborated with UNCTAD in implementing its integrated programme for commodities in the field of tropical timber. After a series of preparatory meetings for which FAO provided substantial technical background documentation and guidance, the negotiations culminated in the adoption of an International Tropical Timber Agreement, now in the process of being ratified by interested producing and consuming countries.
While the Forestry Department's activities in the field of wood and energy had hitherto been limited to fairly restricted technical assistance and training activities, in the late 1970s they took a new leap forward. In particular, the Department was entrusted with the preparation of the specific sections dealing with fuel and charcoal wood for the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy, held in Nairobi in 1981. The availability of fuel and charcoal wood in developing countries was analysed and a strategy was formulated for their improvement. Emphasis was placed not only on technical knowledge but also, particularly, on participatory approaches likely to involve people as active partners as well as beneficiaries. At the same time, a programme of action for forestry and rural energy was launched with a view to mobilizing financial resources and greater assistance capacity for the countries most affected by the fuelwood crisis.
In the area of forestry education and training, field activities led to the organization of a world consultation on forestry education and training, held in Stockholm in 1971. In the early 1970s, emphasis shifted gradually to increasing the effectiveness of forestry schools through staff training and improvement of the content, organization and handling of training programmes. These activities culminated in the creation in the Philippines in 1979 of a Centre on Forestry Education Development for the Asia and South West Pacific Region. FAO has also played a major role in the establishment of nearly every forestry school that now exists in South America. A survey is now being carried out in Africa to assess the need for forestry teachers and ways to meet it. Finally, a contribution was made toward improving relations between forestry schools through the publication in 1974 of a world list of forestry schools, revised in 1977 and 1981.
Activities in forest institutions are closely related to problems affecting forest policies and legislation and to organization factors in forestry development. In 1977, a study was published on forest utilization contracts in state-owned forests. After the publication of a comparative study on forest management problems in six African countries (1976) came two other studies: Public forest administrations in Latin America (1975) and Comparison of public forest administrations in Asia and the Pacific (1980). Following a survey of public forest administrations in French-speaking African countries, an FAO/Swedish International Development Authority (SIDA) consultation on forest administration for development was held in Rome, in 1983.
As far as field operations are concerned, the period from 1970 to the present is characterized by an integrated country approach. The large-scale projects still generally concern three main categories: surveys, feasibility studies and institution-building projects. For FAO to continue to play an effective role in promoting and creating capital involvement possibilities, especially in the field of forest industries, it is necessary to promote new institutions, to strengthen and improve those already in existence, and to improve the quality of techniques and planning methods. Many studies have been carried out, resulting in the creation of integrated forest industries. Education and training at all levels have been probably the biggest beneficiaries of field operations, and many prominent examples could be mentioned.
One aim has been to help make countries self-sufficient in high-quality seed for forest plantation and tree-planting programmes.
Some final reflections
After this account of 40 years of international forestry activities and an attempt to highlight the crucial events, it will undoubtedly be expected that I come up with an assessment of the activities described. I am afraid I feel quite incapable of doing so. In the first place, despite the time that has elapsed, I have been far too involved personally in these activities to be truly unbiased. For instance, I consider it a failure not to have been able to put across some of my ideas on "marginal areas' or on closer ties with representatives of the basic sciences that could have led to new techniques. On the other hand. I feel fairly well-satisfied with the activities developed in the fields of conservation and environment.
But my main objection to making such an assessment is that the period involved - according to certain philosophers, sociologists and historians is a "hinge" period, corresponding to the beginning of an era. It is a period that some have called post-industrial, characterized by an explosion of scientific and technical knowledge, the development of communications and information and an important change in values, not to mention population growth, the extinction of certain resources and the increase in pollution. It is therefore difficult to tell what has been done well and what has been done badly, when the criteria for making judgements have changed.
What I would like to do before concluding is mention a few of the questions that various FAO officers have asked in the course of the activities I have described. This may help anyone who does wish to make an assessment.
· During the last few decades, FAO has had to divide itself between international civil service chiefly the organization and development of inter-state relations (the Regular Programme) and the management of field projects. Has not the latter developed to the detriment of the former?
I sincerely believe so, without however considering, as some do, that involvement in such activities is a pretext for avoiding more serious problems. Let me simply state that operational or field activities have represented an exceptional source of experience and information, as well as a refuge from international tensions, but that they may have turned the organization away from more important duties. Nevertheless, it should be stressed that field activities have expanded largely because of the decisions taken by FAO's Member Governments, and that they have enjoyed some notable successes in forestry and other fields.
· There are many forestry activities in which international cooperation could be useful, and choices must be made that are consistent with the restricted means available. In such cases, has account always been taken of international priorities in situations where cooperation is necessary and useful?
Many activities are so involved with local conditions that international cooperation either accomplishes little for their benefit or has a limited impact. This seems sometimes to have been forgotten.
· Organizations are now dividing their activities between headquarters and the regions or even countries themselves. From a realistic point of view, this tendency is quite understandable. However, the question is whether excessive multiplication of regional and international activities may not be harmful to the universal character of the organization and cause it to lose sight of the emphasis to be given to the world economy.
· When projects are the responsibility of more than one organization, cooperation and coordination mechanisms are necessary. To avoid the overloading of procedures and the overcomplicating of operations, should there not be more strictness about the precise responsibilities of each organization?
· Finally, the institutions created within FAO (divisions, branches, and so on), as well as those set up in accordance with Article VI or XIV of the Constitution, have an internal logic and a life of their own which are sometimes difficult to control. Their adjustment to the needs of the system as a whole poses problems in that it requires complicated mechanisms or periodic changes that are difficult to regulate if there is a desire to avoid a proliferation of activities that are inconsistent with the aims of the organization.
If I have endeavoured to avoid assessments and limit myself to a few reflections on some problems that may have arisen, this does not exclude my appreciation for many of the activities undertaken that were suited to the needs of the period involved be they inventories, statistics, or studies on production and consumption trends. On the whole, they appear to have been positive. A distinguished delegate of France told me, in the 1960s, that the EEC countries would never have been able to conceive a Common Agricultural Policy had they not benefited from the work of FAO. The latest recommendations of UNCTAD's Tropical Timber Council concerning the setting up of regional tropical timber bureaux restate the proposals made by FAO to UNDP at the beginning of the 1970s. Many other examples could be cited. But I think particularly of the potential these activities have to address the last recommendation of COFO 84, "that every possible measure be taken in every country to accelerate
the process of heightening political awareness of the critical importance for the future of mankind of adequate attention being given to the world's forests in the period to the year 2000 and beyond".
All past activities and experiences will need to be assessed without complacency, not only in and of themselves but also to serve as a starting-point for new activities. They need to take into account new requirements and even anticipate the future, consciously or unconsciously, as do certain societies described by the late biologist René Dubos in Célébration de la vie. These new activities, whatever the merits of national politicians and administrators, can be successful only if they can rely upon a competent and motivated international civil service that will, above all, need to overcome a certain disarray that I rightly or wrongly perceive today in the international organizations with which I am in contact. Its members will require the knowledge, the experience and the humility necessary to avoid falling prey to passing fashions or the quest for personal glory. Or - to borrow a conclusion from Albert Camus, the French philosopher who died in 1960, in the conclusion of his
book The rebel - they will have to choose "the frugal and audacious thought, lucid action, and the generosity of the man who understands".
<section>4</section>
The first ten years
Marcel Leloup
Marcel Leloup, first Director of FAO's Forestry Division, reviewed the first decade of forestry activities in the tenth-anniversary issue of Unasylva. Formulating a global policy applicable to nations differing geographically, politically, culturally and economically was an arduous task which evolved slowly. Objectives and a plan of action converged into a consolidated forest policy. Here are some highlights.
Objectives
To supply an expanding world economy with useful forest products, in the qualities and quantities adequate to sustain the general welfare: such, in very broad terms, was the objective that the Quebec Conference of 1945 laid down for FAO.
Taking all facts into account, the Forestry Division soon realized that its general programme of action had to be concentrated on four basic aims. These four aims were and continue to be:
a. Increase in the yield from forests now being used. Even in the most advanced forestry countries, it is admitted that such an increase is possible, either by applying sound forest management methods or by a wider use of techniques that research has improved, is now improving and will further improve in the future.
b. Reduction of waste. This means not only the waste occasioned by the primary conversion of wood but also the waste from logging operations, including trees and species abandoned because there is no economic use for them for the time being. In this field also considerable progress can be made.
c. Opening up of virgin forests. The bringing into use of forests hitherto inaccessible takes place almost automatically when, as in Canada or the USSR, the forests will provide timber of high economic value, especially softwoods. It is a much more difficult proposition in tropical regions where there are extensive forests, because it entails being able to make effective use of the timbers that occur, then the setting up of industries capable of processing them, and often human colonization of the areas involved.
d. Planting of new forests Apart from any economic considerations, the establishment or re-establishment of forests on areas dangerously subject to erosion is a sheer necessity. But locally for some communities, on the national level for many countries, and regionally for some continents, as the studies carried out by the Division in the past ten years have shown, the planting of new forest is essential to meeting foreseeable increases in wood consumption.
Plan of action
In view of the goals to be achieved, the Forestry Division drew up a 15 point plan of action. Formulated in 1951, it still remains valid. The points corresponding to the Division's 15 lines of activity, can be summarized as follows:
1. Forest policy. Advising governments in drawing up and implementing national forest policies in keeping with the relative economic importance of forests in each country, a policy aiming at the conservation and proper utilization of forest resources and the rational development of the corresponding forest industries.
Coordinating national forest policies on the international level, through the action of FAO's Regional Forestry Commissions and ultimately the FAO Conference.
2. Forest inventories. Advising and assisting governments in planning and carrying out national forest inventories, so as to obtain more accurate and internationally comparable data.
Collecting the statistics thus obtained for the preparation and publication of regional and world estimates to serve as a basis for the coordination of national forest I policies on the international plane.
3. Forest economics and statistics. Working out standard estimates of the costs of forest enterprises and operations and assembling data so as to make it possible to compare different methods of conducting such enterprises economically and to calculate the prime cost of the various forest products.
Assembling, compiling and regularly disseminating statistics on forests and forest products with a view to providing governments objective, comprehensive and up-to-date data. Improving national statistics by the introduction of more I reliable assembling methods.
4. Education. Advising and assisting governments in creating public opinion alive to the importance of forests and forestry in the national economy.
Establishing the necessary facilities for the education of foresters and technicians and for the training of subordinate forestry personnel, and forest and industrial workers.
5. Soil and water conservation. Bringing about a general recognition of the essential function of forests and grasslands in streamflow regulation and in soil conservation,
Advising governments so that they can draw up national policies of land use, particularly the use of forested and "wild" lands forming the greater part of catchment (watershed) areas.
6. Conservation and improvement of forest ranges (grazing land). Advising and assisting governments to adopt sound policies for the utilization and conservation of the vast areas which, while serving as natural grazing lands for livestock, play a great but too often disregarded role in protecting farmland and regulating streamflow.
Close coordination of such policies with forest policy.
7. Silviculture and forest management. Advising and assisting governments in applying appropriate silvicultural methods to all forests playing a protective or productive role, or fulfilling other important functions.
Promoting forest research: studying and spreading techniques to assure an increase of growth in forests and improvement of the quality of forest products.
8. Afforestation and reforestation. Encouraging research work and assisting governments to ensure the extension of forests on bare or depleted land, in conformity with the aims defined in each case by the national forest policy.
Improving and spreading modern techniques for the establishing or restocking of forests by planting or seeding, adapted to the various conditions of soil and climate.
9. Forest protection. Assisting governments in devising administrative and technical methods to control fires, pests and diseases.
Encouraging the conclusion of international agreements to control the spread of these destructive forces.
10. Equipment. Promoting the introduction of useful modern equipment for the efficient and economic utilization of forest resources and the industrial processing of their products.
Assembling information from equipment manufacturers and analysing and publishing it in appropriate forms. Encouraging manufacturers to produce machines and equipment that fully meet forestry requirements.
Improving the conditions of forest workers.
11. Modernization and integration of forest industries. Encouraging in all countries a gradual conversion of forest utilization into a suitably planned integration of forest industries with forest management; this entails forest management on a sustained-yield basis so that the forest can supply continuously an optimum group of industries with produce of specific qualities and in specific quantities.
Improving and modernizing existing industries to give increased yields from all phases of operations.
12. Chemical utilization of wood. Promoting research in the field of wood chemistry.
Advising and assisting governments in setting up new industries, in applying modern techniques and in generally improving the chemical utilization of forest products; often such utilization constitutes the only economic possibility of exploiting mixed forest stands or low-grade timber and the residues from logging and mechanical processing operations.
13. Mechanical utilization and standardization. Seeking a more rational mechanical utilization of timber.
Facilitating trade in forest products, particularly by the standardization of export contracts.
Endeavouring to bring about general agreement on the standardization of terminology, measurement, sizes, grades and testing of industrial wood and primary forest products.
14. Production and distribution policies. Keeping a constant check on the current situation regarding the production of and trade in primary forest products and promoting action on the international level, to the extent possible, to adjust available supplies to demand.
15. Stimulation of consumption. Promoting action on the international and national plane to raise consumption of forest products to a level that will ensure for all peoples of the world adequate housing and an adequate standard of living.
<section>5</section>
The disappearance of the tropical forests of Africa
André Marie A. Aubréville
André Marie A. Aubréville, at the time he wrote this article, was a Conservator of Waters and Forests in France. The place names given in the article are those current at the time of original publication. Where necessary, clarification has been added in parentheses.
This article appeared in the very first issue of Unasylva, in July-August 1947. Thirty-eight years later, it still seems relevant and timely. It shows that Africa's present crisis is not something that emerged suddenly and unexpectedly out of nowhere. It even, in retrospect, provides hope that things can be changed. And it shows how critical are forests - and reforestation - to the whole process of development in Africa.
· The equatorial forests of Africa have been little exploited and they contain phenomenal quantities of timber. They cover areas having a particularly favourable climate: there is abundant rainfall spread evenly over the year, except for an occasional short period of drought lasting three months at the most; the temperature remains at an average of 25°-26° centigrade; humidity is very high and there is seldom a lack of moisture in the air. Such conditions are scarcely enjoyable for man but certainly afford a most suitable environment for forest growth and industrial crops like palm, and they produce here the highest yields of oil, rubber, cacao, coffee, and bananas.
In studying Africa's climate one is surprised to discover that over a fringe from a few dozen to two or three hundred kilometers in breadth around the equatorial forest zone, the climate is the same as that prevailing in the forest. All the climatic conditions favouring a dense, humid forest are there, and yet one finds vast prairies of tall grasses, sometimes dotted with shrubs or small, scattered trees, sometimes bare of any such vegetation. They alternate with areas supporting food crops or are interspersed with patches of high forest.
Considering that plant types are conditioned by environment and more particularly by climate, these forest borderlands constitute an astonishing anomaly.
In view of these dense forest stands adjacent to savannah land, the natural assumption would be that the forest "climax" type, favoured by climate, was slowly encroaching on the grassland, and that we were witnessing an ecological transition.
This explanation is, however, inaccurate. The African continent is an old insular shelf that came into existence in primeval times. The forest has had ample time to occupy all areas having favourable environmental conditions. One has only to realize the speed with which it is capable, even today, of invading recent alluvial deposits to agree that this is so.
A study of the woody flora of the borderland savannahs points conclusively to forest regression. The small trees with shrubs which have established themselves on the savannahs belong to a few species only. They are members of a common light-demanding plant community to be found in open spaces throughout tropical Africa. Here they are alien species which have emigrated from regions having a drier climate. Their hardiness, the ease with which they propagate, their resistance to destructive factors, and their ability to throw out new shoots and suckers give them that power of extending their range which is common to all weeds. They do not belong to the dense-forest flora and in any case could not survive under the closed canopy.
NORTH KILIMANJARO PINE PLANTATION trying to reforest Africa
Forest regression. How did the regression from high forest come about? The process continues to unfold before our eyes.
The primary cause can be ascribed to the clearing done by native populations who, living in a compact, unbroken forest, are forced to cut down trees in order to allow the sun to reach their crops. These clearings are not peculiar to Africa. In all tropical countries people use the same methods of preparing land for cultivation. They fell trees and burn them and set fire to those left standing. After one or two crops, they abandon the exhausted soil. A low, dense growth of shrubs, small trees, and creepers, termed secondary scrub, rapidly invades the cleared space. It consists of species different from those of the original forest. Meanwhile, further tracts of forests are cleared where the humus and soil, enriched by wood ash from burnt vegetation, will provide adequate crops.
The primitive nomadic method of agriculture has been practiced by all native populations since time immemorial, and the original forests have, for the most part, been replaced by secondary forests. The latter, provided conditions are favourable, may slowly revert to the original type but such is not always the case. Recovery is poor when the soil has become extremely impoverished, where slopes are worn away by erosion, or where local climatic conditions include a dry season particularly long and arid. In such cases the soil covering, instead of secondary forest, often becomes savannah-type grassland or brush-lands.
The virgin forest is not prone to fire, but the stunted secondary scrub, the savannah and the brush-land become sufficiently desiccated during the dry season to be inflammable. Fires raging every year over the savannah manage to penetrate each time a little further into the high forest by attacking the grass-type plants and secondary scrub which do not resist the flames.
Forest regression is very noticeable where, as frequently happens, the local population concentrates on clearing land on the forest edge, thus opening up gaps through which the fires can penetrate; or in hilly areas where crops are planted on rather steep banks covered only with a thin layer of soil.
It is for these reasons that the forest borderland zone now exhibits such varied characteristics: scattered remnants of the primeval forest, not yet attacked or protected against fire by accidents of topography, such as rocky ridges or very humid valleys; thickets of low scrub, remains of the former secondary scrub that followed land clearings; areas covered with tall grasses and savannahs, bare except for a few tall half-burnt trees, bearing witness to recent clearing; older savannah land already supporting shrubs and small trees belonging to an alien xerophilous flora.
African soil deteriorates with a rapidity unknown in temperate zones where exposure to the sun is less intense and of shorter duration.
We are witnessing the death struggle of a plant world, slow stages in the drying up and degeneration of tropical Africa.
Unnoticeable regression. At present, two factors with conflicting tendencies are affecting the rate of disappearance of the dense African forest.
Populations, in general, tend to move from savannah lands to the forest, first settling around the outskirts, then pushing back the forest limits. Gradually they reach portions of the forest which are increasingly humid and have a greater power of recovery and resistance to fire. The spread of savannahs tends in this way to slow down, as compared to the past when settlers were dealing with less resistant forests under drier climates; the further the advance toward the heart of the equatorial forest, the more the transformation into savannah is held in check. On the other hand, intensive land clearing has become more general with the present-day development of agriculture, particularly of industrial crops, and certain populations have increased in density while economic development in general has given rise to constant shifts in populations, thus increasing the burden on forests.
The contraction of the high evergreen forest may appear slow. There are those who deny that anything of the sort is taking place because they notice no appreciable change from one year to the next! except for occasional nibbles at the forest outskirts by brush-fires which, on dry soils, may sometimes succeed in penetrating the understorey for some yards. In fact, the surrender of the forest to the savannah is spread over vast areas around the perimeter. There is, as it were, slow deterioration altering the landscape in a manner impossible to detect over short periods. Somehow the forest dissolves almost imperceptibly into savannah
In the past, this was not always the case in drier areas likely to be cleared for cultivation. Ground fires were likely to spread directly to the understorey and even to the forest canopy. Forest decay was then definite and rapid. It is because all he forests that could easily be set on fire were burnt out long before Europeans ever arrived that, today, in regions having a climate more properly belonging to a forest climax, we see in contrast either savannah land, bare or supporting an alien flora, or the high evergreen forest, well able to protect itself against man's incursions and the fires which lick at its fringes. The equatorial forest is still diminishing today but at a much slower pace than before.
Were it not for the annual ground fires, the forest would of itself regain much of the ground that it has lost. Every experiment so far demonstrates that recovery is rapid when the soil has retained its humus content and a good structure.
The equatorial forests form an impressive mass in the heart of Africa but represent only a small percentage of the total land area of the continent, even when we exclude the Sahara, the maritime deserts of the Somali coast and the west coast of southern Africa.
Tropical Africa, which has two well-defined seasons, the rainy season and a long dry season, is covered with vast stretches of wooded savannah and with open forests of small-sized trees, which at times grow close enough together to resemble forests of the temperate zones, forests in which, however, there would be a soil covering of grasses.
Each year at the beginning of the dry season, this country is swept by fires. These, however, are only ground fires. Trees and shrubs may have their foliage singed, but as a rule they escape burning. In the wake of the fires, the earth lies covered with a black dust of carbon and ashes and the tree stems appear scorched. Nature seems dead, but should rain fall or dew form a few times, a soft haze of grass covers the soil and the trees turn green again. Nature comes alive, fairer even than before the coming of the flames, when only dried and withered leaves were to be seen.
Each year the same phenomenon is repeated. It seems as if things had always been so, but that is not true.
Actually, we are witnessing the death struggle of a plant world, slow stages in the drying up and degeneration of tropical Africa.
The insidious thing about it is that, generally speaking, nobody seems to realize it, in much the same way that the friends of a very sick man, who has been an invalid for years, get so used to seeing him in an ailing condition that they forget that once he was in perfect health. They cease to perceive the slow encroachment of disease until one day the sick man dies.
Artificial landscape. In Africa, it is now taken for granted that fires, savannahs, and sparse forest stands constitute a state of equilibrium which has always existed. Certain geographic ecologists, who do not yet fully comprehend the biological evolution of these associations, call these wooded savannahs a "climatical" type of vegetation.
Yet a look at these trees and shrubs suffices to show the damaged, stunted boles and the scraggy tops unable to develop normally because the branches are scorched each year, and to prove that the young shoots and seedlings are annually consumed by fire except for a few that manage with difficulty to survive.
It is only because the plants have such remarkable vitality and such power to throw out shoots and suckers and to develop a thick and often corky bark that this woody vegetation survives at all.
The naturalist, however, can but wonder at this unnatural association of grasses and trees - the grasses tend to smother seedlings and young plants and the shade of the trees tends to kill the light-seeking grasses.
If it were not that the annual fires kept the forest cover open and allowed the grass to regenerate, the latter would disappear in a matter of years or centuries, depending on the particular environment.
The typical African landscape of wooded savannahs is artificial, except in the desert borderland areas. It has come into existence from the effects of fire and clearings on the old, dense, close-canopied high forest, with shrubby understorey but with no grass undergrowth, a forest of a type altogether different from the humid equatorial forest but the formation of which is lost in the mists of time.
All the forests which in the past covered the arid regions of Africa with a huge unbroken mantle have today ceased to exist, save for a few traces that have to be painstakingly tracked down in uninhabited areas; there, however, it is a surprise to find in closed communities all those species of trees and shrubs that are customarily found in isolated stunted groups on the wooded savannahs. This is their real habitat. Here species are associated together according to climate and soil, whereas ordinarily they seem to be thrown together haphazardly with no apparent reason. There is a compact understorey of shrubs, woody climbers and creepers below a forest canopy, varying in height from 12 to 20 metres, sometimes closed, sometimes partly open, depending on the soil. Various tree associations are to be found with some particular dominant species: for instance, with Anogeissus; with Isoberlinia-Uapaca-Monites; with tall leguminous Burkea-Erythrophleum tetrapleura-Prosopis; with
Parkia-Pterocarpus; with Brachystegia-Isoberlinia; with Cryptosephalum; with Detarium-Parinari-Afzelia; with Combretum-Terminalia; with Anogeissus-Boswellia.
These latter stands will sooner or later disappear. The process can be watched, as the clearing of land for cultivation proceeds. Sometimes fire alone is sufficient to destroy the forest. The undergrowth is most vulnerable to fire during the dry season. Fires generally sweep along lanes into the forest according to the direction of the wind and the degree of dryness of the jungle. The more resistant patches are left isolated. Grass species immediately establish themselves in the clearings and in the following season feed anew the flames and help the fires to spread further. The dominant trees are more or less able to resist because of the protection afforded by their thick bark and their deep root system. Nevertheless they often suffer damage at the base and the cumulative effect of several seasons' fires accounts for a great many of them.
Thus the forest is gradually thinned and reverts to grassland. In the course of centuries savannahs tend to replace the forest and the latter would have long since vanished had it not been for the exceptional vitality of some of its component species which manage to survive in spite of all adverse circumstances. But as long as fires remain an annual occurrence, the forest will continue to deteriorate.
These developments, which changed the face of Africa, date back to a time so far distant that no memory of them is left. The change was complete and general. Were it not for the forest areas that have survived, it would be difficult to imagine how things had once been.
The consequences
The consequences
In general, it can be said that tropical Africa is tending to become savannah Economically, for both local and world forestry, this tendency must have serious consequences.
Except for the equatorial forest regions, Africa already imports timber. Further progress and increase of its population will only make this situation worse. Where the climate is dry, haphazard clearing around centres of population has already resulted in a total disappearance of woody growth. Now the women of a community are often obliged to walk for hours in order to gather firewood which they will have to carry back to the village; otherwise they must buy their firewood for cooking at a high price, in the market-place. Timber has become scarce; straight-stemmed trees are to be found only along far distant riverbanks. The problem of wood shortage has to be faced everywhere in these dry, populated areas, and the problem is indeed trying for both the local population and the administration.
The resources of the great equatorial forests, on the other hand, greatly exceed the needs of the local population.
Timber reserves are still very considerable, compared with the relatively insignificant quantities now taken out for export. The outlook for the future, however, is disturbing since each year, as further land is cleared, part of these reserves go up in smoke.
Secondary growth of medium and small trees covers larger and larger areas as time goes on. The timber is soft, non-durable, and good for no particular use. On the average, one-to two-thirds of the forest area consists of secondary growth of no great value.
When the shortage of timber forces the world to start giving serious consideration to African woods, the vaunted equatorial forests might only be able to supply an insignificant contribution to world production, unless precautions are taken now.
In certain areas, however, climate and species offer wonderful possibilities for rapid growth of timber, it would be possible by very simple silvicultural methods and with no great financial outlay to establish rich forests on the coastal areas of the Gulf of Guinea, from the Ivory Coast to Gabon.
The effect of the disappearance of the forest on living conditions in Africa is far more serious than its effect on timber production, since the future of mankind on a whole continent is at stake.
The removal of the forest cover influences the climate, soil conservation, and water reserves far more than would be the case anywhere else in the world.
To begin with, as was mentioned earlier, we are dealing here with a general phenomenon which affects the greater part of tropical Africa and thus assumes the proportions of a major factor in regulating climatic conditions.
For the duration of the dry season, lasting from four to nine months (except in the desert and desert borderland countries), the bare, scorched earth is exposed to the sun's intense heat and is subject to a high rate of evaporation, caused either by the direct heating of the soil or by the dryness of the atmosphere and the desiccating winds that prevail during this season.
The major result of this dry heat is a change in the physical structure of the soil, making it less resistant to the forces of erosion which are set in motion by the violent rains ending the dry season. There is also a fall in the water-table which, though made up to some extent by later rains, still affects the total water supply for the year.
The exposure of the soil to excessive heat, followed by severe leaching, leads to erosion in all its forms: gully erosion and sheet erosion, loss of productivity through the burying of humus, and the disintegration of the colloidal structure of the soil - all important elements in soil fertility. The African soil deteriorates with a rapidity unknown in temperate zones where exposure to the sun is less intense and of shorter duration. Deterioration is also accelerated by the loss of carbon and nitrogen as a result of the burning of the vegetation during the period of ground fires.
For the reasons enumerated above, the crops of the farmers yield very lime There are, generally speaking, no fertilizers to replenish the soil and, as a result, Africa is a poor country agriculturally. The people hardly question this state of affairs, having long since become accustomed to meagre crops. When the soil is exhausted in one place, they can move and clear further areas of forest. Wooded land is still to be found where, although the trees have deteriorated, the soil is still capable of cultivation. Thus the process will continue so long as virgin soil remains to be cultivated, but it cannot go on forever.
One odd result of erosion, following deforestation, can be seen in certain regions of undulating plateaus. Beneath the topsoil are found hard ferruginous and lateritic strata, probably of fossil origin. When the surface soil wears away, these strata are exposed and harden into a ferruginous or lateritic shell which will support no vegetation other than barren grass. Such regions acquire a semi-desert character in spite of abundant rain.
BURKINA FASO REFORESTATION there Is still time
Hostile weather. Africa is a continent badly situated with regard to the major atmospheric currents. On the Atlantic coast, the marine trade winds veer off in other directions; in the North Atlantic, they are diverted and blow from northeast to southwest; in the South Atlantic, they blow toward South America, from southeast to northwest. The trade winds are diverted by the low pressures over the continent and only cool the coastal regions; they bring no rain but merely humidity and fog.
During the Northern Hemisphere winter, North Africa is swept by dry winds coming from the Sahara. These are continental trade winds, called harmattan in West Africa and "the Egyptian current" in the Nile region. They exercise a drying effect up to the Gulf of Guinea in West Africa, and to the equator and even beyond in Central Africa. Northeast Africa receives the Asiatic winter monsoon. This wind is usually dry but, after passing over the Indian Ocean, it brings a few light winter rains into Eritrea (northern Ethiopia) and Somaliland (Somalia, Djibouti and southeastern Ethiopia).
During this same time of the year, southern Africa, where it is the warm and rainy season, is under the influence of the Indian Ocean trade winds, which blow in a general southeast to northwest direction. They cause rain to fall on the coastal areas, but they dry up rapidly and bring little rain inland. During the southern winter (northern summer), they are drawn to the overheated Asiatic continent and, by avoiding Africa, are drawn into the powerful air currents of the Asiatic wet monsoon; East Africa, however, receives very little rain.
Thus while Africa gets little benefit from the major air currents emanating from the sea, it is much exposed to dry, continental winds, which absorb its moisture reserves, or to sea winds, which have lost their water content. Fortunately, there is one important exception, without which Africa would have dried up long ago. The equatorial Atlantic monsoon, blowing from the southwest toward the continent, brings abundant summer rains. Drawn inland by low barometric pressure, it penetrates far into the heart of the continent up to the southern borders of the Sahara and crosses the continent to Ethiopia.
The amount of rain originating from the sea and brought in by the monsoon is important, but experiments carried out in Africa, to determine the proportion in rainfall between water vapour from ground evaporation and from sea winds, have shown that over half, or even two-thirds, originated from ground evaporation.
The effect of the disappearance of the forest on living conditions in Africa is far more serious than its effect on timber production, since the future of mankind on a whole continent is at stake.
Evaporation from the ground is governed by the water reserves in the soil. Anything that tends to decrease the latter affects the former. Deforestation involves the loss of soils that constitute reservoirs for the accumulation of water. It exposes these soils to evaporation and to desiccation during the prolonged dry season, so that it cannot but decrease Africa's water reserves and, in the long run, the amount of precipitation.
The dry forests which once covered the major portion of tropical Africa are not of much importance as far as timber production is concerned, except locally. Their role consists in protecting the soil against erosion and desiccation during the dry season. Their disappearance from whole areas probably has had, long before the present age, a continuously unfavourable influence on the climate and undoubtedly has had disastrous effects on the soil.
The diminishing surface of the equatorial forests has also had other results. A vast forest mass can affect the climate through the great amount of moisture it releases into the atmosphere from evaporation and which not only gives rise to local rainfall but also increases the amount of precipitation in the warmer deforested areas surrounding the forest. Early in the century a study was made of the influence of forests on rainfall in Europe. Experiments were confined to one particular forest and the results were inconclusive. They could not have been otherwise. Only immense stretches of forest land, such as are found in equatorial areas, are capable of producing sufficient evaporation to exercise a climatic effect. Furthermore, the moisture thrown off by evaporation from a forest is often carried long distances by air currents before becoming condensed and precipitated as rain.
Masses of equatorial forests help to keep dry areas moist and to increase the amount of rainfall in such regions even when they are located quite a distance away. Their effect is comparable to that of the sea or of great lakes - the presence of the equatorial forest approximating climatically that of deep ocean gulfs reaching into Africa. The monsoon, blowing inland from the sea, rapidly sheds most of its moisture in the coastal belt and would soon be unable to produce abundant rains in the heart of Africa if it were not reinforced along its course by vapour from large rivers, marshlands, soil, and vegetation. The equatorial forests of the Guinea (West African) coast assume their greatest importance at the beginning and end of the dry seasons, when the soil left uncovered by the action of fire or covered with dry savannahs is desiccated on the surface and only the forests can still yield up moisture to the monsoon winds. Without them, the rainy season of the Sudanese regions
would probably be of shorter duration.
The amount of rainfall over the southern borderland regions of the Sahara depends directly on the Atlantic monsoon. When the latter is active, rainfall is comparatively abundant. If not, a drought year results and famine strikes man and beast. Additional rainfall at the beginning and end of the dry season depends on the moisture supplied to the monsoon by the coastal forest regions of the Gulf of Guinea.
FEWER TREES MEAN LESS FOOD compounding the crisis
Drying up of inner Africa
What has been said above regarding the effect of African forests upon environment makes it probable that the wholesale destruction of inland forests would accelerate deterioration of vegetation and soil in Africa and bring about acute desert conditions.
These changes in the aspect of the vegetation and correspondingly in the environment took place for the most part, as previously pointed out, at remote epochs long before the advent of Europeans. They continue even today wherever there are any forests left.
It is surprising to note the ease with which it was possible for man to set fire to such large areas within periods of time which are relatively short when compared to the age of the forests covering Africa.
Resistance to fire varies considerably according to the type of forest. Dense humid forests protect themselves better against all destructive agencies. Certain types of dry, closed, or semi-closed forests are very prone to fire damage. They deteriorate and become open forests or wooded savannahs but they survive somehow and, should the threat of fire be removed, could again become high forests. Other forest communities, on the contrary, may disappear altogether with great rapidity. This is the case, for instance, with the forests of western Madagascar which are almost nonexistent today, with the forests of the lower Congo and Mayombe regions of west central Africa and of Futa-Jalon in French Guinea (the Fouta Djallon massif, Guinea), and probably with a great many others. Everything tends to show that these forests, so easy to transform into savannahs, are not in biological equilibrium with the present climate, which has apparently become drier than the climate prevailing
during the remote epochs when these forests came into being.
Such a theory is not improbable but it is impossible to prove it by meteorological statistics, since, with few exceptions, such data have only been collected in the last 50 years, a mere fleeting instant in the biological age of the earth. What we do know is that the climate of tropical Africa changed several times during the Quaternary Age and probably also during prior geological ages. Concurrently with the glacial periods of the temperate zones, Africa had alternate periods of drought and heavy rainfall that furthered the formation of deserts and of the equatorial forests.
Remnants of old canal systems in the Sahara, traces of human occupation, certain facts established historically, and vestiges of a tropical flora south of the Atlas Mountains - all point conclusively to the presence of humid periods. South of the Sahara, in Senegal, the Sudan, Nigeria, and Chad, the sand-hills (ergs) now hemmed in by vegetation and the cloak of sand covering vast expanses prove conversely that desert conditions formerly extended south far beyond the present limits. The forest vegetation of West Africa presents a curious mixture of different floras which developed as environment changed with climatic phases. Some have remained to form groups of species which have more or less adapted themselves to new environmental conditions, though their presence seems ecologically abnormal.
The salvation of Africa is a gigantic task, requiring great tenacity for several generations, that can be achieved only if undertaken on an international scale.
International action
Deforestation of Africa is going on now as it has been for ages past. At present we are witnessing the finishing touches to a process which probably started before the dawn of history and which reached a climax during the unknown era when the first great invasions of man into Africa took place.
The social progress of the African population is linked with the development of their agriculture, of the means of production, and of adequate living conditions in their countries. The wholesale disappearance of the forests tends, as we have shown, to make Africa a continent less and less favourable to man's progress, save in a few favoured sections.
Is it possible to take adequate measures to protect Africa, its soil and its forest cover? The answer is yes, since the evil and the remedies are known.
Restrictions must be imposed to limit indiscriminate burning and land clearing, and to prevent all unnecessary destruction. In some cases, new agricultural methods must be brought into use; in others, cultivation of any kind must be prohibited. At times, migration of populations from areas that are too arid and too poor toward richer centres should be helped and encouraged. The work of the indigenous population must be made more productive. New resources should be made available to them through the development of crops suitable to the environment. Sometimes reforestation would have to be carried out and often forest protection would be indicated.
In this field, considerable research and many experiments have already been undertaken by various countries, but there is, of course, a wide gap between theory and practice.
In our opinion, the salvation of Africa is a gigantic task, requiring great tenacity for several generations, that can be achieved only if undertaken on an international scale.
We also believe that however intelligent, praiseworthy, and timely any particular measure may be, if it is applied within geographical limits that are too narrow, it will fail to achieve worthwhile results simply because these would not be commensurate with the scale of the African continent. All African countries are concerned. Forest masses yield an influence over wide distances and what is done in one country may have repercussions in other distant countries.
TANZANIAN ACACIAS fighting the tide of deforestation
Pooling of effort, joint research, and the synchronizing of undertakings appear to us imperative if failure is to be avoided.
As a beginning, we believe that, within the framework of the international agencies, an office for the protection of African soils and forests could first usefully be entrusted with the study of all these problems; later this office would become well qualified to promote policies of protection which should be adhered to by all governments. It would also become the agency empowered to make recommendations and suggest measures which should be adopted, and to keep under observation the evolution of a continent which at present seems doomed to become unproductive grassland or even a desert.
<section>6</section>
Technical assistance: Forestry and the Point Four Program
E.I. Kotok
E.I. Kotok, at the time he wrote this article, was Assistant Chief in Charge of Forest Research, United States Department of Agriculture Forest Service.
In its October-December 1950 issue (Vol. 4, No. 4). Unasylva published a special issue on the UN's new "Expanded Technical Assistance Programme. FAO's own involvement with technical assistance to developing countries had begun in September 1950 - only one month before that issue of Unasylva appeared - with the signing of agreements with Burma, Guatemala and Saudi Arabia.
The first time technical assistance was discussed at UN headquarters was in 1946, during the First General Assembly, at Lake Success. In a letter of 2 December, the Lebanese delegation proposed an item, then called "Expert Advice", which was accepted and discussed by the Assembly's Joint Second and Third Committee, and then approved by the Assembly in the form of a resolution. The text referred the item to the Economic and Social Council to study the question of "providing effective ways and means for furnishing, in cooperation with the specialized agencies, expert advice in the economic, social and cultural fields to member nations who desire the assistance".
The fundamental point in the Lebanese proposal was the need for countries politically independent but lacking sufficient technical and economic means, to obtain help "through collective international action to avoid bilateral agreements' which might "endanger their political independence. Within a year the Economic and Social Council held several meetings and came up with a resolution instructing the Secretary-General of the UN to "establish machinery within the Secretariat" and to work with the specialized agencies in assisting the States Members with information on expert personnel, research facilities, and other resources; in the elaboration of plans and programmes for their utilization; and in assistance in securing teams of experts who would study specific problems and recommend solutions.
The structure for technical assistance was soon ready, but the take-off was to be very slow because of the limited means of a young UN, counting only 55 members, many of which were economically and physically wounded by war.
Meanwhile, in November 1948, President Truman had won the presidential election in the United States, securing a second term in office. On 20 January 1949, he introduced the concept of Point Four in his inaugural address.
"Not so long ago," said an article entitled "FAO and technical assistance" in the Unasylva special issue, and written by the FAO secretariat, "Point Four was not a programme but a state of mind. Now its proposals are beginning to be fused into a workable design."
· President Truman's announcement of the Point Four Program struck a highly responsive chord in the United States of America. Here was a measure which sought through peaceful means to build up a modern economic base over the widest possible area. Its major plank, to bring the "know-how" and capital of the more highly developed countries to the underdeveloped regions of the world, had a particular meaning for the professional men of America. Never in the history of our country had there been as keen an interest in overall world affairs. The last world war and the exigencies that have grown out of it obviously were the reasons for this.
As discussions of the Point Four Program proceeded, our State Department marshalled together many groups of scientists to consider the scope and the manner in which such a programme could be carried out. A good many American foresters were called into these conferences, and they contributed forestry items that might be included in the programme. It is rather fortunate that in the last decade the opportunities for American foresters to observe and understand forest problems of the world have been greater than ever before. They were therefore able to urge with sympathy and understanding that forestry be given its fair share in the Point Four Program.
A further factor that had an important bearing on the acceptance of the foresters' viewpoints grew out of developments in the Marshall Plan and the subsequent Economic Cooperation Administration (ECA) Program. In these programmes dealing largely with Central European economic problems, policy-makers and planners, both in America and in Europe, were startled to find that forestry was a necessity and not a luxury. For American participants in the ECA Program, led by some of our outstanding industrialists, it was a new awakening to the importance of forestry. This has had repercussions even in internal American policy, where we had been slowly moulding an American forestry policy.
DROUGHT-RESISTANT IRANIAN PLANTS started with FAO assistance
The point I wish to make is that American foresters not only have had an interest in the Point Four Program but were given the chance to shape it in part in the preliminary stages. Another factor that influenced American opinion and outlook regarding forestry grew out of our experience of observing the benefits that grow out of well-managed and highly industrialized forest properties, both in Europe and in some parts of our own country. We also could appreciate the consequences of mismanaged and abused forests, the effects they have on rural communities, and the corollary consequences in destructive floods and desolation. We noted that in our own country, and those of us who had the opportunity observed it in far too many places elsewhere in the world.
So it was easy for us to envisage an important part for forestry in a Point Four Program, and we hope that nothing goes amiss in achieving this objective.
The question that now requires attention deals with the manner in which such a programme can be carried out positively and effectively. No one who has studied this problem has been concerned over any lack of technical skills to be mustered for the underdeveloped regions of the world. We also must assume that finances will be available in due course where justifiable plans are presented to the appropriate governments and international organizations.
FORTY YEARS OF TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE harvesting the fruits
The role of FAO
We now come to a happy circumstance that has grown out of Franklin Delano Roosevelt's promotion of a Food and Agriculture Organization. It is well to reread the charter that created this instrumentality. Even with its all too meagre budget, FAO is one international organization that in five years has been able to assemble technicians in the fields of agriculture, fisheries, and forestry from practically every region of the world. It has been able, through its own personnel, to get a real understanding of the problems in these fields, to establish contacts with technicians and governments, and to assemble a substantial body of information which will prove more and more useful as time goes on.
The Division of Forestry and Forest Products in FAO has made good use of its five years. Work that it has performed for governments in underdeveloped countries has given it a rich experience in how to deal with their problems and how to assemble specialists and experts from many lands for task forces.
For forestry, therefore, it is obvious that FAO should become an important international agency in the Point Four Program. It has had good training for this task.
Those of us who have participated in FAO conferences and other of its activities and have deliberated on its programmes have always been disturbed that recommendations from governments for work to be undertaken far exceeded the financial capabilities of the organization. The demands for new work and the expansion of activities for the forestry section of FAO have been especially heavy from countries in the underdeveloped regions. Funds, therefore, that may come from the Point Four Program may well fill this need, and profitably.
Long-term developments
There are a few troublesome possibilities that will have to be guarded against. There is no quick and easy cure for belated development and no short cut to rapid rehabilitation of abused forest land. Programmes will take time to develop. Some of the capital investments will have deferred returns. But in such development temporary incomes may be available to indigenous populations. And in the long run productivity of lands and forests with their related industries in place should bring livelihoods to many and a source of wealth for internal and external use.
The Point Four Program cannot merely depend upon its well wishes. A good many of the richer countries have already indicated the extent to which they will contribute to this work. It now devolves upon those countries who seek work under this plan to formulate their programmes for consideration by the appropriate international agencies.
Forestry under this programme may be the key project to stimulate internal industrial development in many regions. We must not, however, lose sight of the fact that the world's wood basket is none too full for growing populations under any expanding economy. The world needs productive forests for an inexhaustible array of forest products.
<section>7</section>
Technical assistance: A view from Brazil
Vasconcelos Sobrinho
The debate over technical assistance following the announcement of President Truman's Point Four
Program absorbed technicians, economists and politicians. But it was the experts directly concerned who wrote most of the papers and articles about it: the main themes were what technical assistance should do or should be. Foresters from developing countries were quick to realize the impact such a programme could have. In the field of forestry, Brazil was particularly interested, and the Director of the Brazilian Forest Service, Vasconcelos Sobrinho, wrote an article expressing his country's views. Part of that article, which appeared in Unasylva in October 1950, is published here.
· In order to study all the possibilities in the vast and rich forests of this country, it will be necessary for Brazil to arrange for technical assistance from other countries who have experts in the different forest research branches. Brazil is still in the initial phase of forest industrialization, using the most elementary techniques even in the cutting of the trees. Also Brazil does not have available experts who are sufficiently experienced to draw up plans for the existing overall needs. Therefore it is necessary to obtain such experts from other countries where the forest industries attempt to use all the products of the forest, and the methods employed are based on experience acquired over a long time.
However, although Brazil urgently needs foreign experts to aid in plans for improving its forest industry, nevertheless, it is also in a position to supply technicians with a good knowledge of the ecological condition of the different natural forest regions. Brazil has within its frontiers a great variety of different types of climate and phytological zones and is able to reciprocate by providing specialists who are experts in regional problems and whose services might be of value to countries which have humid tropical regions similar to the Hiléia. There are also available specialists on entirely different problems, such as those concerning arid tropical regions; their experience has been gained from studies and observations made in the vast northern part of Brazil.
In this way. Brazil is in a position to carry out an exchange of technicians on forestry problems with interested countries whose climatic and ecological conditions are the same as those found in Brazil.
In order to realize such a comprehensive programme of technical assistance, FAO can be of great help, principally in helping to secure personnel with overall experience in the various forest industries and industrial techniques in which Brazil at present is inadequately staffed.
<section>8</section>
The forest crop of the future: Quality or quantity?
FAO forestry staff
An important issue in tropical forest management today is whether to reforest - or afforest - with plantations or with mixed, natural stands. While plantations generally offer the promise of greater output per hectare, they are expensive to maintain and have uncertain long-term environmental impacts. Natural stands normally produce a lower output than plantations, but they are generally cheaper to manage, produce a wider variety of trees and provide greater environmental stability.
In the early years of forestry at FAO, there was debate over a similar issue: would quantity prevail over quality in the forest crop of the future? An FAO paper raised the issue at the Third World Forestry Congress, in Helsinki in July 1949. The majority of delegates favoured an emphasis on quality. A few months later, Unasylva (Vol. 4, No. 2, 1950) carried an article by FAO's forestry staff on the same question which, at Helsinki, was "left rather in the air". Here are some excerpts.
WOOD QUALITY harder to achieve
· In view of the varied interpretations which can be attached to the word "quality", it is not surprising that the trade and the forester tend to think in different terms.
For the trade the prime factor is the value of the timber, based on suitability for the purpose for which it is required. The user is not interested in the vigour, health, or appearance of the stand from which the timber has come. He assesses value according to utility and the extent to which the raw material measures up to the particular requirements of an industry.
To the forester "quality" is a subtle mixture of fine appearance and value. He is more concerned with the value of the standing trees than with the value of the harvested timber. But, generally, the forester cannot help associating value with the general aspect of the forest crop.
MONOCULTURE IN ARGENTINA maximizing the volume
The ideal forest crop
Before considering the world market, the forester must consider the demand in his own locality. It may therefore be asked whether in the event that he decides to lower felling limits, he will not run the risk of limiting the size and grade of product which he can offer on the market.
Will this not lead to local upsets, which could be avoided by more progressive local action, even though the global trend is inescapable? In other words, is there not a danger, even if we again stress we are generalizing, that the mere statement that there is this trend will lead foresters to try to establish more uniform types of crop, whose output will furnish supplies for some industries but fail to satisfy the raw material needs of others? Is it not contradictory to foster the idea of integrated forest industries while recommending steps which might render it difficult to supply certain industries that should constitute an integral part of such a set-up?
The paper submitted by FAO to the Helsinki Congress attempted to obviate just such a reproach by suggesting that present trends in the requirements of wood-using industries made it advisable, whenever possible, to cultivate mixed, uneven-aged forests rather than uniform, even-aged types. Preference was expressed for what might be termed a silviculture looking toward the growth of individual trees rather than the growth of the stand as a whole.
Even where this kind of silviculture is possible - and it cannot always be possible - it is assuredly the more difficult to carry out successfully. It involves complex methods of management and continuous control of the forest, which is not practicable without a large staff, an adequate network of roads and paths, an effective fire-fighting system, and a grouping of industries capable of absorbing all the produce of the forest. However, as an ideal, it is the most flexible means of adapting forest production, not only to the special needs of industries, but also to changes in their requirements.
When a certain industry needs a particular species or very large-diameter trees from a forest managed in this way, the desired species can be favoured or selected trees left to grow to the required diameter. When the demand from this particular industry falls off, the proportion of the particular species in the growing stock can be changed or the maximum felling limit reduced. This can be done without drastic treatment of the forest or any serious modification in the working plan, and without any interruption in the supplies to other industries.
It is advisable, whenever possible, to cultivate mixed, uneven-aged forests rather than uniform, even-aged types.
Were such a system of silviculture universally adopted, it might be virtually unnecessary to worry further about trends in wood-using industries, because the adaptation of forest production to industrial requirements would be practically automatic. Unfortunately, we are still very far indeed from such an ideal state of affairs, and, as we have just stated, such a system presupposes a harmonious development of both silvicultural methods and forest industries, which cannot be expected to come about quickly. It is nevertheless true that the present trend in wood requirements logically favours such a development.
The conclusion of this paper is that, from the silvicultural standpoint, there are no valid grounds for an assumption that quantity production will displace quality production. For the future, as in the past, a fine-looking tree and a fine stand will have to measure up to certain standards which are a sign of high raw-material output of the desired quality. Although on the global scale the requirements of the wood-using industries appear to be for "quantity" rather than "quality", this does not in any way lessen the need for effective and improved silviculture. The trend may, and probably will, necessitate more or less extensive local adjustments. But such adjustments need not cause the forester to alter his ideal of a high-quality forest. Rather, quantity and quality production will go together as a means toward wood abundance and economical silviculture.
No strict rules can, of course, be laid down for foresters as to the course which they should follow in view of probable wood utilization trends. Not only is there room for much latitude in the light of local conditions, but naturally each country will define its own policy, coordinating this policy with that of other countries in the world through the medium of FAO and its regional bodies.
The Division of Forestry and Forest Products seeks to point out the trends as they emerge from statistics and general thinking, and to deduce from them consequences of worldwide import. That is what was attempted in the paper presented to the Third World Forestry Congress, and what is again attempted here.
FAO's answers are here, In two widely quoted recent books on tropical forest resources
FAO FORESTRY PAPER No. 30 (1982) tropical forest resources (available In English, French and Spanish
FAO FORESTRY PAPER No. 37 (1982) conservation and development of tropical forest resources (available In English and Spanish)
<section>9</section>
Forestry in Mexico
An interview with Dr Eduardo Pesqueira Olea, Secretary of Agriculture and Water Resources, the United Mexican States
Dr Eduardo Pesqueira Olea
Unasylva: Mr Secretary, why was Mexico interested in hosting the Ninth World Forestry Congress?
Dr Pesqueira Olea: The World Forestry Congress in itself offers a number of advantages to whichever country has the honour to be selected as its venue.
The fact of assembling in Mexico forestry intellectuals from all over the world and of having the opportunity to strengthen the ties between our own reality and that of other countries would alone justify the event, but the World Forestry Congress offers much more: it enables us to reinforce our mechanisms of exchange with countries that can contribute scientific and technological information appropriate to our development conditions, and to establish technical, scientific and commercial cooperation agreements with other countries with common interests; and it enables our national scientific community dealing with forest activities to learn directly of progress and trends in forestry science and technology in other countries and regions. It will project the true image of Mexico's forest potential internationally.
Unasylva: What will sponsoring the Congress mean for Mexico - for its forestry programme and for the country as a whole?
Dr Pesqueira Olea: The National Programme for Temperate and Broad-leaved Forests (PRO-NABSE) has been worked out within the National Planning System, and it establishes clearly the aims, strategy, scope and actions to be carried out in the near future to invigorate forestry activities. For that purpose, the presence of technicians at the World Forestry Congress will allow a revision and even an enrichment of some aspects of our programme, based on the experiences of other countries that have faced similar challenges in their turn and overcome them successfully. The Congress represents to the country in general an excellent promotional opportunity to encourage forestry education, a fundamental element in forestry development in our country. Only a country conscious of the volume and value of its resources-can maximize their development.
Unasylva: What efforts will you be making to inform the Mexican people about the Congress and to involve them in its activities? How much regional and international attention do you expect the Congress to attract?
Dr Pesqueira Olea: In answer to your first question, we will use all necessary means to obtain the widest diffusion of the Congress through every communications medium - the press, radio and TV - to inform people about all activities before, during and after the Congress, and to make them realize the significance of the world's forest resources, and particularly those of Mexico.
In conjunction with this information process, we will involve the people in the Congress by carrying out a scientific, cultural and technical programme consisting of events in keeping with the theme of the Congress, "forestry resources in the integral development of society". This programme was started last March. The technical and scientific forestry community is participating in discussions and proposals for alternative solutions to the more pressing problems in Mexico's forest activities.
Furthermore, we will foster promotional activities on forestry culture before and after the event, including a conference on forestry communication and culture, a poster and photography show, an international forest film festival, and concerts of music for wooden instruments.
We believe that the Congress has already attracted the world's attention because of the special circumstances existing today that have made many countries clearly realize the importance of forest resources for the development and conservation of their environments. The member countries of FAO, Mexico among them, have stated this interest by declaring 1985 the International Year of the Forest, an event that will reach its peak at the Ninth World Forestry Congress.
Unasylva: The theme of the Congress is "forest resources in the integral development of society". Why was that theme chosen?
Dr Pesqueira Olea: The theme clearly defines the value of forest activities in the world, and in each specific country, at the economic, ecological and social levels, since the goods and services supplied by forests at these levels satisfy directly or indirectly the needs of urban as well as rural communities, so that a solid interrelationship is built, one that must be sustained and improved upon for future generations.
Unasylva: It is anticipated that the Congress will result in a "Mexico Declaration' much as the Eighth World Forestry Congress resulted in a Jakarta Declaration. What is such a declaration likely to contain? What can be done to ensure that action to implement the declaration will be undertaken soon after the Congress ends?
Dr Pesqueira Olea: The Mexico Declaration will be the result of Congress discussions and recommendations, and we hope that it will deal with the most serious problems affecting forest resources conservation, their possible solutions, and their use as an instrument in the integral development of society. The Mexico Declaration must be a joint pledge by the countries attending to take local steps to solve universal problems at the technical and social levels. Furthermore, we believe that it will be a guide for forestry professionals in their future activities.
Forestry in Mexico
Unasylva: The theme of the first plenary session of the Congress is "forestry activities and their role in development - in temperate forests, tropical forests and arid zones". What role has forestry played in development in Mexico? Do you anticipate that it will play a greater role in the future - possibly, in part, as a result of the Congress?
Dr Pesqueira Olea: Although Mexico is a country with a substantial forestry profession, forestry activities until now have not been a vital factor in our development process. They contribute barely 1.2 percent to the nation's GNP, which means their potential is far above their present level of realization: The present administration has clearly seen the possibilities of forest resources and has included them as a priority item in the government programmer. The World Forestry Congress will greatly contribute to the diffusion and the dynamics of these activities. We intend to break out from the stagnation in forestry production of the past six years and consolidate a sustained growth in the future.
Unasylva: Primarily because falling world oil prices have drastically reduced Mexico's foreign-exchange earnings, Mexico has had to borrow large amounts of money and is now in the midst of a debt crisis. This fact is well known. What is perhaps not well known is how this debt crisis has affected Mexico's forestry programmes. Have there been cut-backs? If so, when can activities that have had to be reduced in scope or eliminated be restored? Can any expansion of forestry-activities be anticipated in the near future, or must expansion wait until the debt crisis is resolved?
Dr Pesqueira Olea: Our country is going through one of the greatest economic crises of the past few years, and the national economy has undoubtedly suffered a severe recession. This has inexorably affected forestry activities: the slowdown in the growth of the construction and furniture industries, the rise in the price of intermediate goods and foreign capital, the scarcity and high cost of financing - these have been some of the factors that have slowed down demand on the one hand and the production of forest products on the other. However, not everything is negative in this crisis. The new exchange rate has enabled us to make inroads into the markets across the northern border of our country and in international markets, thus increasing our forestry exports by 271 percent between 1982 and 1983.
All this increased primary forest production's share of GNP by 0.5 percent in 1982. This figure, though small, is significant, since overall economic activity decreased by 4.6 percent.
Unasylva: Could you briefly describe the principal activities of Mexico's forestry programme at present?
Dr Pesqueira Olea: At present, Mexico is implementing its National Programme for Temperate and Broad-Leaved Forests, a product of the National Development Plan. The premises of this programme acknowledge the following facts: a great need for assistance in the social organization of production; six years with no expansion in the production of merchantable wood; an increase in imports, especially cellulose; an inadequate and insufficient road infrastructure; a tack of industrial integration; limited exploitation of tropical inputs and woods; an insufficient cultivation of forests and plantations; and a period of 24 years since any change in forest law. The programme also acknowledges that, unless immediate steps are taken, by 1990 we will be importing US$1000 million worth of forest products, the problems of inequality and social unrest will intensify, and environmental deterioration will continue.
The main purpose of the programme is to involve landlords and owners in forestry protection and production, to exploit forest resources intensively, to protect the environment and to reduce the deficit in the balance of trade.
Unasylva: Mexico's forest resources cover more than 1.4 million km^2. About 48 percent of this is arid-zone vegetation, 19 percent is temperate forest, 9 percent is tropical forest, and 24 percent is classified as "other". Which of these regions is currently receiving the most emphasis - or are they all receiving equal emphasis? Will there be any changes in emphasis in the future?
Dr Pesqueira Olea: The temperate wood regions have been emphasized most, because of their present contribution to goods and services, their infrastructure and their unexploited potential. In accordance with the priority established for forestry policy within the National Development Plan, the attention paid to areas of broad-leaved forest and to arid zones has increased. A pilot programme is taking place to exploit the broad-leaved forests of Quintana Roo. Another deals with the integrated exploitation of arid-zone resources in the Chihuahua desert.
Unasylva: Mexico currently imports more than three times as many wood products as it exports, and its imports of non-wood forest products are more than double its exports. Is this situation considered acceptable, or will efforts be made to increase exports in relation to imports?
Dr Pesqueira Olea: In no way is it considered acceptable. I would instead say that it has become a cause for concern in our country. It seems paradoxical that in spite of having this previously mentioned forestry potential, we cannot even satisfy internal demand. It is important to point out that 85 percent of forestry imports consist of pulp and paper, cardboard scraps, machine made paper and cardboard, and the rest falls under carved wood, logs, railway sleepers, panels and some non-merchantable products such as resin, rubber and latex.
To meet this concern, Mexico is setting up import-rationalization programmes through the Regulating
Committee for Forest Product Imports in the Northwest Border Zones, which was created for that purpose. Exports are handled by the Productivity and Quality Control Committee of the National Forestry Industry, also created recently, in which both the Government and private industry participate, in addition, the pulp and paper programme - at present the most important - is being promoted. Its scope is to reach self-sufficiency in cellulose by installing between six and eight modular plants adapted to Mexico's resources and conditions. This project will be supported by an economic package that includes tariff adjustments, fiscal policy stimulation and financing for forestry.
Unasylva: Are there any current plans for plant expansions or new construction in sawmilling, pulp and paper, or panels?
A CARTOGRAPHER IN OAXACA surveying Mexico's forest resources
Dr Pesqueira Olea: Because of the economic recession facing the Mexican economy, the main sectors requiring forest products - construction, furniture, transportation, publishing, the graphic arts - have seen a decreased rate of growth over the past few years. However, under the Economic Reorganization Programme and the Employment and Productivity Protection Programme directed by the Government, a number of actions have been planned to stimulate and reactivate investment in forest industry. As a result, three new plywood and board plants are expected to be built. Also anticipated are an expansion of the newsprint industry and the establishment of six plants for chemical and mechanical pulp for kraft paper. No new projects are planned in sawmilling, since present capacity is meeting national consumption.
Unasylva: What is the present condition of Mexico's forest resources? Are there any significant problems with fire, insects, diseases, air pollution, overcutting or shifting cultivation? What is Mexico currently doing in the area of forest conservation and rehabilitation? Is the creation of more protected zones, forest reserves or national parks being contemplated? How is the rural population being incorporated in the forestry framework?
Dr Pesqueira Olea: Like any other country with forest resources, we have serious problems with forest fires, phytosanitation and pollution. This last is particularly severe in the Valley of Mexico. Excessive tree cutting and shifting cultivation problems also exist, especially in the tropical and subtropical areas. Within the new structure of the forestry undersecretaryship, an office has been set up for the conservation of forestry resources. It will deal with the following:
· the administration and management of the country's 206 protected zones and 19 forest reserves;
· the integral organization and utilization of soil in forestry areas, using watershed management criteria;
· the recovery and protection of forestry lands through vegetative and mechanical means;
· the rationalization of changes in land use in forestry areas.
In land rehabilitation, we expect to reforest 12000 ha and to recover 7560 ha of degraded land this year through Department of Agriculture and Water Resources (SARH) programmes. We intend to increase our target to 50000 ha a year with various types of reforestation.
In order to involve the rural population in forestry activities, the department is considering organizing and training peasants in every stage of forest raw-material production, up to the industrial level. We are also developing programmes to involve the rural population in work projects covering plants, nurseries, reforestation, conservation and forest soil recovery, as well as fire fighting and prevention. These programmes aim to create jobs and to make peasant organizations responsible, along with the Government, for the conservation, protection and development of property.
Regional and international cooperation
Unasylva: Culturally, Mexico is linked to the countries of Central and South America, but its forest resource is more similar to that of the United States particularly the southwestern states. How have these two factors affected Mexico's regional cooperation efforts? What structures, activities and programmes currently exist for regional cooperation?
Dr Pesqueira Olea: Mexico has coniferous forests as well as temperate and broad-leaved forests and arid zones. It has undertaken important activities in these three biomes, acquiring valuable experience that allows significant participation in cooperative programmes with Central and South American countries.
Unasylva: Could you briefly outline Mexico's current role in international assistance and cooperation activities in forestry?
Dr Pesqueira Olea: The ongoing cooperation with Central and South American countries in forestry activities is taking place in the areas of education, technical assistance, research, joint investments and specific commercialization agreements. Assistance and cooperation in education are structured to set up and support forestry education centres and to receive requests and offer technical assistance by means of bilateral agreements.
Unasylva: How would you evaluate the role of FAO in international forestry activities? What things should it be doing that it is not now doing?
Dr Pesqueira Olea: The technical capability of FAO is well known worldwide. It consists of a vast number of studies and projects that stimulate numerous forestry activities in many countries. The exchanges that take place through international and technical meetings, the statistical information, and specific projects or education programmes are some of the main aspects that have particularly helped Mexico.
The scope and continuity of cooperation programmes would be increased by the dissemination of FAO programmes, as well as by the coordination of specific cooperation programmes among several countries in order to develop the technical means for a better utilization of forest resources.
Unasylva: Thank you very much, Mr Secretary.
<section>a</section>
Forest farmers: The transformation of land use and society in eastern Madagascar
Clare Oxby
Forest farmers: the transformation of land use and society in eastern Madagascar
Clare Oxby, a social anthropologist at the Overseas Development Institute, UK, recently visited an FAO project in Madagascar in connection with a study on alternatives to shifting cultivation in Africa for FAO's Forestry Department (see References: FAO, 1984, and Oxby, 1983a and b).
The practice of hill rice cultivation with the "slash and burn" technique is one among many factors leading to a steady diminishing of Madagascar's eastern forest reserves. The alternative, irrigated rice, not only would help to preserve forests but also appears to be a better economic choice for the farmers themselves. Indeed, there has been a gradual increase in irrigated rice cultivation throughout the region, and an associated change toward a more settled, village-based society. However, the transformation has not been as fast as planners might have expected and, significantly, there has not been any noticeable decrease in the incidence of slash and burn. A closer look shows that there are a variety of good reasons why farmers persist in growing hill rice.
· Among forest farmers in the east coast region of Madagascar, it is traditional to sacrifice an ox the day before clearing forest vegetation in preparation for cultivation. This ceremony is performed by way of atonement for "undressing the tombs of the ancestors"; it demonstrates the farmers' reluctance to destroy the forest unless they have no alternative. Since their ancestors are buried in tombs deep in the forest, there is a strong prohibition against removing any vegetation in the vicinity. Even in largely deforested areas, small groves of primary forest hide the ancestors' tombs. The forest dwellers of eastern Madagascar have a profound respect both for their ancestors and for the forest, which is their main source of household construction materials, fuel, fruit, nuts, game meat and medicines.
The actual process of deforestation in this region is familiar from other parts of the world. Familiar too is the way that blame for deforestation is directed toward small farmers and their "short-sighted" practices. This view not only distracts attention away from other agents of forest destruction and degradation, such I as charcoal burners, fuelwood traders, timber companies and large scale agriculturists operating in forest areas, but also undervalues small farmers' position by failing to take into account the constraints under which they operate and the limited alternatives open to them. Small farmers may indeed be agents of forest destruction, but understanding the causes of deforestation requires looking a little further (Westoby, 1978). Farmers may be unwilling agents, like those mentioned above; moreover, they are easy to blame, since on the whole they do not respond to allegations against them.
This article attempts to explain why small farmers continue to practice an extensive form of fallow farming known as tavy, a term better translated as "slash and burn" than "shifting cultivation", since it refers to a technique of clearing vegetation in preparation for cultivation that may be applied even when the fallow period is reduced to as little as two years, and when house sites are permanent. Small farmers are often reluctant to abandon tavy in favour of more intensive forms of land cultivation such as irrigated rice. Such a switch, it is believed, would relieve the pressure on the remaining forest, halt soil erosion and degradation, and enable farmers to produce a surplus which would help to raise their incomes and feed the urban areas, which at present are obliged to depend on imported food.
The reasons why such an apparently advantageous change is not taking place as fast as planners had expected are instructive. They are particularly instructive to foresters, since the slash-and-burn technique is one of the immediate causes of deforestation in the tropics. The annual rate of primary forest destruction in Madagascar has been estimated at 165000 ha (FAO, 1981); and the annual production of hill rice with the slash-and-burn method at 60000 to 80000 tonnes (Ratovoson, 1979).
These figures are nationwide, I but the largest concentration of forests, as well as the main area of hill rice production, is in the east coast region. The transformation of land use from forest to farm is gradual: the ancestors of the irrigated-rice cultivators of the central plateau area of Madagascar were hill rice cultivators several centuries ago, when the area was covered by forest. Gradually, as the forest was destroyed, they turned to irrigated agriculture. In some cases, people were pushed back into the forest as a result of wars and reverted to hill rice cultivation (Bloch, 1975).
Instructive also is the social transformation, from a sparse population of forest dwellers living in semi-permanent settlements whose social organization is relatively egalitarian, to a village-based society characterized by higher population densities and a more hierarchical social structure. These parallel changes in land use and society are important in understanding the farmers' choice of agricultural strategy.
The east coast region
Less than 100 km wide but about 1000 km long is a stretch of mountainous, forest-covered land known as the east coast region of Madagascar. It rises from the sea through a series of escarpments to the edges of the central plateau at a height of over 1000 m. Eastern winds bring year-round rain. The annual average is 3000 mm on the coast at Toamasina and 2200 mm inland at Vavatenina. Tropical forest thrives in this warm and damp climate. At one time the entire area was covered by rain forest, including even the present-day coastal swamps (as attested by fossil remains). Today most of the narrow coastal plains and the lower slopes have been deforested, but some two-thirds of the region, particularly the higher slopes, is still covered by primary forest. This forest is quite unique, since about 90 percent of the tree species therein are found only in Madagascar.
Flying between the highland capital Antananarivo and the east coast during the cultivation season, one can observe the entire progression from forest to agricultural plain. Leaving the deforested central plateau region, one passes over the edge of the escarpment and down its densely forested higher slopes. The deep-green forest cover extends ahead and on both sides as far as the horizon, interrupted only by rocky outbursts, shiny rivers, and the two lines of communication - the railway, and the road, which is usually impassable at this time of year. Along them are concentrated tiny, cleared patches of paler-green vegetation, representing hill rice fields, or forest regrowth (known as savoka in Malagasy).
Further down the escarpment, the forest is interrupted by bright-green river valleys; this is irrigated rice cultivation. As the plane approaches the coast, there is a sudden increase in the number of cleared areas, areas now either under cultivation or under fallow vegetation. The deep-green patches of high forest become scarce. Along the narrow coastal strip can be seen, between the villages and towns, ordered plantations, irrigated rice fields and some green-gray "exhausted" areas of degraded vegetation. Such an air trip illustrates the gradual process of deforestation and concentrates in half an hour what has happened over centuries.
At ground level, forests are first selectively felled by timber companies, who remove the most valuable trees for sale on the international markets. The remaining trees are exploited for railway sleepers and fuelwood through local marketing networks. Sections of the remaining forest vegetation are then burnt and cleared, either by plantation wage labourers, who also plant trees in the cleared area, or by independent farmers, who prepare the area for hill rice cultivation according to the tavy slash-and-burn technique, which uses the ashes from burnt woody vegetation to fertilize the soil in preparation for cultivation.
IRRIGATED RICE (below) HILL RICE (above) a complex choice
In the densely forested areas of the upper slopes, away from the main lines of communication, hill rice is interplanted with maize and often beans during the first cultivation season, and is sometimes followed the next year by a crop of cassava. The land is then left for a six-to-ten-year fallow period, after which the process is repeated. When high forest is cleared, rice is usually grown consecutively for two years. Yields may be higher in the second year, since some of the thicker branches escape the fire and take some time to decompose (Dandoy, 1973). Cassava is planted last, as it thrives on poorer soils.
Population densities in such areas are low; but as one approaches the deforested areas of the coast, they gradually rise: from 5 inhabitants per km^2 in Andasibe district to 10 in Ranomafana district and 41 in Andevoranto district on the coast. Where there is population pressure and a shortage of fertile land as occurs in deforested areas on the lower slopes, around the irrigated valleys, and to a certain extent along the road and the railway - it is no longer possible to leave sufficiently long periods of fallow. The fallow vegetation is thus cleared for farming before the forest regrowth has had time to establish itself and regenerate soil fertility. The six-to-ten-year fallow period is thereby reduced to five, three and - in some cases - only two years. If the land is repeatedly cultivated after such short periods of fallow, the result is a degraded fallow vegetation characterized by an absence of valuable species and often dominated by a single species like bamboo, or
ravenala (in French, l'arbre du voyageur).
A trend of soil degradation and decreasing yields sets in which is difficult to reverse without a radical change in farming technique, often requiring much capital and labour investment. Along the coast can be seen areas of degraded vegetation, which the farmers have abandoned to move nearer the forest. The techniques of hill rice cultivation are not in themselves responsible: it is when such techniques are applied too frequently on the same piece of land that soil degradation occurs.
East coast agriculture
East coast agriculture
East coast forest farmers generally practice a complex farming system. There are three kinds of land cultivation: tsabo, or perennial agricultural crop cultivation; horaka, or wet rice cultivation; and tavy, or hill rice cultivation. Most households practice all three techniques at the same time. Coffee became widespread in the 1910s, and cloves in the 1930s (Dandoy, 1973). Both remain an important source of household income, which is used to hire agricultural wage labour and to buy clothes and hardware and, in times of shortage, food.
Wet rice cultivation is not a recent introduction: it was reported by eighteenth-century travelers. However, irrigation technologies and the associated use of the plough were introduced into the region only in the last century. The surface area under wet rice cultivation has gradually increased, especially in areas of growing population density. However, this has not been associated with a decrease in hill rice cultivation.
As a means of maximizing rice production and coping with increasing rates of population growth (3-3.5 percent annually), and despite certain constraints on the development of wet rice cultivation which will be discussed below, slash-and-burn agriculture has remained the most important technique for producing food in the region. Twice as much hill rice as wet rice is produced in the region (Le Bourdiec, 1974); most people there agree that the species grown on the slopes taste better than those grown in the swamps, and hill rice is still regarded as the local staple food. Because of difficulty of access to land, the main trend has been toward a gradual reduction of the fallow period, with severe consequences for the regeneration of soil fertility. However, up-to-date regional figures would be necessary to document these trends more precisely.
Slash-and-burn agriculture has remained the most important technique for producing food in the region.
It is necessary to go beyond economic calculations of rice yields in order to understand why people continue to practice hill rice cultivation.
Meanwhile, the east coast region is not self-sufficient in rice, and in many areas there are chronic shortages. Rice needs are satisfied on average during nine months of the year. During the remaining three months, other food crops like cassava and bananas help to bridge the gap until the next rice harvest. Moreover, severe marketing and distribution problems mean that rice is not always available to buy during this time.
In terms of rice yields per hectare, it is clear that wet rice is more productive than hill rice, as the table shows. As for the returns to labour (most work-days are woman-days, not man-days), the results are not so clear. According to Le Bourdiec, hill rice takes less work than wet rice; SECMO and Dandoy claim the opposite. Perhaps the difference can be accounted for by the fact that Le Bourdiec includes time for canal maintenance, whereas it is not clear whether the other sources do. In this case, Le Bourdiec's would be the more reliable figures. In a comparison of yields from hill and wet rice cultivation, however, the utility of a per-hectare measurement must be in doubt. Whereas new land is generally available for hill rice production, access to suitable land is a major constraint on the production of irrigated rice and may therefore limit producers' performance. Again, hill rice requires much more land than is actually under cultivation in any one season: if the area
under fallow as well as that under cultivation were taken into account, the resulting yields would be ridiculously low. These points only strengthen the argument that wet rice is a more rational choice for the farmer than hill rice.
However, a closer scrutiny of what is being measured, and how, points to a less definite conclusion. Since hill rice is usually cultivated in association with maize and often also with beans and cassava, to measure yields in terms of only rice is to underestimate productivity by a considerable amount. Also, clearing forest vegetation involves cutting wood, some of which is used in home construction or as fuelwood and some of which may be sold as railway sleepers, fuelwood or charcoal. None of this is taken into account in the above figures. The figures may also ignore not only the time required to maintain the irrigation infrastructure, as seen above, but also the time needed to construct it in the first place. In the mountainous areas of the east coast, where swampland and flat land generally occur in small, isolated tracts, the time involved can be considerable. Moreover, whereas irrigated fields require a certain amount of supervision and maintenance even outside the
cultivation season, hill rice cultivation releases all workers completely in the off season so that they can seek seasonal wage work.
Perhaps most important is the fact that the figures relate to areas where hill rice production is in crisis because of rising population densities, increasingly difficult access to land, and consequently decreasing fallow periods. Dandoy, who records the highest yields, specifically chose to carry out his surveys in the Vavatenina region because it was a crisis area: of the 13 villages he studied, only one managed to satisfy its rice needs. This is also one of the most densely populated areas of the east coast, having experienced a sudden 50 percent increase in population density between 1955 and 1966 (from 14 to 21 inhabitants per km^2). In 1966, one-quarter of the farmers of Vohibary had to leave village land to find areas to clear and farm because of land shortage.
Unfortunately, it was impossible to locate any comparable figures for hill rice production in the more densely forested areas. The returns to labour are likely to be higher, for the following reason: weeding, which is one of the main tasks in Vavatenina, is much less of a problem when cultivation follows the clearing of primary forest or forest regrowth of a certain age.
It is thus difficult to draw any firm conclusions on the relative yields of hill and wet rice in the east coast region. The returns to labour from hill rice cultivation are probably lower in most cases - especially in the crisis areas of land shortage and shortened fallows - but not as low, in relation to irrigated rice, as the figures suggest. But if the returns to labour are lower, why do farmers continue to practice tavy?
Labour input and crop yield from hill rice and wet rice cultivation in the east coast region of Madagascar
Location
Hill rice
Wet rice
Reference
Labour input (work-days per ha)
Yield (kg per ha)
Labour input (work-days per ha)
Yield (kg per ha)
Vavatenina (Tsaramainandro)
FAO project staff, personal communication; SECMO. 1980
Betsimisaraka region
100 (of which 50 on clearing vegetation)
Le Bourdiec, 1974
Vavatenina (Vohibary)
244 (of which 158 on bird-scaring)
Dandoy, 1973
Tamatave province
Chabrolin, 1965
Constraints
One explanation for farmers' failure to adapt irrigated rice cultivation more rapidly that should be ruled out at an early stage is ignorance: many farmers, in fact, practice both cultivation techniques every year, in addition to tending their agricultural cash crops and vegetable plots. They are clearly in the best position to compare the different cultivation techniques, being intimately aware of the effects of the cultivation of different crops on different types of soil, which they judge according to the type of growth of wild species (Dandoy, 1973). There are various topographical, technological, sociological, economic and political reasons why small farmers in the east coast region continue to practice hill rice cultivation despite low and variable yields.
Topographical In mountainous regions like the east coast of Madagascar, land suitable for swamp or irrigated rice cultivation, using techniques accessible to small farmers, is not always easy to find. The most desirable land has, frequently, already been claimed (though not necessarily exploited). Although there is still plenty of irrigable land in Tanala country in the south of the east coast region, many of the suitable areas in Betsimisaraka country to the north pose particular problems because they are narrow, isolated valleys and are subject to drainage problems (Le Bourdiec, 1974).
In Vohibary, for example, 4 ha were irrigated but there was a total of only 10 ha of irrigable land available. In some neighbouring villages, all irrigable land had already been used, or else there was no suitable land available, given that major labour and capital investments for constructing terraces and canals were beyond the capabilities of local farmers. As a result, a survey of 13 neighbouring villages, including Vohibary, demonstrated a complete contrast in agricultural techniques: two practiced only wet rice and no tavy; four practiced only tavy and no wet rice; and the remaining seven, including Vohibary, practiced varying combinations of tavy and wet rice. Such variations should be understood primarily in terms of topography, and correspond to three different types of localities: a long but narrow swamp, the plain of lazafo; the forest-covered hills; and, finally, the forest margins (Dandoy, 1973).
Tenurial Parallel to the differences in natural environment between areas of limitless high forest on the upper slopes of the escarpment and areas of intense cultivation and degraded forest fallow on the lower slopes, there are important differences in social relations within the communities living there. Among the Zafimaniry, for example, who live in small groups in the forest, there is relatively little differentiation of wealth between households.
Access to land is easy, and the main constraint to production is the lack of labour to clear the forest and cultivate the land (Bloch. 1975).
HILL RICE IN MADAGASCAR pressure on the forest
Lower down the slopes, in areas like Vavatenina, where population densities are higher, where large surfaces have been planted in perennial crops for export, where remaining areas of primary forest are scarce and remote, and where fallow periods are shortened and cultivation repeated frequently on the same spot, access to land becomes an important constraint. A recurrent topic of conversation, in contrast to the situation in the forest villages, is therefore the access to and inheritance of land. There is a rush to establish rights to land: either by clearing it, which gives temporary use rights; or by planting perennial crops like coffee or cloves, which gives more permanent rights of ownership; or by getting the land formally registered as private property by the local administration, which is a long and complicated process (it frequently takes 15 years), and small farmers are at a disadvantage in following it through. Large tracts of land have been privatized in this way,
usually for large-scale crop cultivation. In some cases, privately owned land may be left fallow on a permanent basis, and small farmers may be denied use rights (SECMO, 1980). One attempt to improve wet rice cultivation and discourage tavy at Marolafa near Beforona has been severely hampered by problems of land tenure (Benoit de Coignac et al., 1973; Oxby. 1983a).
There are considerable differences in the desirability of different types of land, and irrigated land is at a premium. Those who are established on such land and manage to get it registered in their own name find themselves in a position of great advantage. This advantage increases as population pressure and land shortage grow. Farmers with insufficient fertile land may have to resort to working as wage labourers for the larger landowners for part of the year, in order to supplement their meagre rice harvest. There is social stigma attached to such wage labouring, and farmers go to neighbouring villages to do it, not their own. Some land is rented out by the larger landowners, and there develops a class of landless tenant farmers. Given this situation, leaving the village for a more forested area in order to practice hill rice cultivation may represent an attractive alternative to tenant farming or wage labouring. In a comparison of hill rice and irrigated rice, the relevant
figure for many farmers is not the yields from hill rice farms, but the amount of irrigated rice received according to the share-cropping arrangement between tenant farmers and landowners, or else the amount of rice that can be bought with a daily wage, if indeed there is rice available to buy.
HILL RICE GROWERS NEAR ANDASIBE with untouched forest in background
Administrative A full discussion of the constraints to the intensification of agriculture cannot omit reference to the political relations between the hill farmers and those whom they group together as vazaha (outsiders). The vazaha include the local agents of the central authorities, of private enterprise, of foreign investment and of international aid.
Despite the lack of communications in the forest areas - the main way of traveling is still on foot - all of the villages there grow at least some cash crops, pay taxes and participate to some degree in the national economy. This is the result of a gradual social transformation over a long period of history. The French colonized the island of Madagascar in 1895, and their administration was imposed on the east coast and other areas in the early twentieth century. In the early nineteenth century, the forest areas of the east coast had been conquered by the Merina kingdom of the central plateau area of Madagascar. Before that, in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the establishment of Arab, Dutch, French and British trading posts along the east coast made its impact on the local population. Forest products like wood, raffia, rubber and beeswax and gold and other minerals were sought after, and tracks through the forest represented the main trading link between the
coastal settlers and the civilization of the plateau region. Forest villages represented a source of labour for obtaining forest products and for porterage between highland settlements and coastal trading posts.
The nineteenth and twentieth centuries have seen increasing control of the east coast area by vazaha. This has taken the form of tax collection, efforts to ban the cutting of forest for hill rice plantations, and attempts at controlling agriculture, in particular the strong discouragement of hill rice and encouragement of perennial crops for export.
The following example of a ban on cutting down forests for rice production is taken from the legal code of Queen Ranavalona II, issued in 1881:
The forest may not be cleared by fire with the aim of establishing fields of rice maize or any other crops; only those parts previously cleared and burnt may be cultivated; any persons effecting new clearings by fire or extending those already in existence shall be clapped in irons for five years. (Quoted in the original French in Uhart, 1962)
Afterwards, during the colonial administration, permission to clear forests for tavy was generally given only when taxes had been paid (Althabe, 1969); moreover, punishments were imposed for "illegally" cutting down the forest, with a penalty of either a fine or an obligation to plant trees (Ratovoson, 1979). Remembering this, the reaction today of some local farmers, upon being asked to plant trees, is: "What have I done wrong?" However, by 1975, the area for which permits to clear forest vegetation had been granted, which had steadily diminished during the period 1960-69, had nearly doubled to 193500 ha (Ramamonjisoa, 1983).
Forests, like mountains, are places that centralized administrations find particularly difficult to govern. Because of the low population densities and lack of communications characteristic of such areas, communities may remain largely autonomous. In some cases, the lack of detailed local knowledge on the part of the authorities facilitates this autonomy. The east coast region of Madagascar is both mountainous and forested. Not surprisingly, therefore, the region has a strong history of resistance.
Elaborate controls were introduced in the east coast region in 1935-40, when every household head was obliged by the colonial government to plant a certain number of perennial cash crops, coffee or cloves, under the supervision of local administrators. At the same time, many concessions were granted by the government to settlers, who established plantations in the region. In the agitated political atmosphere of repeated election campaigns after 1945, towns and army barracks in the central part of the east coast region were attacked in 1947 by armed groups of several hundred men. This escalated into a rebellion which spread to other parts of Madagascar. By 1948, it had been quelled by force, and thousands were killed. There followed a period of fierce reprisals and many years of redoubled control, taking the form of forced labour to construct roads and buildings. Laws against cutting down primary forest were enforced with renewed vigour, and offenders were punished.
Such experiences are not quickly forgotten. Althabe (1969) describes a society in the east coast region that is split. On the one hand is the façade presented to outsiders, who are allowed but a partial view of village life. They see the "village on the road" - the permanent houses, the permanent vegetable and fruit gardens, the permanent rice fields and the perennial agricultural crops. On the other hand, what outsiders are not shown, and what they are discouraged from seeing, is the other side of village life - the rice fields some distance away in the forested hills, the temporary houses constructed there every year, the feasts and ceremonies (closely linked to hill rice production) that are practiced there, and the herds of cattle that live in the hills and provide the oxen to be sacrificed during these ceremonies. Althabe observed a strict and symbolic distinction between the European type of clothing worn in the "village on the road" - in the wet rice fields and
cash-crop fields and at the market and the traditional bark-cloth clothes worn in the tavy. He also observed a spirit-possession cult - a recent development and not an ancestral cult which reinforces this distinction.
All this is to stress how important is the villagers' perception of subordination to the various central authorities of different times, and to explain why it is necessary to go beyond economic calculations of rice yields in order to understand why they continue to practice hill rice cultivation. Part of the attraction of tavy - and the ways of thinking and living that go with it is the relative freedom of decision-making it gives to individual producers. This is in strong contrast with the regulation and supervision associated with the cultivation of wet rice and perennial crops.
Conclusion
The straightforward question that was asked at the outset - why do farmers not turn to a more productive form of rice cultivation? - thus has a many-faceted answer: farmers are gradually changing their techniques of rice cultivation and turning from hill rice to wet rice in response to changing circumstances, but there are important constraints. There is in many places a scarcity of land suitable for wet rice cultivation with irrigation technologies that are accessible to small farmers. This is compounded by strong inequalities within communities in access to that land. Those who lack access to suitable land find themselves in a dilemma: either they go to work for landowners and share the harvest with them, or they choose autonomy by moving to a forested area. Otherwise, they may practice a combination of both irrigated and hill rice cultivation. Hill rice farmers in the forest may be isolated and suffer from lack of services, distance from markets and the need to work
harder, but at least they enjoy more freedom and independence in their work. It is for these reasons that the new technologies, and the hierarchical society that goes with them, may not be accepted - especially if farmers must enter this society as tenant farmers or wage labourers.
What about the longer term, when the forests run out? The high rates of deforestation may be impressive; but so are the vast expanses of forest that remain in the east coast region of Madagascar, as anyone who has travelled in the area will agree. The policies of the central authorities may have seemed somewhat contradictory to forest farmers, especially during colonial times: farmers were discouraged from cutting down the forest for their own farms, yet at the same time they were encouraged to cut it down to plant export crops and to establish forest plantations. If the forest is going to be cut in order to establish a large coffee plantation for a new settler from overseas, why should it not also be cut so that they can grow their own rice?
What are the implications of this analysis for development plans in the region? A number of improvements can be suggested. Detailed topographical surveys, for example, are needed to indicate areas where capital outlay beyond the capabilities of local farmers might enable the land to be cultivated more intensively. Any technological changes undertaken should be monitored very carefully so that benefits go to poorer farmers who would otherwise rely on tavy, than to wealthy farmers who do not practice tavy anyway. In areas where there is no land suitable for wet rice cultivation or where irrigation has yet to be developed, it is unthinkable to prevent farmers from clearing forest in order to plant food crops for their own subsistence needs. In this case, it would be desirable to concentrate on improving hill rice yields, for example by introducing agroforestry techniques. The hope would be for contact between local authorities and farmers to be as egalitarian as possible so
that the technical knowledge farmers have of their own regions is valued and put to good use.
Where wet rice cultivation is already practiced, farmers could be encouraged to make more use of oxen and to grow a second crop. Moreover, in order to compensate for the fact that several crops may be grown together with hill rice, thus giving it a certain advantage over wet rice, it might be desirable to encourage the cultivation of several food crops, such as cassava and sweet potatoes, on ridges (Trinh Ton That, personal communication). Care should be taken, however, to ensure that the labour requirements of these improvements are compatible with those of other agricultural activities. In the past this has proved a major problem which has sometimes been overlooked by planners (Le Bourdiec, 1974).
Any analysis of deforestation has to go deeper than establishing how many trees are cut and who cuts them. It has to ask why they are cut, and what the alternatives are. It must recognize that the immediate agents of deforestation the people who cut down trees - do not necessarily like what they are doing, but find re doing, but find themselves in a situation where it is their best strategy for decent survival.
References
ALTHABE G. 1969, Oppression et libération dans l'imagination. Les communautés villageoises de la côte orientale de Madagascar. Paris, Maspéro.
BENOIT DE COIGNAC. 1973, G. et al. Essai d'aménagement des terres dans la zone forestière de rest de Madagascar. Bois et forêts des tropiques, 152.
BLOCH. 1975, M. Property and the end of affinity. In M. Bloch, ed. Marxist analyses and social anthropology. London, Malaby Press.
CHABROLIN, R. 1965, La riziculture de tavy 3 Madagascar. Agronomie tropicale, 20.
DANDOY, G. 1973, Terroirs et economies villageoises de la region de Vavatenina (côte orientale malgaghe). In Atlas des structures agraires à Madagascar, 1. Paris, ORSTOM.
FAO. 1981, Tropical Forest Resources Assessment Project: Forest resources of tropical Africa. Part 1: Regional synthesis. Part II: Country studies. Rome, FAO.
FAO. 1984, Changes in shifting cultivation in Africa. FAO Forestry Paper 50. Rome.
LE BOURDIEC, F. 1974, Hommes et paysages du riz à Madagascar: etude de géographie humaine. Madagascar, Geography Laboratory of Tananarive.
OXBY, C. 1983a, Alternatives and improvements to shifting cultivation on the east coast of Madagascar: socio-economic aspects. Report prepared for FAO Forestry Department. Rome. (Mimeograph.)
OXBY, C. 1983b, Should shifting cultivators take the blame? A summary of research findings on socioeconomic aspects of shifting cultivation in Africa. Paper presented at the Technical Consultation on the Education, Training and Extension Aspects of Shifting Cultivation, Rome, 12-16 December 1983. Rome, FAO.
RAMAMONJISOA, J. 1983, Les aménagements malgaches dans le domaine des aménagements rizicoles. Paper presented at the conference Développement agricole et participation paysanne, held at the Centre d'études juridiques comparatives, Paris 14-15 October 1983.
RATOVOSON, C. 1979, Les problèmes du tavy sur la côte est malgache. Madagascar Revue de geographic, 35.
SECMO. 1980, Restauration et mise en valeur des savoka: étude socio-économique. 4 vols. Madagascar, Société des études et de la construction des maisons et des ouvrages.
UHART, E. 1962, Le problème forestier à Madagascar. Cahiers de l'Institut de science économique appliquée. Développement, croissance, progrès, 121, Series F. No. 17.
WESTOBY, J. 1978, Forest industries for socio-economic development. Paper presented at the World Forestry Congress, Jakarta.
<section>b</section>
The world of forestry
FAO in Latin America and the Caribbean
IUFRO World Congress
The role of gaps in forest growth
Forest prisons
FAO PROJECT IN GUATEMALA a significant Latin American program
FAO in Latin America and the Caribbean
Latin America contains extensive - and largely undeveloped - forest resources. FAO's main efforts in forestry here have been connected with the development of the region's vast forest potential and with the integration of agricultural and forestry activities.
FAO has provided technical assistance in logging and skidding methods in numerous member countries in the region. In Mexico, for instance, an exploratory mission was sent to assist in the development of a national pulp and paper industry. In Costa Rica, FAO helped in the clearing of forests for road construction.
These are but a few of the many examples of projects and missions contained in FAO's report on the Eighteenth Regional Conference for Latin America and the Caribbean. Each project currently in operation is numbered and adumbrated under the section heading of its respective agricultural field. In this way, the report can be used as a quick reference to all the forestry and agricultural programmes undertaken by FAO and the member countries in 1982-83 and the first months of 1984.
The report describes, for example, FAO's response to the emergency outbreak of African swine-fever and how new precautions were taken to prevent not only this particular exotic disease but exotic diseases in general. The fight to save swine from death by disease is counterbalanced in the report by the exigency to increase animal reproduction by the establishment of artificial insemination services.
There has been considerable activity in research and technology, and in collaboration among countries to exchange experiences on appropriate technologies for the production of low-cost biogas, solar, wind, and dendro-energy. The report gives an account of the workshops established for the purpose of such exchanges.
A number of projects have been undertaken to assist in the practice of better farming methods; this has largely been facilitated by the utilization of a video system, which provides audio-visual training courses to farmers in the most important fields of agriculture.
In order to prevent a starvation crisis in impoverished areas, the Food and Nutrition Surveillance System was established in Mexico in 1983. This project monitors the rate of food consumption and can detect or predict any likelihood of a food shortage. In such circumstances corrective measures are advised. FAO has supported this project with a document entitled Field programme management: food and nutrition a - training pack.
But these are only a handful of the projects and missions contained in this report, which will benefit anyone interested in a short course on FAO's agricultural activities in Latin America and the Caribbean.
A GAP IN THE FOREST a new study of its function
IUFRO World Congress
The International Union of Forestry Research Organizations (IUFRO) is organizing its eighteenth world congress in Ljubljana, Yugoslavia, from 7 to 21 September 1986. All foresters and researchers interested in forestry are being invited; forest scientists from various disciplines and from about 100 different countries are expected to attend. The overall theme of the congress will be "Forestry Science Serving Society''.
Special attention will be given to the following topics: a holistic conception of forestry; more basically oriented forestry research; the responsibilities of forestry energy saving forestry; multipurpose forestry; the protective character of forestry; forestry in developing countries; the reclamation of degraded lands; wood quality and effective wood use; atmospheric pollution and deposition as impacts on forests and forestry's own research methods; and technology transfer.
Activities for IUFRO's approximately 240 research groups are being scheduled, with opportunities to suggest ideas and report research findings during different types of meetings. There will also be poster sessions and 19 post congress excursions. Those wishing for additional information should write to: Eighteenth IUFRO World Congress, Organization Committee, Cankarjev dom, Congress and Cultural Centre, Kidricev Park 1, 61000 Ljubljana, Yugoslavia.
The role of gaps in forest growth
Dense forests undergo constant modifications in both structure and flora which are caused by natural catastrophes such as landslides resulting from earthquakes, timber felled by cyclones or by lightning, or more restricted incidents like the fall of individual trees.
In the gaps resulting from such incidents, natural regrowth takes place. A two part study published in Bois et forêts des tropiques (third and fourth quarters, 1983) examines part of this process. B. Rollet, the author and a conservationist with France's Overseas Forests and Waters Department, takes as an example a Brazilian Amazonian forest near Rio Curua Una. During a forest survey of a 100-ha lot, he observed the existence of numerous gaps caused by individual trees that had fallen naturally. The aim of the survey was to compare the botanical composition of the gaps with the surrounding undergrowth and assess their contribution to the general dynamics of the forest.
Seventy-three gaps, each greater than 100 m^2, were surveyed. The most prevalent species were studied and compared with those growing in the surrounding forest in order to assess "the stimulus exerted by light incidence in the gaps in comparison with pre-existing vegetation". The results of the comparison are examined in very detailed tables. A first assessment indicates that there are no great differences in composition between the flora in the gaps and the undergrowth.
Nevertheless, when examining the species found only in the gaps, the author notes that these are nearly always light-requiring species and that "among the large trees there is a notable proportion of commercial species".
The author poses the question, "Do the gaps have a beneficial effect on the forest?", and he is of the opinion that the answer is positive. Modifying the theory advanced by a research worker, who claimed that "windfallen trees are the starting-point for forest growth'', Rollet notes that the windfallen trees "cause the presence of heliophilic plants in the forest vegetation''.
CONVICTED MURDERER WITH FAMILY a second chance in the forest
GROWING UP IN THE FOREST children of forest workers
Forest prisons
The extensive tropical forests of India's Maharashtra State, where temperatures have been known to exceed 50°C, are now being used as residences for convicted murderers who have been "released" after ten years of imprisonment. In the forests, they are given the opportunity to earn a living and maintain a family.
As reported by Dennis Craig in his article "New life for murderers in India's open forest prisons" (World Food Programme News, April-June 1984), these "released" convicts are men like Bombay's Ram Singh, an ax-wrestler turned milk vendor who, on one of the rare occasions when he lost his temper, "seized" (as he describes it) his unfortunate antagonist and then "squeezed too hard", realizing only after the man "had stopped moving" that he had committed murder, or Sarjerao Dhoble, who said he drew his kukri knife only when words failed to settle a land dispute.
Provided their crimes were not intentional and were committed in passionate de-fence of their dignity or rights, convicted murderers in Maharashtra like Singh and Dhoble are permitted to choose, after ten years of good conduct in prison, the alternative of an open forest prison. Every year of paid labour (with part of the payment going to a welfare fund), either clearing forest wasteland or working on the new plantations of teak and bamboo, reduces a criminal's sentence by two years.
Nearly 1000 murderers have transferred to the open forest prisons. This unique labour-force is an integrated part of Maharashtra's scheme to clear its jungles and regenerate the land for agricultural plantations. The scheme is also intended to teach impoverished forest peoples to conserve - rather than destroy - India's seriously diminished woodland.
The scheme has been made possible with the assistance of the World Food Programme which, since 1971, has channeled more than 100000 tonnes of food with a value of about US$34 million into Maharashtra's socio-agricultural enterprise, providing food not only for criminals but also for voluntary forest workers. The scheme has been so effective that the neighbouring states of Madhya Pradesh. Bihar and Orissa are planning to follow Maharashtra's example.
<section>c</section>
Books
Forest policy: One step forward
Law: The meeting-point of ecology and economics
Conifer predators
Protecting Mediterranean natural areas
Reconstructing forests
Fuelwood in Central America: Two new books
Amazonian woods
DOES OVERPOPULATION CAUSE DEFORESTATION? our reviewer says no; others say yes
Forest policy: One step forward
Forest policy. F.C. Hummel, ed. The Hague, Nijhoff/Junk. 1984. Price: £40.00 stg or US$60.00.
Reviewed by Jack Westoby
This is not the book we have all been waiting for. It is, nevertheless, a very good book, crammed with common sense and well-digested experience. There are few professional foresters who will not gain at least some new insights from it. Most students will learn from it that forest policy has ramifications that reach well beyond the courses they have been taught. And la, readers will begin to understand some of the complexities that confront those charged with devising and implementing forest policy.
The book's principal shortcoming is one the authors freely admit in their introduction. Though all the contributors have international experience, only two have substantial direct knowledge of forestry problems in Third World countries. Thus, the book rests mainly on European experience and addresses itself primarily to European problems. This does not mean that Third World foresters have little to learn from it. On the contrary, they can learn much. But it does mean that some forestry issues of prime importance to many Third World countries today are insufficiently developed.
There are other criticisms that can be leveled. English is not the first language of several of the contributors, but the editor, perhaps in deference to the susceptibilities of his colleagues, has been far too gentle in wielding his blue pencil. The consequence is that many passages remain obscure.
Adrian van Maaren, who contributes the first chapter, "Forests and forestry in national life", has perhaps suffered most from this over respectful editing. This is a pity because, in spite of some obscure passages, Dr van Maaren's common sense, keen observation and dry wit shine from every page. He touches on many aspects of forest policy that are often overlooked. And if, in concluding his chapter, he maintains that forest policy is a policy for the forestry sector, a definition this reviewer rejects as too restrictive - since forestry policy should treat all areas where forests, woodlands and trees can affect human welfare - he is certainly not alone in taking this narrow view.
Tim Peck's chapter, "The world perspective", succinctly sets forth the world context, and is a model of lucidity. Mr Peck has the happy but rare quality of truly knowing his statistics, with their strengths and their weaknesses. This means that he knows how to ride his statistics exactly as far as they will safely take him, and no farther. In reviewing the history of timber resources and requirements studies, Mr Peck has many intelligent things to say about the utility and techniques of forecasting. On occasion, however, he inadvertently gives the impression that early studies in this genre were more naive than perhaps they were in fact.
In a chapter entitled "The production functions", Otto Eckmullner and Andras Madas touch on a wide variety of topics, from the role of forest products in the world economy to planning techniques in the centrally planned economies. One of their tables, based on the UN yearbook of industrial statistics, shows changes in world industrial activity by sectors, but the authors fail to point out and comment on the most striking feature of this table: that over the decade cited, wood and paper products had a slower rise in productivity than any other sector. This chapter includes a brief and quite inadequate discussion of the-reasons for the failure of many forest industries in developing countries. On the other hand, the short history of how planning has evolved in recent times in the centrally planned economies is most useful.
Andras Madas also authors the chapter called "The service functions". Here he sidesteps neither the problem of unmarked values nor the problem of non-identity of cost-bearers and beneficiaries. On the carbon cycle, Dr Madas has perhaps accepted too uncritically the views of some conservationist polemicists. The issue is certainly an important one, but until the several groups at present researching this subject come closer to a consensus, we will not know for certain whether forests are, on balance, a sink or a source of carbon. This chapter also includes a discussion of urban forestry.
Fred Hummel's chapter, "Institutions and administration", is a pleasure to read. A former UK forestry commissioner and subsequently head of the EEC's department of forestry, Dr Hummel writes with the cool detachment of one who has seen it all (in Europe, at any rate): good and bad, success and failure, genuine innovations and bogus reorganizations. He knows that there are no easy answers. Students will do well to ponder his sage comments on taxation; incentives, research and structure. His observations on education and training, surprisingly, are much less penetrating.
A useful chapter by Eero Kalkkinen lists the various international organizations, governmental and non-governmental, concerned directly or indirectly with forestry, forest industry and trade. Here a historical account, however brief, of the evolution of these organizations would have been more informative than a mere catalogue and summary of their present scope. Space might thus have been found to trace the pre-natal history of the imminent addition to the international family, the International Tropical Timber Organization. The protracted pregnancy and birth pangs of this organization constitute a most instructive story. The final section of this chapter treats of problems and achievements. However, the discussion of problems (including failures of development assistance) is very superficial: the subject warrants a much more profound treatment than it has been accorded here.
The book's chief flaw - its concentration on European conditions and problems has been compounded by the decision to treat a number of issues in a miscellaneous chapter, confided to Drs Eckmullner and van Maaren. These issues are forest protection; the biomass concept; wood and energy; tropical moist forest; farm forestry; agroforestry; and rural community development. Some, though not all, of these topics are dealt with very well. Many go right to the heart of the forest/people issues confronting nearly 100 Third World countries. Their relegation to a rag-bag chapter not only understates their importance; it robs other chapters of essential background, so that the discussion therein is divorced from themes that should have conditioned the discourse. Hence, some implicit assumptions in other chapters (for example, that a forest service should be of a certain type and structure, that forestry education and training should follow certain lines) are never seriously challenged.
The fact is (and I suspect that several of the contributors would acknowledge this) that today there are a number of countries where the potential of forestry and forest-based activities for raising rural welfare is unlikely to be realized unless the forest service as it at present exists is either dissolved or thoroughly reconstituted. It is the greatest of pities that, although the book is studded with passages that demonstrate an awareness of critical forestry issues in the Third World today, that awareness - partly as a consequence of the way in which the book has been organized - never fully illumines the discussion of policy and its implementation. If and when this book runs into a second edition - and the reviewer fervently hopes that it will - its value will be greatly enhanced if its contents are reorganized to meet this criticism.
By the time a second edition is needed, the authors will also have had time to rid themselves of the misapprehension that recurs again and again (and is still, alas, shared by many foresters): that tropical deforestation and desertification arise from overpopulation, and condoms and IUDs can reverse deforestation. It is odd that none of the contributors has taken to heart J.P. Lanly's observation: "The problem of deforestation, as it is now developing in tropical countries, should be seen in a historical perspective by looking back sufficiently far in the history of each country." It is the authors' failure to delve into history that has led them to constantly revert to their facile but false explanation paraded throughout the book.
The authors seem to have forgotten that vast areas of tropical forest were destroyed in centuries past, in places and at times when there was little if any population; indeed populations - slaves, and later indentured labour - had to be brought in to accomplish the deforestation. The assault on the tropical moist forest did not start, as Dr van Maaren avers, with this century. Brazil's northeast and most of the Caribbean were deforested in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. In all three tropical regions, deforestation accelerated in the nineteenth century, with the spread of imperialism and the expanding world market. Throughout the tropics it was export-oriented agriculture that pushed the forest back. Agriculture required, and engendered, a growing population to assure a plentiful supply of docile labour. It occupied the best lands: the river bottoms, the gentle slopes.
Dr van Maaren is wrong, moreover, in supposing that medical advances have caused the numbers of shifting cultivators to explode, bringing about a shortening of the fallow period and destruction of the forests. Traditional shifting cultivators, mainly tribal groups and ethnic minorities, practicing an agriculture apparently technologically primitive but ecologically sustainable, have almost always been left alone until someone else wanted either their land, or what grew on it or what lay beneath it, or their labour. The health revolution rarely reached them. Increased pressure on the land came about when large areas of forest were no longer open to them. It is when shifting cultivation is squeezed that forest destruction comes about.
But much more important than the traditional shifting cultivator as an agent (though again, not the cause) of forest destruction are the shifted cultivators: rural people who have been deprived of their land or employment or both by large-scale export-oriented agriculture, including ranching. These rural landless, whose numbers are increasing everywhere, have no option but to invade the remaining tropical forest in an endeavour to scratch a living from soils that are both unfamiliar and fragile. The cause of tropical deforestation lies behind them, on the land from which they have been driven: millions of hectares of relatively good land, owned by a wealthy few, producing the wrong crops for the wrong people at a low level of productivity. So long as the highly skewed distribution of land, wealth and power that characterizes most tropical forested countries endures, the battle to save the tropical forests will inevitably be a losing one. To argue that overpopulation is the
cause of tropical deforestation is to argue that spots cause measles.
In some quarters this is beginning to be understood. There is, for example, grudging and partial recognition in the recent block-buster publication of the US Congress Office of Technology Assessment (Technologies for sustaining tropical agriculture), a recognition not accompanied by any willingness to examine the political implications. On the other hand, John Spears (World Bank) and Edward S. Ayensu (Smithsonian Institute) recently stated categorically: "Strong political commitment by national governments to pursue policies of land reform that would lead to more equitable land ownership would, in the short term, do more to relieve pressure on forest lands than any other single policy intervention or any conceivable level of investment in forest resources development.''
Although Forest policy, in its first edition at least, may not be the book we have all been waiting for, it comes nearer to so being than most of the books and writings on forest policy in recent years. To read this book, even with all its present faults, is to sit in a seminar with a group of intelligent observers with wide experience of the forestry scene. One can disagree strongly with this one or that, but one cannot fail to benefit. It is a thousand pities, therefore, that more care was not taken in the physical production of the book. Several chapters simply teem with misprints, and the punctuation at times verges on the bizarre. A retail price of $60 really ought to guarantee a cleaner text.
Jack Westoby is the former Director of
Programme Coordination and
Operations of FAO's Forestry
Department
DEFINING FOREST LAND variation from country to country
Law: The meeting-point of ecology and economics
Forêt et environnement en droit comparé et international. M. Prieur, ed. Limoges, Presses universitaires de France. 1983. 310 p.
This collection brings together the proceedings of an international seminar organized in Limoges by the Limoges International Centre for Comparative Environmental Law with the support of FAO. Twenty authors from different countries have made contributions, and their joint efforts provide a review of current legal systems for forest and environmental protection in selected European, African and North American countries.
If there is a criticism to be made of this work, it is that it excludes both Asia, with its huge, dense, humid forests, and North America, where some of the world's most renowned national parks are situated. The first part of the hook could also be criticized because, under the title "The ecology of the great forest systems", it includes three unconvincing studies dealing with temperate, inter-tropical and boreal forests. However, it does serve as an introduction by presenting the framework in which the different countries studied have elaborated their forest legal systems.
The authors try, first, to come to an understanding of the term "forest''. In Spain, for example, the corresponding word monte describes any wooded area, hut it also includes areas that could he forested in the future hut are at present bush-land, as well as national prairie land and even mountainous agricultural land. In Italy, where there is no definition of "wood'' and "forest'' as such, it is the intended purpose of the land - which must be "cultivated'' with trees in order to he "forest'' - that counts.
The African legal systems are reflections of their colonial origin English-language texts do not formally define forest, and it seems that a forest need not necessarily he a population of trees. Texts derived from the Latin legal tradition, which are intended to he more precise, often assume extreme definitions, as in Gabon, where forest is considered as "zones which do or do not comprise a layer of vegetation''. Argentina and Brazil, which troth follow the US example, tend to confuse the idea of forest land with that of a national park.
No matter what the ideal definition of the term may be, different countries have all thought it necessary to draw up a forestry code to protect their heritage, to safeguard their rights and define those of private forest owners, to regulate exploitation and, finally, to allow their citizens to benefit from the advantages, material and psychological, of the forest lands.
Each country studied has, depending on its political structure, delegated the management of its forested areas to a selected authority, whether it be the ministry of agriculture or, as in the case of highly decentralized administrations, the region (Italy) or the canton (Switzerland), which defines forestry policy and is responsible for surveying forest resources.
In most European countries the forests are divided into national forests or parks, public forests, forests owned by collectives, and private forests - although these categories are not all well defined. For instance, very few people can identify the ownership of forest land in Switzerland, because the civil law allows everyone free access to others' forests and pastures. Certain private forests in Italy benefit from special regulations which do not allow ownership to be transferred. Such is the case of the Regole d'Ampezzo in the Alps, where the legal status dates from customs established back in the eighth and ninth centuries. These are rights of property held in common by several persons, which cannot be sold and can only be transferred by inheritance to the owners' sons.
In Africa, there is traditionally no private property. By custom, people could hunt, take their sustenance and farm the land wherever they liked; but the earth belonged to ancestors or mythical owners. Hence, until colonial times, there were no legal systems. European colonization imposed its laws upon local customs and made natural spaces the property of the general public. After independence, these natural spaces came under the ownership of the new nations and peasants had common user rights.
In South America, obligatory reservations were established throughout Brazilian national territory with the aim of making all owners share initiatives to preserve the forests. However, the lack of precise boundaries indicating preservation zones and private ownership resulted, through sales manipulation, in a reduction in lot sizes. Paradoxically, Brazilian forest laws, which are so concerned with the preservation of forest resources allow owners of mixed forests to convert them to homogeneous forests by uprooting replaceable species and disregarding the ecological balance between the flora and fauna of the region.
By far the most interesting parts of the book are those that deal with user rights, in particular the articles of C. du Saussay and Mohamed Ali Mekouar. (See du Saussay's article. "The evolution of forestry legislation for rural communities'' in Unasylva, Vol. 35, No. 142.)
Such user rights, which have practically disappeared in the West, remain firmly rooted in the African tradition and persist up to the present time. They are the result of "man's ingrained inclination...to regard it as a legitimate legal right to take what Nature has to offer'' and demonstrate "the most direct and certain way of putting the forest at the disposal of the rural population''. In almost all legislation, forest user rights are confined to the self-subsistence of the tenants. They are given free but also entail some responsibility. In Senegal, "user rights impose on the tenants the duty to share in the maintenance of the forests". Very often they are the cause of conflicts because of competition for different activities on the same land, such as agriculture, grazing and the harvesting of forest products.
In Morocco, agriculture and stock-raising are often combined in forest lands. Agriculture on lands deforested for this purpose is common practice, although legally prohibited. Pasturage in forest land is very widespread and covers about one-third of the available forest land.
Legislation, while recognizing the importance of customary rights, is at the same time used to set forth provisions for the protection of the forests. Offenses against forest regulations are punished by penalties that range from fines to prison sentences. Senegalese law devotes almost the whole of its regulatory section to reducing the abuse of forest land, often disregarding the traditions and needs of populations for whom wood is a high-priority need. In Morocco, forest laws also bristle with punitive measures. In Uruguay, on the other hand, the law has no provisions for infringement on the forest.
Protective measures are not all of a prohibitive character. Incentives like tax exemption encourage tree-planting and reforestation. In Spain the montes protectores, in Brazil the "forests of permanent conservation", and in Senegal the encouragement of "shared forestry" are examples of efforts to safeguard the forest heritage and the environment.
The collection ends with three interesting articles dealing with international forest protection. One studies the legal aspects of the "assessment of impacts on the environment'' as seen by FAO and emphasizes the importance of planning and establishing integrated forest strategies. Another analyses the role of the forest in the world conservation strategy, in the maintenance of essential ecological processes and as a reservoir for plant and animal species. It stresses that "international action...must remain the foundation and an indispensable complement to national measures''.
The last in the collection sees the forest as an endowment of the world's heritage and asserts that it is not impossible to conceive that "the concept of a common human heritage and the principle of sovereign rights are not incompatible''.
Fay Banoun, Rome
FOREST AND COASTLINE a need to preserve nature/areas
Conifer predators
Les insectes ravageurs des cônes et graines de conifères en France. Alain Roques. Paris, Institut national de la recherche agronomique (INRA). 1983. Numerous colour photographs. 134 p.
The economic impact of insect damage to conifer seeds and cones is a source of increasing concern for foresters. Indeed, in an attempt to improve the genetic quality of the seeds utilized to restock forests, seed-gathering has been restricted to a certain number of selected nursery stocks and seed orchards.
On one hand, this means that infestation is concentrated in smaller areas. On the other hand, however, the policy causes a proliferation of insects because the strategy of concentration and the system of utilizing nursery-raised plants are chosen precisely to produce abundant fruit. This offers a more favourable environment for insect infestation.
For ten years, INRA's researches have been aimed at a more thorough analysis of the predators that ravage conifers. INRA has always been willing to share the results of its research with other countries affected. Consequently, this book provides a detailed description of the predatory insects associated with each plant or tree species.
Each chapter begins with a diagram that clarifies the insect's relationship with the host plant, and provides a second diagram designed to provide easier identification of the predator, starting from the damages observed. Finally, the insects themselves are studied in the chronological order in which they infest the vegetation. The appropriate reference file-card data for each predator are supplied.
More than 100 colour plates accompany the text, and these enhance the descriptions of troth the insects and the damage they inflict. The result of such a presentation is that the information is clearly imprinted in the reader's memory. A glossary at the end of the text provides definitions of certain entomological terms. There is an index of the insect species considered and one for the various plant or tree species they infest.
The book is addressed primarily to the serious forester, hut anyone interested in entomology will also find it helpful and instructive.
Protecting Mediterranean natural areas
Que faire des espaces naturels méditerranéens? Report by J.P. Richard Guichard. C. Seguret and Y Prats. Nice, Editions Serre. 148 p.
This report was commissioned by France's interministerial mission for the protection and management of Mediterranean natural areas. It also includes, besides the people cited as authors, contributions from several participants in a round-table discussion organized by the mission. Among the questions raised at the deliberations, the most urgent focused on Mediterranean natural areas that have been destroyed by unbridled urbanization, forest fires and desertification.
The authors stress the difficulties in delineating policies for preserving the integrity of natural areas while respecting the interests of nearby established communities, since the character of the areas is frequently the result of very complex social pressures. They also explore the future of such areas and the means to protect them against the threats posed by tax problems.
The book is in three parts. The first describes a study of the transformation that has actually taken place, and includes a critical analysis that places serious blame upon public authorities. The second is a report on a round-table discussion held on 2 and 3 September 1982 in Aix-en-Provence and organized by the national association for the development of research and teaching on regional management. The book concludes with reflections on proposed solutions, but leaves the door open to future debate.
Reconstructing forests
La reconstitution de la forêt tropicale humide: sud-ouest de la Côte-d'Ivoire. F. Kahn. Paris, Office of Overseas Scientific and Technical Research (ORSTOM). 1982. Illustrations, sketches, maps. 150 p.
A rice field, abandoned after being cultivated for one year by itinerant farmers, is an ideal living laboratory for studying a forest's natural reconstruction. Such is the framework selected by F. Kahn to conduct his investigation. His studies were carried out in the Ivory Coast, where deforestation has reached alarming proportions, notably in the southwest, where extensive colonization has occurred over the past several years.
Beginning with a search for abandoned sites, Kahn finds 17 plots, of which 14 are ten years old or older. His observations, recorded in this book, are the result of studying these sites. He analyses the three stages through which vegetation progresses during the first ten years after cultivation has been abandoned: the essentially graminaceous herbaceous stage, the subligneous stage and the pioneer shrub stage. There is also a fourth stage, which establishes the secondary pre-climax forest. Finally, Kahn describes the principal agents of reconstruction and some of the factors that may thwart it.
The second part of the book, based on the preceding analysis, formulates proposals for managing the stages of forest reconstruction. Kahn recommends the institution of a system of protected forest zones, of cultivated al-errs and of vast tracts earmarked for the reconstruction of forest ecosystems. The author maintains that this would mean elaborating a process of reconstruction silviculture. Ensuring forest regeneration, however, does not imply that economic aspects al-e to he overlooked. Rather, one of the priority objectives of management would he the profitability of areas mobilized for reconstruction.
Fuelwood in Central America: Two new books
Situación leñera en los países centroamericanos. Paul Dukin. Turrialba (Costa Rica), Tropical Agricultural Research and Training Centre (CATIE). 1984.
About 80 percent of the population in Central America depends upon fuelwood for household fuel. This wood comes from broad-leaved and coniferous forests, mangroves and shrubby trees. The forests also provide timber for construction, and are being felled to allow for the expansion of agricultural activity. This extensive use, because of increased population and agricultural expansion, is now leading to serious deforestation in Central American countries.
CATIE, recognizing the problem, decided to make a detailed study of the fuelwood situation in Central America as part of a 1979 agreement signed with the United States Agency for International Development (AID).
The first part of this book describes the conceptual framework, meaning the present land use and population density, and the methodology employed, which is based on computerized geographical information. Indicated also are data sources and the scope and limitations of the study.
The fuelwood situation in each Central American country is described in detail in the second part. Each country's fuelwood situation, based on population density and land use, is determined, classified and interpreted by means of tables.
Areas climáticas análogas para especies productoras de leña en los países centroamericanos. Paul Dukin. Turrialba (Costa Rica), Tropical Agricultural Research and Training Centre (CATIE). 1984.
One of the objectives of the Fuelwood and Alternative Sources of Energy Project, based on the 1979 agreement signed between CATIE and AID, is the development of techniques for reforestation with fuelwood species suited to the environmental characteristics of each country. This book attempts to define which areas in these countries have similar climatic characteristics in order to facilitate the transfer of information and technology on handling fuelwood species adapted to a particular region to other climatically similar regions.
The concepts and methodology used are clearly established in the first part of the report. Thus the system of ecological analogies is based on Holdridge's classification of "living areas' (Ecología basada en zonas de vida. San José. Costa Rica, Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture. 1979). These al-e determined by the climatic parameters of biotemperature and average rainfall. Consideration should also be given to the behaviour of the species in the various types of dry season.
The second part applies these concepts and the methodology to each country individually. It covers the living areas, the duration of the dry season and the similar climatic areas, and is copiously illustrated.
The bibliography and a series of maps of Central American countries, illustrating the results described in the report, complete this study. It will he a very useful guide in selecting areas for reforestation, not only with fuelwood species hut also with timber and fruit-tree species.
Amazonian woods
Atlas d'identification des bois de l'Amazonie et des regions voisines. P. Detienne and P. Jacquet. Nogent-sur-Marne (France), Centre technique forestier tropical (CTFT). 1983. Numerous illustrations. 640 p.
This is the second work in a CTFT series that commenced with an atlas of Guyanese woods in 1982. The new volume extends the investigation to the entire tropical Amazon region. One of the motives in pursuing this research was a desire to identify definitively this extensive arboreal flora.
The authors set three objectives:
· to enrich the state of anatomical knowledge;
· to name the species currently being exploited;
· to indicate which species will be circulating on world markets in the near future.
The system used by the authors to identify woods is one they have used before: macroscopic and microscopic descriptions of the wood, genus by genus. The book also indicates the peculiarities of the different species and supplies a punched-card coding for each species. The volume is liberally illustrated.
One-third of the work is devoted to an impressive atlas which contains over 1600 photographs of wood cross sections, arranged alphabetically according to botanical family and genus. One final word: the book is bound in russet leather and has a very elegant appearance.
<section>d</section>
Environment
Monitoring arid lands in Kenya
Harmonizing environment and development
The importance of bats
Monitoring arid lands in Kenya
The Government of Kenya is setting up an Arid Lands Research Station to monitor results and continue to operate the network of research and training facilities established under the Integrated Project in Arid Lands (IPAL). IPAL was established in 1976 within the framework of Unesco's Man and the Biosphere Programme. However, the project ended in December 1983 after preparing an integrated resources management plan for northern Kenya, where environmental degradation is endangering the livelihood of indigenous peoples, particularly pastoralists.
Nature and Resources
Harmonizing environment and development
The World Commission on Environment and Development, established by Resolution 38/161 of the UN General Assembly in 1983, held its inaugural meeting in Geneva in October 1984. The Commission, whose member-serve in their individual capacities, has the following mandate:
· to re-examine the critical issues of environment and development and to formulate innovative, concrete and realistic action proposals to deal with them;
· to strengthen international cooperation in environment and development and to assess and propose new forms of cooperation that can influence policies and events in the direction of needed change;
· to raise the level of understanding and commitment to action on the part of individuals, voluntary associations, businesses, institutes and governments.
A report on the mandate, key issues, strategies and work-plan of the Commission, whose work is expected to be completed by mid-1986, has been issued. It can be obtained from: World Commission on Environment and Development, 15 route des Morillons, CH-1218 Geneva, Switzerland.
HERDER IN THE RIFT VALLEY marginal lands are overused
The importance of bats
A study being conducted by the World Wildlife Fund on the economic importance of hats to plants notes that the destruction of hats and their habitats has reached a critical stage in Latin America. Fruit eating and nectar-eating hats, through seed dispersal and pollination, influence the survival and development of many commercially important trees, plants and shrubs, such as almonds, mangoes, cashews, bananas and avocados.
World Environment Report
39 (1982) Frame saw manual (available only in English)
40 (1983) Circular saw manual (available only in English)
Practical forestry manuals from FAO
More than 250 helpful photos, drawings and diagrams
42 (1983) Fuelwood supplies in the developing countries
FAO's pioneering study of the world fuelwood crisis (available in English, French and Spanish)
43: (1983) Forest revenue systems in developing countries
A practical guide to forest fees and charges in developing countries and in tropical forests in general (available only in English)
44/1 (1983) Food and fruit-bearing forest species
1: Examples from Eastern Africa.
40 SPECIES MONOGRAPHS information on: ecology, distribution, main uses, cultivation, collection periods, nutritional value, propagation, marketing (available in English, French and Spanish)
The only international forestry magazine
Unasylva
4 issues per year
Unasylva - an international Journal of forestry and forest industries
ORDER FORM to be mailed to:
Distribution and Sales Section
FAO - Via delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome - Italy
or to any of the FAO Sales Agents listed on the Inside black cover.
Please enter my subscription to Unasylva for a period of one year (Price: $10.00 *)
* For subscription rates in your currency check with your local FAO Sales Agent.
Name ______________________Street _____________________________
Occupation _________________City __________Country ______________
Edition required:
English
French
Spanish
Form of payment:
Cheque enclosed
Bank order
Unesco coupons
On receipt of invoice
<section>e</section>
Where to purchase FAO publications locally - Points de vente des publications de la FAO - Puntos de venta de publicaciones de la FAO
· ANGOLA
Empresa Nacional do Disco e de Publicações, ENDIPU-U.E.E.
Rua Cirilo da Conceição Silva, N° 7
C.P. N° 1314-C, Luanda
· ARGENTINA
Librería Agropecuaria
Pasteur 743, 1028 Buenos Aires
Oficina del Libro Internacional
Av. Córdoba 1877, 1120 Buenos Aires
E-mail: olilibro@satlink.com
· AUSTRALIA
Hunter Publications
P.O. Box 404, Abbotsford, Vic. 3067
Tel.:(03) 9417 5361
Fax: (03) 914 7154
E-mail: jpdavies@ozemail.com.au
· AUSTRIA
Gerold Buch & Co.
Weihburggasse 26, 1010 Vienna
· BANGLADESH
Association of Development Agencies in Bangladesh
House No. 1/3, Block F,
Lalmatia, Dhaka 1207
· BELGIQUE
M.J. De Lannoy
202, avenue du Roi, 1060 Bruxelles
CCP 000-0808993-13
E-mail: jean.de.lannoy@infoboard.be
· BOLIVIA
Los Amigos del Libro
Av. Heroínas 311, Casilla 450
Cochabamba;
Mercado 1315, La Paz
· BOTSWANA
Botsalo Books (Pty) Ltd
P.O. Box 1532, Gaborone
· BRAZIL
Fundação Getúlio Vargas
Praia do Botafogo 190, C.P. 9052
Rio de Janeiro
E-mail: valeria@sede.fgvrj.br
Núcleo Editora da Universidade Federal Fluminense
Rua Miguel de Frias 9
Icaraí-Niterói 24
220-000 Rio de Janeiro
Fundação da Universidade Federal do Paraná - FUNPAR
Rua Alfredo Bufrem 140, 30° andar
80020-240 Curitiba
· CAMEROON
CADDES
Centre Africain de Diffusion et
Développement Social
B.P. 7317 Douala Bassa
Tel.: (237) 43 37 83
Fax: (237) 42 77 03
· CANADA
Renouf Publishing
5369 chemin Canotek Road, Unit 1
Ottawa, Ontario K1J 9J3
Tel.: (613) 745-2665
Fax: (613) 745 7660
Website: www.renoufbooks.com
E-mail: renouf@fox.nstn.ca
· CHILE
Librería - Oficina Regional FAO
c/o FAO Officina Regional para América
Latina y el Caribe (RLC)
Avda. Dag Hammarskjold, 3241
Vitacura, Santiago
Tel.: 33 72 314
Fax: 696 1121/696 1124
E-mail: german.rojas@field.fao.org
Universitaria Textolibros Ltda.
Avda. L. Bernardo O'Higgins 1050
Santiago
· CHINA
China National Publications Import & Export Corporation
16 Gongti East Road, Beijing 100020
Tel.: 6506 30 70
Fax: 6506 3101
E-mail: cnpiec@public.3.bta.net.cn
· COLOMBIA
Banco Ganadero
Vicepresidencia de Fomento
Carrera 9^a N° 72-21, Piso 5
Bogotá D.E.
Tel.: 217 0100
· CONGO
Office national des librairies populaires
B.P. 577, Brazzaville
· COSTA RICA
Librería Lehmann S.A.
Av. Central, Apartado 10011
1000 San José
CINDE
Coalición Costarricense de Iniciativas de Desarrollo
Apdo 7170, 1000 San José
E-mail: rtacinde@sol.rassa.co.cr
· CÔTE D'IVOIRE
CEDA
04 B.P. 541, Abidjan 04
Tel.: 22 20 55
Fax: 21 72 62
· CUBA
Ediciones Cubanas Empresa de Comercio Exterior de Publicaciones
Obispo 461, Apartado 605, La Habana
· CZECH REPUBLIC
Artia Pegas Press Ltd Import of Periodicals
Palác Metro, P.O. Box 825
Národní 25, 111 21 Praha 1
· DENMARK
Munksgaard, Book and Subscription Service
P.O. Box 2148
DK 1016 Copenhagen K.
Tel.: 4533128570
Fax: 4533129387
Website: www.munksgaard.dk;
E-mail: subscription.service@mail.munksgaard.dk
· DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
CUESTA - Centro del libro
Av. 27 de Febrero, esq. A. Lincoln
Centro Comercial Nacional
Apartado 1241, Santo Domingo
· ECUADOR
Libri Mundi, Librería Internacional
Juan León Mera 851
Apartado Postal 3029, Quito
E-mail: librimul@librimundi.com.ec
Universidad agraria del Ecuador Centro de Información Agraria
Av. 23 de Julio, Apdo 09-01-1248
Guayaquil
Librería Española
Murgeón 364 y Ulloa, Quito
· EGYPT
The Middle East Observer
41 Sherif Street, Cairo
Tel.: 393 97 2
Fax.: 360 68 04
E-mail: fouda@soficom.com.eg
· ESPAÑA
Librería Agrícola
Fernando VI 2, 28004 Madrid
Librería de la Generalitat de Catalunya
Rambla dels Estudis 118 (Palau Moja)
08002 Barcelona
Tel.: (93) 302 6462
Fax: (93) 302 1299
Mundi Prensa Libros S.A.
Castelló 37, 28001 Madrid
Tel.: 914 36 37 00
Fax: 915 75 39 98
Website: www.tsai.es/MPRENSA
E-mail: mundiprensa@tsai.es
Mundi Prensa - Barcelona
Consejo de Ciento 391,
08009 Barcelona
Tel.: 301 8615
Fax: 317 0141
· FINLAND
Aketeeminen Kirjakauppa Subscription Services
P.O. Box 23, FIN-00371 Helsinki
Tel.: (358) 0121 4416
Fax.: (358) 0121 4450
· FRANCE
Editions A. Pedone
13, rue Soufflot, 75005 Paris
Lavoisier Tec & Doc
14, rue de Provigny
94236 Cachan Cedex
Website: www.lavoisier.fr
E-mail: livres@lavoisier.fr
Librairie du Commerce International
10, avenue d'Iéna
75783 Paris Cedex 16
Website: www.cfce.fr
E-mail: pl@net-export.fr
WORLD DATA
10, rue Nicolas Flamand
75004 Paris
Tel.: (01) 4278 0578
Fax: (01) 4278 1472
· GERMANY
Alexander Horn Internationale Buchhandlung
Friedrichstrasse 34
D-65185 Wiesbaden
Tel.: 37 42 12
S. Toeche-Mittler GmbH Versandbuchhandlung
Hindenburgstrasse 33
D-64295 Darmstadt
Tel.: 6151 336 65
Fax: 6151 314 048
Website: www. booksell.com/triops
E-mail: triops@booksell.com
Uno Verlag
Poppelsdorfer Allee 55
D-53115 Bonn 1
Tel.: 49 (0) 228 94 90 20
Fax: 49 (0) 228 21 74 92
Website: www.uno-verlag.de
E-mail: unoverlag@aol.com
· GHANA
SEDCO Publishing Ltd
Sedco House, Tabon Street
Off Ring Road Central, North Ridge
P.O. Box 2051, Accra
· GREECE
Papasotiriou S.A.
35 Stournara Str., 10682 Athens
Tel.: +301 3302 980
Fax: +301 3648254
· GUYANA
Guyana National Trading Corporation Ltd
45-47 Water Street, P.O. Box 308
Georgetown
· HAÏTI
Librairie «A la Caravelle»
26, rue Bonne Foi
B.P. 111, Port-au-Prince
· HONDURAS
Escuela Agrícola Panamericana Librería RTAC
El Zamorano, Apartado 93, Tegucigalpa
Oficina de la Escuela Agrícola Panamericana en Tegucigalpa
Blvd. Morazán, Apts. Glapson
Apartado 93, Tegucigalpa
· HUNGARY
Librotrade Kft.
P.O. Box 126, H-1656 Budapest
Tel.: 256 1672
Fax: 256 8727
· INDIA
EWP Affiliated East-West Press PVT, Ltd
G-I/16, Ansari Road, Darya Gany
New Delhi 110 002
Tel.: 32 64 180
Fax: 32 60 538
Oxford Book and Stationery Co.
Scindia House
New Delhi 110 001
Tel.: 91 11 331 5310
Fax: 91 11 371 3275
Oxford Subscription Agency
Institute for Development Education
1 Anasuya Ave., Kilpauk
Madras 600 010
Periodical Expert Book Agency
D-42, Vivek Vihar, Delhi 110095
Bookwell
Head Office:
2/72, Nirankari Colony, New Delhi - 110009
Tel.: 725 1283
Fax: 91-11-328 13 15
Sales Office:
24/4800, Ansari Road
Darya Ganj, New Delhi - 110002
Tel.: 326 8786, 325 7264
E-mail: bkwell@nde.vsnl.net.in
· IRAN
The FAO Bureau, International and Regional Specialized Organizations Affairs
Ministry of Agriculture of the Islamic Republic of Iran
Keshavarz Bld, M.O.A., 17th floor
Teheran
· IRELAND
Office of Public Work
4-5 Harcourt Road, Dublin 2
· ISRAEL
R.O.Y. International
P.O. Box 13056, Tel Aviv 61130
E-mail: royil@netvision.net.il
· ITALY
FAO Bookshop
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Roma
Tel.: 06 57055688
Fax: 06 57055155
E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org
Librería Commissionaria Sansoni S.p.A. - Licosa
Via Duca di Calabria 1/1
50125 Firenze
Tel.: 055 64 54 15
Fax: 055 64 12 57
E-mail: licosa@ftbcc.it
Libreria Scientifica Dott. Lucio de Biasio "Aeiou"
Via Coronelli 6, 20146 Milano
· JAPAN
Far Eastern Booksellers (Kyokuto Shoten Ltd.)
12 Kanda-Jimbocho 2 chome
Chiyoda-ku - P.O. Box 72
Tokyo 101-91
Tel.: 03 3265 7531
Fax: 03 3265 4656
Maruzen Company Ltd.
P.O. Box 5050
Tokyo International 100-31
Tel.: 81 3 3278 1894
Fax: 81 3 3278 1895
E-mail: h_sugiyama@maruzen.co.jp
· KENYA
Text Book Centre Ltd.
Kijabe Street
P.O. Box 47540, Nairobi
Tel.: 330 342
Fax: 22 57 79
Inter Africa Book Distribution
Kencom House, Moi Avenue
P.O. Box 73580, Nairobi
Tel.: 21 11 84
Fax: 254 2 22 35 70
· LUXEMBOURG
M. J. De Lannoy
202, avenue du Roi
1060 Bruxelles (Belgique)
E-mail: jean.de.lannoy@infoboard.be
· MADAGASCAR
Centre d'information et de Documentation Scientifique et Technique
Ministère de la recherche appliquée au développement
B.P 6224 Tsimbazaza, Antanarivo
· MALAYSIA
Electronic products only:
Southbound Sendirian Berhad Publishers
9 College Square, 01250 Penang
· MALI
Librairie Traore
Rue Soundiata Keita X 115
B.P. 3243, Bamako
· MAROC
La Librairie Internationale
70 Rue T'ssoule
PO. Box 302 (RP), Rabat
Tel./Fax: 212 7 75 01 83
· MEXICO
Librería, Universidad Autónoma de Chapingo
56230 Chapingo
Libros y Editoriales S.A.
Av. Progreso N° 202-1° Piso A
Apdo. Postal 18922
Col. Escandón, 11800 México D.F.
Mundi Prensa Mexico, S.A.
Rió Pánuco, 141 Col. Cuauhtémoc
C.P. 06500, México, DF
Tel.: 533-5658 al 60
Fax: 514-6799
E-mail: 1015452361@compuserve.com
· NETHERLANDS
Roodveldt Import b.v.
Brouwersgracht 288
1013 HG Amsterdam
E-mail: roodboek@euronet.nl
Tel.: 622 8035
Fax: 625 5493
Swets & Zeitlinger b.v.
P.O. Box 830, 2160 Lisse
Heereweg 347 B, 2161 CA Lisse
E-mail: infono@swets.nl
Website: www.swets.nl
· NEW ZEALAND
Legislation Services
P.O. Box 12418
Thorndon, Wellington
E-mail: gppmjxf@gp.co.nz
Oasis Official
P.O. Box 3627, Wellington
Tel.: (+64) 4 499 1551
Fax: (+64) 4 499 1972
E-mail: oasis@clear.net.nz
Website: www.oasisbooks.co.nzl
· NICARAGUA
Librería HISPAMER
Costado Este Univ. Centroamericana
Apdo. Postal A-221, Managua
· NIGERIA
University Bookshop (Nigeria) Ltd.
University of Ibadan, Ibadan
· NORWAY
Swets Norge AS
P.O. Box 6512, Etterstad
N-0606 Oslo
Tel.: (+47) 2297 4500
Fax: (+47) 2297 4545
E-mail: nicagen@swets.nl
· PAKISTAN
Mirza Book Agency
65 Shahrah-e-Quaid-e-Azam
P.O. Box 729, Lahore 3
· PARAGUAY
Librería Intercontinental Editora e Impresora S.R.L.
Caballero 270 c/Mcal Estigarribia
Asunción
· PERU
INDEAR
Jirón Apurimac 375, Casilla 4937
Lima 1
Universidad Nacional "Pedro Ruiz Gallo"
Facultad de Agronomía, A.P. 795
Lambayeque (Chiclayo)
· PHILIPPINES
International Booksource Center, Inc.
Room 720, Cityland 10 Tower 2
H.V. de la Costa, Cor. Valero St
Makati, Metro Manila
Tel.: 817 9676
Fax: 817 1741
· POLAND
Ars Polona
Krakowskie Przedmiescie 7
00-950 Warsaw
· PORTUGAL
Livraria Portugal, Dias e Andrade Ltda.
Rua do Carmo 70-74
Apartado 2681, 1200 Lisboa Codex
· SINGAPORE
Select Books Pte Ltd.
03-15 Tanglin Shopping Centre
19 Tanglin Road, Singapore 1024
Tel.: 732 1515
Fax: 736 0855
· SLOVAK REPUBLIC
Institute of Scientific and Technical Information for Agriculture
Samova 9, 950 10 Nitra
Tel.: +42 87 522 185
Fax: +42 87 525 275
E-mail: uvtip @ nr.sanet.sk
· SOMALIA
Samater
P.O. Box 936, Mogadishu
· SOUTH AFRICA
David Philip Publishers (Pty) Ltd.
P.O. Box 23408, Claremont 7735
Tel.: Cape Town (021) 64-4136
Fax: Cape Town (021) 64-3358
E-mail: dpp@iafrica.com
Website: www.twisted.co.za
· SRI LANKA
M.D. Gunasena & Co. Ltd.
217 Olcott Mawatha, P.O. Box 246
Colombo 11
· SUISSE
Buchhandlung und Antiquariat Heinimann & Co.
Kirchgasse 17, 8001 Zurich
UN Bookshop
Palais des Nations
CH-1211 Genève 1
Website: www.un.org
Van Diermen Editions Techniques ADECO
41 Lacuez, CH-1807 Blonzy
· SURINAME
Vaco n.v. in Suriname
Domineestraat 26, P.O. Box 1841
Paramaribo
· SWEDEN
Wennergren Williams AB
P.O. Box 1305, S-171 25 Solna
Tel.: 46 8 705 9750
Fax: 46 8 27 00 71
E-mail: mail@wwi.se
Bokdistributören
P.O. Box 301 61, S-104 25 Stockholm
Tel.: 46 8 728 2500
Fax: 46 8 31 30 44
E-mail: lis.ledin @ hk.akademibokhandeln.se
· THAILAND
Suksapan Panit
Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue
Bangkok
· TOGO
Librairie du Bon Pasteur
B.P. 1164, Lomé
· TUNISIE
Société tunisienne de diffusion
5, avenue de Carthage, Tunis
· TURKEY
DUNYA INFOTEL
100. Yil Mahallesi
34440 Bagcilar, Istanbul
Tel.: 0212 629 08 08
Fax: 0212 629 46 89
E-mail: dunya@dunya-gazete.com.tr
Website: http://www.dunya.com
· UNITED KINGDOM
The Stationery Office
51 Nine Elms Lane
London SW8 5DR
Tel.: (0171) 873 9090 (orders)
(0171) 873 0011 (inquiries)
Fax: (0171) 873 8463
and through The Stationery Office Bookshops
E-mail: postmaster@theso.co.uk
Website: www.the-stationery-office.co.uk
Electronic products only:
Microinfo Ltd.
P.O. Box 3, Omega Road
Alton, Hampshire GU34 2PG
Tel.: (01420) 86848
Fax: (01420) 89889
Website: www.microinfo.co.uk
E-mail: emedia@microinfo.co.uk
· UNITED STATES
Publications:
BERNAN Associates (ex UNIPUB)
4611/F Assembly Drive
Lanham, MD 20706-4391
Toll-free 1-800-274-4447
Fax: 301-459-0056
Website: www.bernan.com
E-mail: info@bernan.com
UN Bookshop
The United Nations Bookshop
General Assembly Building Room 32
New York, N.Y. 10017
Tel.: 212 963 7680
Fax: 212 963 4910
Website: www.un.org
E-mail: bookshop@un.org
Periodicals:
Ebsco Subscription Services
P.O. Box 1943
Birmingham, AL 35201 -1943
Tel.: (205) 991-6600
Telex: 78-2661
Fax: (205) 991-1449
The Faxon Company Inc.
15 Southwest Park
Westwood, MA 02090
Tel.: 6117-329-3350
Telex: 95-1980
Cable: FW Faxon Wood
· URUGUAY
Librería Agropecuaria S.R.L.
Buenos Aires 335, Casilla 1755
Montevideo C.P. 11000
· VENEZUELA
Fundación La Era Agrícola
Calle 31 Junin Qta Coromoto 5-49
Apartado 456, Mérida
Fundación para la Investigación Agrícola
San Javier
Estado Yaracuy, A.P. 182, San Felipe
Fax: 054 44210
E-mail: damac@diero.conicit.ve
Fudeco, Librería
Avenida Libertador-Este
Ed. Fudeco, Apartado 254
Barquisimeto C.P. 3002, Ed. Lara
Tel.: (051) 538 022
Fax: (051) 544 394
Telex: (051) 513 14 FUDEC VC
Librería FAGRO
Universidad Central de Venezuela (UCV)
Maracay
Librería Universitaria, C.A.
Av. 3, entre 29 y 30
N° 29-25 Edif. EVA, Mérida
Fax: 074 52 09 56
Tamanaco Libros Técnicos S.R.L.
Centro Comercial Ciudad Tamanaco
Nivel C-2, Caracas
Tel.: 261 3344/261 3335/959 0016
Tecni-Ciencia Libros S.A.
Torre Phelps-Mezzanina
Plaza Venezuela
A.P. 20.315, 1020 Caracas
Tel.: 782 8697/781 9945/781 9954
E-mail: tchlibros@ibm.net
Tecni-Ciencia Libros, S.A.
Centro Comercial
Av. Andrés Eloy, Urb. El Prebo
Valencia, Ed. Carabobo
Tel.: 222 724
· ZIMBABWE
Grassroots Books
The Book Café
Fife Avenue, Harare;
61 a Fort Street, Bulawayo
Tel.: 79 31 82
Fax: 70 21 29
· Other countries/Autres pays/Otros países
Sales and Marketing Group
Information Division, FAO
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy
Tel.: (39) 06 57051
Fax: (39) 06 57053360
Telex: 625852/625853/610181 FAO I
E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org
