<title>Unasylva - No. 149 - 1985: International year of the forest - Ann&eacute;e internationale de la for&ecirc;t - A&ntilde;o internacional del bosque</title>
<section>1</section>
Editorial - International year of the forest
It would be understandable if the reader of Unasylva seeing this special issue of the journal, wanted to know why the FAO Council decided "so suddenly" - some might even say "hastily" - to proclaim 1985 as the International Year of the Forest. There are four main reasons:
· the pressure of events on the world forestry scene-throughout the world, with good reason, concern is being expressed over ominous factors that mean the removal of ever-increasing areas of forest;
· acid rain and the forest degradation associated with it in Western Europe and North America, which have alerted public opinion in these countries and alarmed and challenged technicians and scientists;
· forest fires in the Mediterranean area and in the dry tropics, a major source of concern that has not yet found satisfactory solutions;
· the loss or conversion of more than 11 million ha of tropical forest resources every year while drought is killing millions of trees and causing soil erosion and desertification, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa.
This disturbing situation led first the European Forestry Commission and later FAO's Committee on Forestry to alert the FAO Council, which decided to take action and ring the alarm bell. Thus the Council, meeting between 19 and 30 November 1984, adopted Resolution 2/86 proclaiming 1985 the International Year of the Forest.
As with other, similar celebrations, the purpose of the International Year of the Forest is, above all, to alert, to inform, to sensitize and to motivate in such a way that action is taken for the benefit not only of world forest resources but also of all forms of production, land use, and conservation in which trees and woody vegetation in general are involved.
FAO, entrusted with the task of launching and promoting the International Year of the Forest, is doing so In a number of ways:
· the proclamation of the International Year of the Forest on 22 January 1985 by Director-General Edouard Saouma;
· the dispatch of relevant information and an invitation to participate to all Member Governments other UN agencies and a number of national and regional governmental and non-governmental institutions and organizations;
· the execution of its own plan of action, which includes producing and distributing information and extension materials; disseminating existing technical information; involving and making available its own technical staff, at headquarters and in the field, for forestry, agricultural and even fisheries projects; and, finally, within the context of its regular functions, making provisions for meaningful future action resulting from ideas generated by the International Year of the Forest.
The World Forestry Congress, the Commonwealth Forestry Conference and other large international and regional meetings dealing with forestry present an opportunity to transmit the message of the international Year of the Forest.
This message will highlight all current problems relating to forestry, but special emphasis will be placed on the major theme of forestry and food security and its four supporting themes: forest conservation, forestry and people, appropriate forest industries, and the fuelwood crisis.
The articles in this issue of Unasylva deal with such problems. The lead article on forestry and food security describes the importance of forestry In the maintenance, improvement or rehabilitation of the productive capacity of agriculture. Following is an article dealing with the threat of acid rain. Finally, it must be kept in mind that the best guardians of forest resources are the people who are the first to benefit from them. Therefore, the efforts of non-governmental organizations should be directed toward helping to increase people's participation in all aspects of forest management. The third article deals with this topic.
If the International Year of the Forest succeeds in putting across its message convincingly, much will have been achieved. But even this would be no more than a beginning.
<section>2</section>
International year of the forest
Objectives
· The short-term objectives of the International Year of the Forest are (i) to focus world attention on the need for forest conservation and protection; (ii) to raise the political and public awareness of forest resources: (iii) to identify and draw attention to the factors threatening these forest resources; and (iv) to mobilize people, and especially youth, to participate in forest-oriented activities during 1985.
· The long-term objectives are (i) to strengthen national and international commitments to safeguarding the productive and protective: capacity of each nation's forest resources in support of national, social, economic and environmental goals; (ii) to address with greater determination resources and skill the threats to forest resources and (iii) to promote better planning and implementation of forestry programmes, and to give them due importance in national economic planning, on a sustained basis.
· Overall theme: Forestry and food security.
· Supporting themes: Conserving the forest. Forestry and people: Appropriate industries; The fuelwood crisis
Resolution 2/86 - FAO Council Eighty-sixth Session
Rome 19-30 November 1984
THE COUNCIL
Convinced that forest conservation has become one of the greatest environmental problems and that society cannot afford further damage and degradation to the world's forest resources;
Being aware of the alarming rate at which tropical forest resources are being depleted, currently estimated at some 11 million ha per year;
Recognizing the important role of arid-zone forestry in preventing desertification through closer integration of forestry with agriculture in rural development programmes;
Being aware of the fact that forest fires are the major cause of the destruction of Mediterranean forests and that atmospheric pollution alone or in combination with insects and diseases, seriously threatens the survival of many forests in temperate regions;
Believing that the damage to forest resources by all these factors combined may signal potential damage to other sectors of human activity such as agriculture, quality of food and water, conservation of wildlife and fish populations and the quality of human life per se;
Expressing deep concern at the lack of political awareness at all levels of the social economic and environmental consequences of continued excessive deforestation and of neglect of the world's forest resources;
Believing that every possible measure should be taken urgently in every country to accelerate the process of heightening political awareness at al levels of the critical importance for the future of mankind of adequate attention being given to the word's forests;
Being aware of the fact that the United Nations General Assembly has designated 1985 as International Youth Year and that "Tree Planting'' will be one of the main programmes involving youth in development;
Considering that the Ninth World Forestry Congress will be held in Mexico in 1985 and the obvious advantages of associating internal efforts for he conservation of the forest with the Congress;
1. Recommends that the Ninth World Forestry Congress in Mexico in July 1985 pay special attention to the conservation and proper use of vest resources.
2. Requests all Member Nations to give special recognition to "The Forest" during 1985 and to consider the conservation of their respective forest resources as a matter of national and global concern and to heighten public awareness of the importance of forests for the quality of life, the safeguarding of environmental stability and of their contribution to socioeconomic progress, and to sponsor programmes providing opportunities for youth to participate in tree planting and forest conservation.
3. Declares 1985 the International Year of the Forest.
4 Requests the Director-General to seek, within he limits of available funds in 1985, to respond to requests from FAO Member Nations for assistance in their separate and collective efforts to have "The Forest" duly recognized as a global concern during the year 1985 and in pursuance of he International Year.
FAO's coordinator for the International Year of the Forest - Mr El Hadji Sène, former head of the Forest Service in Senegal, is serving as coordinator for FAO activities relating to International Year of the Forest during 1985.
<section>3</section>
Forestry and food security
FAO Forestry Department
FAO has chosen "Forestry and food security" as the overall theme for the international Year of the Forest, 1985. This article is based on a paper presented at the tenth session of the FAO Committee on Food Security, which met in Rome between 10 and 17 April 1985. Its origins, however, can be traced back to several recent sessions of the FAO Conference which have expressed concern over the threat from excessive deforestation to the resource base needed for sustained and adequate food production. The FAO Committee on Forestry, at its seventh session in May 1984, recommended that FAO prepare a study on the interrelationship between forestry and food security and that this be brought to the attention of the Committee on Food Security.
· Land-use practices that lead to environmental degradation are widely recognized as a principal cause of the food emergencies that occur with such tragic frequency in developing countries. It is also well known that they put the long-term future of food supplies in jeopardy. Nevertheless, they have so far received little attention in international discussions of world food security.
This article is mainly concerned with the fundamental contribution of forestry to environmental stability, but it also makes a preliminary survey of the many other roles of forestry in food security.
Maintaining soil and water
The most obvious of the links between food production and forests is the continued transfer of land from forest to agricultural use. Much of the world's agricultural land was formerly under forest vegetation. It is estimated by FAO that in the tropics, 7.5 million ha of closed forest and 3.8 million ha of more open woodland are currently cleared each year, almost entirely for agriculture (FAO, 1982).
There is no doubt that additional forest land will be cleared for agriculture. However, much of the land that is cleared is unsuitable for permanent agriculture and is likely to become rapidly degraded or eroded. Such land serves a more useful productive function under forest cover, which maintains the soil and water base. It is therefore encouraging that FAO's proposals on how agricultural production should be increased up to the end of this century call for only about one-fourth of the increase in crop production to come from the extension of the arable area, with the remaining increase coming from improved productivity (FAO, 1981).
Forest vegetation and its accompanying soil organisms probably make up as much as 90 percent of the total biomass on land and thus represent a physically immense foundation for ecological stability. However, human beings have already vastly weakened this asset by deforestation, and the stability of many ecological systems has therefore been greatly disturbed.
The relation between forests and environmental stability is complex and not yet fully understood. What is certain is that forests can help to even out the run-off of whatever rain does fall, and thereby avoid extremes of soil inundation and desiccation. At the local level, the presence of forest areas has a moderating effect on extremes of temperature and air humidity on neighbouring agricultural land.
Three specific situations in which forest cover plays a critical role in maintaining the soil and water base for food production are in upland watersheds, arid lands and tropical forest soils, and these cases are therefore discussed separately below.
CARVING HIPPOPOTAMUS IN UGANDA wildlife is a crucial food
Upland watersheds Excessive deforestation of mountain land not only causes soil erosion on the cleared land but is also, because of its effects on the water regime, a major threat to agriculture in the areas situated downstream. Torrential rivers carry away soil in vast quantities, destroy bridges and buildings, flood fields, disturb fisheries, and deposit silt in reservoirs and irrigation channels, thus greatly reducing the useful life of these costly installations. Deforestation can even cause droughts as well as floods downstream, as the result of a less regular flow of water. The massive effect of flood damage on food production in the plain areas of South Asia is only one example of the consequences of excessive deforestation in upland watershed areas.
To protect agriculture from such disasters, the integrated management of whole watersheds is essential. The conservation of existing forests, together with strategically located reforestation, is a key aspect of protecting the soil in the upper parts of a catchment area and of limiting downstream damage. The presence of trees breaks the force of heavy rainfall, thus facilitating its absorption into the soil, reducing surface run-off, and moderating and regulating stream flow. Although this may reduce the quantity of water available to irrigation schemes fed from the hills, the improved quality of the water and its more regular flow should usually compensate by saving reservoirs and channels from rapid siltation.
In addition to forest conservation and reforestation, the maintenance and rehabilitation of watersheds require that they also be used in the construction of physical works to control erosion and flooding. It is also necessary to recognize that many people are already living in these areas as farmers, and to introduce programmes that are acceptable to them to minimize damage to the forest resource from harmful cultivation and grazing practices. As is discussed later in this article, trees are an essential component of many of the improved farming systems that are required. Examples of successful watershed rehabilitation, embodying all these aspects, include a number of recent projects in India and Nepal.
Woody vegetation can provide important reserves of livestock feed for the dry season and in drought years.
Arid and semi-arid lands In arid and semi-arid areas, wind rather than water is the main agent of erosion. The maintenance of woodland areas reduces the removal of dust and sand from badly eroded land, and the presence of trees between these areas and agricultural land can moderate the effects of dust storms and sand-dune formation. Woody vegetation, with its shade and deep roots, also stays green when grasslands have dried up. It can thus provide important reserves of livestock feed for the dry season and in drought years. The seasonal importance of arboreal fodder is particularly great in the Sahelian zone of Africa.
Tree components in land use in arid areas (shelter-belts and windbreaks are examples) help to combat drought and desertification through improved biological productivity and plant biomass; to increase carrying capacity for livestock; to boost crop yields from soil conservation; to reduce wind erosion; to fix sand-dunes; to ameliorate microclimates; and to protect human habitats and infrastructure. Trees can also be used to rehabilitate salt-affected land and sand-dunes, through their ability to tap moisture and nutrients in the deeper soil layers.
Excessive deforestation, together with overgrazing and the cultivation of marginal land, can greatly worsen the effects on food production of periods of low rainfall or drought. It is also a major cause of desertification. In addition to the 6 percent of the world's land area that is already extreme desert, a further 29 percent has been classified as subject to varying degrees of desertification hazard (FAO/Unesco/WMO, 1977).
Government programmes to control desertification are increasingly based on the greater incorporation of trees in farming systems, which is discussed in a later part of this article. They also include major forestation schemes like China's "Great Green Wall", about 6000 km long, round the borders of the Gobi Desert.
Forest soils Many forest soils of the humid tropics are of low fertility and poor structure and are difficult to keep in continuous cultivation. Their principal present use for agriculture is under the various systems of shifting cultivation, relying on a long period of fallow for the restoration of fertility. These are still the most widespread farming systems in the tropics. It is estimated that the fallow areas associated with shifting cultivation occupy some 410 million ha, or more than 20 percent of the existing area of tropical forest (FAO, 1982). Part of this area is in the fragile upland watersheds discussed above.
The natural regeneration of woody vegetation during the fallow period of shifting cultivation applies to many species with deep roots that can draw on sources of plant nutrients inaccessible to crop plants. These nutrients are drawn into their leaves, which end up scattered on the surface and incorporated in the soil layers that can be exploited by crop plants.
Provided the fallow period is long enough, traditional systems of shifting cultivation are in ecological balance with the environment and do not irreversibly degrade the soil resource. However, increasing population pressure has led to longer cropping periods and to shorter fallows that are no longer adequate to restore fertility. When the natural cycle of regeneration is broken in this way, crop yields fall sharply and rapid soil degradation sets in.
In the past, government programmes were often aimed at abolishing shifting cultivation, but the main emphasis now is on its amelioration. The problems of changing from shifting cultivation to more permanent systems are very complex, especially because the cultivators, impoverished still further by declining yields, cannot afford the improvements required to maintain fertility and prevent degradation. Many different permanent systems have been proposed as an alternative to shifting cultivation, and these are the subject of a substantial amount of research (Okigbo, 1984). Several of the more promising of the proposed solutions involve some combination of forest or other trees with crops and livestock, and these will be discussed later in connection with the role of trees in farming systems.
Other contributions
Although by far the greatest contribution of forestry to food security is through its protective environmental role outlined above, forestry proper (as opposed to the use of trees in farming systems) also contributes in a number of other ways. Naturally occurring foods from the forest (including wildlife) are much more important than is generally realized in the food supplies of many countries. Forestry also provides rural employment and income, and foreign-exchange earnings - all of which increase the ability of people to purchase adequate food supplies. Finally, there is the special and urgent question of fuelwood supplies.
Food from the forest Some wild forest plants, such as the sago palm of Southeast Asia, provide staple foods. More generally, they provide nutritionally valuable supplements in diets based on one or a few staples. They may be available when other foods are short, thus contributing to the stability of food supplies throughout the year. Plant foods from the forest include many different fruits, nuts, leaves, roots and fungi. Some are also important sources of income, like the palm hearts of which Brazil produces between 20000 and 30000 tonnes a year. Honey is another significant source of food and income from the forest.
Forest trees and plants also provide fodder for livestock; they are often the only source available when grassland has dried out. Suitable shoots, foliage and fruits can be gathered, or the animals can browse directly in the forest, although this requires careful regulation of the numbers and movement of grazing animals if the forest resource is not to be destroyed. With wide spacing, high pruning and the sowing of a nutritious ground cover (for example, elephant grass), it is also possible to improve the fodder yield of forest plantations.
Probably, however, wildlife is the biggest single source of food directly available from the forest. In many areas wildlife, including small rodents, reptiles, birds, snails and insects as well as larger species, makes up a very large part of animal protein supplies: for example, as much as 60 percent in Botswana, 70 percent in Liberia and 75 percent in Ghana.
In some situations, such as the savannah (open woodland) areas of Africa, the larger mammalian species of wildlife are superior to domestic livestock because of their more efficient conversion of vegetation to meat, their better ecological adaptation, and their more limited management requirements (including disease protection). Much attention has therefore been given recently to methods of exploiting them more effectively through such methods as game cropping and ranching.
As regards both wildlife and potential food plants, the forests of the world constitute its largest reserve of genetic diversity, including the wild relatives of important staple food plants. The surest method of conserving this irreplaceable pool of genetic material is the conservation of the forest habitats themselves.
Employment and income Forestry and the industrial and artisanal activities based on it are significant sources of rural employment and income. Forest management operations, including planting, weeding, thinning, pruning, felling, logging and road-building, lend themselves to the use of labour-intensive technology. With such technology there can be about 25 full-time jobs per 1000 ha of intensively managed forest plantation, as compared with only 1015 using labour-saving equipment.
Industrial plants such as sawmills and pulp mills also provide some employment. However, it is becoming increasingly clear that the biggest and most dynamic source of employment in the whole forestry sector (including primary forestry operations) is small-scale artisanal activities (for example, carpentry, furniture-making, handicrafts and charcoal-burning) at the household and workshop level. In many countries this is one of the most important sources of rural employment after farming, and it merits much more study than it has received up to now.
In some situations, larger mammalian species of wildlife are superior to domestic livestock for food.
Foreign-exchange earnings In view of the food import requirements of many developing countries, their foreign-exchange earnings from the export of logs and processed forest products contribute to access to adequate food supplies. However, very few of these countries now have a net export of forest products. Countries with such large forest resources as Nigeria have become net importers. The main emphasis at present is therefore on increased local processing, not only to raise the value-added component of export earnings but also to limit foreign-exchange expenditure on imports of processed forest products. The total value of the developing producing countries' exports of tropical logs, sawnwood, veneer and plywood peaked at about US$5900 million in 1980 and then dropped sharply. The developing countries' imports of forest products (mostly pulp and paper) reached US$8700 million in 1981 and have since fallen slightly. Wood-based fuels may also sometimes replace imported
fossil fuels.
Fuelwood supplies Fuelwood still represents more than half of the world's total output of wood, and about 85 percent of that used in the developing countries. It accounts for more than one-fifth of the total energy consumption in these countries, and more than three-quarters in the poorest of them.
It is the principal fuel used in the preservation and other processing of food in the rural areas of the developing countries and thus contributes to the stability of food supplies throughout the year. Above all, however, as the predominant fuel used by poor people for cooking, it is essential in order to convert adequate food supplies into adequate diets. A few foods, such as some varieties of cassava, have to be cooked to make them safe for human consumption, and many other foods require cooking to increase their digestibility and palatability and reduce the danger of disease from parasites and other pathogens.
Fuelwood supplies have been rapidly depleted, and the cutting of fuelwood has in turn been a major cause of excessive deforestation. In many rural areas people (and especially women) now have to walk very long distances to collect and haul fuelwood, and often the frequency of cooked meals has had to be reduced. The shortage of fuelwood is an important contributory cause of malnutrition and disease in many areas.
BHUTANESE RICE READY FOR HARVEST trees preserve soil and water
FAO has estimated that in 1980, almost 100 million rural people in the developing countries were living in areas with an acute scarcity of fuelwood, a further 1000 million where current levels of use could no longer be sustained, and another 300 million where there was a prospective deficit. By the year 2000, if present trends continue, as many as 2400 million people will live in areas of acute scarcity or unsustainable levels of use (FAO, 1983a).
This shortage had long been foreseen, but it was assumed that fuelwood would rapidly be replaced by cheap supplies of kerosene and other oil-based fuels. However, these expectations were drastically altered with the first steep rise in oil prices in the early 1970s, since when maintaining and increasing fuelwood supplies have become an urgent priority.
BANANAS AWAITING DISTRIBUTION an abundance of food born the forest
Existing forest resources have to be managed more effectively, with much greater emphasis on fuelwood production. New plantations of quick-growing species must be established as rapidly as possible, either for multiple use or specifically to produce fuelwood. Small village-level community wood-lots are of particular importance in this regard. The increased incorporation of trees in farming systems, as discussed below, can also add to fuelwood supplies. More efficient methods and equipment are required for charcoal-making and for wood-burning stoves and cooking utensils.
However, the dimensions of the fuelwood problem are so large that it is unlikely to be possible to do more than mitigate it. An acute shortage of fuel seems bound to continue in the rural areas of the developing countries until new, alternative sources of cheap energy can be developed and made available on a large scale.
Forest cover plays a critical role in maintaining the soil and water base for food production.
Trees in farming systems
Up to now, the discussion has been almost entirely in terms of the macro-level contributions to food security of what may be described as "conventional forestry" - that is to say, the areas (generally large units) that are officially classified as forests and that are the responsibility of government forestry departments. Some of the same contributions to food security can, however, also be made by the greater use of forest trees and others at the micro level of the farm, including farming systems that combine the production of trees, field crops and livestock.
A bridge between these two levels is afforded by the recently introduced concept of "community forestry", which in fact includes the promotion of farming systems that incorporate the use of forest trees. It is bringing about a much closer involvement of the forestry sector (and of professional foresters as well) in poverty-oriented rural development, which is essential for eventual world food security.
Contributions Trees are often removed from agricultural land be cause they compete with crops, harbour pests, and impede monocropping and mechanization. Forest trees and others can, however, make an important contribution in increasing and maintaining the productivity of food production systems in situations that are now primarily agricultural rather than forest. This contribution includes fuelwood and other wood outputs required as inputs for food production, fodder for livestock, shade and protection from wind and water erosion, and the maintenance of soil fertility.
Increased tree-planting in farm shelter-belts, along roads and canals, and in small farm and village wood-lots can significantly contribute to fuelwood supplies. Wood, bamboo and other forest products are also often the cheapest material for the construction or manufacture of a very wide range of inputs for farming, including barns, storehouses, racks for drying and storage, livestock pens, fencing, carts, wheelbarrows, tools and tool handles, stakes, and crates and baskets for the marketing of certain products. All of these can be made locally, provided the raw material is available.
A promising new approach to fodder production is the growing of high-yielding tree species in "fodder orchards". Certain leguminous species in particular yield foods that are very rich in protein. In some circumstances, trees can produce more livestock feed than cereals: for instance, carobs in dry areas of North Africa. Some shrubs in Nepal can provide fodder even in the first year after planting.
By screening neighbouring land from wind and by reducing air turbulence, trees affect conditions over an area whose depth is several times their own height. They reduce the rate of evaporation and enable crops and grass to achieve more growth for a given amount of water. The shelter-belt impact on soil erosion is very great, reducing both wind and water erosion. The shade and "nurse" function of trees is also important for both crops and livestock, especially in arid areas, through the interplanting of shade trees as well as wind-breaks and shelter-belts.
FISHING AMID THE EUCALYPTS Inland fisheries depend upon forests
As was noted earlier, trees can draw nutrients from much deeper soil layers than crop plants. Their leaf fall can be used as a natural mulch to increase soil moisture as well as fertility. As many as 600 different tree species (not only leguminous ones) are known to be able to fix atmospheric nitrogen. Thus, it has been estimated that, in the humid tropics, Leucaena leucocephala fixes an annual average of 500 kg of nitrogen per ha, and Casuarina littoralis 218 kg. The latter species also has fungal symbionts which metabolize phosphorus and other nutrients and slowly release them into the soil.
The most appropriate trees for incorporation into farming systems must, of course, be chosen in accordance with local conditions. However, a number of species, especially some quick-growing legumes, combine several of the desired characteristics, including the rapid production of a useful crop of wood, fodder production, deep roots and nitrogen fixation.
The aim is to devise stable, sustainable systems that do not damage the environment and that maximize total productivity and income.
Integrated production systems Increasing attention has recently been given to integrated farm production systems that include trees as well as crops and livestock, especially in particularly fragile situations such as upland watersheds, where shifting cultivation is destroying forest cover, and arid areas in danger of desertification. This approach is now widely described as agroforestry. While intensive research on agroforestry is fairly recent, the practice is not. There are many traditional agroforestry systems, including - if, as is normal, the concept is defined to cover sequential as well as spatial combinations - shifting cultivation itself (FAO, 1978).
Apart from shifting cultivation, the main sequential system is the taungya system, a type of agricultural forestation involving the temporary cultivation of food crops in young tree plantations, which was started in Burma more than a century ago. However, because of the temporary nature of the agricultural phase, the farmer has to resettle at frequent intervals, and it is becoming less attractive.
More recently, therefore, attention has been focused mainly on inter-cropping systems based on the spatial arrangement of the components of agroforestry. These include border tree-planting, alternate rows or strips, and random mixing. (See "Agroforestry systems: a primer" by Napoleon T. Vergara in Unasylva 147 [1985]:22-28.)
Border tree-planting is gaining adherents because of the need for fuelwood, fodder and organic fertilizer. It also has the advantage of providing a much cheaper fence than cut poles and wire. Alternate rows or strips ("alley cropping") are particularly appropriate on sloping, degradation-prone land, where the planting of contour hedgerows is almost as effective as terracing, which is far more costly. The random mixing of field crops, climbers, small fruit-trees and larger trees like coconut palms is typical of small-scale agricultural production in many parts of the developing world, although in some areas it is tending to be replaced by monocropping.
All of these systems can also include pasture and grazing, provided the latter is properly controlled, and especially if fodder trees are used. If sufficient fuelwood can be produced to meet the needs of the farm family, animal dung need not be used for fuel and becomes available as additional organic manure.
Although agroforestry is not the panacea it is sometimes said to be, it is a very promising area which can contribute to greater food security in many different ways. In addition to its environmental contributions, it can bring a much-needed diversification of farm production systems, leading to more stable and secure incomes and thus better access to food supplies. Trees can provide valuable cash crops in the forms of fuelwood, fodder and other products.
Many research problems remain to be solved, especially concerning the most appropriate combinations - and there are numerous interactions and trade-offs to be considered - of trees, field crops and livestock in specific local conditions. The aim is to devise stable, sustainable systems that do not damage the environment and that maximize total productivity and income. Long-term security of land tenure is an essential ingredient. A massive extension effort is required in areas where there is no tradition of tree cultivation, to convince small farmers that trees do not necessarily get in the way of their food production but instead can actually contribute to it in many ways; to teach them how to take advantage of these contributions; and to provide them with planting stock and other inputs.
Forestry departments will inevitably have to be expanded in order to play this increasingly important role in helping scattered small farmers, as well as dealing with large but generally concentrated forest areas. However, not all of these new tasks need fall solely on forestry departments! as is evidenced by the successful development of tree nurseries in India by schools and farmers and other private individuals.
Conclusions
This preliminary review should leave no doubt that forestry's actual and potential contributions to world food security are both numerous and crucial. They occur both at the macro level of the national forest area and at the micro level of the farm. Although the protective environmental role of forestry is of overwhelming importance, it also makes many other direct and indirect contributions to the adequacy and stability of food supplies and to their availability. The current acute shortage of fuelwood also seriously affects food production and food security.
The main purpose of this article is to increase awareness and to ensure that the role of forestry is given due consideration in discussions of world food security. One of the most urgent problems concerns the upland watersheds, where forests are being destroyed by shifting cultivation, and the need to develop sustainable farming systems for the people who inhabit them. Other problems of similar urgency include the arid areas in danger of desertification, the conservation of threatened forest ecosystems containing irreplaceable genetic resources for future plant- and animal-breeding, and the improvement of fuelwood and other rural energy supplies.
There is much scope for closer collaboration between agricultural and forestry experts and departments in land-use planning. It is increasingly necessary to recognize that agriculture and forestry are not competitive but interdependent uses of the land. It is essential, especially in Africa, to study and propose remedies for harmful land-use practices, leading to environmental degradation, which underlie so many of the current food emergencies.
A specific area that merits further study in relation to food security is the contribution made to rural employment and incomes by artisanal activities based on forestry. Their role in enabling people to have better access to food supplies could be particularly important for the growing number of landless rural people in many countries.
At the farm level, the recent growth of interest in agroforestry can help to break down the legal and administrative barriers that have often developed between agriculture and forestry. It offers the opportunity for agricultural and forestry staff to work together in innovative approaches to land use and in devising and promoting the stable, sustainable, diversified and highly productive systems that are an essential foundation for food security.
Bibliography
FAO. 1978, Forestry for local community development. FAO Forestry Paper 7 Rome.
FAO. 1981, Agriculture: toward 2000. Rome.
FAO. 1982, Tropical forest resources. FAO Forestry Paper 30. Rome.
FAO. 1983a, Fuelwood supplies in the developing countries. FAO Forestry Paper 42. Rome.
FAO. 1983b, Report of the Conference of FAO. Twenty-second Session Rome, 5-23 November. Rome (C 83/REP).
FAO. 1984a, Report of the Eighty-sixth Session of the Council, Rome, 19-30 November. Rome (CL 86/REP).
FAO. 1984b, Report of the Seventh Session of the Committee on Forestry, Rome, 7- 11 May, Rome (COFO-84/REP).
FAO/UNESCO/WMO. 1977, Explanatory note and desertification map of the world. United Nations Conference on Desertification, 29 August-9 September Nairobi (A/Conf. 74/2).
OKIGBO, B.N. 1984, Improved permanent production systems as an alternative to shifting intermittent cultivation. In FAO. Improved production systems as an alternative to shifting cultivation. FAO Soils Bulletin 53. Rome.
<section>4</section>
Long-range air pollution: A threat to European forests
FAO Forestry Department
This article is adapted from a paper prepared by the FAO Forestry Department as a basis for discussion on forest protection at the Fourteenth FAO Regional Conference for Europe in Reykjavik, 17-21 September 1984. Significant contributions were received from P. Bazire Chief of the French National Forest Inventory Service, with inputs from Giancarlo Calabri (forest fires), Chief of Italy's Forest Fire Service, Ministry of Agriculture and Forests; Manlio Mariani (long-range air pollution), a forest inspector with the Italian Ministry of Agriculture and forests; and Tran Van Nao (insects and diseases), a former FAO Forestry Officer. Daniel Liefgreen is a special correspondent for the Wall Street Journal in Milan, Italy, and was public relations officer for the Navajo Indian tribe in Window Rock. Arizona USA.
· Europe's forest resources include forest lands per se, as well as other lands covered with various types of woody vegetation - such as heaths or maquis formations - which can be grouped under the term "other woodlands". Table 1 indicates the proportion of land occupied by various woodlands in the different subregions. The "forestation rate" shown in the last column is the ratio of the land area occupied by forests and "other woodlands" to the total land area.
Overall, broad-leaved and coniferous forests and other woodlands cover almost exactly one-third of Europe's total land area. Also notable are (a) the high forest cover rate and the large proportion of coniferous forests in the Nordic and Central European countries; (b) the relatively large area of "other woodlands" in Southern Europe; and (c) the preponderance of broad-leaved forests in the European Economic Community and Southern European countries.
The quantity of wood harvested yearly gives an idea of the economic importance of European forests (Table 2). In all the subregions, the quantities of both round-wood and softwood represent between 1.6 and 2.8 percent of corresponding total standing volume. Even considering harvesting losses, or frequently underestimated rural self-consumption, these values show that forest resources are being rationally exploited and that removals are lower than average annual growth.
In recent years, damage of considerable intensity and scale attributable to long-range air pollution has occurred in Europe. Well-known examples are the decrease of fishery resources in many Scandinavian lakes and the thinning of thousands of hectares of forest in Central Europe. Occurrences like these have served to emphasize the worldwide danger to forest resources and have helped lead to the proclamation of the International Year of the Forest, 1985. The suddenness of these phenomena, together with their wide scope and visibility, has struck public opinion and drawn the attention of governments. Technicians, meanwhile, have pointed out that the degradation caused by one agent - air pollution - has made the forest more vulnerable to the attacks of others, such as insects and diseases, thereby setting off a multiplying effect with a potential for damage of incalculable magnitude. In this sense, long-range air pollution - popularly but somewhat imprecisely known as "acid
rain" - cannot be examined in isolation.
Table 1. Forests and other woodlands in Europe (Areas in thousands of hectares)
Subregion
Total land area excluding water
Area as proportion of total European land area
Total forest area
Forest area as proportion of European total
Area covered by hard-woods
Hard woods' share of forest area
Area covered by soft-woods
Soft woods' share of forest area
Area of other wood-lands
This as proportion of European total of other wood-lands
Forestation rate
Nordic countries ^1
EEC (excluding Greece) ^2
Central Europe ^3
Eastern Europe ^4
Southern Europe ^5
Other Mediterranean countries ^6
Europe
Source: FAO unpublished data.
^1 Finland, Iceland, Norway. Sweden. ^2 Belgium, Denmark, Federal Republic of Germany, France, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, United Kingdom. ^3 Austria, Switzerland. ^4 Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, German Democratic Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania. ^5 Greece, Portugal, Spain, Turkey, Yugoslavia. ^6 Albania, Cyprus, Israel.
Table 2. Quantities of wood harvested in 1982 (Roundwood volumes)
Subregion
Hardwoods
Softwoods Hardwoods/softwoods
Total (thousands of m^3)
Share of European total (%)
Total (thousands of m^3)
Share of European total (%)
Share of total hardwoods/ softwoods (%)
Total (thousands of m^3)
Share of European total (%)
Nordic countries
European Economic Community (excluding Greece)
Central Europe
Eastern Europe
Southern Europe
Other Mediterranean countries
Europe
Source: 1982 yearbook of forest products (FAO, 1984).
The market value of wood production may seem small when compared with that of agricultural crop and livestock products. However, wood as a raw material (its role as an energy source in Europe is small, although not negligible) serves as a base for large industries and a varied artisan sector employing considerable numbers of people, without counting those employed in the forest itself for silviculture and forestry enterprises. In Europe, these jobs are numbered in the millions and have a considerable share in the rural activities and economy of regions that are often disadvantaged owing to the quality of their soil or the harshness of their climate.
However, the woodlands are not only wood producers. They play a fundamental role in the protection of soil, the regulation of water regimes, the mitigation of climatic extremes, and the protection of plant and animal wildlife and of environmental stability in general.
Woodlands also play a leading role in the recreation sector. The growth of urban life has intensified the need felt by human beings to rediscover contact with nature. The growth in access to transport and in leisure time has made for increased use of wooded areas. The forests of the Paris green belt, for example, receive a yearly average of several tens of millions of strolling tourists, far more than all the monuments of the capital combined.
Until recently, there was a tendency to forecast a slight expansion of wooded areas and a substantial increase in standing volume and wood production for Europe as a whole. However, these positive tendencies could be reversed by the degradation of forests observed in some regions in Europe, and by the various threats to which forests are subject, if protection, prevention and control measures are not sufficiently strengthened.
The relationship between forest degradation and air pollution has sound statistical bases.
Long-range air pollution remains a serious threat to the future of forests, to the soil, and to all the functions and services that forests perform.
Biotic factors: pests and diseases
Insects or diseases can attack different parts of the tree and either cause its death or diminish its growth. They even eliminate fructification and hence the natural regeneration of forests. The wood itself can be modified to some extent and lose all or part of its utilization value.
The death of trees can also have a considerable influence on landscapes. This happens in the case of the famous Dutch elm disease, which affects moat of the Northern Hemisphere and has proved disastrous for the rural and urban landscapes in most European countries. The diseases that have recently affected the Mediterranean plane and cypress trees, together with the caterpillar (Mastococcus feytaudi) - which in 20 years destroyed the maritime pines of Provence and has affected Italy in the past few years - have gravely modified the urban and rural landscapes of what are predominantly tourist areas.
The present situation varies widely from country to country and from year to year. A particular insect or disease may suddenly acquire great importance for a few months or years and then disappear, or return in a milder form. Reducing the area of European forest ecosystems with the aim of more intensive use for production purposes has shown the importance of only a small number of insects or diseases. The lowering of tree vitality caused by this reduction in area can often lead to epidemics that affect a significant portion of productive capacity.
An example is the large Bostrychidae group, insects endemic in conifer populations and ever ready to proliferate at the first favourable opportunity, especially if tree vigour has been undermined (by drought, storms, air pollution). Some Bostrychidae species attack hardwood trees: for example, the bark beetle propagated by the fungus Ceratocystis ulmi, itself responsible for elm disease.
Also to be mentioned in this regard are the pine processionary caterpillar, which mostly affects southern areas from the French Atlantic coast to Spain and Cyprus; the gypsy moth, which attacks oaks, especially in southern regions; the nun tussock-moth (Lymantria monacha), which, having ravaged the German spruce forests at the end of the last century, has devastated the Polish spruce and wild pine forests on more than 2 million ha for several years. These attacks may be the result of trees weakening from the effects of air pollution.
Among fungi, Fomes annosus is the deadliest. Every year it causes the loss of about 20 percent of the production of spruce and other conifers. Ink disease and blight in the chestnut are the source of the considerable decline of this fine species, once the base of a civilization.
As with the elm, it is the association of an insect, the beech-scale caterpillar Cryptococcus fagisuga, with a fungus, Nectrus coccinea, that has greatly damaged the beech; beech bark disease is widespread in Western Europe, especially since the 1976 drought. Fungi are also the source of the degradation of the Mediterranean plane and cypress trees.
Although these different factors may be mentioned separately, they are closely interrelated. A forest population struck down by storm or destroyed as a result of drought or air pollution is an ideal prey for insects and fungi. Conversely, by weakening the root system of trees, air pollution or a severe drought makes them more vulnerable to wind (by lowering the automatic resistance of roots) and cold (because of the poor nutrition of soft tissues). The degradation or mere weakening of trees makes them more vulnerable to attacks from pests (either insects or diseases). Moreover, these different factors act not only separately but also in synergy.
Air pollution
Long-range air pollution is produced by the transformation of gaseous components, emanating primarily from combustion, during their transport in the atmosphere under the influence of the sun's radiation, and by gases in the atmosphere - especially water vapour. The most widespread of these are sulphur dioxide (SO[2]) and nitrogen oxides (NO[x]). The products of their transformation are varied and complex, but they include ozone, heavy acids (sulphuric and nitric) and peroxidants.
Owing to volcanic eruptions, discharges of electricity during storms, or the activity of soil microorganisms, these components already exist naturally in the atmosphere in varying, usually small, quantities. However, industrial development in the Northern Hemisphere, and especially in Europe, has led to great energy consumption, especially during the past 30 years, which has significantly increased the emissions of these components in the atmosphere.
The first occurrences of long-range air pollution in Europe were reported in Scandinavia, where many lakes that had suffered high acidification caused by heavily acid-charged precipitations (rainfall, snow) gradually lost all aquatic life. During the past few years, alarming phenomena have been observed in the Central European forests, rapidly increasing both in area impacted and in intensity. Countries such as Austria, Czechoslovakia, the Federal Republic of Germany, the German Democratic Republic and Poland, and, more recently, Belgium (northeast), France, Luxembourg and Switzerland, have also reported grave forest damage.
The relationship between forest degradation and air pollution has sound statistical bases. In fact, the primary pollutants (SO[2] and NO[x]) and the products of their transformation act synergistically among themselves and with meteorological factors.
Initially, pollution affects the leaves, where it arrests the regulation of evapo-transpiration and damages the chlorophyll system which is the source of photosynthesis, thus weakening the plant by making it vulnerable to hydric "stress" and reducing its nutrition. This causes damage to the root system, further reducing the nutrition of the organism. In the long term, changes in the composition of the soil made by acid precipitation can release harmful substances.
The initial manifestations are reflected by a decrease in annual tree growth. This can pass practically unnoticed unless detailed inventories are made: the Nordic countries are still at this stage. Pollution levels that have been fatal to Scandinavian lakes have not yet caused real degradation of the forests.
This growth slowdown caused by a lowering of photosynthesis also occurs in farm crops. Here, it is not perceived until the pollutants cause leaf necroses (death). In fact, the experimental establishment of "open-top chambers" freely fed by "ambient" or filtered air in the midst of crop fields has demonstrated that atmospheric pollution, especially ozone and (SO[2] can reduce crop yields by between 15 and 25 percent.
Under these conditions, it is sufficient that the forest be subject to an unfavourable circumstance like a heavy drought for visible symptoms of degradation to appear. These can take the form of a premature falling of needles, which makes tree crowns abnormally thin and irregular, or discoloration or yellowing of green tissues. The droughts of 1976 and 1983 and the high temperatures in the summer of 1983 conducive to ozone production have had an influence on the sudden expansion of degradation observed recently.
In the Federal Republic of Germany, the forest area affected by long-range air pollution increased from 562000 ha in 1982 to 2500000 ha in 1983, or 34.4 percent of the country's total wooded area; heavily degraded areas increased from 35000 ha to 64000 ha, or 1 percent of total woodlands, during the same period. In the Vosges forest massif in France, which covers about 400000 ha, 15 percent of trees were affected and 3 percent degraded in the autumn of 1983. Similar percentages apply to Swiss forests.
On the other hand, the Mediterranean or far western areas of Europe seem little affected as yet. In Greece, Ireland, Italy, Spain and the United Kingdom, there have not yet been reports of serious damage or even weakening of growth, with the exception of such special cases as pollution along the sea coasts or areas located near pollution sources.
It is difficult as yet to draw up an accurate tally of the damage caused by long-range air pollution to forest resources. The volume losses in annual growth, in the few cases where they can be evaluated, can reach 15 to 25 percent, and they can therefore be counted in several hundreds of thousands of cubic metres of wood. The survey undertaken by the Joint ECE/FAO Agriculture and Timber Division and the Economic Commission for Europe is attempting to evaluate the impact on the wood market but has not yet been able to assess it accurately. For now, it can be said that the quantity of pollution damage is less than that of large storms, which can strike down several million cubic metres of wood in a few hours.
Whatever its immediate effects, long-range air pollution remains a serious threat to the future of forests, to the soil, and to all the functions and services that forests perform.
AIR POLLUTION AND TREES a troubled coexistence
Prevention and control
The state of prevention and control varies widely according to countries, but generally there is a need to raise consciousness at the international level. Unlike local air pollution, whose source can be identified, long-range air pollution comes from emission sources that are not easy to identify. In fact, this is a trans-boundary problem requiring the adoption of international measures. Its prevention and control are more difficult because they must be exercised not in forests but at the sources of the emissions, especially industrial ones, which throw back the products of combustion - SO[2], NO[x], dust, unburnt fossil fuels - into the atmosphere.
Drastic reduction of pollutant emissions, which is the only effective means of prevention, should be widespread and include not only ordinary gas components (SO[2], NO[x], fluorine) but also acids, heavy metals, fossil fuels and oxidants. In fact, the interactions between different pollutants increase their harmfulness. For example, the toxicity of heavy metals and SO[2] increases in the presence of acids. NO[2], which in its pure state is not toxic for the chlorophyll system, becomes toxic in the presence of SO[2], which destroys the enzyme that can reduce it to ammonia.
The effect of air pollution on forests cannot be deduced from the concentration of a few components like SO[2]. A complete network of air pollution measures is necessary in the forest itself, permanently recording the concentrations of SO[2], NO[x], ozone, and dry or humid acid deposits, the degree of acidity of precipitations and their anion-cation balance, etc. Continuous measurement can record the pollutant emission "peaks", which may be 10 to 20 times above average levels. For example, (SO[2] recordings in the Black Forest showed an average level ranging between 25 and 80, micrograms per m^3 of air, but reaching 600 micrograms per m^3 during "peaks".
Delays in detection of the effects of long-range air pollution on the forests have demonstrated the need for the continuous monitoring of forest ecosystems. Such monitoring includes the establishment of a' network of stations observing the state of trees' health, permanent forest-inventory stations for monitoring tree growth at frequent intervals, and global control based on colour aerial photographs in infrared emulsion, or even high-resolution satellite images (for example, the Landsat 5 satellite's "thematic mapper" and the sensors of the future Spot satellite).
Certain national measures cannot be adopted in isolation if they are to be effective.
Regional and international agreements on acceptable air pollutant content should be broadened in scope and in their objectives.
Forest fires
The role of fire in shaping forest landscapes is well known. There exists a danger of aggravation, since the vegetation that grows afresh following a forest fire is itself extremely vulnerable to fire. In fact, it is not in the trees that fires start, but rather in the understorey vegetation occurring in open formations, or in "other woodlands" such as heaths, moors and maquis, or under sparse forest populations such as those composed of pines, flex and cork oaks. But whereas the regressive evolution from a dense and closed forest formation to a sparse and open one is usually rapid, the opposite evolution, from an open to a closed forest, requires decades.
The seriousness of the danger of fire varies widely according to region. In Europe it increases from north to south and reaches a maximum in the Mediterranean area. In northern, central and western Europe, the most dangerous time is usually the end of winter, before the new vegetation starts to grow; further south, periods of acute drought, together with tourist visits - both occurring during the summer - present the greatest danger.
In 1981, 85 percent of the total number of forest fires in Europe and about 99 percent of the total area burnt were concentrated in nine Mediterranean countries. In average years, the forest areas affected by fire in France, Greece, Italy and Spain exceed 200000 ha, not including "other woodlands" such as maquis and moors. (See "Fighting fires in Mediterranean forests" by Giancarlo Calabri in Unasylva 141 [1983]:14-21.)
However, lengthy droughts like that of 1976 in the non-Mediterranean part of Europe can cause forest fires that are all the more grave since these areas are poorly prepared to prevent and combat them. Thus, no area of Europe is really safe from the risk of forest fires.
In the Mediterranean areas, climate is not the only unfavourable factor. The decline of the farming and harvesting of wood or forest products (cork, tanning bark) has facilitated the development of highly combustible, low understory vegetation which has eliminated the natural fire-breaks created by well-tended crops, grazing areas, chestnut groves and cork stands.
Damage due to forest fires is not confined to losses of wood and forest products. The destruction of an ecosystem through fire bares the soil and permits a further degradation which is often more grave than that caused by the fire itself, if only because of the economic consequences. A heavy rainfall occurring after a forest fire on sloping stony ground, for instance, can remove all of the topsoil. The beneficial effects that forests have on the climate, the regulation of water regimes, and soil protection are then reduced or eliminated.
Consequently, it is difficult to evaluate natural losses due to forest fires in monetary terms. For example, European statistics for the 1979-81 period record an annual average loss of US$567 million. But when such estimates are made, they are confined to the value of the wood or forest products. The costs of re-establishing the forest are therefore largely underestimated.
Strengthening cooperation efforts
The protection of European forest resources has, first, a national dimension. The different levels of international cooperation - subregional, European, interregional - have no basis unless they already exist within the framework of national policies.
DOES ACID RAIN KILL TREES? the evidence is mounting
In most European countries, forest protection has been subject to specific, often very strict national regulations. What may sometimes be lacking is the political will to enforce them. As a rule, this kind of protection is in the public interest and may therefore conflict with private interests. In other sectors, regulations must still be worked out. Other measures, adopted following insufficiently thorough studies, have occasionally had perverse effects. For example, it was supposed that by raising the height of factory chimneys the concentration of pollutants such as SO[2] and fluorine would be reduced below a threshold harmful to local plant life. While this did eliminate the effects of localized pollution, it created long-range pollution, whose effects are different, more complex, and spread over much wider areas.
Certain national measures cannot be adopted in isolation if they are to be effective. They must be designed in concert with neighbouring countries, especially in the case of industrial policy, where measures should be subject to intersectoral consensus. Final decisions should be harmonized through international agreements. The harmonization should start at the subregional level so as to take into account affinities between groups of countries sharing similar environmental conditions and confronting the same problems.
International cooperation already plays a major role, especially in the research sector, in harmonizing national legislation, in human resources training and in data circulation. This is true, for example, in the case of border monitoring and control over the introduction of parasite or predator plant and animal organisms or those likely to harbour pests. Severe measures have been adopted, first in the agricultural field and then in the forestry sector. Nevertheless, their effectiveness has not been able to prevent the spread of such major epidemics as those of Dutch elm disease or the pear-tree fire blight. In fact, the speed of modern means of transport and the volume of international trade make monitoring and control very difficult.
The magnitude of the problems related to long-range air pollution, its transboundary character, and the variety of sectors affected-from public health to crop yields, from the degradation of forests to the death of aquatic life, from the degradation of buildings to the corrosion of metals-demand global awareness of the phenomenon, first at the government level in each country, then at the European regional level. And finally at the interregional level, and between Europe and North America in particular.
International cooperation has already been a reality in this sector for about ten years, especially in Europe. Concerning destruction of forests specifically, mention could be made of the following:
· the organization by the Commission of the European Communities of a symposium at Karlsruhe, Federal Republic of Germany, between 19 and 21 September 1983;
· special meetings under the auspices of the FAO European Forestry Commission at Geneva in April and again in December 1983, and at Freiburg im Breisgau, Federal Republic of Germany, between 18 and 20 June 1984.
However, cooperation in the field of European forest resources protection has so far been confined within limits that are too narrow both geographically and in terms of content. The main concern has been with the effects of local pollution, particularly plant necrosis, near emission sources. The maximum content thresholds adopted have addressed concentrations of pollutants, especially SO[2], likely to cause necrosis These thresholds, to be sure, were based on serious trials, but trials that were short-term in scope and that did not include pollutant transformation products such as ozone, sulphuric and nitric acids, and photo-oxidants. They did not take account of the indirect effects of those pollutants on the soil microfauna and microflora - which play a fundamental role in consolidating life cycles. Nor did they consider their long-term effects in subnecrotic doses, effects that are now being observed.
If international research is to operate more effectively, it must be expanded to include new areas: the transformation of pollutants during their transmission in the atmosphere; forms of physiological effects on plants; impact on soil evolution; air circulation; technological research to reduce pollutant emissions; evaluation of new toxicity thresholds; and so on.
Should acid rain worry developing countries?
Robin Levingston, former FAO Senior Forestry Officer, and other forestry officials say that while acid rain may be affecting forests in the Third World, documentation of its occurrence is scarce in comparison with that in Industrialized countries.
Some evidence, nevertheless, is emerging. Tropical forests in Venezuela have reportedly been affected by acid rain, which in Peru has killed vegetation on thousands of hectares of mountains near mines and refineries - causing heavy soil erosion. Emissions of sulphur dioxide have tripled since the early 1960s in India. Cities there and in China have reported pH rain levels of 4.5 and below, the same levels reported in the sections of Europe and North America where acid rain's impact on forests is believed to be the highest.
Moreover, large regions of Brazil, southern India, Southeast Asia and eastern China feature the soil types most vulnerable to acidification.
In southwestern Venezuela, studies conducted by scientists from the University of Georgia and Pennsylvania State University in 1982 detected the presence of acid rain in the remote Amazon rain forest. These studies suggested the possibility that this was the result of long-range transport of industrial pollutants to the region-although at relatively low levels.
Scientists reported pH levels of 4.7 averaged over 70 storms during a one-year period at the small settlement of San Carlos de Rio Negro, located about 900 km from industrial areas in Venezuela and 5000 km from industrial areas in Brazil. Because of prevailing winds in the Amazon basin, pollutants originating in industrial regions of Venezuela, Guyana and Brazil could be carried to the San Carlos location, the scientists concluded.
Given the nature of such precedents, documented reports of the effects of acid rain in Third World regions could therefore become more frequent.
Daniel Liefgreen
Regional and international agreements on acceptable air pollutant content should be broadened in scope and in their objectives; they should not be confined to SO[2] and "black dusts" but should also include nitrogen oxides and heavy metals. Moreover, they should prescribe maximum and average content levels decidedly below those accepted so far. Although SO[2] emissions in Europe are now tending to become stabilized or even to decrease, the average content observed is still above the threshold that can be borne by sensitive species such as silver fir or common spruce. On the other hand, nitrogen oxide emissions are steadily increasing, mainly owing to the rise in automobile traffic, which is responsible for about 50 percent of total NO[x] in the atmosphere.
A drastic reduction of pollutant emissions, which is the only practical long-term solution, raises serious problems of industrial technology. The sums that will have to be invested will be considerable. However, the direct and indirect costs of the effects of long-range air pollution are still far higher, not to mention those that cannot be evaluated in monetary terms. Of course, the greatest difficulties lie in the industrial problems that must be solved, and it is here that intersectoral and international cooperation is most necessary.
Cooperation between neighbouring countries at the subregional level, at the European level, or at the interregional level can considerably strengthen the impact of national programmes.
Atmospheric pollution measurement methods must be harmonized so as to make the results obtained comparable in time and space and to enable meaningful maximum and average pollutant levels to be established.
The debate: is acid rain harmful?
"The question is not whether acid rain affects our forests, but rather to what degree, and it the effects are irreversible."
That is the opinion of Professor Hubert W. Vogelmann, Chairman of the Botany Department at the University of Vermont Burlington, Vt., United States. "We know that present-day rains contain sulfuric and nitric acids, copper, lead, zinc, cadmium, hydrocarbons, fluorocarbons, organic acids... and lots more. It is ecologically inconceivable that this complex of substances cannot have some effect on tree growth," Vogelmann wrote in a 1983 article.
After years of research, however, the scientific community still finds itself divided on the Issue of acid rain's effect on forests. Continuing research only seems to cloud the issue further and intensify the debate.
"The problem facing legislators and the public", Vogelmann says, "is that we cannot also demonstrate unequivocally a clear, lawyer-proof, cause-and-effect relationship between acid rain and alterations in forested ecosystems viewed as a whole. Just because these interactions haven't yet been nailed down does not mean that they don't exist. As every biologist knows, such relationships do exist. But ecosystems are so remarkably complex that acid rain's guilt has not yet been proven."
FAO's ad hoc Working Group on the Impact of Air Pollution on Forests of the European Forestry Commission concluded in its December 1983 meeting: "Although it has yet to be scientifically proved, there are strong indications that the damage to forests is, at least in Central Europe, mainly due to air pollutants: not only sulphur dioxide, which has been receiving particular attention, but also nitrogen oxide, heavy metals and photo-oxidants."
The Worldwatch Institute, an environmental research group based in Washington, D.C., stated in a recent report: "Decades of additional research may be needed to prove precisely how pollution causes damage. But like cigarette smoking and cancer, the evidence linking fossil-fuel pollution to forest damage is overwhelming."
But the voice of dissent is still strong. The Hudson Institute, a US think-tank, concluded last year that "the popular notion that acid rain is threatening forests in the Eastern US, and indeed all across the earth's temperate zone, is based less on substance than upon ill-informed conjecture and is probably wrong".
J.P. Lanly, Director of FAO's Forestry Resources Division, says the need to curtail air pollution is universally accepted, but adds: "No forest researcher can tell you he has demonstrated that dieback is solely caused by atmospheric pollution... It is air pollution on top of other things, like insects, disease and drought, that leads to harmful effects."
Lanly nevertheless is among those who say remedial action must not be delayed while research continues. "We can't wait for research to provide definitive results before doing something; we have some presumption that air pollution is at least one of the causes (of dieback)," he says.
Peter Baum of the Council of Europe's committee for the conservation of nature and natural resources says to the doubters of acid rain's impact on forests: "Go into the forests and have a look; go into the Black Forest and see the effects. It's difficult to say if (acid rain) is the primary factor, but it is certainly significant enough to establish anti-pollution programmes. The problem is under-stated. Since 1983, damage has doubled in Germany - and all species are being affected."
Others believe that calls for additional research are a veiled attempt to table the issue. Says Canada's Minister of Environment, John Roberts, "I say we do have enough information to act; it's not a matter of science any longer, it's a matter of political will. We have reached the point where a decision to stall and drag our feet on the pretext that we need more research is, in fact, a decision to do nothing."
Meanwhile, research into the causes of acid rain and its effects on forests continues. For example, the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) in Vienna is developing computer models for governments to use in evaluating various air-pollution control measures. The work is carried out with the cooperation of the UN Economic Commission for Europe. In February, the organization began studying direct impacts of air pollution on forests.
"There's enough information to take action, but it's a question of what action to take," says Joseph Alcamo of IIASA. He adds that the aim of IIASA's research is that it serve as a "common technical ground" in the hopes of reaching an international agreement on air pollution abatement.
Daniel Liefgreen
The destruction of forest resources is perceived as something endangering a natural environment that provides a balancing factor in the face of the tensions produced by modern life
IN THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY...
... AND IN SWEDEN dying trees among the healthy
Health control criteria for forest stands and research methods in the forest itself must also be harmonized to allow comparison of on-site observations. The distribution of sites should provide a representative sample of the populations concerned. Through a series of observation networks, the identification of forests suffering initial damages due to long-range air pollution can provide agriculture with indicators of the presence of pollution, which can easily have cumulative and negative effects on human health.
Acid rain in Italy?
Fabio Clauser peers outside the window of his office nestled in a wooded area on the outskirts of Florence. Clauser, forest administrator for the lush forest region of Vallombrosa, points out yellowing needles on pine trees that he says are ailing because of acid rain.
A native of Florence, Clauser remembers a period "when the trees used to look so healthy". He and other Italian forestry officials believe the forest regions of Vallombrosa, Trentino-Alto Adige and Abruzzo in the north, and Calabria in the south, are showing the same symptoms of suffering from acid rain fallout as those in the Federal Republic of Germany. The forests of Bavaria are similar in composition to those of the Vallombrosa region - rich in conifers of all types.
"We don't have the same acid rain problem as Germany and Poland and some other countries, but we do have cause to worry," says Alfonso Alessandrini, Director-General of the Italian Forest Service.
This past October, the Forest Service completed an investigation which revealed that 400000 ha of Italy's forests (5 percent of the total) have now been affected by acid rain. In May 1985, a government study group issued a map indicating the chemical characteristics of precipitation in a 60000 km^2 area in the north of the country. Within the study area, the city of Turin showed the greatest presence of acidic precipitation (pH 4.09-4.26).
Romano Gellini, professor of forest biology at the University of Florence, has conducted studies of the effects of atmospheric pollution near Florence. His experiments found pH rain levels below 5.6 in three zones in and around Florence. A pH level of 5.6 is considered slightly acidic. (The lower the pH number, the greater the acidity.)
In Vallombrosa, Gellini's tests found pH levels ranging from 4 to 5.5, with particularly high levels of sulphur. "The fact of finding acid pH levels in a mountain locality like Vallombrosa, more than ten kilometres from any urban-industrial zone, is a further indication of the transportation of pollution from distant areas," Gellini says.
But what would be the source of the pollution? Gellini and others can only speculate.
"We don't know exactly where the pollution is coming from, but forest damage has been reported in all regions of the country - north, central and south," says Professor Mario Pavan of the Institute of Entomology at the University of Pavia.
Depending on the outcome of the state Forest Service's investigation, Italy could be one of the first Mediterranean countries to document forest damage from acid rain. (The effects of acid rain on monuments in Athena have been widely publicized.)
Adds Eliodoro Runca, former air pollution director with IIASA in Vienna: "I think there is an acid rain problem In Italy, but there are not enough data to demonstrate it." The effects of acid rain on monuments in Italy are well documented, Runca says, and it can reasonably be assumed that the forests are being affected, too. "Italy is a heavily industrialized country. We have a lot of sulphur emitted, and with relatively sunny weather and a lot of cars there probably Is a high degree of oxidant pollution," he says.
"It is evident, unfortunately, that even in Vallombrosa, one has to speak, if not of the death of the forest... at least of its deterioration," says Gellini.
Daniel Liefgreen
Conclusions
Damage to the growth and even existence of the European forests from long-range air pollution undermines not only their productive capacity but also their other, no less important functions: soil conservation, regulation of water balances, genetic resource conservation, recreation, and improvement of the quality of life. At the same time, forests constitute a basic feature in the life-styles of many of Europe's inhabitants. The destruction of forest resources is thus perceived as something endangering a natural environment that provides a balancing factor in the face of the tensions produced by modem life.
Prevention, monitoring and control measures have been adopted at the national level, but they are not always adequate or sufficient. Nor are they always coordinated with neighbouring countries adopting similar measures. Cooperation between neighbouring countries at the subregional level, at the overall European level, or even at the interregional level can considerably strengthen the impact of national programmes, both on basic and applied research and on the implementation of operations.
Consequently, two levels of action - national and international - need to be considered.
LONG-RANGE AIR POLLUTION an unwanted export
At the national level, the countries of the European region could consider strengthening their action in the following sectors:
· improvement of data on the magnitude and extent of degradation phenomena, in particular by systematic surveys allowing measurement of damages to forest resources and evaluation of their impacts on the production of raw materials, the protective role of soil and water, etc.;
· research programmes aimed at better knowledge of long-range air pollution, its origin and dissemination, and control and prevention mechanisms;
· prevention policies and measures taking into account, among other things, the need to coordinate actions through intersectoral liaison, i.e., industry, urbanization, environment, agriculture and forests.
At the international level, two types of measure should receive attention:
· rapid exchange of information and data collected according to agreed methods, not only affording improved knowledge of pollution and its impacts but also effectively taking into account its transboundary character;
· harmonization of prevention, combat and control measures from the centre of origin to their place of impact.
International cooperation can be organized at the subregional level according to need, but cooperation within a whole region or even with other regions is at least as important. In this context of cooperation at the global, regional and interregional levels, FAO is well placed to provide its collaboration if countries wish it. Indeed, it is especially well placed to promote regional or interregional cooperation in the exchange of information and the study of appropriate measures.
<section>5</section>
Non-governmental organizations - Increasing NGO involvement in forestry: Some implications from Senegal
Jill Carr-Harris
Jill Carr-Harris is Coordinator for the Tree Project at the United Nations Non-Governmental Liaison Service in New York.
LOCAL FARMER'S HOME GARDEN IN SENEGAL telling NGOs that trees are important
During the International Year of the Forest, 1985, FAO is making a special effort to encourage the participation of non-governmental organizations at the international, regional, national and local levels. This article demonstrates in specific terms how such organizations can play a significant role in forest activities during the Year - and well beyond.
· Non-governmental organizations (NGOs) often emerge as a population's response to a lack of government goods and services. The ways an NGO operates within a given socio-economic setting are diverse, but in drought-stricken Africa many of their actions are currently motivated by one development imperative: relief from famine and achievement of food self-sufficiency.
This overriding concern has evolved in many parts of sub-Saharan Africa as an organic response to the drought and corresponding desertification. With an increasing population relying on a diminishing resource base, a number of indigenous groups are responding with anti-desertification activities. Preserving watersheds, enriching the soil, and restoring the tree cover are not entirely new areas for local NGOs in rural development programmes. In fact, reforestation, tree-planting and agroforestry techniques are increasingly perceived as part of their regular programming. However, many of the NGOs lack the technical know-how to participate in these forestry operations, which have traditionally been carried out within the jurisdiction of government forestry departments.
Government forestry departments have been moving closer to working with local groups by virtue of the community forestry projects that have been implemented in the last decade. The planting, tending and growing of trees, however, require an extended period that frequently does not coincide with the usual government plans and with already-instituted project management schemes. Owing to the increasing demands of forest management, local communities are being called upon to sustain many of these planting efforts. This explains why NGOs are working with communities to increase community wood-lots and forest farming activities.
In other words, NGOs and local groups could assist forestry extension agents in the task of reaching local communities, particularly in areas where government forestry projects are not being established. NGOs could do extension and training work, using innovative educational techniques tailored to a community, by obtaining material and financial resources, often through independent channels. Moreover, NGOs are in a position to integrate forest management skills in their overall community development schemes and may focus on forest operations as they relate to village or home gardening, well construction and literacy programmes. NGOs are capable of forging these links because of the flexibility that enables them to work within communities - a flexibility often lacking in governments.
To test the potential of NGOs, a pilot programme was developed in Senegal. Through a government and NGO consultation on the NGO role in forestry development, there was clear evidence in favour of future project collaboration. In the process of discussing the course of action to be taken in the future, the range of NGO activities was profiled. Attention was also given to the relationship between these activities and food self-sufficiency, given the scale of the present African crisis.
The Senegal consultation
From 20 to 27 February 1985, a meeting on NGO involvement in reforestation activities took place in Dakar, Senegal, organized by a national Senegalese NGO umbrella organization known as CONGAD (Conseil des organisations non gouvernementales d'appui au développement). Thirty-eight NGO representatives from Senegal and representatives of NGOs in Burkina Faso, Ghana, Kenya, Mauritania and the Niger met for an active week of site visits, workshops and meetings.
The consultation was significantly timed. In 1984, the Government of Senegal, through the Minister of Nature Protection and the Water and Forests Service, had launched a programme of desertification control unparalleled in Senegal's history. In the context of worldwide desertification, and specifically of that in the eight critically affected countries of the Sahel, the Government saw its mandate as being to enlarge the national forestry programmes of the last decade so as to include increased institution-strengthening - particularly in the area of community-based participation in forestry.
This important initiative on the part of the Government had evolved over the last seven years in response to the massive devastation caused by drought. Such community forestry projects as Project Precoba, developed in the groundnut basin, are good examples of the Government's efforts to involve local communities in its programmes and to ensure the growth and protection of trees by providing local people with the right incentive schemes. Through "food for work" programmes, 20 rural communities are involved in soil preparation and planting operations.
These community-based projects within the national forestry programme seem to be having a significant impact, even though they are not sufficient in scale to assist the Government in reaching its planting targets. In 1983, for example, 5100 ha of trees were planted by popular efforts, as against the 4700 ha planted by the Government Nevertheless, this is far from meeting the needs produced by population increases and national fuelwood demands which, the state has estimated, require a level of 50000 ha annually (Direction des eaux, forêts et chasses, 1984).
As a partial response to the difficulties, Senegal's Minister of the Environment hosted a major African anti-desertification conference in July 1984. Taking the lead on new strategies, the Government of Senegal featured the importance of local participation in an overall anti-desertification campaign and drew attention to the role of the non-governmental community in this effort (Government of Senegal, 1984).
This event set the stage for the NGO consultation on reforestation, held in Senegal in February 1985. Perceiving the timeliness of calling an NGO consultation, UNDP undertook an assessment of the NGOs in Senegal at the same time as the anti-desertification meeting took place. It was concluded that a substantial number of NGOs either had the potential to be or were already involved in forestry activities (UN/NGLS Tree Project, 1985).
However, yet another factor made this consultation possible. Before 1981, many of the NGOs that existed in Senegal were locally based groups, responding to immediate and local needs. Although the Fédération des organisations non gouvernementales du Sénégal (FONGS) was at that time coordinating information among many of the rural groups, it was by nature very decentralized. Many of the NGOs - including those that came into existence in the early 1980s- started to collaborate and constituted themselves into a national "networking" group - CONGAD. As a national umbrella group consisting of 33 development NGOs, CONGAD had the mandate to improve links between its group members and between the different government agencies and other external NGOs. Being a loose federation of local and external NGOs working in Senegal, CONGAD could organize meetings to encourage information-sharing but was not itself involved in any field-level programming.
CONGAD was therefore in a position to perform the function of assembling its membership and the necessary government representatives at a consultation, and, more importantly, it could assist in establishing a national NGO forestry committee, given a mandate from its members.
Although many of CONGAD's members had been involved in forestry activities, the demands of establishing a national forestry committee needed some kind of precedent. To assist CONGAD, a Kenyan energy group known as KENGO (Kenya Energy NGOs) sent four anglophone representatives to the consultation to act in the capacity of resource persons. KENGO was established in 1981 to perform the task of providing material and technical assistance to its group members and to coordinate information and training programmes on agroforestry practices and energy conservation techniques.
INVESTIGATING ARID CONDITIONS local youth groups try to help
Results
The consultation in Senegal reached a consensus on the objectives of the consultation process as being to encourage more NGO coordination on forestry activities; more NGO/Government collaboration on reforestation programmes; more forestry activities at the field level; more donor support for NGO activities; and more interregional exchange among NGOs. Once agreed on by the participating NGOs and agencies, the consultation process could be institutionalized by a follow-up committee of NGOs and agency personnel.
The meeting was designed to elicit specific recommendations from the participants, so that the follow-up committee could draft specific project proposals and submit them to donor agencies. To ensure the interest of the donors in more NGO projects in the area of forestry, those donors not present for the entire meeting met with the participants on the final day for informal discussions.
Owing to the limited time available to formulate specific and manageable recommendations, the consultation had to be highly structured. Each participant was provided with the opportunity to evaluate forestry projects through organized field trips to reforestation projects. Five sites in the more arid Sahelian zone of the Senegal river basin and five in the southern central groundnut basin were assessed. After carefully recording site-specific profiles, the participants returned to Dakar for three days of intensive workshops. Two more rounds of workshops followed: the first focusing on how NGOs could most effectively assist with reforestation at the village level, and the second on how NGO projects and project support could be increased.
COMMUNITY WOOD-LOT, PROJECT PRECOBA encouraged by the Senegalese Government
Some of the technical issues raised both in the field and at the workshops were as follows:
· the advantages of growing eucalyptus trees as against growing indigenous species;
· the problems of seed and water availability;
· the need for improved agroforestry techniques like the increased use of multi-purpose-species trees.
Equal attention was given to a variety of social problems in the field:
· the lack of literacy programmes in areas where technical assistance was being given;
· the absence of training in local languages for groups undertaking much of the gardening, planting and cooking-principally women's and youth groups;
· the failure of forestry projects to respond to the traditional agroforestry systems of pastoralists and sedentary farmers.
After identifying some of the problems, the workshop participants explored recommendations for concrete NGO action. Controversy frequently surfaced on the methods and approach. For example, on the question of compensating people for planting trees either directly or through food aid, some expressed the view that this was limiting and expendable while others saw it as a necessary incentive scheme for mobilizing rural participation, particularly among marginal farmers.
Other areas of considerable disagreement were whether grassroots efforts can begin only with the people themselves or whether outside NGOs can effectively enter a community to motivate the people to plant trees. This provoked a number of questions on the best kind of training techniques.
Another issue leading to considerable debate was whether training and education should focus on a sector of the community like women's groups or on the community as a whole. There was also discussion on women being trained as extension agents in the context of women's rights: for example, economic rights - the difficulty women have in getting the necessary financing to start a local nursery and consequently to learn some land management practices; or legal rights - the problems of starting a reforestation programme when land-tenure systems are determined by village councils, largely composed of men.
However, in spite of differences on methods, there was a consensus that NGO training must digress from the traditional project format if the training does not incorporate the needs of the beneficiaries in its design and if it does not lead to the achievement of fuelwood and food self-sufficiency. This view was held unanimously by the group and was evident from the outset.
The participants felt that to undertake more forestry projects, it was necessary to have a systematic method for cataloguing existing and successful projects. An institutionalized network of NGOs therefore needed to be established. A permanent network would link groups from rural areas with NGOs and government technicians capable of offering training or extension programmes.
Particularly instrumental in these discussions on information coordination and networking was the participation of KENGO and the Groupement des aides privées (GAP) from the Niger. Both organizations have considerable experience of mediating between governments and NGOs. KENGO has worked with the Kenyan Ministry of Energy to carry out extension for the Government in local communities, while GAP was the consultative mechanism between the Niger Government and the private voluntary community at large.
Recommendations One of the most significant outcomes of the consultation was the success of the NGOs in identifying the range of NGO activities in the area of forestry, both within Senegal and in other parts of Africa. Bearing in mind their own limitations, they were able to set forth four manageable recommendations:
· the formation of a follow-up committee which can continue to consult with the various government departments;
· the development of a pilot project to encourage working relationships with the Government on the ground;
· the review of a training programme which will better link resource groups with local groups in a specific region of Senegal;
· the design of more exchanges between NGO African experts.
Besides being a first meeting between Government donors and NGOs in Senegal, this was a unique opportunity to observe, synthesize and recommend new alternatives in reforestation as it relates to community development. NGOs, which generally support self-reliance and food self-sufficiency, have a perspective on sustainable development and land-use management which will undoubtedly become manifest in tree-planting schemes, achieving a long-term impact on national forestry programmes in the future.
It is absolutely necessary, however, that the forest service respond to the momentum that has been created. The NGO follow-up forestry committee can continue consultations with the Government, but unless the forest service responds to their proposals with technical input, the consultations will be bottle-necked. It has become evident through this first consultation that the lack of technical know-how and project management is a serious limitation on the potential of many NGOs. Their own recognition of these shortcomings is a first step in the right direction.
Bibliography
DIRECTION DES EAUX FORÊTS ET CHASSES (SENEGAL). 1984, Rapport introductif. Conférence préparatoire à la Campagne nationale de reboisement. Dakar. Senegal, Ministère de protection de la nature.
GOVERNMENT OF SENEGAL. 1984, Summary report of the Interministerial Conference on Anti-desertification. 18-24 July 1984, Dakar. Senegal.
UN/NGLS TREE PROJECT. 1985, Senegal: a case study. Reports from the pre-consultation assessment of the strength of NGOs in forestry projects. New York, United Nations Non-Governmental Liaison Service.
WILLIAMS, PAULA. 1985, Mobilizing popular tree-planting efforts. Article published for the Institute of Current World Affairs, 10 March.
<section>6</section>
Egon Glesinger - The role of forestry
Dr Egon Glesinger was Assistant Director-General in charge of the Department of Public Relations and Legal Affairs when he retired from FAO in 1969. Before that, he was Director of the Forestry and Forest Products Division, from 1959 to 1963. He was instrumental in banging forestry into FAO and was the founder of the Comité international du bois. Glesinger returned to forestry activities as a consultant for the United Nations Development Programme after leaving FAO. He died in 1979.
1. The role of forestry in world economic development
Excerpts from an address delivered in 1960 at the Fifth World Forestry Congress, where the multiple use of forest lands, the establishment of industrial plantations and the increased attention being given to demand were widely discussed. It was published that same year in Unasylva Vol. 14, No. 3.
· The benefits from forests are essentially twofold: on the one hand wood, and on the other various physical and social effects frequently termed "forest influences". In many instances the latter transcend in importance the significance of forests as producers of wood, indeed, over much of the earth's surface, forests and associated vegetation are the protecting covers which secure the maximum absorption of rainfall, regulate streamflow, and help prevent flooding and silting. Thus they improve the efficiency with which water resources are used for almost all of man's activities - irrigation, domestic water supplies, industry, hydroelectric works, to mention but a few. The quantity of water needed every day by modern cities and industry is enormous, yet it is seldom realized what a large part forests play in the complicated process of ensuring steady supplies.
Then, again, forests give protection against erosion, and shelter to agriculture in adjoining areas. They can act as barriers against landfalls and avalanches, they can furnish fodder and grazing for livestock and a habitat for wildlife, they provide places for public recreation, and surroundings for rest and the restoration of health - as well as contributing to the beauty of the landscape.
The trouble is that while almost everyone accepts in theory the indispensable role of the forest in all these connections, yet governments, economists and planners conveniently forget about it and assign to forest investment far lower priority than it deserves, because foresters have not yet succeeded in measuring the value of these "influences" in monetary terms. The studies made in connection with FAO's Mediterranean Development Project produced many striking illustrations of the catastrophic consequences which threaten a large number of countries as a result of inadequate provision of funds and priorities for the restoration and maintenance of a proper forest cover for protective purposes.
By recognizing the many purposes of the forest and acknowledging the multiple use concept, we do not mean that there should be equal division of forest lands among all possible uses or all uses on every hectare. What we do mean is that, in defending our forest resources against competing claims for land, we must weigh any one exclusive use against a possible combination of uses, with the idea of getting the optimum combination in a given management unit. The forest will not necessarily yield maximum production for any one of the uses selected, but the total benefits will probably be greater than could be obtained by exclusive use for one purpose.
We all know very well that there is scarcely a country in the world where one does not find substantial areas which should be covered by forests-areas which are at present either used for cultivation or grazing or have become denuded and unproductive. Moreover, with the growth of world population and the inevitable rise in living standards particularly of the underdeveloped countries, the areas needed to be reserved for tree cover or where productive forests have to be restored are bound to grow. It is one of the important responsibilities of foresters, economists and statesmen to see to it that the maintenance or establishment of forests in critical areas becomes accepted as an indispensable aspect of all national programmes for economic and social development. This process must go hand in hand with increased food production and be complementary to it.
"Brilliant, dynamic, effective..."
Egon Glesinger by Gunnar Myrdal
The late Gunnar Myrdal, distinguished Swedish economist and political scientist, was the first Executive Secretary of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe, established in 1947 with the aim of achieving the economic reconstruction of Europe. He was the author of severe/studies, among them Asian drama and The challenge of poverty. There was a strong bond of friendship between Myrdal and Glesinger which lasted for almost 50 years, until Glesinger's death in 1979. The article he wrote for Unasylva, "In memoriam" (Vol. 30, No. 122), is more than a tribute to a friend; it also tells of some events little known, or forgotten, which occurred in 1943 while FAO was first being planned.
Egon was a lifelong intimate friend and in some periods also a close collaborator.
We first met when, for the academic year 1930/31, I served as assistant professor at the Institut universitaire de hautes études internationales in Geneva. Egon was then completing his voluminous and valuable doctoral thesis on the European forestry industry, "Le bois en Europe". He participated in a seminar I led on the Great Depression, which had then spread to Europe and was worsening. I retain memories of his brilliant analytical conception of what was happening.
In 1931, our personal relations had become so close that Egon, finished with his doctoral studies, decided to come to Sweden, where he rapidly developed effective relations with the leading personalities in the forestry and pulp and paper industries. In Sweden he also found his life companion. Ruth.
Bringing together the interested parties, he succeeded in forming the Comité international du bois in the 1930s. I recall that he reckoned it a major accomplishment to have brought the Russians into cooperation within the new organization, instead of their becoming, as was feared at that time, disrupting outsiders. Their incorporation into the new organization was a major factor in the maintaining of the relative stability of trade and prices in Europe in the field of forestry and wood products in the period between the two world wars.
After the outbreak of World War II, Egon moved the headquarters from Vienna to Brussels and then to Geneva, but could not, of course, prevent its collapse. Egon and Ruth then finally came to the United States.
This was the time when preparations were going on for the creation of the worldwide organization that was to become FAO. Egon was working toward having forestry and wood industries included as a major field of activity of FAO. This met with much resistance from many quarters and was rejected by the formative FAO conference at Hot Springs, Virginia, in April 1943. After this meeting, an interim commission was established to create FAO's operating procedures. Lester B. Pearson, later Prime Minister of Canada, was the chairman of this commission. Egon gradually succeeded in getting Pearson, Frank L. McDougall, the influential Australian member of the commission, and others to reverse the Hot Springs decision and include forestry in FAO. He called on Clarence Forsling of the US Forest Service and together they formed an informal group of international foresters and forestry-minded persons, including Lyle Watts, Chief of the US Forestry Service, to support forestry in FAO. The US
representative on the commission, Under-Secretary of Agriculture Paul H. Appleby, hesitated to go against the Hot Springs decision. He was prevailed upon to consult with Dean Acheson, then US Assistant Secretary of State, who replied, "By all means, forestry should be included." and finally with President Franklin D. Roosevelt, who personally approved it, sending back Appleby's letter with a note scrawled on it: "Yes - I think forestry should be included. FDR." The result was that FAO got a Forestry and Forest Products Division. Its first Director was Marcel Leloup and Egon was his deputy. Later Egon succeeded Leloup as Director. His entire working life made him eminently qualified for his contributions to international forestry and FAO.
Egon was a dynamic person, and when I became Executive Secretary of the UN Economic Commission for Europe (ECE) in 1947, it was natural that I should turn to my old friend for advice and collaboration.
According to ECE's terms of reference, both agriculture and the forestry industries were, of course, under its responsibility, as well as that of FAO. Instead of following the unfortunate pattern of interagency rivalry and jealousy, which have become so prevalent among intergovernmental organizations, Egon and I made up our minds that ECE and FAO should work together. And we got the unreserved support of John Boyd Orr, the first Director-General of FAO, and also that of Lord Bruce of Melbourne, who was at that time an effective Chairman of FAO's Council.
Together we developed an organizational scheme, according to which the regional economic commissions -of which ECE was the first one - should serve as FAO's regional agency in Europe; ECE should establish committees for work on the problems in Europe, which would be serviced by FAO officials. Thus ECE had a Timber Committee and later an Agricultural Committee, both with subcommittees and working parties to the exent needed for their practical work, and they were subordinate to both organizations.
For FAO this had the special advantage that it got its work in Europe integrated into ECE's general work on the economy of Europe. Another advantage was that as the USSR was a member of ECE and gradually came to cooperate more actively in its committees, FAO could extend its work to include also that country, though the USSR refrained from joining FAO. For ECE this cooperation implied that we had all the expert knowledge that could be mobilized in FAO at our disposal when working on European economic problems.
As Executive Secretary of ECE, I, of course, came to rely on my old friend Egon much more generally. Besides his responsibilities in FAO he became an effective member of my group of directors and, indeed, of my Central Office, whenever he came to Geneva.
Throughout his life Egon focused on the great international problems that he began to deal with as a youth in Geneva. He was often controversial, and sometimes disliked, but always respected. He counted among his personal friends many leading international figures, including three heads of the United Nations: Trigve Lie, Dag Hammarskjöld and Kurt Waldheim. He remained active in international development work almost to the end, and one of the last letters he received was from Secretary-General Waldheim concerning his work as a consultant to help found an Indonesian pulp mill with the cooperation of UNDP.
At one time when he was just leaving his duties with FAO, we made a plan that we two, working together, would write a book on the deterioration of the various intergovernmental organizations within the UN family, which we had anxiously been watching from inside and from outside. That plan we were not able to fulfill, although I still have preserved outlines and sketches of manuscripts by Egon and myself.
To me personally the death of Egon Glesinger is a tremendous loss.
EGON GLESINGER Head of FAO Forestry Department, 1959-63
2. Projections in forest policy
After the period of post-war reconstruction, which lasted about 15 years, thinking at international gatherings converged toward shaping the future. This trend found its strongest expression in two organizations: the new Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), which decided that its members would try to achieve, by 1970, gross national products 50 percent higher than in 1960; and the United Nations, where the General Assembly decided, by unanimous vote in December 1960, that the next ten years (1961-70) would constitute a "Development Decade", meaning that all UN members would aim at a GNP increase of 5 percent a year.
Such decisions implied that, thereafter, adjusting production to needs would bring planning, statistics and projections much closer than before into every aspect of a country's economic life-including forestry. Glesinger commented on the significance of these two policies quite often. In 1963, Unasylva (Vol. 17, No. 2) carried a speech he made before the Italian Academy of Forestry Sciences in Florence. Here are some excerpts.
HOME CONSTRUCTION IN MOROCCO forest products help development
· One of the many striking aspects of these two solemn declarations is undoubtedly the fact that quantitative growth targets have now been accepted as basic elements of economic policy by the leading governments in the Western world. This constitutes an important innovation. While systematic planning has long been practiced in the USSR and the other socialist countries of Eastern Europe, it has been customary in Western Europe and North America to consider broad planning as not reconcilable with the principles of a free enterprise economy. This has now changed, since a corollary of the adoption of a growth target is the elaboration of some kind of plan to achieve the declared objectives. Moreover, it is clear that an overall figure for national income or gross national product is rather meaningless unless it is broken down into a substantial number of the elements of which either of these broad aggregates is composed, such as, for example, the output of key industries and of
agriculture, the consumption of certain key commodities, the structure and size of foreign trade and of investments, etc.
It is here that an important distinction between the so-called "free economies" of Western Europe and the planned socialist economies needs to be made. The five-year plans prevalent in the latter countries attempt to spell out in detail how many houses should be built and where, how much steel should be produced in each factory, and how many new mills are to be built - and these plan figures eventually become compulsory objectives laid down by law. In Western Europe and North America no such detailed plans have been introduced. Instead, attempts are being made by governments and by industries to estimate consumption and production for 5, 10, or even 20 years ahead, in order to determine whether there will be a reasonable correspondence between supply and demand, and to plan appropriate steps to adjust production to prospective requirements.
These forward estimates are called projections. The term has been deliberately chosen, to make it clear that these figures are in no way prophecies. They are simply logical conclusions resulting from known past facts and explicitly stated assumptions regarding future developments.
This inevitably raises the question, why was this need for projections not felt before? In my opinion the growing emphasis on projections is due to three developments, all interrelated. First, the great improvement in statistical information and techniques which has occurred since the war. Secondly, the better appreciation of the relationship between the various magnitudes in the economy - the advance in social accounting. These two elements have evidently gone hand in hand. Improved statistics have deepened and made more precise our knowledge of how the economy works, and this knowledge has led to further improvements in the statistics available for analysis. And the third development, which to some extent underlies the other two, is that economists and statesmen have had to abandon their concern for stability and equilibrium and have become increasingly preoccupied with problems of growth.
Thirty years ago it would have been almost impossible to formulate general growth targets, since the majority of European countries did not even know the size of their national income or annual product. As for growth, it may be well to remember that Europe's industrial production (the only major item for which statistics are available) increased in the last pre-war decade by roughly 25 percent, but that the corresponding figure for the decade of the 1950s was around 85 percent. Most countries are hoping to do as well or better during the present decade of development, which one might one day come to regard also as the decade of targets and projections.
There is a certain conservatism among foresters whenever the allowable annual cut is being determined and a tendency toward systematic underestimates of growing stock and yield.
Turning now at last to forestry, I feel sure that nobody in this audience would dispute the fact that- irrespective of whether we like or dislike the approach-the general adoption of projections makes it imperative to do so for forestry as well, since it Constitutes a major sector of the European economy.
FELLING TIMBER IN THE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC a need for economic forecasting
Taking a long historical perspective, forest utilization started everywhere as a mining operation, that is, the use of materials, which nature places readymade at the disposal of man.
This phase has been followed by systematic resource management, aimed at achieving a sustained yield of wood while at the same time protecting the growing stock. This was a necessary reaction to forest destruction, but the fact that it started as a move to protect the forest against destruction by man has left some clear traces, among which a certain conservatism among foresters whenever the allowable annual cut is being determined and a tendency toward systematic underestimates of growing stock and yield are the most significant in the present context. Moreover, even though economic factors are taken into account when management plans are being established, the main emphasis in establishing annual cut is being placed on physical and technical considerations.
With the introduction of projections into this process, the concept of forestry would move into a new, third phase. Long-term plans of forest output would need to be established, primarily with the objective of meeting local, national and international needs at reasonable cost. Sustained yield and resource protection would still remain the basis for the management of natural forests, but instead of planning output - as hitherto - in accordance with the capacity of existing forests, one would try to adjust production to effective demand. And since forests take a long time to grow, projections of future demand become a sine qua non in achieving a sound balance between timber supply and requirements.
<section>7</section>
B.K. Steenberg - Forestry, the environment and the modern forester
B.K. Steenberg was Assistant Director-General, FAO Forestry Department, from 1968 to 1974.
1. Forestry and the environment
By 1972, concern for the environment had become widespread, both inside and outside the United Nations. The General Assembly had approved a UN Declaration on the Human Environment at the end of the previous year. When the Seventh World Forestry Congress was held in Buenos Aires in 1972 the theme, "Forests and socioeconomic development", included emphasis on forestry's environmental role. B.K. Steenberg delivered the opening address at the Congress (Unasylva Vol. 25, No. 104 [1972])- Here are some excerpts.
· The focus of man's concern has shifted dramatically since the last World Forestry Congress. In the 1960s we confronted hopefully a world explosion of expectations and aspirations. Now we have come to a period of hesitation, of grave concern, sometimes close to fear. We have concern for the sheer number of people on the earth, and for the implications of their demands for space, energy and other resources. We have concern for the availability of clean water and air, for the preservation of natural ecosystems and gene resources. We have seen many of the earlier cherished products of man's ingenuity branded as dangerous and persistent poisons in the global ecosystem. Even while discounting some of the predictions of doom, it is a fact that only today has man been made aware of some very real threats to our environment. We have only recently realized the brutal fact that this little world is all we have.
The theme of the last World Forestry Congress was "The role of forestry in the changing world economy", which recognized and proclaimed the contribution of the forestry sector to economic development. The rather more reflective note of this congress, "Forests and socio-economic development", recognizes that economic development is not an end in itself.
The contribution of forests to mankind was for a long time analysed under polarized light, which made their material products and the related economic factors stand out more clearly. Naturally, development was pursued in this direction. Today the plane of polarization has rotated, and the forest's role in man's environment and thus the purely social benefits are stressed. But still we are dealing with the same forests, but less of them, and the world is populated with the same man, but many more.
The concern about the long-term aspects of forestry - those that are implied by currently fashionable words like ecology and environmental concern - has always been central in the minds of those responsible for the forest ecosystem. Foresters already decades ago pointed out the dangers of soil run-off and soil erosion, water quality, changes of climate, and other long-term hazards of overexploitation of the forests. It has always been inherent in the forester's task to deal with subjects beyond the planning horizon of the individual, a horizon which seldom exceeds one year. Even the planning period of governments today is most often expressed as about half a decade- short, in terms of the life of a tree or of a family. For individual man and for the practical politician the problem has been one of optimizing the current benefits with a minimum of current hardships.
But today, with the increased possibility for man to communicate and to travel, with far more people and these people more and more concentrated in urban areas, the results of overexploitation or mismanagement of forests have become current hardships.
The attrition of the forest with its flora and fauna, the disappearance of clean flowing water, the difficulty of finding easily places which provide privacy and shelter from noise and pollution and stress are being felt to an ever-increasing extent.
The rate of exploitation of the forest has also increased, and its scars now become visible within the life span of the individual. This exploitation, let it not be forgotten, was at least partially necessary in order to satisfy the demands of the accelerated population move toward urban areas, and it became possible through man's inventiveness.
B.K. STEENBERG Head of FAO Forestry Department, 1968-74
Foresters are able to manage the forests, but they alone cannot formulate national policy. Now the world tends to agree with the foresters that the time has come to formulate and codify forest policy for the sake of man's social well-being in the framework of general economic-social development. The United Nations Declaration on the Human Environment is a sign of this thinking, and the declaration can, in fact, be considered the basis of an international forest policy.
Thus today foresters have arrived at a crucial period. Looking to the future they must assert their leadership and induce governments to adopt a forest policy.
The objective of such a policy is clear - to balance man's drive toward efficiency and personal fulfilment with the need to protect him from himself and from his own deeds. For this no mechanical balance exists; it is a matter of judgement, in which all known facts have to be analysed singly, and above all their interrelation. Some facts can be quantified, some can be given a scientific basis, but many are qualitative and transscientific in nature. This is why they are political.
The necessity to protect man from himself rests with the biological nature of the forest ecosystem; even fast-growing species grow very slowly in relation to the speed at which forests can destroyed, whether by man or by other means such as fire, insects or disease. Some of the responsibilities for the future of the ecosystem know no national boundary. Are not the forests of the world a heritage to mankind? But forest policy must recognize that forests are useful, indeed indispensable, for man's efficiency and personal fulfilment.
This does not, on the other hand, imply that forest land must be included in sustained-yield schemes. The classical single-use concept of the forest, followed by the multiple-use concept, is now much better articulated, and the managers of natural resources can differentiate more clearly between single use, multiple use and dominant use.
Now the world tends to agree with the foresters that the time has come to formulate and codify forest policy for the sake of man's social well-being in the framework of general economic-social development.
A basic forest policy must be founded on a determination of how the forests and their products are expected to fulfil national aims and objectives. From this policy will follow, for instance, the size of the annual cut, what level of management this implies, what the capital and manpower implications are, and so on.
Uncertainty about the growth and importance of substitute materials has been a factor in delaying a basic forestry policy in some countries. Some people think that the increased use of plastics and metals will within a short time make wood a useless material. Therefore there is no need to formulate a policy dealing with productive forestry. Of course, if a country has no expressed policy for the use of its own productive natural resources, then there will be less investment and less expectation of forest development, and eventually the prophecy will be self-fulfilling.
But the increased knowledge of the scarcity of the world's energy resources, including fossil hydrocarbons and the vast energy requirements for the production of aluminium, plastics and other substitute materials, clearly shows that the forest as a source of raw materials will be needed forever. Further, the trend of modern technology is toward the use of compound rather than single materials, and the consequent growth in non-wood components should only amplify the growth in wood-based goods.
The formation of policies is, of course, not an end in itself. The next and crucial step is the creation or modernization of flexible institutions to develop and implement those policies.
I would like to refer briefly to just one group of forestry institutions which is indispensable to the endurance, or staying-power, of any reform of the forestry sector - the forestry education institutions. Trainees of these institutions must, of course, implement forest policy; the most brilliant of schemes is worthless without them. More important, they must make and implement future forest policy in a world where change can only become more rapid and more significant in relation to the forest.
The trainees of forestry education institutions will be making and implementing future forest policy in a world where change can only become more rapid and significant in relation to the forest.
On the applied research side there is an increasing trend to seek assistance from the behavioural sciences. Problems like urban forestry, national park management, shifting cultivation, etc. can only be solved by determined efforts to improve and apply the tools of the social sciences, together with those of the classical forestry sciences. The position of forested areas and marginal lands in relation to various population movements is being studied more intensively. Many countries are carrying out research with a view to improving the working conditions of the forest labourer, and thus ergonomics, health conditions and accident prevention are getting increased attention.
Even in forest industry the applied research objectives are increasingly oriented toward social problems. The determined efforts to combat the pollution problems in the pulp and paper industry at the moment outweigh other new research efforts. The method whereby pulp is bleached without chlorine, using oxygen, would not have moved so rapidly from laboratory to full-scale operation if it had not been spurred on by the interest in decreasing fresh water consumption and combating pollution.
Let me give at the moment just two examples of the importance of these main trends for the planning exercise: one of a global nature, the other related to tropical forests.
We can still merely guess what types of forests and trees mankind will need a few generations from now. With the advances in genetics it is imperative that the genetic resources of the world be preserved as bases for future options. Exploration and conservation of the greatest possible variation in forest-gene resources are a responsibility which requires planning and action on a large scale. This is a global task which was stressed at the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, and FAO will continue to work in this field and commends this work also to your attention.
The second example deals with the risk of not being in the mainstream of development. Tropical forest utilization deals essentially with large trees. If the mainstream of development - for instance, in logging - is centred on problems associated with smaller-sized trees, then now is the time to plan a determined research and development effort for dealing also with large-sized trees. This can best be realized if there is closer cooperation among those countries concerned with tropical forestry.
The United Nations Conference on the Human Environment stressed the importance of action in the field of tropical forest management, with a concentrated attack on the marginal land problem and increased attention to forest fire prevention, detection and control. It is recommended that the Environment Fund, to be formally established by the United Nations General Assembly, finance such activities through, for example, the Unesco Man and the Biosphere Programme in cooperation with FAO. No doubt foresters in their respective countries will embrace this important world consensus and provide a spur to the formulation and implementation of national plans and policies for action.
In fact, the FAO Forestry Department's field activities are a mirror of the dynamics already on the move. Our Field Programme now covers 77 countries, which means that practically all developing countries with a forestry potential are included. The nature of the projects which we operate shows an explosion of problems dealing with environmental forestry, including wildlife, forest recreation and national parks management. Our fieldwork in tropical forests has increased by a factor of ten in financial terms over the last three years. In addition to projects dealing with building and strengthening forestry institutions and with education, there are various types of pre-feasibility studies, and here our cooperation with the development banks is rapidly increasing. The total magnitude of the large projects which FAO operates in forestry on behalf of the United Nations Development Programme is shown by the Special Fund contribution, amounting to about $50 million. Our
forestry-sector activities within the framework of the World Food Programme have at the moment 27 operational projects with a total World Food Programme contribution of $75 million.
This is a clear demonstration that the foresters of the developing world are capable of having their strategies accepted by the authorities in charge of overall country programming. And the donor countries in accepting the proposals are aware that the forestry sector has many dynamic growth centres to be explored. One may thus confidently draw the conclusion that many more patterns in the forestry sector conducive to social and economic progress are awaiting identification.
HOW MUCH PRIMARY FOREST TO SAVE? an era of environmental concern
2. The modern forester
An excerpt from B.K. Steenberg's report "Forestry in FAO" to the Organization's ad hoc Committee on Forestry in 1969, published in Unasylva Vol. 23, No. 3 (1969).
· It is evident that the many services the forester is called upon to provide in this modern world demand also a modern type of professional. It is possible to spend a considerable amount of time in listing the various disciplines and techniques with which he ought to be familiar. I believe, however, that if I say that he should be a resource manager, and at the same time that he should be development-oriented, I shall have covered the main attributes of the type of professional that is now vitally needed.
By the term "resource" I mean, of course, not only the production forests but also lands which, though they do not at present carry forests of any sort or bear production forests, must be managed to provide many of the nation's products and services: water regulation and control, soil conservation, wildlife and recreation. The word "manager" is also of importance, for it implies a professional who does not see his job as one of passively accepting the results of the interplay of the various forces of nature and of man but one who, being aware of the nation's socio-economic requirements, consciously and deliberately employs-his training and education to bring about the necessary changes, being fully aware of their consequences. To be "development-oriented" means that he must understand the social and economic forces that influence the operation of his own sector of the economy, and its place in national development, fully appreciating that development is an integrated
process.
The new forester must also realize that forestry is becoming more and more international. The fact that the problems of soil and water conservation often ignore international boundaries, the need for countries to select and use the accumulated experience and the advances of others, and the necessity for all to appreciate the changing patterns in international markets and in world trade in forest products are well known. However, the international approach is desirable in another area, for the disparity between the two blocs of the world, the more industrialized and the developing countries, is not only reflected in differences in per caput income, in technology, and in the rates of economic growth but, in the field of forestry, in an oversupply of foresters in some countries of Europe and North America, and a dearth of forestry professionals in the less industrialized countries.
This oversupply has come about through the rationalization of forestry and forest industries, the increased use of mechanical appliances, and the centralization of administrations. It seems to us that this situation may be used to the advantage of the developing countries, as a holding operation. It is obviously going to take time to train the considerable numbers of forestry professionals who are needed in the developing countries and, in the intervening period, it may be wise policy for them to utilize, through bilateral and international aid, the manpower that may be available from developed countries.
This will need careful arrangement and control. The foresters who are sent to the developing countries must be scrupulously selected not only on the basis of their professional knowledge, but also, perhaps especially, on their capacity to work in alien societies, on their possible reactions to different peoples, different cultures, different ways of life. For only by an appreciation of the culture, the spirit, and the aspirations of the people among whom they are working will they be able to give the best of their technical and scientific knowledge.
<section>8</section>
Sir Henry Beresford-Peirse - The evolution of forestry: Latest trends in thinking
When the first Timber Trend Studies carried out by FAO were completed, they indicated that world wood demand was rising and would continue to rise well above production for the next 20 to 40 years, in spite of vast untapped forested areas in many parts of the earth. This apparent paradox provoked new thinking, of which one example is provided by this selection of excerpts from a 1962 article in Unasylva (Vol. 16, No. 4) by Sir Henry Beresford-Peirse, then Deputy Director of FAO's Forestry and Forest Products Division and later to become Director-General of the Forestry Commission of Great Britain.
· At heart, foresters are apt to consider almost all kinds of forests, from low-producing tropical forests to the high-yielding and intensively managed coniferous forests of Europe, to be essentially areas whose function is the production of wood. They pay lip-service, perhaps less reluctantly than in the past, to the concept of multiple use and concede that their forests may, for instance, be used by tourists or even by wild animals. Even where a forest is playing predominantly a protective role, foresters generally like to extract as much timber and wood as possible, so long as the protective function is not impaired.
In discussing the protective role (of the forest), the first point to make is that timber-producing plantations and man-made forests, while their role is first and foremost production of wood, can also have a protective role as shelter and to safeguard soil and water, especially in catchment areas, and they can have other secondary functions as well. It is the natural forests, however, not earmarked for wood production, that are the main source of protection: they can now be allowed to exercise this role unhampered by the favourite objective of all foresters - to produce wood. It will be unimportant what shape the trees in these forests develop, whether they are bent and crooked or tall and straight, dense or scattered, whether the forests have many or few species - provided they perform the function of maintaining a suitable vegetative cover for the protection of soil and control of water flow. Nor will the old argument need to be pursued acrimoniously as to whether forest
or grass or other vegetation should be grown: any combination will be acceptable if the main objective is achieved. There are great areas, too, where the natural forest has been destroyed and where a protective vegetative cover must be restored. The same consideration should apply here, and choice of species need not be influenced by thoughts of producing wood. The protective role of any vegetative cover is something extremely difficult to evaluate, though there is no doubt that this value, and sometimes a very high one, exists when, for instance, the vegetation safeguards costly reservoirs or irrigation works from silting or flooding.
AUCTIONING CATTLE IN ARGENTINA pert of "multiple use "?
Because these protective forests need not be called upon to produce wood (except incidentally), this does not mean they can have no productive function. Forests and scrubland, together with adjoining and merging rangeland, can be developed to the full for the grazing of domestic animals and wild animals as well; and the yield can be in terms of meat, hides and other animal products and as fodder. Grazing would obviously have to be carefully controlled, not with the objective of protecting the trees from damage by browsing or rubbing but only to the extent of ensuring that the protective role of the vegetation is fully safeguarded. These protective forests and rangelands can merge also with intensively managed pastures, these being devoted essentially to animal and fodder production. This use of forests for grazing is something repugnant to many foresters who have been brought up to look upon wild and domestic animals as almost always enemies of the forest. But this is an
attitude which will have to change, even perhaps to the extent of welcoming goats, of course under controlled conditions, into certain forest and scrub areas if full use is to be made of forests and maquis not wanted for wood production, and their related range and pasture lands.
These protective forests and rangelands, as well as producing meat and harbouring wild animals, can offer recreation on a growing scale, and the opening up of these areas for this purpose can relieve the pressure on the essentially productive forest areas. Recreation inevitably brings with it an increased risk of fire, but that is something that must be faced, and if the people of a country demand recreation facilities, they must surely be prepared to pay what is necessary for fire protection and other essential controls.
The concept of the "multiple use" of forests was readily accepted at the Fifth World Forestry Congress without perhaps much deep and careful thought as to what this really implied.
The concept of the "multiple use" of forests was readily accepted at the Fifth World Forestry Congress without perhaps much deep and careful thought as to what this really implied. Indeed, there is the risk that the concept may be interpreted to mean a little of everything in every forest. The true interpretation of this concept is one which could perhaps better lead to the name "multiple role". There would be forests devoted essentially to wood production, mainly man-made or heavily influenced by silvicultural treatment designed to step up to the maximum the yield, both in quantity and quality, and always regulated by economic and social considerations. And there would be forests devoted essentially to a protective role but producing as much as possible of animal and fodder products, and these could also, together with rangelands, provide for recreation, tourism and wildlife. This planning in terms of a dual role does not imply the need to put into one category or the other
all the forest areas in any country, for, as far ahead as it is reasonable to look, there will be vast forest areas which can be totally forgotten. One of the largest would be the great part of the Amazon forests which could be left undisturbed to grow and be the habitat for animals and primitive tribes as they have been for many thousands of years; and there are many similar, though smaller, forest areas elsewhere.
If this picture of the two distinct roles of forests is accepted, there must be a reorientation in much of the thinking and action on the many different aspects of forestry with which foresters are concerned. In policy, and in land-use planning which follows from it, there will need to be a much closer link with farming policy, since the boundaries between the forest and the farm will in many instances entirely disappear. There will be, of course, and always must be, great areas devoted to wood production, where farming has little or no part to play. But there will be an expanding area earmarked for tree farming and forest plots used as part of farm rotations where food and wood production are both part of a coordinated intensive agricultural enterprise - agricultural, that is, in its widest FAO sense. And there will be extensive protection areas-forest, rangelands and pastures - devoted, in conjunction with their protective role, to the production of animal products,
fodder, recreation, and wildlife. It then becomes virtually impossible to evolve for a country a forest policy, as distinct from a farming policy. It follows from this that any new or existing forest law must be looked at with care to see that the distinction, which should be made to disappear, is not perpetuated by legislation.
Basic principles unchanged
In the light of the latest thinking on forestry, it is interesting to look back to the Principles of Forest Policy, approved by the FAO Conference in 1951. It would seem that none of the changing thoughts or practices - which are in many respects revolutionary - makes it necessary to vary at all these principles which were the result of far-sighted thought and much discussion. Perhaps one of the most difficult problems will be that of devising suitable administrative machinery. It might be argued that the close coordination of farming and forestry should lead to one omnibus service. That, however, does not seem a necessary or desirable solution; because of the very special skills which have to bear on managing trees and forests for either role, there must continue to be specialist forest services. Similarly, since production forests are essentially an industry or a business, they must be managed as such to yield a profit, and a different form of administration is necessary
for them as compared with an agricultural administration concerned mainly with extension work and implementation of the law. Where control of land use is of fundamental importance is in catchment areas, particularly in steep mountain country, and for this reason there is much to be said for the Italian arrangement which puts under one authority forestry and the whole economy of the mountain regions.
This merging of forestry and farming, particularly in the protective areas, will considerably simplify the social problems which so often seem an insuperable barrier to proper management. When catchment areas have to be put under or kept under proper vegetative cover, the approach is often complete exclusion of grazing animals and, therefore, a drastic alteration in the people's way of life. If now the concept is that these forests and adjoining lands can be managed so as to carry a reasonable stocking of domestic and wild animals, the change will be not nearly so drastic and the full benefit can be achieved more simply by the coordinated use of range and protective forest instead of the separate use and management of the two.
There will need to be a much closer link with farming policy, since the boundaries between the forest and the farm will in many instances almost entirely disappear.
Education and research
Education and training are rightly given a very high priority in FAO's work for less developed countries. Is it certain that the advice given is really sound for these countries? Changes in thinking and practice must be fully reflected in the curricula of new education and training institutes as these are set up. While it is difficult and perhaps unnecessary to change quickly or fundamentally the teaching of universities in the older forestry countries, it would be disastrous if these well-tried, intensely valuable ways of thought were transplanted without "spring cleaning" into the newly developing countries. Not only must the teaching and training incorporate the latest thinking and experience but it must be adapted to the circumstances, and particularly the social circumstances, of the new countries. The objective for many years ahead should be, however heretical this may seem, teaching which is practical and simple rather than deeply scientific and theoretical. Saying
this is not to imply that standards should be allowed to slip but rather that the standards, while set high, should be of a kind suitable to new developing countries. These countries can have the advantage of the long years of thought and experience of the older forestry countries, but they need not perhaps go through the same processes of training and education evolved over many years, mainly in and suitable for Europe and North America.
A great responsibility rests upon research. In describing, inevitably superficially, the two complex roles of forestry, it might be thought that it has been assumed that the techniques and methods of the establishment and management of man-made forests, of tree cropping and of the combination of protection forests and grazing are all known. Far from it; there is a vast field of new research as well as the pursuit of old lines of investigation which need to be carefully thought out and followed. A basic aim in all the growing of trees for whatever purpose must be the assurance that the fertility of the site be maintained or, if possible, improved, but we know all too little about how to achieve the best and cheapest. Is the farmer right when he often condemns tree crops as using too much water or reducing fertility? Or is the forester right in contending that in many instances a tree crop can be more profitable than a normal farm crop and at the same time maintain or improve
the site quality? What is the level of grazing that can be tolerated in forests of different kinds and still maintain a satisfactory vegetative cover and a proper regeneration of grasses, herbs and trees? Much research and experimentation is needed on these and many other subjects, above all on the way tropical forests should be treated as simply and cheaply as possible to improve their productivity, while the delicate balance of their soil fertility is maintained. A difficult task is to determine which are the most important problems to be tackled and to settle this not necessarily by reference to the well-accepted lines of research but from the point of view of the unsolved problems of each of the two main forest roles as they are adopted for the developing countries.
In the field of wood technology, one of the problems frequently encountered in many parts of the world is how to put to good use the almost countless different species which grow in natural forests, especially in the tropics. If we accept the view that man-made forests will on a growing scale provide the wood that is needed, this problem of using many different species will become a lessening rather than a growing problem. The very complex structure will not be repeated after initial clearing; instead, the composition of the forest will be chosen for maximum wood production of a kind which is most suitable for and needed by industry. Selection and breeding can be directed more specifically to developing types of tree whose wood is most suitable for a variety of industries, and to forests which will produce relatively uniform products. In this way the problems of industry will be considerably lessened. Agricultural crops are now being bred to produce, in conjunction with
ever-improving techniques, higher and higher yields for various sites and for various end-uses, and they maintain a remarkable uniformity. The same process will certainly be increasingly introduced with regard to forest crops, especially for pulp and paper. But in thinking about simplifying and increasing the production of raw material for industry, it must not be forgotten that one of the most urgent needs is for wood for fuel, primitive houses, and general village purposes.
The function of FAO
Finally, the growing importance of man-made forests emphasizes once more the highly important part that forestry economics must play. As in the case of genetics, the application of economic theory to forestry is of comparatively recent origin, and even now the number of trained economists in this field is one of the main obstacles to practical planning of forest and forest industry development. Yet it is economic considerations, the aim of producing wood as cheaply as possible and the necessity of fitting forest and forest industry development into the general framework of a country's growth, that must be a weighty factor in settling the pattern of plantation forestry, of farm wood-lots and of tree cropping. But while cheapness and efficiency of production both in quantity and quality are essential, as they are in any business, it is important never to lose sight of the social aspect of forestry. Economic considerations may sometimes have to be largely disregarded so that
the ways of life of men and women, families and tribes, whose heritage lies in the forest and related lands, are not drastically disturbed; on the contrary, it is only by making full use of the inherent skills, characteristics, beliefs, and even prejudices of the local people that the effective improvement of the general productivity of land can be achieved, even if this is done by slow and costly procedures measured by purely economic considerations.
The task for which FAO was originally set up has been described in So bold an aim as the "collection and dissemination of information using a variety of media - international meetings, publications, visits" and "the acquiring of expertise principally by the less developed countries from the more developed". This was the basis of FAO's Regular Programme, now greatly widened or extended by field and action programmes. However large and important these field programmes become - and the need for them is almost infinite - the Regular Programme must always remain the foundation upon which they are built and sustained. But - at any rate so far as forestry and forest products are concerned, and if we accept the existence of this evolution in our midst in thinking and practice - FAO has a further and more fundamental responsibility which should be fully recognized and implemented. Not only must FAO collect and disseminate information and knowledge of techniques, but it must play a
role which no other organization or institution can do so effectively, that of shaping and guiding the thinking and practice of the older countries to fit the quite different circumstances of the new, so that they are applicable to the aspirations of the people of these new countries and are offered to them in a form in which they are able to take full advantage of them. The concept of the two great roles of forestry, merging with intensive cultivation on the one hand and extensive grazing on the other, and taking full account of the people for whom, after all, all this thinking and planning, education and research is undertaken, infringes in not the smallest degree the principles of ecology in its widest sense, "the study of the reciprocal relations of living organisms- plants, animals and men - and their environment", which should be the essential guide for all the work undertaken by FAO.
FAO forestry papers
42 (1983) - Fuelwood supplies in the developing countries - FAO's pioneering study of the world fuelwood crisis (available in English, French and Spanish)
43 (1983) - Forest revenue systems in developing countries - a practical guide to forest fees and charges in developing countries and in tropical forests in general (available only in English)
44/1 (1983) - Food and fruit-bearing forest species - 1: Examples from Eastern Africa - 40 SPECIES MONOGRAPHS - information on: ecology, distribution, main uses, cultivation, collection periods, nutritional value, propagation, marketing (available In English, French and Spanish)
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS
<section>9</section>
The world of forestry
Teaching social forestry
New Malaysian forestry strategy
Forestry and biotechnology
The multiple uses of Gliricidia sepium
US tree-planting increases
Forestation in Tibet
Irish-American agreement
Latin American news
Teaching social forestry
VILLAGE RESIDENT IN GHANA how to teach community forestry?
A workshop on the socio-economic aspects of social forestry held in Bangkok between 18 and 22 September 1984 had approximately 60 participants from India, Indonesia, Nepal, Pakistan, the Philippines, Sri Lanka and Thailand. Resource persons came from the workshop's sponsor, the East-West Center in Hawaii, and from FAO.
Apart from helping to identify what are seen as the most serious socio-economic grey areas in knowledge about planning and execution of social forestry projects, the workshop was also expected to suggest elements that should be incorporated in university curricula on social forestry. To this end, there was significant representation from universities in some of the participating countries and especially from Thailand's Kasetsart University, at which the FAO/SIDA (Swedish International Development Authority) Forestry for Local Community Development programme has an ongoing curriculum development project.
Two working groups were formed, one to concentrate on identifying priority research issues and the other on curriculum matters; joint plenary sessions before and after group meetings ensured coordination. The issues that deserve priority research attention in the region seem to fall into three main overlapping categories:
· organizational/institutional/legal aspects (including weaknesses of both the intervening agencies and beneficiaries "receiving" organizations);
· people's effective and sustained participation, and its determinants;
· other socio-economic dimensions especially us they affect the distribution of both benefits and costs in social forestry.
Considerable attention was given to the fact that while planners or project executors generally mean well, there seems to be a considerable divergence between their view of what is valuable and deserving of priority and that of the intended rural beneficiaries. The means of more correctly understanding rural people's perceptions was seen to he crucial, but the workshop suggested that current indicators and measuring systems fail to record this accurately, if at all.
The key specific proposed areas of research can be summarized as follows:
1. Development of planning methodologies specific to socioeconomic analysis of social forestry projects.
2. Development of improved indicators for people's perceptions and preferences for use in planning.
3. Distribution of benefits from and costs of social forestry (and influence on people's willingness to participate).
4. Improved institutional coordination and legal frameworks for social forestry including role of NGOs)) and for people's participation.
5. Rural people's perception of social forestry's costs and benefits and its influence on participation cultural, historical and political context to be considered also).
On curriculum development, it became clear that the approaches of the various universities remain for the moment in a state of flux, While the commitment is there to include social forestry in programmes, there is as yet no consensus on whether one is better advised to do so at undergraduate, postgraduate or "refresher course" level. Examples of all three approaches exist, but they are still too new to evaluate. A commonly identified problem is leek of lime. Classroom hours are limited, and to cram into them the numerous hits of knowledge a "social forester'' needs risks creating foresters who are socially aware but perhaps not adequately competent in what they must do in the field.
Undergraduate social forestry "specialization'' is another option being explored, but such programmes perhaps also may face charges of skill dilution. The workshop did not come out with a clear recommendation on how social forestry should he taught, but instead worked out check-lists of elements to he taught at the levels of field operators, their supervisors and higher-level cadres. The workshop made it clear that an officer's awareness of what social skills may he called for in a given situation is often just as important as possession of the skill itself.
WOOD PRODUCTS AT THE VILLAGE LEVEL goal of community forestry
New Malaysian forestry strategy
A permanent forest estate is to be set up in Peninsular Malaysia to meet ecological requirements through the protection of catchment areas and watercourses, as well as for productive purposes. A three-pronged strategy has been adopted by the National
Forestry Council to meet the needs of sustained log supply and ecological requirements:
· Reduction in the annual logging rate from about 365967 ha in 1978 to about 149000 ha in 1986 and there-after.
· Intensification of rehabilitation efforts through silvicultural treatment of logged areas in the permanent forests.
· Implementation of a large-scale compensatory plantation project involving the planting of 188183 ha with fast-growing tree species in the next 15 years.
The Government has decided to reduce the area of timber felled annually by a drastic 25 percent, to prevent a timber crisis in future, Under the new ruling, one of the ways chosen to address some of the crucial problems facing the forestry sector-depleting resources, excessive wastage and slow recovery rate-the total felled annually was to he progressively reduced from 200000 ha to 170000 ha in 1984; 160000 ha in 1985; and 149000 ha in 1986 and each successive year up until the year 2000.
Forestry and biotechnology
The Forest Service of the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) has begun a new programme of basic research in biotechnology at the Forestry Sciences Laboratory in Rhinelander, Wisconsin. The new programme is part of a Forest Service initiative in biotechnology that includes other research groups at the Pacific Southwest Station in Berkeley. California, and the Forest Products laboratory in Madison, Wisconsin. The work includes studies in gene-splicing, microculture and genetic engineering.
The initiative marks the first major entry the Forest Service has made into the genetic engineering of forest trees. "The ultimate goal is to shorten the time it takes to produce better trees," said programme leader Neil Nelson. "Instead of using conventional tree-breeding methods to improve growth, wood quality, and resistance to insects and disease, we might eventually be able to transfer single genes or groups of genes from one kind of tree or plant into the tree species we want to improve. Even though this has actually been done with some micro-organisms and herbaceous plants, we have a long way to go in forestry.''
"The programme has three objectives," Nelson said. "One is to try to find cells whose genes allow them to grow into complete tree seedlings when cultured in a nutrient-rich mixture. This ability may he controlled by only a few genes, not hundreds as we once thought.
"The second is to use these cells to screen for mutations in genes that control resistance to chemicals, particularly herbicides. Seedlings that are resistant to weed-killing chemicals will have a better chance of surviving their first few years in a managed plantation. Such a screening technique would be commercially valuable, as it is for crop plants.
"The third objective is to grow masses of tree cells in culture and subject them to the toxins or poisons from fungi that attack trees. The cells that survive the toxins would be micro-cultured into fungus-resistant tree seedlings. In all these objectives, the growing of new trees front tissue-cultured single cells is called 'somacloning'," be explained.
Journal of Forestry
The multiple uses of Gliricidia sepium
Gliricidia sepium (madero negro or madero-cacao), a species native to Central America and the Caribbean, is frequently used in this region to form living fences, to afford shade in coffee plantations and to provide posts and fuelwood. It is also an important generator of biomass.
In Costa Rica, where madero negro is used extensively. CATIE (the Tropical Agricultural Research and Training Centre) has recently conducted various studies on its characteristics, its present uses and its yield in fuelwood and biomass. These studies show that the tree is easy to manage and has many advantages - among others, the case with which it propagates vegetatively, anti the rapid growth of its shoots which enables it to he cut every one or two years.
The tree does not reach a height of more than 20 metres. Unless the coppice is harvested periodically, it degenerates and produces hardly any fuelwood. However, if the tree is used for shade in coffee plantations, this characteristic becomes an advantage, because pruning once or twice a year is not necessary, and the costs of coffee production are thus reduced.
In addition to being a species that fixes nitrogen, Gliricidia sepium provides the soil with a large quantity of organic material every sear by shedding its leaves in the summer - something that does not happen if it is pruned regularly. The hedges of Gliricidia sepium provide fuelwood and posts if cut every two years.
Greater and better utilization of this species would make an important contribution to forestry in Latin America and the Caribbean.
COSTA RICA'S MULTI-PURPOSE TREE monitoring Gliricidia sepium's growth and habits
US tree-planting increases
The USDA Forest Service reports that in each of the past three years, more trees have been planted in the United States than in any previous year. In 1984. 1020000 ha were planted, five times the area planted 35 years ago. About 30 percent of this tree-planting was on non-industrial private lands; 56 percent on forest industry lands; 11 percent on national forest lands; and 3 percent on other public lands.
Forestation in Tibet
Forestation in Tibet is targeted at 66000 ha by the year 2000 as against the present total of only 13000 ha. The autonomous region's grazing grounds are also expected to reach 2.6 million ha by the end of this century.
Specifically, each household in farming, semi-farming and semi-pastoral areas is required to plant 50 trees and one mou (about 614 m^2) of grass while those in pastoral areas are expected to create or improve two or three mou of grazing ground.
Irish-American agreement
An agreement has been signed between the Irish-American Cultural Institute (United States) and the Department of Fisheries and Forestry (Ireland) on a sponsored tree-planting project. Under the terms of the agreement donors will he able to sponsor the planting of trees in Ireland in counties of their choice.
Over past centuries. Ireland was denuded of its forests, and despite an active and successful state-hacked reforestation campaign, only about 5 percent of the land is under trees. The project is considered a practical way for Irish Americans to express goodwill toward Ireland as well as enhance the beauty of the Irish countryside.
Bulletin of the Department of Foreign Affairs, Ireland
Latin American news
1. Wood energy in Latin America
During 1984, a great deal of attention was devoted to wood energy in rural areas in Latin America and the Caribbean There were several meetings devoted to the subject, but special mention must he made of the Round Table on Dendrology held in January 1984 in the FAO Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean. This was chaired by the Assistant Director-General. Mr Mario Jalil, ant attended by many experts from the various Latin American countries.
After underlining the strategic role of forest resources as a source of energy and the present lack of interest shown by many countries of the region in developing and making use of this resource the round table directed its efforts toward solving all aspects of wood energy problems. A strategy was suggested for improving the productivity of the existing resource, creating new resources, organizing their distribution and marketing, and promoting and disseminating effective techniques for the conversion and use of energy. This strategy, it was agreed, should always he implemented within the framework of integrated rural development. Technical cooperation among developing countries (TCDC) was considered to he an instrument of great importance for accelerating the spread of appropriate solutions to energy problems through local resources, and it was proposed that a technical cooperation network among countries be established.
The participants likewise identified the priorities for technical cooperation, such as the preparation of wood energy forecasts, the promotion of participatory systems for rural populations, anti the training of technical personnel at various levels.
Finally, it was agreed to convert the most relevant conclusions into project ideas for inclusion in the proposed Plan of Action for the Development of Rural Energy in Latin America.
Three months later, consultants from 13 Latin American and Caribbean countries met at the same venue for an Expert Consultation on a Plan of Action for Rural Development in Latin America and the Caribbean organized by the FAO Regional Office in collaboration with the UN Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) and the Latin-American Energy Organization (OLADE). The background paper set out the ideas of the three agencies and discussion centred on various aspects of the problem of developing rural energy by means of the forest biomass, the procedure for establishing priority actions, and the form, timetable and organizational implications of these actions.
Wood energy in Latin America
The subject of the forest biomass as an energy source of prime importance for the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean was discussed again in October, in Buenos Aires, with the cooperation of the Argentine National Industrial Technology Institute, and in November, in Mexico, with the collaboration of Mexico's Undersecretariat for Forestry and Wildlife.
2. Colombian deforestation threatens fuelwood
As a result of widespread deforestation, some 8 million rural Colombians are finding it increasingly difficult to secure sufficient firewood to meet their domestic energy needs. An environmental study by Colombian scientist Jose Torres reveals that 1.2 million families now spend between five and eight hours a week collecting wood for fuel.
Inderena, the Government's environment protection agency, calculated that as many as 7 million m^3 of timber are utilized annually in Colombia for firewood which year by year is becoming more scarce in densely populated zones. The result is that peasants have to walk further each month to obtain firewood.
It is estimated that an average family of six persons utilizes over 500 kg of wood for fuel monthly. Approximately three-quarters of all rural families use firewood as cooking fuel. In addition, such centres of rural industry as village sugar mills consume large quantities of wood in districts without electricity. Each year, some 500000 ha of forest arc destroyed in Colombia, primarily by clearing and for crops in uninhabited zones. Against this, no more than 30000 ha are reforested annually.
Plans to replace firewood with other energy sources are still at the take-off stage. Government credit for the purchase of solar energy equipment is now available to small-holders, and in the last two years several thousand units for domestic use have been sold. But the bulk of the equipment now being marketed has insufficient capacity to power stoves. Thus, for the foreseeable future, radiant power will not replace firewood to any significant extent.
Another alternative, biogas, is considered impracticable on a wide scale. Only 6 percent of Colombian rural households own sufficient livestock to produce the quantity of inputs required for biomass systems. Over the long haul, then. The demand for firewood will only decrease with the extension of the electricity network. Today, 1.4 million Colombian families in country zones still have no power services, and though the network is being expanded in a US$30 million programme, it will he decades fort before the country is covered adequately by the national grid.
Consequently, until such time as peasants are provided with a low-cost alternative energy source, they will continue to rely on firewood - and the nation's forests will continue to shrink at an alarming rate.
OPEC Bulletin
February 1985
3. Promoting agroforestry
Agroforestry activities in Latin America were the subject of a round table organized by the FAO Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean in Bogota. Colombia, in July 1984. Colombia's Corporación Nacional de Investigación y Fomento Forestal (CONIF) hosted the event, which was opened on behalf of FAO by Mr Juan Ignacio de la Vega and on behalf of CONIF by its president, Mr Gerardo Lozano. Many experts from serious Latin American countries took part.
The participants recognized the great economic potential of the forestry sector, the importance of having a uniform methodology for evaluating agroforestry systems in all countries, the need to train professionals in this subject, and the necessity of incorporating peasants into agroforestry programmes. Two major suggestions made concerned the selection of zones for agroforestry activities and the setting Up of a technical cooperation network on these activities. Finally, it was decided that CONIF should start technical cooperation and information activities.
<section>a</section>
Books
Forestry development needs
Managing forest industries
A quality wood
Tropical timbers
All about mangroves
Making scientific policy
Agriculturists look at forestry
Combining cork and fodder in the Mediterranean
African tree-planting guide
A book of timber samples
Forestry development needs
SPLITTING GURJUN WOOD IN THE ANDAMAN ISLANDS forestry development takes time
A reappraisal of forestry development in developing countries. James J. Douglas. The Hague, Nijhoff/Junk. 1983. ISBN 90-247-2830-4. 178 p. Price: fl 75 (about US$33).
This interesting hook, written from a definite viewpoint rather than as an academic review, deals with some recent fundamental changes in the thinking about the development process in very poor countries, particularly the roles of industrialization and rural development. It attempts to make a link between general economic issues in development and the specific concerns and characteristics of the forestry sector of the developing countries. The author, an Australian economist, draws heavily on his experience as an FAO/UNDP consultant in Bangladesh.
Part 1 deals first with general issues in economic development, including economic growth, population growth, modernization theories, and the allocation of capital in industries and agriculture. Bangladesh serves as an example. Then income distribution is presented as a critical issue, in terms of the need to improve the lot of the rural poor as part of an overall national economic improvement. This distribution is considered in the context of international trade, the arguments of export versus import substitution, and the so-called new international economic order.
It is argued that a deliberate national policy aimed at rapid industrialization may worsen credit problems for small farmers: the financial dualism phenomenon. Even the so-called green revolution is seen as a limited success for income distribution. In low-income countries, the scope for improving welfare through income redistribution is limited unless overall income growth also occurs, but social, economic and religious patterns and conditions of village structure frustrate many attempts. Dependency theory, appropriate technology and the basic needs approach are reviewed in relation to income distribution.
In part 2, forestry development is considered in its dual and sometimes conflicting aspects of large-scale communal activities. The translation of economic arguments into forestry terms is examined. The underlying theme suggests that development will he slow and must he phased from a basis of growth in rural incomes and output rather than from the superimposition of a modern industrial sector. Even appropriately designed capital-intensive and sophisticated technology will not directly benefit the poor, because of the absolute shortage of investment capital. The limited success of industrialization in Bangladesh is analysed. Forestry can assist rural development (e.g., fuelwood production, settlement of shifting cultivators), but it can also impede it (officials protecting "their'' forest against encroachers, absorbing scarce capital). Examples of successes in rural forestry are taken from the Philippines, northern Thailand. Kenya and China. A community forestry project for
Bangladesh is discussed.
Part 3, deals with new approaches to development. Some reasons for the disappointing results of development are reviewed first, leading to the author's major point that development theory and practice in the past have been based on unsuitable postulations of political maturity anti government intent. In very poor countries he sees the achievement of an agricultural surplus and reduction of absolute destitution as primary objectives. He recommends that forest industry be aimed at export rattler than at import substitution (leading to supposed economic independence) and that it he strongly linked to agriculture.
The final plea is for upgrading the study of political sociology of the forestry sector in developing countries, because a change is needed perhaps more in the character of forestry administration than in improving productivity or institutions. Such a change, conceptual rather than technical, in the transformation of forestry will remain in many ways an internal matter. Development agencies, it is argued, need to emphasize more problem analyses than project initiation, more the effectiveness of assistance than the capacity to disburse funds.
Appendixes deal with the economy and the forest industries of Bangladesh and with the economic desirability of converting plain land forests (mainly sal) to fast-growing plantations of, for example, eucalyptus.
In the past five years or so, FAO, often supported by national agencies, has initiated a number of programmes on such topics its local community development, social forestry, village forestry, and the prosperity approach, all of which seem to answer needs presented in this hook. The author's opinions on these endeavours would have been instinctive.
There are many typographical mistakes and a reference (to Hagen) ii missing from the bibliography. But these are minor annoyances in a hook that is very readable, with few hut sufficient tabular data, allowing the reader to concentrate on concepts and arguments. The book meets its objective of bringing macroeconomists and foresters together, and it may he suitable for seminar discussions in universities anti elsewhere.
D. Burger
Forestry Chronicle
Managing forest industries
Operations management in the forest products industry. Richard Baldwin. San Francisco.. Miller Freeman. 1984. 264 p.; 93 illustrations Price: US$ 59.50 (hardback); $45 (paperback).
Understanding the changes in the forest products industry and knowing how to react to them can make the difference between surviving only through the good times and surviving, the downturns as well.
Operations management in the forest products industry provides a base for understanding and managing change in this industry. In a systematic way, the hook covers the technical and managerial knowledge needed for success in the complex world of competition, advanced technology and rapidly changing economic anti environmental conditions. In addition, the hook reveals how attitudes can affect the success or failure of a mill.
A quality wood
Terminalia superba. Monograph by J. Groulez and P.J. Wood Nogent-sur-Marne, France. CTFT, 1984. 85 p. Many photographs, drawings, graphs and tables.
This monograph brings together in a single volume data currently available in English and French on Terminalia superba, the forest species whose wood is known under the trade names of "Limba" and "Frake'' in French-speaking countries and "Afara" in English-speaking ones. The hook is tile outcome of collective work by specialists of the Centre technique forestier tropical (CTFT) and the Commonwealth Forestry Institute.
Terminalia superba is a deciduous, very quick-growing African species that covers a vast natural range stretching from Sierra Leone and Guinea to Angola. In the first part of the book, the authors give a detailed botanical description, complete with drawings and photographs. They examine the climatic and soil requirements and note that the tree can withstand considerable variation from ideal conditions. A very heliophilous species given to growing in clusters. Terminalia superba, in its optimum habitat, may he the only dominant over a very wide area. Thanks to the high germinative power of its seeds, the tree is known its an "invader of cleared land". The authors study the structure of the natural stands and analyse the development of the young plant and of the adult tree, and the latter's aptitude for vegetative propagation. Although fairly free from diseases that might threaten its life and its growth, Afara may he affected by "heart rot'', which affects the quality of its
wood. An important section of this first part is devoted to the silvicultural aspects of this species.
The second part of the hook studies the tree from the commercial point of view: the trunk, the sawn timber, the anatomical structure, the physical, mechanical and chemical characteristics, and the utilization of the wood (peeling and slicing internal and external joinery, carpentry, furniture-making).
The hook is attractively presented, easy to read and of interest to both the lay person and the expert. It contains good black-and-white photographs anti is completed by a lengthy bibliography.
Tropical timbers
Tropical timbers of the world. Marlin Chudnoff. Washington, D.C., USDA Forest Service. 1985. 464 p. Price: US$ 16.
This new publication will provide university, industrial anti other research facilities - as well as processors and importers of tropical woods - with a reference hook that is well organized anti easy to use.
The publication concisely describes tree and timber characteristics arid uses for various species in three geographical areas - tropical America, Africa, and Southeast Asia and Oceania. All 370 species are arranged alphabetically by their scientific name within each geographic area.
Species information includes scientific anti common names, distribution, general characteristics, weight, mechanical properties, drying and shrinkage, working properties, durability, preservation, and a listing of current uses.
In addition to the individual species entries, there is a section containing comparative tables of specific properties and end uses. Following these tables is an index of trade names and important common names, geographic regions, and scientific names.
To obtain a copy of Tropical timbers of the world, send US$16 to the Superintendent of Documents, US Government Printing Office, 710 N. Capitol Street, Washington, DC 20402 (tel. (202) 275-2091). The stock number is 001-001-00607-6.
All about mangroves
PART OF MANGROVE ECOSYSTEM a new handbook la available
Handbook for mangrove area management. Lawrence S. Hamilton and Samuel C. Snedaker, eds. Joint publication of the Environment and Policy Institute of the East-West Center. Hawaii, the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN), UNEP and Unesco. Available upon request from Division of Marine Sciences, Science Sector, Unesco, 7, place de Fontenoy, 75007 Paris, France.
This hook does two things: it summarizes the most up-to-date information on the range of products, benefits and services provided by the world's mangrove resources, and it provides guidelines for sustainable, multiple-use management of mangrove ecosystems. The problems of mangrove conservation and utilization are discussed in five sections:
· Policy and planning.
· Management options, including recreation, fisheries, mariculture wood production, salt production and human habitation.
· Restoration and establishment of mangrove vegetation in intertidal land areas.
· Economic considerations of a sustainable, multi-use approach to mangrove resource management.
· Development of national management plans.
Other publications on mangroves include Bibliography on mangrove research 1600-1675 (Unesco, 1981); Mangrove ecosystems: research methods (Unesco, 1984); and Global status of mangrove ecosystems (IUCN, 1981).
Making scientific policy
World directory of national science and technology policy-making bodies. Science Policy Studies and Documents series, no. 59. Paris, Unesco. 1984. 99 p. Price: FF 21.
The organizations listed in this directory all have a central policymaking function at the national level for the planning, organization or coordination of scientific and technological activities. The information was compiled by questionnaire, and has now been entered into Unesco's computerized international data base known as CDS/ISIS, which is available free of charge upon request. To the extent that information was supplied, each entry includes the name of the body's executive, a description of its aims and objectives, the names and periodicity of its bulletins and other publications, and an evaluation of its place in the policymaking network of the country.
Agriculturists look at forestry
Actes du Séminaire "Agriculture et forêt". Proceedings of a seminar organized by the European Association of Agricultural Economists, the Laboratoire d'économie forestière of the National Institute for Agricultural Research. Paris, and the Ecole nationale du génie rural et des eaux et forêts, Nancy, France, 1983. 398 p.
This publication contains the proceedings of the Fifth European Seminar of the European Association of Agricultural Economists, held in the Ecole française du génie rural des eaux et forêts, from 19 to 21 April 1983 at Nancy.
The seminar brought economists from several European countries together to exchange ideas and experiences. The countries represented were Austria, Belgium, Denmark. Finland, France, Ireland. Italy, Sweden and the United Kingdom.
The four main topics dealt with were rural land use; the contribution of forests to rural economy; farm wood-lots; and the role of forests in the development of marginal areas But certain problems received closer attention: farmers and their activities in other people's forests; the employment of forest workers-cum-agricultural labourers; small forest investments in farming; the search for a better balance ager-saltus-silva; and the conflict between agricultural and forestry activities - to name only a few.
Thirty-five reports develop these topics, with reference to the author's own experience in his/her own country. The contributions in English are all preceded by a summary in French. The volume concludes with some of the main comments made by the participants during the working meetings.
Combining cork and fodder in the Mediterranean
"Aménagement sylvo-pastoral des forêts de chêne-liège." Doctoral thesis by H. Lillelund. Copenhagen, Den Kongelige Veterinaer og Landbohøjskole Skovbruginstituttet. 1981. 225 p. Many tables and figures.
H. Lillelund, in his thesis, starts from the principle that modern animal husbandry competes directly with people for food by using agricultural resources that could have beets used for human nutrition to feed livestock. He then studies the possibility of "animal production based on natural resources that cannot be consumed by people", such as the fodder resources of the forests, an ideal combination of which would be grazing and cork-oak growing.
He centres his research on Mediterranean cork-oak stands, particularly in Morocco, where almost all the forests are state-owned and traditionally used for cork production by the state and for intensive grazing by stock-raising communities. One chapter is devoted to studying the economic value of the cork industry and the uses of cork. Tables are given analysing developments in sales, prices and exports during recent years.
African tree-planting guide
Tree planting in Africa south of the Sahara. Nairobi, Environmental Liaison Centre. 1984. 75 p. Free from ELC, P.O. Box 72461, Nairobi, Kenya.
Extensive deforestation in developing countries has created a critical need for effective tree-planting programmes. Tree planting in Africa south of the Sahara describes the stages involved in such a programme, including assessment, nursery management, and maintenance.
The guide presents planting techniques that have been used successfully in Africa and that could he applied elsewhere.
Selecting trees that will thrive in a specific area requires climatic, ecological and soil analysis. The guide lists the basic characteristics of different climatic and ecological zones, presents maps of Africa illustrating these zones, and discusses the soil attributes that are important for planting trees.
Included is a chart that lists more than 30 species, their site requirements and uses, and the best methods for planting. While local species - especially those resistant to burning practices, overgrazing, pests, and diseases - may not be listed, they are often sound candidates for a tree-planting programme.
The importance of quality care for seedlings is emphasized. Strong plants are more likely to survive, even in harsh environments, and arc therefore more cost-effective. The guide provides advice about the location and management of nurseries and describes practical techniques for sowing, transplanting seedlings, watering, shading, pruning roots, and controlling quality.
A book of timber samples
Timber monographs. Edmondo Palutan. Trans. W.W. Brown. Milan, Palutan Editrice. 3 vols.
Sample veneers of 120 different timbers are contained in this three-volume set of books, previously available only in Italian and German, which has now been published in English.
Each of the three volumes has 40 samples of those timbers most used in the wood and furniture industries. Samples are mounted in loose-leaf cards which contain text relating to the particular timber on the back. Each card contains a sample of real wood veneer measuring 10 x 14 cm, together with botanical names, commercial and local names, and information on distribution, general characteristics, seasoning, specific gravity and properties and uses.
<section>b</section>
Environment
World industry discusses the environment
Wildlife management in Chile
Coffee and charcoal
Termite soil boosts crop yields
New data centre in Peru
World industry discusses the environment
The first World Industry Conference on Environmental Management (WICEM), held in Versailles, France, between 14 and 16 November 1984, drew 514 participants from 71 countries representing various sectors: governments, industry. Non-governmental organizations (NGOs), parliamentarians, labour and the scientific community. The conference was sponsored by world industry and UNEP, in cooperation with the International Chamber of Commerce.
WICEM was about policies - how to foster closer cooperation between industry and governments in environmental management at both national and international levels.
The consensus was that there has been substantial progress in tackling the industrial pollution problems of the North, but that worrying "hot spots" of traditional forms of pollution remain.
There are also new emerging problems such as acid rain, hazardous waste disposal and accident control in industrial plants. These often prove more difficult to tackle than many of the problems successfully solved to date.
Industry made it clear at WICEM that it intends to play a more effective role in future environmental management, although there were divergencies of opinion about just what approach might be adopted.
In the South, meanwhile, problems such as tropical deforestation, soil erosion, desertification and ultra-rapid urbanization are still receiving inadequate attention, according to the WICEM declaration. The document warned that skills and resources needed to cope with these problems are in critically short supply.
HEAVY INDUSTRY IN THE USSR a meeting to discuss the environment
WICEM demonstrated that there is a tremendous array of expertise, technology and other resources available for environmentally sound development in the world's public and private sector industries, although the conference heard more about the private sector's activities and incentives than it did about the world's publicly owned industries.
The key to tapping industry's enthusiasm and ingenuity for environmental protection is to involve it in environmental management at the earliest possible moment. As its role in economic development is vital, it makes sense to invite industry in from the beginning.
The conference emphasized the importance of information and its transfer. Many delegates felt that industry could do more in this area, and in sharing with developing countries the resources at its disposal. One way to transfer information was to transfer people to provide expert training and advice.
While some government representatives from the developing world still hoped to find ready-made environmental standards to apply to industries in their own countries, a growing number recognized that such standards have to be carefully tailored to local environmental conditions. Delegates, particularly those from the governments and NGOs of developing countries, pointed out that much remains to he done to develop standards and to implement new legislation that is effectively enforced.
It was also recognized that, in an increasingly interdependent world, foreign investment is a key ingredient in the development process. However, foreign investment projects must be subjected to rigorous environmental impact assessment and must include in-plant safety control measures if they are to contribute to safe and sustainable development.
On follow-up mechanisms, there was a strong consensus against the formation of any new organization. The overwhelming majority of WICEM delegates would have liked to see the existing organizations carry on with their responsibilities and cooperate with industry in implementing the WICEM recommendations. To propagate the WICEM principles, there was strong feeling among those from developing countries that there should be regional industry conferences on environmental management so that each agenda could he narrowed to match regional concerns.
UNEP News
March 1985
Wildlife management in Chile
The National Forestry Corporation of Chile (CONAF) reports excellent results in restoring the populations of certain key wildlife species. Since 1972, when it assumed responsibility for the administration of parks and nature reserves. CONAF has carried out exhaustive studies and developed important projects for the protection and conservation of wildlife. Wildlife management was given a high priority as a result of the decimation of chinchilla and other valuable species.
As a result of the creation of nature reserves and sanctuaries for the protection of chinchilla, vicuña, the black-necked swan and other species, the vicuña population has grown from 400 in 1970 to 14600 in 1983, while that of the guanaco has increased from 5300 in 1977 to 10670 in 1983.
CONAF has trained guards for its reserves and prepared studies on various wildlife species. It is now responsible for the protection and administration of all terrestrial forest wildlife in Chile.
Coffee and charcoal
SORTING COFFEE IN ETHIOPIA can the husks produce charcoal?
Turning unwanted coffee husks into useful charcoal is a conservationist's dream come true. Not only does it do away with the growing problem of husks but it is also playing an important role in conserving Kenya's environment.
The Kenya Planters' Cooperative Union (KPCU), a coffee growers' organization, set up a project three years ago to deal with an increasing mountain of coffee husks.
"Our problem then was that we wanted to get rid of accumulating husks, a by-product of coffee milling, which were becoming too expensive to transport, and we did not have enough space for them." said KPCU mills engineer Francis Kagwima. Union technicians conducted feasibility studies for seven years until 1979, when a British engineering firm designed a plant for turning the husks into charcoal briquettes: this began operation in Nairobi in 1981.
The KPCU plant is able to produce 200 tonnes of charcoal a month from 400 tonnes of husks, hut Kagwima said production had recently been reduced. "We want to sell off current stocks before we resume producing at full capacity." he said.
As an unexpected bonus, the project has also helped reduce Kenya's yearly consumption of about 21 million tonnes of wood fuel, which represents hundreds of thousands of trees. It takes about nine tonnes of wood to produce one tonne of ordinary charcoal, whereas KPCU produces one tonne of charcoal from two tonnes of husks.
Kagwima said the KPCU has exported 36000 tonnes of charcoal to the Near East and wits processing an order for 80000 tonnes for Saudi Arabia. A recent study showed that waste materials from cotton, rice, maize and other agricultural products could also produce charcoal briquettes, he said. 'With government assistance, we can produce most of the country's charcoal, thus substantially reducing the destruction of forests."
Reuter
Termite soil boosts crop yields
Crops top-dressed with soil taken from termite mounds were found to treble their yields in trials conducted at the University of Agricultural Science in Hebbal, India. Soil was taken from termite mounds and spread on plots of fodder sorghum before planting. Analysis of the soil from termite mounds showed that it contained more calcium, magnesium, potassium, sodium and phosphorus than adjacent untreated soil.
Far Eastern Agriculture
May-June 1984
New data centre in Peru
The main aim of the newly created Data Centre in Peru is to make possible a continuing inventory of the country's natural resources. The Centre has been set up in cooperation with the Agrarian University in Lima and the International Programme of Nature Conservancy, a private, non-profit organization devoted to identifying and protecting areas of ecological significance.
By identifying very rare terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems and geographical area; with endangered animal and plant species, it is possible to keep a continuing inventory of the natural areas most in need of protection.
This programme is accessible to anyone - research worker, administrator, or member of the public - involved in the protection of natural areas, the management of natural resources, and the evaluation of environmental impact.
How endangered are the world's tropical forests?
What can be done to save them?
FAO's answers are here, two widely quoted recent books on tropical forest resources
FAO FORESTRY PAPER - No. 30 (1982) - tropical forest resources (available in English, French and Spanish)
FAO FORESTRY PAPER - No. 37 (1982) - conservation and development of tropical forest resources (available in English and Spanish)
FAO - FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS
<section>c</section>
Where to purchase FAO publications locally - Points de vente des publications de la FAO - Puntos de venta de publicaciones de la FAO
· ANGOLA
Empresa Nacional do Disco e de Publicações, ENDIPU-U.E.E.
Rua Cirilo da Conceição Silva, N° 7
C.P. N° 1314-C, Luanda
· ARGENTINA
Librería Agropecuaria
Pasteur 743, 1028 Buenos Aires
Oficina del Libro Internacional
Av. Córdoba 1877, 1120 Buenos Aires
E-mail: olilibro@satlink.com
· AUSTRALIA
Hunter Publications
P.O. Box 404, Abbotsford, Vic. 3067
Tel.:(03) 9417 5361
Fax: (03) 914 7154
E-mail: jpdavies@ozemail.com.au
· AUSTRIA
Gerold Buch & Co.
Weihburggasse 26, 1010 Vienna
· BANGLADESH
Association of Development Agencies in Bangladesh
House No. 1/3, Block F,
Lalmatia, Dhaka 1207
· BELGIQUE
M.J. De Lannoy
202, avenue du Roi, 1060 Bruxelles
CCP 000-0808993-13
E-mail: jean.de.lannoy@infoboard.be
· BOLIVIA
Los Amigos del Libro
Av. Heroínas 311, Casilla 450
Cochabamba;
Mercado 1315, La Paz
· BOTSWANA
Botsalo Books (Pty) Ltd
P.O. Box 1532, Gaborone
· BRAZIL
Fundação Getúlio Vargas
Praia do Botafogo 190, C.P. 9052
Rio de Janeiro
E-mail: valeria@sede.fgvrj.br
Núcleo Editora da Universidade Federal Fluminense
Rua Miguel de Frias 9
Icaraí-Niterói 24
220-000 Rio de Janeiro
Fundação da Universidade Federal do Paraná - FUNPAR
Rua Alfredo Bufrem 140, 30° andar
80020-240 Curitiba
· CAMEROON
CADDES
Centre Africain de Diffusion et
Développement Social
B.P. 7317 Douala Bassa
Tel.: (237) 43 37 83
Fax: (237) 42 77 03
· CANADA
Renouf Publishing
5369 chemin Canotek Road, Unit 1
Ottawa, Ontario K1J 9J3
Tel.: (613) 745-2665
Fax: (613) 745 7660
Website: www.renoufbooks.com
E-mail: renouf@fox.nstn.ca
· CHILE
Librería - Oficina Regional FAO
c/o FAO Officina Regional para América
Latina y el Caribe (RLC)
Avda. Dag Hammarskjold, 3241
Vitacura, Santiago
Tel.: 33 72 314
Fax: 696 1121/696 1124
E-mail: german.rojas@field.fao.org
Universitaria Textolibros Ltda.
Avda. L. Bernardo O'Higgins 1050
Santiago
· CHINA
China National Publications Import & Export Corporation
16 Gongti East Road, Beijing 100020
Tel.: 6506 30 70
Fax: 6506 3101
E-mail: cnpiec@public.3.bta.net.cn
· COLOMBIA
Banco Ganadero
Vicepresidencia de Fomento
Carrera 9^a N° 72-21, Piso 5
Bogotá D.E.
Tel.: 217 0100
· CONGO
Office national des librairies populaires
B.P. 577, Brazzaville
· COSTA RICA
Librería Lehmann S.A.
Av. Central, Apartado 10011
1000 San José
CINDE
Coalición Costarricense de Iniciativas de Desarrollo
Apdo 7170, 1000 San José
E-mail: rtacinde@sol.rassa.co.cr
· CÔTE D'IVOIRE
CEDA
04 B.P. 541, Abidjan 04
Tel.: 22 20 55
Fax: 21 72 62
· CUBA
Ediciones Cubanas Empresa de Comercio Exterior de Publicaciones
Obispo 461, Apartado 605, La Habana
· CZECH REPUBLIC
Artia Pegas Press Ltd Import of Periodicals
Palác Metro, P.O. Box 825
Národní 25, 111 21 Praha 1
· DENMARK
Munksgaard, Book and Subscription Service
P.O. Box 2148
DK 1016 Copenhagen K.
Tel.: 4533128570
Fax: 4533129387
Website: www.munksgaard.dk;
E-mail: subscription.service@mail.munksgaard.dk
· DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
CUESTA - Centro del libro
Av. 27 de Febrero, esq. A. Lincoln
Centro Comercial Nacional
Apartado 1241, Santo Domingo
· ECUADOR
Libri Mundi, Librería Internacional
Juan León Mera 851
Apartado Postal 3029, Quito
E-mail: librimul@librimundi.com.ec
Universidad agraria del Ecuador Centro de Información Agraria
Av. 23 de Julio, Apdo 09-01-1248
Guayaquil
Librería Española
Murgeón 364 y Ulloa, Quito
· EGYPT
The Middle East Observer
41 Sherif Street, Cairo
Tel.: 393 97 2
Fax.: 360 68 04
E-mail: fouda@soficom.com.eg
· ESPAÑA
Librería Agrícola
Fernando VI 2, 28004 Madrid
Librería de la Generalitat de Catalunya
Rambla dels Estudis 118 (Palau Moja)
08002 Barcelona
Tel.: (93) 302 6462
Fax: (93) 302 1299
Mundi Prensa Libros S.A.
Castelló 37, 28001 Madrid
Tel.: 914 36 37 00
Fax: 915 75 39 98
Website: www.tsai.es/MPRENSA
E-mail: mundiprensa@tsai.es
Mundi Prensa - Barcelona
Consejo de Ciento 391,
08009 Barcelona
Tel.: 301 8615
Fax: 317 0141
· FINLAND
Aketeeminen Kirjakauppa Subscription Services
P.O. Box 23, FIN-00371 Helsinki
Tel.: (358) 0121 4416
Fax.: (358) 0121 4450
· FRANCE
Editions A. Pedone
13, rue Soufflot, 75005 Paris
Lavoisier Tec & Doc
14, rue de Provigny
94236 Cachan Cedex
Website: www.lavoisier.fr
E-mail: livres@lavoisier.fr
Librairie du Commerce International
10, avenue d'Iéna
75783 Paris Cedex 16
Website: www.cfce.fr
E-mail: pl@net-export.fr
WORLD DATA
10, rue Nicolas Flamand
75004 Paris
Tel.: (01) 4278 0578
Fax: (01) 4278 1472
· GERMANY
Alexander Horn Internationale Buchhandlung
Friedrichstrasse 34
D-65185 Wiesbaden
Tel.: 37 42 12
S. Toeche-Mittler GmbH Versandbuchhandlung
Hindenburgstrasse 33
D-64295 Darmstadt
Tel.: 6151 336 65
Fax: 6151 314 048
Website: www. booksell.com/triops
E-mail: triops@booksell.com
Uno Verlag
Poppelsdorfer Allee 55
D-53115 Bonn 1
Tel.: 49 (0) 228 94 90 20
Fax: 49 (0) 228 21 74 92
Website: www.uno-verlag.de
E-mail: unoverlag@aol.com
· GHANA
SEDCO Publishing Ltd
Sedco House, Tabon Street
Off Ring Road Central, North Ridge
P.O. Box 2051, Accra
· GREECE
Papasotiriou S.A.
35 Stournara Str., 10682 Athens
Tel.: +301 3302 980
Fax: +301 3648254
· GUYANA
Guyana National Trading Corporation Ltd
45-47 Water Street, P.O. Box 308
Georgetown
· HAÏTI
Librairie «A la Caravelle»
26, rue Bonne Foi
B.P. 111, Port-au-Prince
· HONDURAS
Escuela Agrícola Panamericana Librería RTAC
El Zamorano, Apartado 93, Tegucigalpa
Oficina de la Escuela Agrícola Panamericana en Tegucigalpa
Blvd. Morazán, Apts. Glapson
Apartado 93, Tegucigalpa
· HUNGARY
Librotrade Kft.
P.O. Box 126, H-1656 Budapest
Tel.: 256 1672
Fax: 256 8727
· INDIA
EWP Affiliated East-West Press PVT, Ltd
G-I/16, Ansari Road, Darya Gany
New Delhi 110 002
Tel.: 32 64 180
Fax: 32 60 538
Oxford Book and Stationery Co.
Scindia House
New Delhi 110 001
Tel.: 91 11 331 5310
Fax: 91 11 371 3275
Oxford Subscription Agency
Institute for Development Education
1 Anasuya Ave., Kilpauk
Madras 600 010
Periodical Expert Book Agency
D-42, Vivek Vihar, Delhi 110095
Bookwell
Head Office:
2/72, Nirankari Colony, New Delhi - 110009
Tel.: 725 1283
Fax: 91-11-328 13 15
Sales Office:
24/4800, Ansari Road
Darya Ganj, New Delhi - 110002
Tel.: 326 8786, 325 7264
E-mail: bkwell@nde.vsnl.net.in
· IRAN
The FAO Bureau, International and Regional Specialized Organizations Affairs
Ministry of Agriculture of the Islamic Republic of Iran
Keshavarz Bld, M.O.A., 17th floor
Teheran
· IRELAND
Office of Public Work
4-5 Harcourt Road, Dublin 2
· ISRAEL
R.O.Y. International
P.O. Box 13056, Tel Aviv 61130
E-mail: royil@netvision.net.il
· ITALY
FAO Bookshop
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Roma
Tel.: 06 57055688
Fax: 06 57055155
E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org
Librería Commissionaria Sansoni S.p.A. - Licosa
Via Duca di Calabria 1/1
50125 Firenze
Tel.: 055 64 54 15
Fax: 055 64 12 57
E-mail: licosa@ftbcc.it
Libreria Scientifica Dott. Lucio de Biasio "Aeiou"
Via Coronelli 6, 20146 Milano
· JAPAN
Far Eastern Booksellers (Kyokuto Shoten Ltd.)
12 Kanda-Jimbocho 2 chome
Chiyoda-ku - P.O. Box 72
Tokyo 101-91
Tel.: 03 3265 7531
Fax: 03 3265 4656
Maruzen Company Ltd.
P.O. Box 5050
Tokyo International 100-31
Tel.: 81 3 3278 1894
Fax: 81 3 3278 1895
E-mail: h_sugiyama@maruzen.co.jp
· KENYA
Text Book Centre Ltd.
Kijabe Street
P.O. Box 47540, Nairobi
Tel.: 330 342
Fax: 22 57 79
Inter Africa Book Distribution
Kencom House, Moi Avenue
P.O. Box 73580, Nairobi
Tel.: 21 11 84
Fax: 254 2 22 35 70
· LUXEMBOURG
M. J. De Lannoy
202, avenue du Roi
1060 Bruxelles (Belgique)
E-mail: jean.de.lannoy@infoboard.be
· MADAGASCAR
Centre d'information et de Documentation Scientifique et Technique
Ministère de la recherche appliquée au développement
B.P 6224 Tsimbazaza, Antanarivo
· MALAYSIA
Electronic products only:
Southbound Sendirian Berhad Publishers
9 College Square, 01250 Penang
· MALI
Librairie Traore
Rue Soundiata Keita X 115
B.P. 3243, Bamako
· MAROC
La Librairie Internationale
70 Rue T'ssoule
PO. Box 302 (RP), Rabat
Tel./Fax: 212 7 75 01 83
· MEXICO
Librería, Universidad Autónoma de Chapingo
56230 Chapingo
Libros y Editoriales S.A.
Av. Progreso N° 202-1° Piso A
Apdo. Postal 18922
Col. Escandón, 11800 México D.F.
Mundi Prensa Mexico, S.A.
Rió Pánuco, 141 Col. Cuauhtémoc
C.P. 06500, México, DF
Tel.: 533-5658 al 60
Fax: 514-6799
E-mail: 1015452361@compuserve.com
· NETHERLANDS
Roodveldt Import b.v.
Brouwersgracht 288
1013 HG Amsterdam
E-mail: roodboek@euronet.nl
Tel.: 622 8035
Fax: 625 5493
Swets & Zeitlinger b.v.
P.O. Box 830, 2160 Lisse
Heereweg 347 B, 2161 CA Lisse
E-mail: infono@swets.nl
Website: www.swets.nl
· NEW ZEALAND
Legislation Services
P.O. Box 12418
Thorndon, Wellington
E-mail: gppmjxf@gp.co.nz
Oasis Official
P.O. Box 3627, Wellington
Tel.: (+64) 4 499 1551
Fax: (+64) 4 499 1972
E-mail: oasis@clear.net.nz
Website: www.oasisbooks.co.nzl
· NICARAGUA
Librería HISPAMER
Costado Este Univ. Centroamericana
Apdo. Postal A-221, Managua
· NIGERIA
University Bookshop (Nigeria) Ltd.
University of Ibadan, Ibadan
· NORWAY
Swets Norge AS
P.O. Box 6512, Etterstad
N-0606 Oslo
Tel.: (+47) 2297 4500
Fax: (+47) 2297 4545
E-mail: nicagen@swets.nl
· PAKISTAN
Mirza Book Agency
65 Shahrah-e-Quaid-e-Azam
P.O. Box 729, Lahore 3
· PARAGUAY
Librería Intercontinental Editora e Impresora S.R.L.
Caballero 270 c/Mcal Estigarribia
Asunción
· PERU
INDEAR
Jirón Apurimac 375, Casilla 4937
Lima 1
Universidad Nacional "Pedro Ruiz Gallo"
Facultad de Agronomía, A.P. 795
Lambayeque (Chiclayo)
· PHILIPPINES
International Booksource Center, Inc.
Room 720, Cityland 10 Tower 2
H.V. de la Costa, Cor. Valero St
Makati, Metro Manila
Tel.: 817 9676
Fax: 817 1741
· POLAND
Ars Polona
Krakowskie Przedmiescie 7
00-950 Warsaw
· PORTUGAL
Livraria Portugal, Dias e Andrade Ltda.
Rua do Carmo 70-74
Apartado 2681, 1200 Lisboa Codex
· SINGAPORE
Select Books Pte Ltd.
03-15 Tanglin Shopping Centre
19 Tanglin Road, Singapore 1024
Tel.: 732 1515
Fax: 736 0855
· SLOVAK REPUBLIC
Institute of Scientific and Technical Information for Agriculture
Samova 9, 950 10 Nitra
Tel.: +42 87 522 185
Fax: +42 87 525 275
E-mail: uvtip @ nr.sanet.sk
· SOMALIA
Samater
P.O. Box 936, Mogadishu
· SOUTH AFRICA
David Philip Publishers (Pty) Ltd.
P.O. Box 23408, Claremont 7735
Tel.: Cape Town (021) 64-4136
Fax: Cape Town (021) 64-3358
E-mail: dpp@iafrica.com
Website: www.twisted.co.za
· SRI LANKA
M.D. Gunasena & Co. Ltd.
217 Olcott Mawatha, P.O. Box 246
Colombo 11
· SUISSE
Buchhandlung und Antiquariat Heinimann & Co.
Kirchgasse 17, 8001 Zurich
UN Bookshop
Palais des Nations
CH-1211 Genève 1
Website: www.un.org
Van Diermen Editions Techniques ADECO
41 Lacuez, CH-1807 Blonzy
· SURINAME
Vaco n.v. in Suriname
Domineestraat 26, P.O. Box 1841
Paramaribo
· SWEDEN
Wennergren Williams AB
P.O. Box 1305, S-171 25 Solna
Tel.: 46 8 705 9750
Fax: 46 8 27 00 71
E-mail: mail@wwi.se
Bokdistributören
P.O. Box 301 61, S-104 25 Stockholm
Tel.: 46 8 728 2500
Fax: 46 8 31 30 44
E-mail: lis.ledin @ hk.akademibokhandeln.se
· THAILAND
Suksapan Panit
Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue
Bangkok
· TOGO
Librairie du Bon Pasteur
B.P. 1164, Lomé
· TUNISIE
Société tunisienne de diffusion
5, avenue de Carthage, Tunis
· TURKEY
DUNYA INFOTEL
100. Yil Mahallesi
34440 Bagcilar, Istanbul
Tel.: 0212 629 08 08
Fax: 0212 629 46 89
E-mail: dunya@dunya-gazete.com.tr
Website: http://www.dunya.com
· UNITED KINGDOM
The Stationery Office
51 Nine Elms Lane
London SW8 5DR
Tel.: (0171) 873 9090 (orders)
(0171) 873 0011 (inquiries)
Fax: (0171) 873 8463
and through The Stationery Office Bookshops
E-mail: postmaster@theso.co.uk
Website: www.the-stationery-office.co.uk
Electronic products only:
Microinfo Ltd.
P.O. Box 3, Omega Road
Alton, Hampshire GU34 2PG
Tel.: (01420) 86848
Fax: (01420) 89889
Website: www.microinfo.co.uk
E-mail: emedia@microinfo.co.uk
· UNITED STATES
Publications:
BERNAN Associates (ex UNIPUB)
4611/F Assembly Drive
Lanham, MD 20706-4391
Toll-free 1-800-274-4447
Fax: 301-459-0056
Website: www.bernan.com
E-mail: info@bernan.com
UN Bookshop
The United Nations Bookshop
General Assembly Building Room 32
New York, N.Y. 10017
Tel.: 212 963 7680
Fax: 212 963 4910
Website: www.un.org
E-mail: bookshop@un.org
Periodicals:
Ebsco Subscription Services
P.O. Box 1943
Birmingham, AL 35201 -1943
Tel.: (205) 991-6600
Telex: 78-2661
Fax: (205) 991-1449
The Faxon Company Inc.
15 Southwest Park
Westwood, MA 02090
Tel.: 6117-329-3350
Telex: 95-1980
Cable: FW Faxon Wood
· URUGUAY
Librería Agropecuaria S.R.L.
Buenos Aires 335, Casilla 1755
Montevideo C.P. 11000
· VENEZUELA
Fundación La Era Agrícola
Calle 31 Junin Qta Coromoto 5-49
Apartado 456, Mérida
Fundación para la Investigación Agrícola
San Javier
Estado Yaracuy, A.P. 182, San Felipe
Fax: 054 44210
E-mail: damac@diero.conicit.ve
Fudeco, Librería
Avenida Libertador-Este
Ed. Fudeco, Apartado 254
Barquisimeto C.P. 3002, Ed. Lara
Tel.: (051) 538 022
Fax: (051) 544 394
Telex: (051) 513 14 FUDEC VC
Librería FAGRO
Universidad Central de Venezuela (UCV)
Maracay
Librería Universitaria, C.A.
Av. 3, entre 29 y 30
N° 29-25 Edif. EVA, Mérida
Fax: 074 52 09 56
Tamanaco Libros Técnicos S.R.L.
Centro Comercial Ciudad Tamanaco
Nivel C-2, Caracas
Tel.: 261 3344/261 3335/959 0016
Tecni-Ciencia Libros S.A.
Torre Phelps-Mezzanina
Plaza Venezuela
A.P. 20.315, 1020 Caracas
Tel.: 782 8697/781 9945/781 9954
E-mail: tchlibros@ibm.net
Tecni-Ciencia Libros, S.A.
Centro Comercial
Av. Andrés Eloy, Urb. El Prebo
Valencia, Ed. Carabobo
Tel.: 222 724
· ZIMBABWE
Grassroots Books
The Book Café
Fife Avenue, Harare;
61 a Fort Street, Bulawayo
Tel.: 79 31 82
Fax: 70 21 29
· Other countries/Autres pays/Otros países
Sales and Marketing Group
Information Division, FAO
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy
Tel.: (39) 06 57051
Fax: (39) 06 57053360
Telex: 625852/625853/610181 FAO I
E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org
