<title>Unasylva - No. 150 - Forestry and the crisis in Africa</title>
<section>1</section>
Forestry and the crisis in Africa
Forestry and the crisis in Africa
This issue of Unasylva focuses on Africa. A large part of the continent has been overrun by drought in successive years, and millions of people are exposed to hunger and malnutrition. In many African countries, cultivation is because of hunger - rapidly expanding into forest land and areas of low rainfall. This process, coupled with necessarily unmanaged exploitation for fuelwood, fodder and other basic goods and services that forests and trees provide, has led to a progressively increasing rate of deforestation. That has brought about general environmental degradation and instability and, in their wake, depletion of the resource base and even desertification over vast areas of land.
Against this background, five thematic articles in this issue have been devoted to explaining the place of forestry, forests and trees in development, especially in the light of their contribution to environmental conservation and food security. They show that there is growing awareness of the fundamental role of forestry in providing humankind with some of the essentials for survival - fuel for cooking, building materials for shelter, fodder for livestock and protection for crops. The contribution of forestry to development can be fully realized, however, only if forests are effectively managed for development and the rural poor share fully in the benefits that can flow from forestry's potential.
One of FAO's main thrusts in assisting its member countries to alleviate and prevent such crises is action at the national level. Hence this issue of Unasylva features a review of the first 40 years of FAO's forestry field operations. This review illustrates the considerable increase in FAO's forestry field programme in recent years, its role in development, and its evolving philosophy. It shows that the programme has responded effectively to the diverse needs of the member countries.
This responsiveness has been demonstrated in the evolution of the content and modus operandi of the forestry field programme, with its new emphasis on the promotion of rural development and environmental management, and the changeover from the concept of technical assistance to one of technical cooperation. The forestry field projects in Africa in their diversity and impact stand as an example for the entire programme. However, as this issue of Unasylva also shows, there is need and scope for more to be done.
<section>2</section>
Desertification in the Sahelian and Sudanian zones of West Africa
Jean Gorse
Jean Gorse is head of a World Bank working group on desertification in West Africa. This article includes contributions by Yvon Dommergues, Robert Fishwick, Willem Floor, David Steeds and James Thomson.
Interactions between droughts and human abuse of the environment are the primary cause of the current crisis in the Sahel, Jean Gorse argues. Based on an extensive new study undertaken by the World Bank, the article offers a series of very specific prescriptions - many of them controversial - for alleviating the Sahelian crisis. Unasylva is devoting an unusual amount of space to this article because of the urgent need for action in the Sahel - a need underscored by FAO's own emergency programme for Africa; because forestry clearly has an important role to play; and because the recommendations contained here are likely to stimulate productive debate and discussion about the problem.
 The Sahel is often viewed as an area isolated from the surrounding region, and with its own special problems. But on ecological grounds, as well as for historical and contemporary political and economic reasons, the Sahel should instead be seen as the northern part of a larger regional whole which includes the more humid Sudanian zone. The focus of this article is, therefore, on the West African Sahelian and Sudanian zones (SSZ).
Within the SSZ, this article concentrates on seven countries: Burkina Faso, Chad, the Gambia, Mali, Mauritania, the Niger and Senegal. These countries are grouped around the fourteenth parallel; all are members of the Permanent Interstate Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel (CILSS). While the northern areas of Benin, Ghana, the Ivory Coast, Nigeria, the Republic of Cameroon and Togo lie within the SSZ, they are not treated explicitly here for reasons of comparability of statistics. Cape Verde, the eighth member of CILSS, has been excluded from this analysis because its island situation gives it a quite different environmental character.
Physical features
The seven continental CILSS states cover 5.3 million km, of which two-thirds are north of the northern limit of rain-fed cultivation. Throughout the remaining area, too, evapo-transpiration exceeds rainfall during most months of the year. Only one rain-fed crop per year is possible without irrigation. The climate is harsh indeed: a short rainy season characterized by often violent and unpredictable showers, followed by a long dry season. The dry season is hot, but the first few months following the rains are perceptibly cooler. This "cool dry season" creates problems for irrigated crops: rice must be planted so that germination occurs before the temperature drops, but the season is not usually cool enough to guarantee a wheat crop.
Of the 530 million ha under discussion, soils are suitable for cultivation on only about 60 million ha, of which about 20 percent were being farmed in the 1970s. About 150 million ha are classified as range land.
Most SSZ soils are of low fertility, particularly poor in phosphates and nitrogen, and structurally fragile with low humus content and reduced water-retention capacity. Hydromorphy, hard clay pans, laterization, and wind and water erosion are all common problems. Research and experience over the past 20 years in SSZ agriculture and forestry tend to confirm that the low fertility and vulnerability to erosion of SSZ soils are as important a constraint on plant productivity as drought (Breman and de Wit, 1983).
Water for perennial or seasonal irrigation is available in abundance from major streams and rivers (the Senegal, the Niger and the Chari-Logone). Uncontrolled irrigation and flood recession cropping are widely practiced, but the area equipped for partially or fully controlled irrigation is still scarcely 100 000 ha. Bottomlands, small streams, lakes and shallow groundwater tables provide locally important sources for dry-season cropping. The shallow aquifers, which are also the principal source of village water supply, depend for recharge on both rainfall and sound resource management, particularly of the natural vegetative cover, in order to reduce surface water run-off and promote infiltration. No systematic work is known to have been conducted on the effects of the current dry period on groundwater reserves, but all recent indications, however sketchy, show that shallow aquifer levels are falling perceptibly.
West Africa - Climatic zones
The natural vegetative cover - forests, woodlands, tree/shrub/grass savannahs and steppes - is relatively drought-resistant and well adapted to the ecological conditions of the SSZ. In the context of traditional production systems, people have selected and developed multipurpose plant and tree species, and productive, anti-erosive vegetative associations such as bush fallows, forest parks and live fences. Much of the tree and shrub cover is composed of slow-growing species. These are often difficult to regenerate where mature stands now exist, because local conditions have deteriorated. Prolonged dry periods, combined with increasing human and livestock population pressure, further retard already slow natural regeneration and thus trigger new phases of the desertification process. The natural forest cover still provides the overwhelming source - 85 percent (CILSS, 1983c) - of domestic energy, in addition to building-poles, timber, and secondary forest products and foods, but
access to these products is fast becoming more difficult.
The anti-desertification effort should focus on the most threatened area, the narrow Sahelo-Sudanian heartland, and not, as sometimes suggested, on the desert fringe.
SSZ pasturelands are estimated at 150 million ha. Patchy, uncertain rainfall makes it difficult to predict locations of good pasture in a given year, although overall carrying capacity can be roughly estimated. In most of the rangeland in the Sahelian and Saharo-Sahelian zones, annual grasses now predominate, having replaced the more valuable but less resistant perennials. Annuals may not appear for years in an area for lack of adequate moisture, and then produce a flush of good forage when the rains strike again. Perennial grasses mixed with shrubs and trees, particularly in the better-watered bottomlands, are still to be found in the Sahelo-Sudanian zone in relative abundance. Overall, however, the situation of the pasturelands is one of deteriorating quality, quite apart from localized problems of acute overgrazing.
Drought, desertification and population
Drought will be defined here as a markedly below average amount of rainfall during a year or series of years. Precision in this regard - how much less rain - is difficult to provide for two reasons. First, averages are deceiving, particularly in the northern arid areas, where precipitation totals vary markedly from one year to the next. A few years of abundant precipitation often skew statistical averages well above realistic expectations of rainfall in a given place in, for instance, seven out of ten years. Second, gross amounts of rainfall only partly determine vegetative productivity. In addition to soil fertility and structure, the timing and distribution of precipitation play a crucial role. "Below average" rainfall, if well distributed temporally and spatially, will produce quite adequate crop yields.
Drought is a constant menace, a fact of life with which rural people must cope if they are to survive in the region. But drought alone does not, in the short run, produce resource degradation of the sort now found in the SSZ. Other factors are at work, including population growth, the spread of extensive agriculture and thus deforestation, and rapid urbanization (which concentrates demand for fuelwood). In addition, changes in national and local political, economic and social institutions have on balance reduced local autonomy and capacity to organize joint undertakings. Together, these factors are making it increasingly difficult to manage the natural resource base upon which the economy of the region rests.
Desertification can be defined as follows: "the continuous and sustained decline in the amount and quality of the biological productivity of arid and semi-arid land. Such stresses, if continued or unchecked over the long term, lead to ecological degradation and ultimately desert-like conditions. Biological productivity refers to the naturally occurring plant and animal life as well as to the agricultural productivity of a given area" (adapted from, Sabadell, 1982). Common indicators of desertification include a reduction in the amount and diversity of plant and animal species, loss of water-retention capacity, lessened soil fertility and increasing wind and water erosion. Eventually, plant and animal communities become so radically simplified that species formerly common in an area can no longer survive under the drastically altered circumstances, even if they are deliberately reintroduced.
Desertification takes two distinct forms: desert spread, and induced desertification in more humid areas. Saharan encroachment into Sahelian lands may occur gradually through growing aridity and resource abuse. Of more immediate concern here is human-induced, accelerated degradation of areas well south of the Saharan fringe. Deteriorated patches occur now with alarming regularity around centres of human activity, even well south into the Sudanian zone. In their struggle to survive, populations further overexploit resources in these focal points of desertification and gradually encourage their spread. The challenge is not "stopping the desert's advance from the north", but effectively managing renewable resources south of the desert.
SAND-DUNE FIXATION IN SENEGAL attempting to halt desertification
Is desertification caused by drought or by resource abuse? The answer to this fundamental question depends upon perceptions of drought and the destruction of resources with which it is often associated. Three general explanations are advanced:
 First position. Drought in the SSZ is an overwhelming, long-term phenomenon in which people play no part. Increasing aridity will inexorably destroy vegetative cover. Desertified areas will spread to engulf and obliterate what are already marginal environments of limited productivity. Resistance to desertification is futile.
 Second position. Drought in the SSZ is a short-term, recurrent phenomenon, again independent of human influence. Resources suffer in the short run, but when a drought of five years' duration or less ends, local production systems sooner or later recover. In any case, droughts of this sort can be endured, especially if food reserves exist in amounts adequate to tide people over periods of low output. Emergency food aid is a further recourse.
 Third position. Desertification is a complex process caused apparently by interactions between drought and human abuse of the environment. Better natural-resource management could mitigate the impact of even serious droughts, although decades-long droughts like the current one could alter the natural resource base profoundly.
This article takes the third position, for two reasons. First, while the available evidence indicates that drought has long played a role in SSZ ecology (National Academy Press, 1983a), past periods of short- to medium-term aridity have had little permanent effect. On the other hand, severe drying trends lasting a century or more unquestionably did modify the natural vegetative cover. During the modern era, however, when droughts of two decades or less have been the rule, much resource destruction has occurred at the hands of human users, whose numbers have increased far more rapidly than before.
Second, whereas climate is a given, human behaviour can be modified in response to changes in the environment. The desertification process is slow and insidious, and governments and rural communities have consequently been slow to react, despite the rapid growth in population. So long as there are unexploited techniques and more appropriate organizational arrangements and policies for encouraging better management of the environment, it would be shortsighted to ignore them by assuming, on uncertain evidence, that the principal cause of desertification is climate. The problem of desertification is nonetheless severe, since it is an example of conflict between public long-term resource use and private short-term resource abuse. If there is no effective reconciliation between these two interests, the process of desertification will continue; while the process can be arrested, the end-result is irreversible. Drought, if not prolonged, does not, by itself, pose an enormous threat
to the long-term viability of rural production systems in the SSZ. But it accelerates the negative consequences of resource abuse. Overuse of one renewable resource, in turn, often reduces the viability of others, and this negative dynamic intensifies when drought periodically strikes an area. This point can be easily illustrated. The spread of rain-fed, extensive agriculture into forest, bush and pasture areas reduces the total forage available to transhumant (seasonally grazed) livestock, particularly when, as now, farmers and breeders increasingly collect and stock crop residues to carry their own animals through the dry season. When drought strikes, transhumant pastoralists do what they can to save herds. Lacking alternative forms of forage, they try to increase their animals' intake of browse. They vigorously lop trees already weakened by lack of soil moisture. Many trees die as a result of this abuse. Pressure then intensifies on the remaining wood stock during the
next drought. Clearing fields for animal traction or machine cultivation may disrupt existing soil fertilization cycles based on nutrients that in-field trees return to the soil surface in the form of humus. If these organic nutrients are not replaced by organic or chemical fertilizers, crop yields decline. Stripping trees from fields also reduces the wind-break effect that even an open canopy can provide, and increases wind erosion. When fields are fallowed, in those systems where people/land ratios still permit it, natural regeneration occurs much more slowly. In the meantime, soils may suffer both wind and water erosion.
Whereas climate is a given, human behaviour can be modified in response to changes in the environment.
Population. Total population in the SSZ countries was estimated at 31 million in 1980. Overall densities remain low: 6 persons/km for the entire area and roughly 15 persons/km if the Saharan and Sahelo-Saharan zones are excluded. Densities can, however, reach 100 persons/km in some areas, visibly overtaxing their carrying capacity. The average density in Senegal is now 20 persons/km The lowest national density is found in Mauritania, with 1.5 persons/km and the highest in the Gambia, with 60 persons/km Population growth rates between 1980 and 2000 are expected to be about 3 percent annually. On this basis, the area will have 75 percent more people by the year 2000, or 54 million inhabitants. In 1961, by contrast, the population was 19 million.
It is clear, however, that people are increasingly moving away from the most densely populated areas to more promising areas in the Sudano-Guinean zone.
According to the ecological classification established by M. Keita, the SSZ population in 1980 was remarkably unevenly distributed (FAO, 1982). While 80 percent of the people lived in 25 percent of the total area south of the Sahelian zone, fully 40 percent lived in only 6 percent of the total area. Furthermore, in the subzone comprising the Senegalese groundnut basin, the Gambia and Burkina Faso's Mossi plateau, fully 24 percent of the total population lived in only 2 percent of the total area; population density there was 60 persons/km, with the rural population at 45 persons/km. Such concentrations of demand for arable land and fuelwood lie at the root of resource abuse. It is in these areas that patches of desertification are most clearly visible; they will spread rapidly if resource management measures are not implemented.
Urban population growth rates reveal an even more volatile situation. Urban populations averaged 22 percent of national populations in 1981 (lowest: Burkina Faso, 11 percent; highest: Senegal, 34 percent), but urban populations now grow at an average rate of 5 percent annually. Mauritania - arguably the country that has suffered most from the impact of drought over the past two decades - has experienced an 8.6 percent urban population growth rate in recent years. Senegal, with one-third of its population already urbanized, has the lowest urban growth rate at 3.3 percent. Migration within rural areas is also a growing phenomenon, although figures are scarce. It is clear, however, that people are increasingly moving away from the most densely populated areas, notably the Mossi plateau and the Senegalese groundnut basin, to more promising areas in the Sudano-Guinean zone.
Two important observations emerge from these figures. First, when population grows at 3 percent annually, total population doubles every 25 years. The ballooning demand for resources that this growth represents almost inevitably generates extensive resource abuse in the short run. Adjustments are not made quickly enough to these changing conditions: consumption accelerates, but at the cost of overexploitation or "mining" of the resource base rather than investment in its improvement or even sustenance. The desertification process takes hold. Second, the destruction of the rural environment will almost certainly result in further uncontrolled urbanization, compounding the problems of already strained municipal administrations.
Traditional production systems
Traditional production systems have been tailored very precisely over time to contend with particular circumstances. The following three basic systems, which can even coexist in the same area, illustrate the range of approaches rather than the richness of any one system. Traditional production systems merit attention because they permit fairly large populations to exploit marginal regions in a sustainable manner.
Agrosilvicultural. Variations on this system are practiced by the Hausa of Nigeria and the Mossi of Burkina Faso, among others. Production is based on rain-fed agriculture in association with trees and shrubs. The system involves the cultivation of several main plant species (such as millet and sorghum) as food crops, and cotton for cloth. Secondary products are obtained from the systematic exploitation of natural vegetation (trees for fruits and leaves as well as firewood and building-poles, bark for cord and medicine, thorn branches for fencing, grasses for thatching, fodder, green manure, etc.). Small ruminants, particularly goats, often play a major role. Production in the agrosilvicultural system is concentrated during the two- to four-month rainy season, individuals, particularly adult men, often travel during the long dry season in search of temporary work.
Traditional production systems were not just technical systems; perhaps more important, they were managed by local authorities.
Trees in this system meet not only consumption demands but also, in bush fallow and open field sites, other needs. If grown in sufficient numbers on fields, they protect exposed soils against wind and water erosion and also regenerate soil fertility by recycling subsoil nutrients as green manure in the form of leaves. Micro-organisms associated with root systems, such as nitrogen-fixing rhizobia and mycorrhizae which improve plant feeding, can also increase the growth of certain species.
CATTLE IN THE SAHEL overgrazing speeds destruction
Agrosilvipastoral. Variations include those practiced by the Senegalese Serer, the Nigerian Bugage and the Malian Soninke societies. This system relies on the sort of field crop/tree/shrub associations characteristic of the agrosilvicultural system but integrates livestock production to reinforce soil fertility, as well as for market sale. This system puts a premium on trees that produce browse or seed pods suitable for fodder. Trees may also be exploited commercially, for gum arabic (Acacia senegal), shea-butter (Butyrospermum paradoxum) and other marketable food products, as well as for firewood and building materials.
Livestock in such systems must be accommodated during the wet and dry seasons by carefully defined access to fields, as well as to surrounding bush and pasture areas. When people are cultivating field crops during the rainy season, animals must be stabled or herded elsewhere. During the dry season, after the harvest has been stored, herded or free-ranging animals can roam fields to forage on crop residues. In those systems based on systematic manuring, stock owners tether their animals (or the herder stables them) in fields at night: the concentration of droppings increases soil fertility. In the past,.however, these systems rarely undertook systematic composting of manure mixed with straw or stalks.
A DESPERATE NEED FOR TREES using every bit of an Acacia albida
Silvipastoral. SSZ silvipastoralists - the Fulani, Tuareg, Mauri and Teda peoples - keep cattle, camels, sheep and goats. Ethnic groups and individuals within them tend herds of different species, sex and age composition. The majority specialize to some extent in one species or another and occupy environmental niches that meet the needs of their particular herd. Most within this group are transhumant pastoralists. Herders operating under normal conditions move within clearly defined ranges; usually, a group has both wet- and dry-season "home" pastures.
The driving force behind these annual displacements is the need to find forage for the herd in all sea sons. Most forage - pasture grasses, shrub and tree browse, and crop residues - appears irregularly in time and space. Herders typically congregate during the wet season in the Sahelian and Saharo-Sahelian zones, when rains usually produce grasses and accumulations of surface water on the desert edge. The abundance of food and easily available water lasts only a few months, typically from July through September/October. Thereafter, until the next rains eight or nine months later, pastoralists depend on well-water for themselves and their stock. Some seasonal watercourses and a few perennial rivers provide water for longer periods for some groups.
In the silvipastoral system, trees are a critically important fodder source during the dry season. When the rains cease, grasses dry out and lose most of their nutrients. They still provide the bulk needed for ruminant diets, but vitamins, digestible proteins and minerals must come from other sources (National Academy Press, 1983b). Traditionally, tree and shrub browse has provided these elements.
Common features. In most traditional production systems, deliberate tree-planting never became a significant activity, since most areas enjoyed a surplus of natural forest cover. Selective cutting and management of the regeneration of natural forest cover, however, often produced stands of preferred tree/shrub species in the fields. Certain trees and shrubs were also preserved in bush stands and served as the basis for restoring soil fertility on fallow lands. Under these systems, humans protected trees, shrubs and bushes useful for many purposes, and not just for browse, building materials, fuelwood and nutrient recycling. The fruits, gum, honey and medicines they provided all justified the protection of certain woody species. This deliberate plant selection has resulted in a large number of specific and valuable associations throughout the SSZ. Farming under a selected forest park canopy is perhaps the most visible example of this sort of activity.
These were not just technical systems; perhaps more important, they were managed by local authorities. In this sense, they were participatory, although not necessarily democratic; at least there were no top-down prescriptions emanating from a distant agro-bureaucracy.
Carrying capacities. The carrying capacity of a natural system can be expressed as the amount of biological matter the system can yield (for consumption by animals, humans, etc.) over a given period of time without impairing its ability to continue producing, or the number of organisms it can support without being degraded (Webb and Jacobsen, 1982). Since carrying capacity will vary as a function of technology, the level of technology has to be specified.
The rural population of the SSZ that can be sustained by traditional agricultural and livestock systems is 36 million, or considerably more than the 1980 rural population of 27 million. By contrast, the total population sustainable on the basis of fuelwood from the natural forest cover is only 21 million, whereas the 1980 total population was 31 million. For all the imperfections in the data, these two broad findings are defensible. The orders of magnitude of sustainable and actual population densities are given in Table 1.
However imperfect the data base and the presentation by zones, which necessarily conceals differences within zones, three general observations are suggested by these figures:
 In all zones, the carrying capacity of the natural forest cover is lower than that of crops and livestock with traditional production techniques. The natural forest cover is therefore the most vulnerable part of the ecosystem; indeed, in five of the six zones, the actual population already exceeds the sustainable population. The natural forest cover is not just vulnerable; it is already being severely overexploited.
 The actual density greatly exceeds sustainable density in three cases: fuelwood, and crops and livestock in the Sahelo-Sudanian zone, and fuelwood in the Sahelian zone. These are clearly the zones most vulnerable to the desertification process.
  The anti-desertification effort should focus on the most threatened area, the narrow Sahelo-Sudanian heartland, and not, as sometimes suggested, on the desert fringe. But in the heartland, the scope for intensive production is much more limited than in the southern Sudano-Guinean zone. The anti-desertification effort should therefore be twofold: first, in the heartland itself, specific anti-desertification measures as well as any intensive production techniques that may be profitable should be undertaken; and second, in the Sudano-Guinean zone, existing, spontaneous settlement by people from the heartland should be further encouraged despite difficulties encountered.
Table 1. Sustainable and actual population densities (People per km)
Zone
Sustainable population:
Actual rural population
Sustainable population fuelwood
Actual total population
Crops
Live-stock
Sum
Saharan
Sahelo-Saharan
Sahelian
Sahelo-Sudanian
Sudanian
Sudano-Guinean
Note: Bold type indicates arena where actual population already greatly exceeds sustainable population.
Past development activities
Although development efforts have been organized along sectoral lines - agriculture, livestock or forestry - they nonetheless share certain weaknesses. In particular, planners have often misunderstood the logic of traditional production systems, and they have thereby overestimated the ease with which improvements could be introduced and underestimated the negative consequences of intended improvements. Planners seem to have neglected the fundamental significance of rainfall variability and risk-avoidance in all SSZ production systems.
One of the reasons for the failure to understand traditional production systems was that the practitioners of such systems were seldom consulted in a participatory fashion. Indeed, lack of participation on the part of the ostensible beneficiaries has been another common weakness of development activities. Supposed beneficiaries usually have little input in to the planning process, and project design suffers in consequence; nor are their views regularly solicited, and acted upon, during implementation. The old political adage that "those who can't say no, have no say" applies.
A third common weakness has been the underestimation of (a) the managerial weaknesses of existing institutions and the difficulty of setting up new institutions, and (b) the remaining strengths of local institutions. In fact, few attempts were made to investigate the organizational bases, capabilities and limits of local institutions, particularly where cooperatives existed, since they were often assumed to be synonymous. More recently, however, dissatisfaction with the agro-bureaucracies has spurred interest in local groups as retailers of inputs, managers of credit, and organizers of primary marketing. Supported by adult literacy campaigns, many promising initiatives are now under way.
Table 2. Relation between actual rural population (RP) and carrying capacity (CC), by zone
Relation
Zones
RP < CC
Sudano-Guinean, Sudanian, Saharan. And parts of Sahelo- Saharan and Sahelian
RP slightly > CC
Sahelian, Sahelo-Saharan, and parts of Sudanian
RP greatly > CC
Sahelo-Sudanian, and parts of Sudanian and Sahelian
Forestry. Forestry departments were first set up in the 1930s and, until recently, their main activity was the demarcation and policing of forest and fauna reserves. These reserves were set up primarily in the Sudano-Guinean zone, where land was relatively abundant, and particularly where diseases such as river blindness and sleeping sickness hampered settlement.
In the last decade, several pilot reforestation plantations have been initiated, mainly in the Sahelo-Sudanian zone, where the natural forest cover is being most rapidly depleted. Although no inventory has yet been made, it is already clear that the results are disappointing, not least because these operations were based on production techniques developed in the Sudano-Guinean zone. In fact, very little research has been done in the drier areas, and there are today no technical packages really adapted to the harsh conditions of the Sahelo-Sudanian zone or further north.
In the last few years, work has begun on the management of the natural forest cover, and the promotion of in-field natural regeneration and community and family - based plantings. Although it is too early to draw conclusions, the initial results are not as cost-effective as anticipated.
Although long established, forestry departments remain weak institutions in SSZ countries; forestry appears to be a postponable undertaking and therefore gets shortchanged in the competition for budgetary resources. Perceptions may be changing, however, as suggested by recent conferences in the Niger and Senegal. Other perceptions must change too, for there is a strong preference among foresters for exotic tree species for wood rather than indigenous multipurpose tree species. Increasing evidence suggests, moreover, that farmers rarely perceive the utility of tree planting for wood as distinct from the need for many other forest products.
A better resource management strategy
A holistic design approach based on participation is necessary to development work, both because of the complexity of the problem of managing the fragile resources of the SSZ and because research has clearly shown that farmers and pastoralists do indeed take a comprehensive approach to the natural resources on which they depend.
A probable-outcome approach to the design of technical innovation is necessary, since contending with dry years is a major preoccupation of SSZ peoples. Benefit-cost ratios of 2.5:1 in "average" years may simply not be sufficiently attractive in the light of the probability of bad years. Fertilizer that can be applied as a top dressing, after a crop has been established, will be more readily adopted than fertilizer that is to be applied as a base dressing, before planting.
However fragile the data base, the ratio of actual population to carrying capacity under traditional production systems is a useful tool for assessing possible actions. Specific action programmes will have to be site-specific, since people's interests, aspirations and readiness for collective action are not identical and the physical conditions, even in apparently homogeneous areas, are not uniform. The following discussion illustrates possible actions by reference to the three types of ratio between rural population and carrying capacity; throughout, it is important to bear in mind that (a) both production potential and rainfall reliability decrease toward the north, and (b) although carrying capacity is not a static concept, it is only in the Sudano-Guinean zone that there is, today, any proven scope for increasing it.
Where rural population is less than carrying capacity. In areas where rural population is less than carrying capacity, everything is to be gained by increasing population. Not only is there excess capacity under traditional production systems, but there is also great scope for increasing capacity by more intensive methods. In the north, however, the most effective approach to maintaining renewable resources will be to rely on traditional production systems and to strengthen local organizations. In the present state of knowledge, the scope for actually increasing carrying capacity is negligible, but two ideas are worth pursuing:
 Improvement of bush fallows. The main goal of fallowing is to promote natural regeneration as rapidly as possible, both to protect bare soils against erosion and to re-establish fertility. The greatest returns to fallowing, measured by regeneration of fertility, occur in the first five years (Gorse, 1973). If this period could be shortened by providing ground cover (reseeding and nitrogen fixing), carrying capacity could be increased.
 Forest parks - trees interspersed as a protective canopy with crops - are a common feature of traditional production systems. These could be rendered more productive by the introduction or reintroduction of noninvasive, multipurpose trees like Acacia albida.
Forestry plantations are conceivable wherever rural population does not exceed carrying capacity, but the practical possibilities are extremely limited since several conditions must be met. In the south, the three conditions to be met are as follows: (a) transport costs from plantation sites to consumption centres must be acceptable; (b) soils must be of at least fair quality (and poor soils may be the explanation for low population in specific sites); (c) such plantations must be developed with the consent of neighbouring people, lest there be such costly reactions as "accidental" fires in the plantations. It may be possible to buy the acquiescence of the local people by creating jobs related to the plantations or to force compliance through strict policing, but both these solutions will involve considerable costs.
Where rural population slightly exceeds carrying capacity. In areas where rural population slightly exceeds carrying capacity, and thus where land has supplanted labour as the major constraint, more intensive production will be more profitable. But the rainfall zones in which these areas are located do not have high potential, and the evidence suggests that cash inputs are just not sufficiently profitable in comparison with the reduction of fallow. In the meantime, exhortations to intensify production are futile, and the accompanying agro-bureaucracy is a waste. If the carrying capacity cannot be increased, at least its decline can be arrested; this can be attempted in a number of ways, with the main focus on increasing soil moisture storage capacity:
 bunding and rock-terracing, and other elementary anti-erosion measures;
 green manuring and use of animal manure, provided it is possible to get the organic content up to some significant level (1-2 percent) and keep it there;
 improvement of bush fallows, where they still exist;
 improving wells and well networks to facilitate grazing on under-exploited dry-season pastures, provided such under-exploitation is verified and such improvements are coupled with locally run systems;
 forest parks, but also live fencing, promoted by mass rural forestry actions;
 revision of the forestry code to remove disincentives to the planting of currently protected species;
 participatory management of the natural forest cover to promote complementary rather than competitive exploitation of the wood stock; this would include organized harvesting by cutting, pollarding or coppicing trees and lopping branches during the period just before the rains, when the sap has begun to rise in most species, in order to promote rather than hamper natural regeneration.
EVERY TREE IS AN OASIS a critical factor is carrying capacity
Where rural population greatly exceeds carrying capacity. In areas where rural population greatly exceeds carrying capacity - where the land constraint is overwhelming - anything that can increase land productivity should be readily adopted. The fact is that overall land productivity is declining, which simply means that the available intensification techniques are just not sufficiently profitable on a wide scale. Faced with this fact, people are opting to move away, notably from the Mossi plateau and the Senegalese groundnut basin. But even in these areas, the total rural population is still increasing, and resource capital is being consumed for short-term survival.
In these areas, the task - and it is a formidable one - is simply to arrest the decline in carrying capacity. In some localities, where local organizations are or can be made effective, small watershed management plans could be executed and maintained satisfactorily. In other areas, bunding and terracing at least could be promoted, also with some public support. More generally, however, individual actions are likely to be easier to promote than group activities.
 Manuring and mixed farming. Keeping livestock in densely settled regions will increasingly require stabling and the provision of fodder and feed supplements. Training in these techniques should pay off. The efficient use of manure, through additives and composting, could also benefit from training efforts.
 Intensified cropping. Although the record is not encouraging on a wide scale, there are impressive pockets of intensive farming. Elimination of any negative distortions in input and output prices can only encourage more intensified farming, but the scope for such corrective policies in the SSZ countries is more limited than is commonly supposed. Vegetable and fruit farming is already well developed around cities as well as in certain quite remote areas. Such intensive production will be limited by the domestic market until more vigorous efforts are made to develop markets in the coastal cities and, possibily, in Europe.
 Forestry. In the densely settled areas, forestry will have to be modelled on the "four around" planting approach, in which every space available to support a tree is used. In some areas, local people have already gone some distance in this direction. Faster-growing and more drought-resistant stock, engineered through innovative techniques, should meet with good demand in many areas.
Table 3. Actual and sustainable numbers of people (Millions)
Zone
Crops/Livestock
Fuelwood
Sustainable population
Actual rural population
Sustainable minus actual population
Sustainable population*
Actual total population
Sustainable minus actual population
Saharan
Sahelo-Saharan
Sahelian
Sahelo-Sudanian
Sudanian
Sudano-Guinean
Total
Reducing demand
Population. Current population growth rates clearly cannot be sustained for very long without a deterioration in living standards - unless there is a dramatic improvement in rural productivity, or non-rural (or foreign) employment opportunities. The magnitude of the problem is best grasped by expressing the comparison between actual and sustainable populations in terms of numbers (see Table 3).
Quite apart from the already overburdened fuelwood resources, the apparently comfortable margin of 9 million people in farming is deceptive. Even if the rural population increases by only 2 percent per year, it will exceed 40 million in the year 2000, as against a total sustainable rural population of 36 million. The latter figure does not take account of proven productivity gains obtainable in the Sudano-Guinean zone, but nor does it take account of the declining productivity in the already overpopulated zones or the tsetse-fly constraint on livestock in the Sudano-Guinean zone.
Although long established, forestry departments remain weak institutions in SSZ countries
Resettlement has a long tradition in the SSZ countries. Today, the number of people involved in spontaneous migration into the Sudano-Guinean zone, although this is a phenomenon little known or understood, far exceeds the number of people being resettled under government-sponsored schemes. Such schemes have proved costly in terms of the number of families settled, and may not even have had any net effect on the total number of settlers. On the other hand, spontaneous migrants tend to destroy vegetative cover unnecessarily, thereby undermining the more cautious approach to resource husbandry of long-term residents. Given these problems, but also the unquestionable potential of the Sudano-Guinean zone to relieve population pressure further north, at least for the next two decades, it is surprising that settlement policies have not attracted more attention; nor are they even high on the policy agenda today. Here is a real challenge to governments and the donor community - to
find answers to the following questions:
 What sorts of readily enforceable land-use regulations should be put in place to promote sustainable settlement in those parts of the Sudano-Guinean zone to which spontaneous migrants are moving?
 What further role, if any, can the public sector usefully play to encourage settlement into the Sudano-Guinean zone? How far can assurances be given, in the context of a land-use planning approach, that the location of investments in roads, wells, medical facilities and schools would be selected to favour areas subject to spontaneous immigration?
Wood. The SSZ countries are already consuming far more than the total fuelwood output of the accessible natural forest cover; they are rapidly cutting into the capital stock of trees, and this is true in every zone except the Sudano-Guinean. The effects are most clearly in evidence in the vicinity of the cities. Reducing urban wood consumption is imperative for rural environmental management and can be achieved through more efficient techniques, greater reliance on other fuels, and realistic pricing.
Building-poles used in SSZ countries for traditional construction jobs are not fully termite-proof, especially poles cut from exotic, fast-growing tree varieties. Chemical treatment of building-poles would increase their useful life, reduce consumption and thereby contribute to maintaining the natural forest cover. For this purpose, creosote, one of the byproducts of the carbonization process, could easily be collected from earthen kilns of the type used in the Casamance region for the production of charcoal.
Pricing of fuelwood and charcoal in all SSZ countries is determined primarily by the market. Apart from sporadic but ineffective urban retail price controls, the only public intervention is at the level of fees for cutting. The manipulation of these fees would have direct repercussions on retail prices. While nothing is yet known about demand elasticity or about cross-elasticities, a sustained increase in cutting and transport fees would necessarily promote some economies in the use of fuelwood and, possibly, the substitution of other fuels. Pricing of the other fuels, except for the crop and animal residues, is regulated either directly or by taxation. Since this regulation is effective, there is scope for adjusting prices of substitutes, notably by holding down the kerosene or gas prices or even cross-subsidizing them.
The natural forest cover, the most vulnerable part of the ecosystem, is not just vulnerable; it is already being severely overexploited.
Implications for action
For governments. The priority areas for action by governments are those that, in combination, set the incentive framework for the day-to-day decisions of millions of decision-makers:
 land law and practice, including the forestry code, should be examined to identify and act upon changes required to increase the incentives for sustainable resource management. This examination would be best done by a multidisciplinary task force reporting to the central authority;
 regulations and laws concerning social organization should be examined to identify and act upon changes required to reduce the barriers to the setting up or recognition of genuine grass-roots organizations;
 population control measures should be initiated;
 in a land-use planning framework, settlement policies should be reexamined, with a view to the promotion and support of sustainable spontaneous settlement instead of organized colonization;
 performance in existing irrigated perimeters has to be improved; the enormous potential for increasing carrying capacities via irrigation cannot begin to be tapped through new perimeters until existing perimeters are made more sustainably productive;
 price incentives have to be moved even further in the direction of encouraging more intensive production techniques, and the market displacement effects of food aid have to be even further reduced. There is an overwhelming case for a dramatic increase in permit fees for cutting fuelwood, but there is no case for intervention in retail prices or in marketing. There is a good case for cross-subsidizing the most likely substitutes for fuelwood - namely kerosene and gas - from revenue raised on other petroleum products.
For financiers. For financiers too, a considerable array of actions is foreseeable, but much will depend on those selected as priorities by governments. For each of these, there are corresponding actions that financiers could take, ranging from technical assistance (land law, social organization) to pilot projects (population) to full-scale projects or sectoral adjustment (irrigation, price changes). In some areas, however, the actions that financiers might take are not entirely clear, a notable example being that of settlement. In this area, it is not clear how spontaneous settlement might be assisted beyond putting into place readily enforceable land-use regulations that offer land rights in exe, change for management responsibilities. Given this uncertainty, a, review of settlement activities elsewhere in the world would be a useful contribution to clarifying the options.
DRY STREAM-BED IN SENEGAL a difficult adjustment to drought
For forestry research. Conventional approaches, such as the usual provenance-testing or the use of cuttings for vegetative propagation, are still useful, but the need cannot be stressed too strongly for innovative technologies that will lead to increased biomass production and improved tolerance of trees to environmental constraints. Two approaches already exist that can contribute to the improvement of the plant material and to the establishment of trees in the harsh Sahelian or Sudanian conditions through better use of available moisture and nutrients: the first is based on the use of plant tissue cultures, the second on the manipulation of symbiotic root micro-organisms.
Special attention should be given at the outset to the choice of tree species able to withstand the major climatic and edaphic stresses (drought, fire, nutrient deficiencies).
The next step would be to undertake provenance-testing or surveys aiming at identifying individual specimens (including trees) presenting the greatest adaptability and the most desirable characteristics.
The third step would be to mass-produce clones of the chosen individuals. When using vegetative propagation techniques, all regenerated plants (clones) are, in theory, exact duplicates of the original genotype. There are two main techniques: one is based on the use of rooted cuttings, and the other on the use of tissue cultures. A number of trees are propagated from rooted cuttings (examples are Eucalyptus in the Congo and Brazil and Casuarina funghuhniana in India and Thailand). This sample method should be applied wherever possible, because of its low cost.
Plant tissue culture methods can be applied in a number of other promising areas, such as disease control (meristem tip cultures to remove viruses from infected plants), the long-term storage of germ-plasm and germ-plasm exchange, wide hybridization (for example, in vitro pollination and fertilization, and the fusion of somatic cells or protoplasts), the production of haploid and homozygous breeding lines, and variant selection (for resistance to drought, salinity, etc.).
It is now well established that symbiotic root micro-organisms (Rhizobium, Frankia and mycorrhizal fungi) can effectively contribute to tree productivity in marginal climatic and edaphic conditions. Since significant advances have been made recently in the manipulation of these microorganisms, it is now possible to contemplate their use in the field.
Given the magnitude of the problem, it would be difficult to develop such an ambitious research programme through the existing scattered and often underequipped research centres. A real need therefore exists for a permanently staffed unit in an international or regional centre focusing on Sudanian and Sahelian zone tree and shrub species. Located in the SSZ region, this unit would be the core of a network consisting on the one hand of African forestry centres and projects, and on the other of laboratories in industrialized countries wishing to participate in the improvement of the SSZ forest.
The main objectives of this forestry unit would be the following:
 to identify the local and exotic tree species with the highest potential for wood and fodder production under SSZ conditions;
 to develop the biotechnologies required for improving the behaviour and growth of selected species, these technologies being used in plant tissue culture or in the manipulation of the root symbiotic micro-organisms;
 to study the pathology (especially such root pathogens as nematodes) and some basic problems related to the physiology of selected trees (e.g.. flower biology, resistance to drought, and plant nutrition).
Within the SSZ heartland, no significant change in carrying capacities is possible without a technological breakthrough. Locally, however, the desertification threat may be arrested by selecting appropriate anti-desertification actions and working with communities that are interested and empowered to use their land in a sustained-yield manner. Reducing the continued rapid growth of population is crucial, and current population pressures in the heartland need to be alleviated by further encouraging the existing spontaneous movement of people to the underpopulated, high-potential Sudano-Guinean zone.
Bibliography
AUBRVILLE, A. 1949. Climats, forts et dsertification de l'Afrique tropicale. Paris, Socit d'ditions gographiques et coloniales.
BAILLY, C., BARBIER, C., CLEMENT, J., GOUDET, J.P. & KAMEL, O. 1982. Les problmes de la satisfaction des besoins en Afrique tropicale sche. CTFT.
BREMAN, H. & DE WIT, C.T. 1983. Rangeland productivity and exploitation in the Sahel. Science, 221: 4618.
CATINOT, C. 1974. Contribution du forestier  la lutte contre la dsertification en zones sches. CTFT.
CILSS. 1978. Energy in the development strategy of the Sahel - situation, perspectives, recommendations.
CILSS. 1983a. Development of rainfed agriculture in the Sahel - overview and prospects.
CILSS. 1983b. Drought control and development in the Sahel: situation at the start of the 1980s - overview and prospects.
CILSS. 1983c. Forestry and ecology development in the Sahel - overview and prospects.
CILSS/CLUB DU SAHEL. 1984. Synthse du sminaire rgional sur la dsertification. Nouakchott.
CLEMENT, J. 1982. Estimation des volumes et de la productivit des formations mixtes forestires (Afrique francophone au nord de l'quateur). CTFT.
CTFT. 1969. Conservation des sols au sud du Sahara. Ministre de la coopration. CTFT.
DALBY, DAVID, HARRISON CHURCH, R.J. & BEZZAZ, FATIMA, eds. 1977. Drought in Africa - Scheresse en Afrique. IAI/ETP-UNEP-IDEP-SIDA. London, Pitman Press.
DASMAN, R.F., MILTON, J.P. & FREEMAN, P.M. 1973. Ecological principles for economic development. UICN, Morges, Switzerland, and Conservation Foundation, Washington, D.C. New York, Wiley.
DELWAULLE, J.C. 1977. Le rle de la foresterie dans la lutte contre la dsertification et sa contribution au dveloppement. CTFT.
DE VRIES, F., PENNING, W.T. & DJITEYE, M.A., eds. 1982. La productivit des pturages sahliens. Wageningen, Netherlands, Centre for Agricultural Publishing & Documentation.
DONGMO, J.L. 1979. Les efforts des Bamilk de l'Ouest-Cameroun pour adapter leur agriculture  l'accumulation dmographique et pour sauver leur quilibre alimentaire contre les "agressions" de l'conomie marchande. In Matrise de l'espace et dveloppement en Afrique tropicale: logique paysanne et rationalit technique. Actes du Colloque de Ouagadougou, 3-8 December 1978, pp. 149-154. Paris, ORSTOM.
FAO. 1976. Etude prospective pour le dveloppement agricole des pays de la zone sahlienne 1975-1990. Rome.
FAO. 1980. An introduction to African pasture land, by L.R.N. Strange. Rome.
FAO. 1981. An eco-climatic classification of intertropical Africa, by H.N. Le Hourou & G. Popov. FAO Plant Production and Protection Paper 31. Rome.
FAO. 1982. Les disponibilits de bois de feu en rgion sahlienne de l'Afrique occidentale. Situations et perspectives, prepared by M. Keita. Rome.
GIRI, JACQUES. 1983. Le Sahel demain - catastrophe ou renaissance? Paris, Karthala.
GLANTZ, M.H., ed. 1977. Desertification: environmental degradation in and around lands. Boulder, Colorado, Westview Press.
GORSE, J. 1973. Culture itinrante et jachre forestire. SEDAGRI-BDPA.
GRAINGER, ALAN. 1983. Desertification - an Earthscan paperback. London, International Institute for Environment and Development.
HOOPER, JONATHAN. 1983. A summary of activities and results of the projects.첗fense et restauration des sols - Kaya, Burkina Faso, Pilot Phase. In Procds du sminaire sur l'agroforesterie au Sahel, p. 111-117. 2 vols. Prepared for CILSS/Club du Sahel/AID, Washington,. D.C., Chaptel Hill, N.C., South East Consortium for International Development.
INSTITUUT VOOR MILIEU-VRAAGSTUKKEN. 1983. L'volution de la lutte antirosive en Haute-Volta depuis l'indpendance vu une plus grande participation de la population. Amsterdam, Vrije Universiteit.
LAYA, DIULD. 1975. A l'coute des paysans et des leveurs au Sahel. Environnement africain, 1 (2): 53-101.
MARCHAL, JEAN-YVES. 1982. Socit, espace et dsertification dans le Yatenga (Haute-Volta), ou la dynamique de l'espace rural soudano-sahlien. 3 vols. Paris, ORSTOM.
MONNIER, YVES. 1981. La poussire et la cendre. Paris, ACCT.
NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS. 1983a. Environmental change in the West African Sahel. Washington, D.C.
NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS. 1983b. Agroforestry in the West African Sahel. Washington, D.C.
NICHOLSON, SHARON E. 1982. The Sahel: a climatic perspective. CILSS/Club du Sahel.
RAULIN, HENRI. 1962. Techniques et bases socio-conomiques des socits rurales nigriennes. Etudes nigriennes N 12, Niamey, Niger/Paris, IFAN/CNRS.
RICHARDS, PAUL. 1983. Ecological change and the politics of African land use. Afr. Stud. Rev., 26 (2): 1-72.
SABADELL, J. ELEONORA. 1982. Systematic approach to desertification. Washington, D.C., George Washington University.
SANFORD, STEPHEN. 1983. Management of pastoral development in the Third World. Overseas Development Institute. New York, Wiley.
THIBAULT, M. 1983. Ecologie forestire - synthse des analyses nationales. Qubec, CILSS/OCDE/AGROVET.
THOMSON, JAMES T. 1983. La participation, l'organisation locale, la politique d'utilisation des terres et du secteur forestier: orientations futures de la foresterie sahlienne. CILSS.
UNESCO. 1973. The Sahel: ecological approaches to land use. MAB Technical Notes. Unesco Press.
UNITED NATIONS. 1977. United Nations Conference on Desertification round-up: plan of actions and resolutions. New York.
UNITED STATES CONGRESS OFFICE OF TECHNOLOGY ASSESSMENT. 1983. Sustaining tropical forest resources - reforestation of degraded lands. Washington, D.C.
WALTON, CHRISTOPHER. 1984. Lessons learned from East African agriculture. In Finance & Dev. (IMF & IBRD), 21 (1).
WEBB, MARYLA & JACOBSEN, JUDITH. 1982. US carrying capacity - an introduction. USA, Carrying Capacity Inc.
WEBER, FRED. 1975. Reforestation in arid lands. USA Action/Peace Corps, Volunteer in Technical Assistance.
WEBER, FRED. 1983. Soil conservation - technical sheets. University of Idaho, Idaho, USA, Forest Wildlife and Range Experiment Station.
WORLD BANK. 1978. Forestry-sector policy paper. Washington, D.C.
WORLD BANK. 1981a. Accelerated development in sub-Saharan Africa: an agenda for action. Washington, D.C.
WORLD BANK. 1981b. Report of the Sahel Working Group. 2 vols (main report and working papers).
WORLD BANK. 1982. IDA in retrospect. Oxford University Press.
WORLD BANK. 1983. 1983 World Development Report. Oxford University Press.
<section>3</section>
Trees, food production and the struggle against desertification
El Hadji Sne
El Hadji Sne is former Director of Forests of the Republic of Senegal and is at present the Coordinator of FAO's International Year of the Forest activities
El Hadji Sne makes a strong case here for the utilization of natural vegetation, including a great diversity of woody shrubs and trees, as a means of meeting basic food needs in many African countries. Native tree species, often exploited successfully for centuries, have been neglected, abandoned or destroyed, Sne says, even though they could play a major role today in relieving the crisis in many African countries as well as in assisting in the whole process of development.
TREE-ENCIRCLED SENEGALESE VILLAGE nourishment from local species
This means switching from bucolic amateurism to real food production, from small woods to the widespread and continuous presence of trees in the agricultural landscape of the area.
 In all the photographs attempting to convey the tragedy of the people of arid, drought-stricken Africa, there is a constant, almost permanent thread: whenever there is hunger, there is first ecological misery - lack of water, lack of trees, sometimes not even a sparse grass cover, but everywhere there is dust raised by a hot and dry wind. Arid Africa is naked, thirsty, hungry. Even more alarming, this parched land has in recent years stretched inexorably south. Poverty is now moving insidiously down to the once rich areas of the Sudano-Sahelian and Sudanian regions, the region of the trees.
In order to ensure a normal human existence, free from crises of hunger and in an environment with a minimum of stability, what can the forest and the trees provide in terms of food production and the fight against barren landscapes and desertification? It has always been recognized, albeit superficially, that forest and trees had an important role to play, and now this role is becoming increasingly evident. What seems less evident, however, is a real knowledge of the elements (species, wood or non-wood products, rural systems) capable of restoring this role and giving it a significance proportional to the magnitude of the present problem. Equally absent is a full awareness of the steps to be taken and of the appropriate programmes to be implemented in order to achieve this rehabilitation and increase the effective contribution of natural plant formations to solving the problems of hunger and desertification. This means switching from bucolic amateurism to real food
production, from small woods to the widespread and continuous presence of trees in the agricultural landscape of the area.
Natural vegetation and food production: a wealth in decline
The variety and wealth of natural plant species found in forests, savannahs and fallows that can provide food are surprising. Especially remarkable is the fact that during almost any period of the year there is a species, a tree or a bush that can produce something to eat.
The author has always been struck by the interrelationship existing between staple food production (cereals) and the contribution of woody formations to the human diet. In the history of the Sahelian and Sudanian populations, some tree species have played a particularly important role as food during normal or critical periods, sometimes even on a par with cereals. Taking, for example, the western Sudano-Sahelian sector, from north to south, the best-known group includes the following:
 Boscia senegalensis
 Crateva religiosa
 Cordyla africana
 Icacina senegalensis (an inconspicuous shrub in the savannah but one that literally explodes in post-crop fallows)
 Borassus ethiopum
 Parkia biglobosa
 Parinari macrophylla
 Moringa pterygosperma (introduced, became subspontaneous)
 Ficus graphalocarpa
 Ficus spp.
Each of the species, treated appropriately, can provide either a primary course (with the same food value as cereal) or the basic component of a sauce or a substantial soup, thus helping to reduce the proportion of cereals used. This contribution is of particular importance when crops are merely average or downright poor. Many other tree species can play the same role.
A second group consists of species producing ingredients that, while not basic, are important to food (oil, spices, etc.) and that have, today as they did in the past, considerable value as an item of important regional or local trade:
 Gum-trees (acacias)
 Sterculiaceae (Sterculia gum and particularly Sterculia setigera)
 Oil-seeds (Balanites aegyptiaca, Vitellaria paradoxa or shea, oil-palms, etc.)
There are, finally, a stunning number of fruit-bearing trees. Looking merely at the Sudano-Sahelian area, one wonders why the world economy contents itself with such a skimpy list of fruits when, with limited investment, an infinite range of varieties could be grown. It is even more remarkable that, with most of these fruits, many different parts can be used, from the pulp to the seeds. Even within areas with an annual rainfall below 700 mm, there are dozens of noteworthy species of high potential.
Looking merely at the Sudano-Sahelian area, one wonders why the world economy contents itself with such a skimpy list of fruits.
An interesting fact is that, despite the drought, in many badly affected areas of the Sudano-Sahelian area with poor annual crops, the people and especially children enjoy satisfactory health conditions. The secret lies in the discreet but permanent role played by the range of foodstuffs produced by the savannah vegetation - isolated trees, shrubs and creepers. This contribution has represented an invaluable food buffer, which operates primarily during the critical periods: April, May and June. In terms of monetary economy, it allows for the circulation of cash in rural areas as well as the purchase of a number of commodities to supplement food supplies.
ONE TREE AT A TIME the results are worth the effort
But what is happening now? There is an ongoing rapid decline in this resource, which has not even had time to yield a minimum of its potential. This decline is due to several factors:
Social. Modern thinking tends to consider this kind of food out of, date. There is therefore widespread "social" obsolescence and technological loss. Very few people today are aware of the technology once applied to Boscia or to Icacina senegalensis.
Reduction of tree populations. Forest stands are not renewed. It is, for instance, no longer possible to assess the importance and the density Parkia biglobosa stands had in the 400 to 800-mm rainfall range in Senegal, where they formed closely knit stands. Traditional history and typonymy can both confirm this. Perhaps an idea of it can be gained by comparing situations in areas with a high human density (west-central Senegal, for instance) and northern Ghana, where a vicarious or analogous species, Parkia clappertoniana, can still be found at high densities in more recent clearings. The comparison is equally valid for Vitellaria paradoxa, which is gradually disappearing from the landscape near cities like Ouagadougou and which can also still be found in exceptionally high densities in northern Ghana (Tamale).
Some African plant species and their use
Type of product (uses)
Levels of use
Possible developments
Boscia senegalensis
fruit (pulp, seeds)
technological improvement
Balanites aegyptiaca
fruit (pulp, oil seeds)
technological improvement
Zizyphus mauritiaca
fruit (pulp, dry pulp)
fruit improvement
Icacina senegalensis
fruit (pulp, seeds)
technological improvement
Parinari macrophylla
fruit (pulp, dry pulp, seeds)
technological improvement
Parkia biglobosa
fruit (dry pulp, seeds)
technological improvement
Tamarindus indica
fruit (pulp, beverage, marmalade)
fruit improvement
Annona senegalensis
pulp
fruit improvement: high potential
Diospyros mesfiliformis
pulp
fruit improvement
Nauclea latifolia
pulp
fruit improvement
Cordyla africana
pulp (unripe/ripe)
technological improvement
Vitex spp.
Pulp
fruit improvement: high potential
Spondias mombin
pulp
beverage industry
Competition of urban consumption. Town dwellers retain many of their rural habits, but eventually the nature of these habits changes. In fact, forest fruits or ingredients derived from the forest are no longer a necessary element of people's diets. They represent what could be called luxury consumption or "delicacies" for children or adults. Powerful economic and financial pressures also tend to upset the balance of the rural environment. Forest fruit harvesting and marketing become destructive elements and result in hasty picking, delimbing, gathering of unripe fruit, and so on.
Lack of a proper place for these resources in forest management and rural regulations. Most of the time, forest management has simply ignored this important use of natural vegetation; and, when it does take it into account, it is merely concerned with collecting taxes on the products that are marketed. No meaningful steps - stand protection, harvesting and marketing regulations, promotion of forest management - have yet been taken.
However, this lack of consideration of the effects of natural vegetation on food supplies is by no means final. A few steps made in the right direction would be restorative, but they should be supported over a long period of time by appropriate short-, medium- and long-term follow-up actions.
Woody formations and food production. As long as people are content with simply listing these "wild riches" and marvelling over them, the situation will continue to deteriorate. Their usefulness will gradually vanish, technologies will be forgotten and the significant buffer role once played by natural vegetation will disappear. In the author's opinion, with the help of a sound, well-designed and timely research-development package (implying social psychology, technology, biology/genetics and extension), Sudano-Sahelian Africa could today be supplying its famine-stricken areas with concentrates and bread - in short, with "food formulae", based on these resources (powder from Parkia, Adansonia, Boscia, the jujube, etc.) and as protein-rich as any product based on soya or other ingredients that are being channelled to the stricken areas.
In the author's opinion, each country of the region should give sustained attention to the resource and its unexplored potential.
Social-psychological aspects
From a psychological viewpoint, calling a product "secondary" reduces its potential. Foresters, be they from temperate, Sahelian or humid areas, have inevitably called secondary whatever came out of the forest - except, of course, the glamorous, flawless log. Despite its historical and human importance, an importance that no other wood has ever enjoyed or perhaps ever will enjoy in the Sahel, gum arabic has long been listed as "secondary" or included among "others" in the statistics drawn up by forest services in the region. The same applies to shea-butter and even more to all the other "miscellaneous" trees. A first step should therefore be the recognition by all administrations concerned of the value of these various products and the fact that they may be managed appropriately and form the subject of serious research. Above all, external institutions should be discouraged from playing a leading role, for the situation would then become permanent and probably worsen. The
author witnessed, during the International Union of Forestry Research Organizations Congress in Kyoto (September 1981), with what chilly politeness verging on irritation the audience listened to a well-meaning speaker trying to demonstrate how Africa could be fed by means of its fruit-trees... clearly a matter of approach, culture and psychology: he failed!
TO BUILD A BETTER FUTURE Parkia plantation in the Sahel
YIELDING A VALUABLE EDIBLE OIL the shea tree
GIVING A VALUABLE FRUIT IN JUNE/JULY Senegal's ntaba (Cola cordifolia)
A further step should be to raise the prestige of many local natural products and demonstrate how they can be used quite normally and not just by the poor, without the users being tainted by the gravest social stigma - appearing unable to produce or purchase their own food.
It is impossible to go into a detailed description here of all the local techniques used for such-and-such a product. However, in this context, an example can be given of one particular fruit species - Cordyla. In April or May, Cordyla produces unripe fruit which is harvested, peeled and boiled - or fried - and eaten like a potato. The fruit can also be dried and preserved and thus be of great help in critical periods in between crops (August - September). Mention this type of food technique to people and they will think you are crazy! A pity. But there are ways of breaking through these preconceived ideas. Nutritionists in Senegal and Mali, for example, have rehabilitated a large number of priceless recipes using such products.
Fighting hunger is like stopping wars. It is in people's minds that the work has to be done.
Foresters, be they from temperate, Sahelian or humid areas, have inevitably called secondary whatever came out of the forest - except, of course, the glamorous, flawless log.
Technological aspects
If direct utilization of fruits does not raise any technical problem, the same cannot be said of processing before consumption. Similarly, if the role of these directly or indirectly consumable products is to be significant in terms of providing a stable food source, problems of conservation, and hence of technology, must be accounted for. Traditional, sometimes even complex, technologies do exist - for instance the rather complicated processing of Boscia and Icacina seeds. Such technologies should be inventoried.
As far as the processing of forest fruits is concerned, interesting experiments are in progress and should be pursued. The Institut de technologie alimentaire of Dakar has already obtained noteworthy results on Detarium senegalensis, Tamarindus indica, Landolphia spp., etc. In Mali, the famous tamarind syrup has won a large number of devotees and shea-butter is already used in cosmetics.
But a more systematic approach needs to be adopted, starting with products that have a higher potential in fighting malnutrition, namely fruits that produce a thick pulp or meal or any other dense substance. These should be given definite priority over others: Parinari, Parkia, Icacina, etc.
Biology and genetics
Clearly, the preparatory work described so far would have little or no effect if what was picked were merely whatever was available. As far as the resource is concerned, it is essential to take action in several fields:
 Basic knowledge. Systematic inventories of plant species with an unexploited or underexploited food potential should be expanded, but at the country level and in a coordinated and exhaustive manner. This task is just as important as that for medicinal plants, and in the author's opinion, more advanced, whether it is carried out traditionally (Traor in Mali) or more scientifically (Kerharo and Paresse in Dakar). The inventory should concentrate not only on the systematics of the species but on its biology and distribution and the health conditions of the stands as well.
 Protection of existing stands or isolated trees. Protecting isolated trees appears to be a more difficult task, but the inclusion of these trees, shrubs or creepers in the list of protected species could prove quite effective, especially where the rural populations understand what is being done and participate in what they see as a true revival.
 Protection of forest areas rich in forest species and the creation of enclaves or fruit-tree stands in reserved forests.
 Species multiplication through seeds, cuttings, layering and suckers, as well as selection and genetic improvement.
In the author's opinion, the potential is of such importance that extensive planning at the national level, combined with regional coordination, should be devoted to it. This is the price to be paid in order that the natural Sudano-Sahelian flora contribute to solving the problem of sub-Saharan hunger and improving the human diet.
ANIMAL PEN IN SENEGAL flaking livestock and forestry
Extension
Extension work should not be particularly difficult if it is based on groups of selected forest fruit species chosen according to the needs of the areas involved. Surveys conducted by community forestry projects have already shown that local populations often request these species, in particular Cordyla, Parinari, Jujube, shea and Diospyros. There are even cases where enterprising farmers have attempted on their own to regenerate species known for their regrowth difficulties, such as Cordyla africana in Senegal and shea in northern Ghana. These are isolated cases, but their existence illustrates the possibilities.
In extension work, imported but perfectly adapted exotic species should not be overlooked. The cashew tree, for example, which may be found very far north, can make an interesting contribution when treated as a domestic fruit-tree. Furthermore, when properly dried, figs could play an important nutrition role. The Spanish plum (Spondias purpurea) that grows almost everywhere and propagates so easily by cuttings should be planted in all courtyards and hedges. Extension services can disseminate such species widely.
Multiple use of woody vegetation in desert control
Woody vegetation can play a significant role only so far as it is adopted in everyday rural life and takes its place in the rural calendar. The neem tree gained importance from the moment the farmer proceeded spontaneously to top it, thus producing shade for two years between cuts, fuelwood and fence stakes after the cuts, and an item for the family pharmacopoeia!
To return to the multiple use of these indigenous species, it is therefore necessary for the forester, the agronomist and the rural extension agent to hasten the integration process which is in fact already under way. Nowadays, the agronomist talks of the importance of trees, and not necessarily fruit-trees, and the forester considers that wood may in certain cases be the least important product that can be extracted from forest trees. A dynamic consensus can be reached on what should be done for the farmer, pointing toward "vegetalization" or "revegetalization" rather than actual reforestation. This revegetalization will then utilize all growing usable plants. Even in areas below the 200-mm annual rainfall level, this can be achieved.
Experience has abundantly emphasized that whatever the rhetoric used in matters of forestry, planting and desert control, the prime concern (reflected also in people's first reaction) is water, food and the survival of livestock. It is here that the links will be found upon which to act in order to promote a silviculture, a natural plant resources management that is acceptable to the rural populations and stimulates their active participation.
Trees in inhabited areas
It must be recognized that the immediate surroundings of many small towns and villages of the Sudano-Sahelian area have grown richer in trees while the nearby bush and savannah areas have gradually lost theirs. This massive tree-growing effort in villages has not yet gone far enough north; it does not utilize a great variety of species; and, finally, the place of fruit-trees is very limited. Efforts should aim at achieving two specific goals:
1. Increasing the diversity of species to be planted, by repopularizing easily reproduced fruit species (Spondias purpurea) or fairly hardy ones such as cashew and mangoes, and by emphasizing the use of certain forest fruit species that may be promoted in their present form, especially when requested by the local population; these include jujube, tamarind (despite their reputation as slow-growing), Parinari, Parkia and Detarium. In this context, it is interesting to note that slow-growing species become remarkably fast-growing when raised domestically. In northern areas, planting obviously becomes increasingly difficult. However, the promotion of increasingly neglected species such as the baobab, Prosopis and local forest species (gum trees, Acacia tortilis) in between concessions should give good results. Many forestry services have, at one time or another, established minimum goals for fruit-tree production in their programmes. This trend should, in the author's
opinion, be encouraged, and the traditional 20-30 percent growth rates should even be exceeded.
2. Increasing and promoting local initiatives aimed at setting up nurseries, plant production and village wood-lots (trees in public squares and lanes and along village roads).
Regeneration of the rural countryside
Natural vegetation in the Sudano-Sahelian areas has strong resilience. Despite harsh climatic conditions and the scourge of bush fires and fellings, a relatively short fallow period is sufficient for regrowth to start by self-germination, especially by shoots and suckers, the latter representing an effective resistance tool.
Community forestry projects have dealt in recent years with this regeneration; it is technically feasible. At the human level, it requires strong popular participation, sound land-use organization and consequent discipline in livestock management. If grazing in dry seasons is not kept under effective control, regrowth in the countryside will be impossible.
Conclusions
All these measures may help to restore an important function of forest species and of isolated bushes, trees and shrubs in food production, and at the same time help to preserve these species in situ and in the village environment. This can be done in the short term.
In the medium and long term, a more extensive research and development programme on forest fruit-trees should undoubtedly permit the vast food potential of African vegetation to be fully realized.
All development projects dealing with agriculture, livestock and water should include a "tree" component. They would thus achieve a double aim: immediate food production, and gradual ecological rehabilitation.
<section>4</section>
West Africa: Impressions and interviews
Henri Chazine
Henri Chazine is a former information Officer with FAO's Regional Office for Europe.
Sahelian tree species growing spontaneously in areas formerly humid; dense forests under threat, with no more than eight or nine years of life left; alarming climatic changes associated with the drying up of rivers - such are the signs pointing to a rapidly advancing degradation. What drastic measures can be applied? What chance is there of success? It is these questions - and others - that this journalistic inquiry, conducted in three West African countries, attempts to answer. Included are the testimony and experience of political leaders, rural villagers and international experts.
LIVING ON MINIMAL RESOURCES a great need to conserve what is left
"When you see their will to fight, particularly the determination of the foresters, it gives you heart"
 Shortly before our arrival in Dakar, the cabin crew announced that the city was all but obscured by a sandstorm and we might not be able to land. But with their customary prowess, the pilots slipped the enormous airbus onto the runway with no mishaps.
When you see their will to fight, particularly the determination of the foresters, it gives you heart
I subsequently learned in Dakar that sandstorms are increasingly frequent, often withering the market gardens that surround and feed the city. Once away from the streets of the city centre, constantly swept by a fleet of motor cycles and automobiles, one drives through a landscape of white and ochre-coloured dunes. The suburbs look more like oases in the midst of the desert than the normal outskirts of a capital city. The few remaining wood-lots are hard put to survive. There is no way to water them, as even metropolitan Dakar is currently suffering from a water shortage - the supply can meet only about two-thirds of the demand.
At the Ministry for the Protection of Nature, and later in the field, authorities confirmed the fact that below-average rainfall readings have long since exceeded the drought-warning stage. The conditions that create deserts are now the norm, not only in Dakar but further south as well, where the desert now extends to the Kaolack region.
FAO experts were avowedly pessimistic. One commented that the region, which formerly enjoyed a Sudano-Guinean climate, is now a Sahelo-Sudanian climate zone. Tree species like eucalypts are already springing up spontaneously in the Kaolack and Kaffrine regions and even as far south as the Gambia. This is matched by a certain decline in local species, increasing the pressures on people and livestock.
Another FAO expert had grave reservations about the future of the forest in the region. He emphasized that after all the research that has been done, "We still haven't found the solution. I really can't imagine anyone who today could say: 'This is what we have to do.' So we run trials. Not just any trial. We think about it before we act. But I can see this is going to be a really tough problem. People in Europe don't really realize what desertification in Africa means. Of course they are terribly moved when they see images of the Sahel, but it's like an earthquake in Chile. People feel pity, but as soon as they turn off the TV they think about something else. The first reaction of someone actually on the spot who sees the enormity of the problem is to lose heart. But when you see the Senegalese will to fight, particularly the determination of the foresters, it gives you heart."
The battle, one soon realizes, is being fought on all fronts. It ranges from the little village wood-lot, somehow kept alive through great effort with the scarce water available and protected after a fashion by thorn hedges, to the revitalization of what remains of the natural forests. No one can doubt that the peasants of the Sahel are very aware of the mortal danger of creeping desertification to their fields and to themselves. They carefully follow the instructions and advice of forestry experts, those modern lay missionaries come to show by example what must be done - and, above all, what must not be done.
Another FAO expert, in a village south of St Louis du Senegal, one of the regions most affected by desertification, noted that the peasants quickly tire of the large government-organized tree-planting programmes but tend their own small plots with great care. The women will cover great distances in search of water for the trees: no trees mean no fuelwood and therefore nothing to cook with. The up-keep of houses is also done by the women, and here too they need wood, to repair walls and roofs.
"What matters today is to pursue our struggle against the advance of the Sahel unfailingly and not let reforestation efforts slide."
The FAO expert comments that there is a sort of spontaneous "people's monitoring" to offset any possible depredations of the wood-lot-lot.. But even speaking as a forester, he thinks that food production has priority over reforestation. "There are families here who eat only once a day... when they do eat," he explains. "So it is imperative that people learn to intercrop food species with trees."
What matters today is to pursue our struggle against the advance of the Sahel unfailingly and not let reforestation efforts slide.
This is already happening in another FAO project in Benin, where maize is thriving between carefully spaced rows of eucalypts. Of course Benin does not have the same climate as the Sahel. Benin is in the wet belt. And yet, even here, the experts view with alarm such forerunners of desertification as a substantial rise in temperature, trees typical of the Sahel spontaneously taking root, and small patches of land becoming unproductive almost overnight.
"Your first impression", the head of the forest service in the People's Republic of Benin explained to me, "is probably that the drought has spared Benin because the vegetation is still exuberant, the climate is typically hot, wet and tropical, and it seems to rain torrents every day. And yet, in the past five years, the country has been unusually dry. In 1983, for example, rainfall was 40 percent less than normal. Moreover, this dryness is deceptive. The rains come early, too early, then stop suddenly, throwing farmers' production schedules off and lowering agricultural productivity. Not only are the rains early; their onslaught is sudden, and there is not even time to set up the usual services for farmers."
Nomadism is becoming current among certain population groups, he went on. Environmental degradation forces people to leave their native soil in an attempt to find fertile farmland elsewhere. The ones mainly affected are northern peoples who come south, exerting further pressure on the land. The final result may well be soil degradation in southern Benin.
"We are conscious of just how serious a problem this is. We are telling all our people that the desert is now on our doorstep and we must react. We have projects now that are helping to thwart the march of the desert, though this is not their direct objective. These are mainly reforestation projects with a five-year target of 12000 hectares for an investment of roughly 14 000 million CFA francs (about US$31.5 million). This is still a limited effort given the size of the problem, but the Government is counting a great deal on people's participation to help reforest. We also have the cooperation of the international agencies, particularly FAO, which began in 1980 to help implement a project for the development of forest resources. It is still too early to say whether we shall win our struggle against the advance of the Sahara. But what matters today is to pursue it unfailingly and not let reforestation efforts slide."
As an illustration of the statement of this top Beninese official, the FAO expert took me to a village remote from the main highway where rural men, women and students from the local school were caring for a fine eucalyptus nursery and several rows of already impressive trees. I asked them: "After you have actually planted the trees, how do you follow it up?"
The answer was prompt and revealing: "We scrupulously respect and maintain village plantations. We are less interested in the vast state operations, as Beninese like to own their own plantations - ones they have established themselves."
Toward social agriculture
The expert who accompanied me to Benin is actually a forester, but I soon realized that he was also, and primarily, a psychologist and sociologist. His personal experience sheds light on many little-known aspects of the work of agriculture in tropical countries.
He stresses that the first thing that has to be faced is the human, element inherent in the rural sector: "First you have to know what the rural people need. They probably know themselves what they need, but they don't always say it. So the expert has to be able to find out. Next, solutions must be proposed. Silviculture, for instance, is a technique that takes little account of the farmer, who consequently, shows little interest in it. The human element is lacking. That's why the trend is toward social forestry. This kind of forestry is very important in Africa."
"Concerning desertification, I in no way wish to be associated with the Malthusian concept some people have who recommend that the Sahel be abandoned - a monstrous policy, both economically and socially."
The speaker is very insistent about the importance of people's own efforts. "Official bodies, governments as well as international agencies, can never alone save a country from desertification, even a country like Benin which has still not been really hard-hit by the drought. You have to have the people behind you. Equally, the people have to be really aware of what is happening. We have done surveys on what rural people are thinking. They show that some people are confusing cause and effect. They see that yields are dwindling. Some understand that yields are falling because they are using the wrong methods, but others need to be convinced that they are responsible for the decline. In my view, any programme without the people behind it is doomed to failure. Information and education are therefore the first and most urgent priority to save Africa."
Toward social agriculture
Information and education, the basis of rehabilitation
I found everywhere this need for informing and educating the public. First and foremost was the serious problem of brush fires, the scourge of tropical lands. The Ivory Coast, in particular, has attacked this problem with the same determination as it has shown in tackling its other problems having to do with the forest.
In July 1984, the Government of the Ivory Coast appointed a committee for brush fire control under the forestry division of the Ministry of Agriculture. This agency, thanks mainly to Canadian aid, has already trained experts. Centres will be set up throughout the country which will direct village "fire brigade" committees.
"Although resources are so scarce now, the need is so urgent, we felt we had to act," the general secretary of the committee explained to me. "So we focused our action on creating awareness among village people. One way to do this is the traditional big campaign with posters, lectures, TV and radio programmes, films, etc. But that takes a lot of money and we thought our presence in the field would be much more important. We don't think an awareness campaign can be run from behind a desk. This is why our action consists in going to these areas to talk to the villagers themselves in their own language. We tell them: Look, you set fires for various reasons. We can't forbid you to use fire in every case. It would be impossible to enforce anyway, since firing is an age-old tradition. One can't just stop doing it one day. But when you do prepare the land for your crops, remove the branches, prune the trees, make small brush piles. If you burn, don't leave the site until you're
sure the fires are all out. Don't leave this job to children. If you have big plots, at least try to limit the fires by crisscrossing the site with fire-breaks."
"We don't think an awareness campaign can be run from behind a desk. This is why our action consists in going into the villages."
I was to learn that this job was made easier by the catastrophe that hit the Ivory Coast two years ago when a number of cacao plantations burned. Now the peasants know more about what needs to be done to avoid losing everything. They are now aware of the danger of brush fires.
The FAO expert accompanying me introduced me to a village in central Ivory Coast, far from major roads, deep in a once dense forest. The young people there have formed a fire brigade. They received me under the village palaver tree proudly wearing their voluntary service uniform consisting of a green helmet and a red jacket. I had already learned that a dense forest will virtually not burn as long as it remains intact. The fire risk occurs when loggers or peasants make clandestine clearings in the forest - the loggers to reach high-value species and the peasants to grow food.
The village chief explains: "Generally, country people respect what they have planted, whether trees, cacao or coffee. But when we discover that someone has turned a protected forest site into fields for cash crops, we let them gather the harvest and then we expel them. Then we plant trees all around the site and reforest." Those expelled are given a piece of land elsewhere, and the UN/FAO World Food Programme provides them with food for the first year.
But the biggest problem is still brush fires. They're part of our tradition. The older people are in the habit of firing their fields to clear them. This is a lot quicker than cutting brush by hand. But our young people are now successfully building awareness among the older ones. It is now forbidden to start fires during the dry season. The young people in the fire brigade patrol the forest and note any sign of smoke. They administer fines, and people do not like that.
"People now wait for the first rains before they light their first fires. But we point out to them that fire in the forest doesn't settle anything; in fact it makes things worse - particularly in the newly reforested areas which constitute the capital of our children and descendants. The young trees are unable to withstand the heat. They may die even if the fire takes place far from them. This includes even the teak trees used as fire-breaks."
FIGHTING A BUSH FIRE IN CHAD a perennial African problem
Never say die
The FAO forest protection mission leader in the Ivory Coast points out that wood exports rank as the fourth biggest earner of foreign exchange. All studies indicate that this resource may well be exhausted in a very few years. The government wisely decided therefore to make sure that wood would be a lasting source of income. It launched industrial-scale reforestation, voluntarily curtailing exports until such time as reforestation can restore former trade levels.
"Surveys by FAO and other organizations show that over 300 000 ha of forest are being destroyed in the Ivory Coast every year," the project leader told me. "There were 16 million hectares of forest at the turn of the century, but now only two and a half million are left. At the rate of 300 000 hectares a year, without reforestation, the remaining forest would have a life expectancy of eight or nine years at most," he emphasized.
So the Ivory Coast is not laying down its arms. The country is working non-stop to save what can be saved and to make a better life for future generations. The visitor leaves the Ivory Coast with the definite impression that the country is coping well with present adversities, and that it is off to a good start.
Nor did I find any traces of pessimism in Benin, though its ecological problems are much more serious. The FAO Representative shared the fruits of his experience in Africa with me:
"Concerning desertification, I in no way wish to be associated with the Malthusian concept some people have who recommended that the Sahel be abandoned - a monstrous policy, both economically and socially. But I am convinced that urgent priority should be devoted to as-yet-unaffected zones, in the hope of halting the advance of the desert and, eventually, gradually reversing the situation. Why not?"
"In my view, any programme without the people behind it is doomed to failure. Information and education are therefore the first and most urgent priority to save Africa."
This will to act and determination to fight back against a suddenly unkind nature had triumphed, I found, in the northern part of Senegal.
The President and Director-General of SAED (Socit d'amnagement et d'exploitation des terres du fleuve Sngal et des valles du fleuve Sngal) received us in his office in the charming city of St Louis du Sngal. Without preamble, he set forth his company's objectives: to replant a wide band of land along the banks of the Sngal from the mouth of the river to the east of the country. The project involves more than 600 000 farmers and livestock owners. These people are now making a good living. SAED plans to reforest the entire region once the present cropping phase is over. The peasants easily adapt to the new (to them) irrigated cropping methods, as they can see the advantages. Indeed, they have now been growing rice for several years.
To realize the full extent of SAED's achievement, you would have to have seen these now desolate lands in northern Senegal:, the desolation dotted here and there by several square metres of market garden crops. I found it so incredible that I went into the field to check whether these rice paddies were as productive as we had been told in St Louis. A few kilometres east of this pretty little town, in the midst of vast horizons of nothing but ochre and white sand and abandoned villages with tumbledown huts, I could see bands of green. They weren't very wide but they were certainly well kept, nicely fenced off by thorn barriers to keep the sandstorms from wiping out the work the people had done. And these green bands ran for several hundred kilometres.
I stopped near Podor, on the Mauritanian border. The local adviser is quite proud of his plot. The main crop is rice, the staple food of the Senegalese people. Of course the region is in the front line of the war against the Sahara, but the fact that it has now been planted certainly seems to be driving the desert back - you can see this with your own eyes.
But not completely back, he went on: "The drop in the level of the river makes it impossible to irrigate as we would like. It's so bad that the off-season crops are in jeopardy, and this season we'll have to make do with just one harvest. But the project has gone so well it has managed to half the flight to the cities and even emigration abroad, which was considerable. Today, between our new irrigation schemes and the economic problems some countries are experiencing, we're even seeing a reverse flow of people - people who had left to seek their fortune elsewhere."
Who should we believe? The expert who has still not found the right tree to stop the desert? Or the unbridled optimist who uses whatever can be used to get food produced? And at what cost? I was unable to get a precise answer.
SAHELIAN WOMAN AT WORK optimism is still alive
<section>5</section>
Tanzanian tree-planting: A voice from the villages
E.M. Mnzava
E.M. Mnzava is Director of Forestry, Forest Division. Ministry of Lands, Natural Resources and Tourism. United Republic of Tanzania. This article is adapted from a study he completed for the Government.
Once the need to plant trees - whether for fuelwood, food, fodder, shelter, income or environmental protection - is accepted and made a part of government planning, methods must be found to make such an effort successful. E.M. Mnzava discusses what has worked - and what has not worked -in the United Republic of Tanzania in this regard. If the Tanzanian experience can be summarized in one simple statement, it is this: listen very carefully to what the villagers themselves have to say.
MASAI WOMAN PLANTING A SEEDLING a need for local responsibility
 More than 87 percent of the United Republic of Tanzania's population of about 19 million people live in rural communities. These communities depend chiefly on biomass energy for their household and village or cottage-industry activities. Fuelwood (including charcoal) is the principal energy source, accounting for about 96 percent of the total. More and more urban residents (especially those in the low-income brackets) are using fuelwood, particularly charcoal. More than 85 percent of residents in towns use charcoal alone or an "energy mix" with other energy sources (Nkonoki. 1981). For instance, between 1978 and 1982, charcoal consumption in Dar-es-Salaam increased from 120-150 to 315 kg a person a year.
Thus, Tanzania is the second largest fuelwood user in Africa (after Nigeria), with a per caput consumption of about 2.5 m a year (Nkonoki, 1981). Like many other developing countries, it uses little commercial energy for cooking. The current fuelwood consumption is estimated at 35 million m; it is expected to rise to about 62 million m by the year 2000, when the population will have almost doubled - to 35.7 million people. The natural forest formations, from which more than 98 percent of the wood is collected, can supply only about 19 million m without being detrimentally overcut.
To bridge this energy supply-demand gap, a massive amount of tree-planting is needed. The natural forest is shrinking very fast, and most alternative energy sources have had no significant impact so far. Either they are physically and economically unavailable or their technology is still relatively new and more time is needed for further development.
Direct-labour costs of establishing an average hectare of wood-lot (first-year)
Activity
Work-days
Cost (US dollars)
Seed and nursery
Land preparation
Planting
Filling in dead trees
Weeding (4 times)
Protection
Total
VILLAGE-LEVEL REFORESTATION IN SENEGAL a viable idea in many countries
Tree species
Despite clear evidence that most villagers know what species they want, most foresters are still using their traditional shopping list of criteria in choosing species - multipurpose, fast-growing, coppicing and so on - without taking villagers' needs into account. For example, one of the main reasons tree-planting is failing among the Masai communities is that they are often given species only for firewood, like eucalyptus. The Masai are a unique pastoral group. Livestock is their life! Their main foods are meat and milk, and they keep large numbers of livestock in a harsh environment to meet family subsistence needs. As they have explained time and again, what they need is species suitable for their animals. When they are given unsuitable eucalypts, the trees are neither planted nor looked after and the blame is put on "pastoral conservatism".
This "top-down" choice is also reflected in the preference for exotic species over indigenous ones. The former are often claimed to be fast-growing, and this is true in many cases. But the fact that some indigenous species are more adapted to the environment and to local needs also merits serious consideration. Many trees that used to yield fruit for farmers when they were cultivating fields, gathering fuelwood and herding livestock are now gone.
So choosing indigenous species is not a question of "indigenous is beautiful"; rather, the indigenous species are likely to be more useful for meeting farmers' many needs. There are some species, for example, that farmers do not cut during farming: the Gogo do not cut down the baobab tree, not because it is too big, but because it has many uses. By the same token, farmers like trees that add fertility to the soil - nitrogen fixers - though they do not necessarily understand the mechanism by which this fertility is added.
Finally, villagers, especially women, know the energy utility of most trees species. They know those trees that give little caloric value, burn too quickly, give too much smoke, produce too much ash and even spot-fire, thus presenting a real danger to grass-thatched houses. For example, a study done by the University of Dar-es-Salaam on the acceptability of charcoal from softwood among local communities revealed that the market was unwilling to buy the charcoal despite the effective caloric value/unit weight - almost the same as that of the favoured hardwoods - and despite the fact that the price of the softwood charcoal was reduced by 50 percent. The main problem seemed to be the relatively quick burning of the charcoal and the fact that it produces more smoke. However, with acute shortages, more energy sources considered inferior are being accepted.
With "wandering" livestock it is difficult to keep tree and wood-lot damage to a minimum, especially considering that villagers often keep more livestock than is commensurate with the land-carrying capacity.
Nurseries
More than 92 percent of all nurseries catering for villages are still located at regional and district levels. A relatively small percentage are owned by the villagers. One of the reasons often given for this is that villagers lack the expertise to look after them. In fact, most farmers normally run their own small nurseries in raising agriculture crops such as coffee, which is a tree. Are forestry trees really so different?
As a result, seedlings have to be transported long distances, sometimes even beyond 50 km. The inadequacy of transport is one of the major setbacks in tree-planting, in terms of both availability and cost. The practical approach is to decentralize the nurseries as much as possible. In order to attain economies of scale, and since not all villages have the necessary conditions for nursery establishment - like ample water supply - several villages could jointly run a nursery whenever circumstances permit. Data indicate that such nurseries are best located in primary schools (normally parts of villages), where there is an infrastructure and more expertise.
Neither the government-owned nor the village nurseries are raising enough seedlings at the right time. The main reason seems to be inadequate resources, combined with the fact that utilization of locally available materials is neglected. A good illustration is the use of polythene seedling pots. Since polythene is a petroleum product, it is often in short supply. Yet foresters sit and wait for these tubes for several months. No wonder that 7090 percent of all late tree-planting between 1970 and 1980 was attributed to the late arrival of these polythene rolls in the regions and districts.
There are other options. Villagers have been using banana peelings to make coffee-seedling pots for ages. Of course, banana plants are not spread all over the country. Earth balls (a ball-like pot made from clay and other types of soil) have also been tried at the Sao Hill Forest Project. They have been found to provide a reasonable amount of tree survival and are low in cost: almost two-thirds lower than a polythene tube.
Tree and wood-lot establishment
The general land-use pattern includes 43 percent forest land, 50 percent rough grazing land. 4 percent smallholder cultivation, 1 percent large-scale farms and 2 percent urban, rocky or swampy areas. Most tree-planting and wood-lot establishment is done on the grazing, smallholder and large-scale farming land. And here is where most problems are encountered.
On the rough grazing land, livestock herding is "free-range". Among the Masai, for example, seasonal movements in searching for pasture can involve travelling up to 20 km (Moris, 1981). Eighty-five percent of the respondents in the 257 villages surveyed by the author in Dodoma in 1971-72 said they did not have enough land for grazing. This figure was higher - 94 percent - when the survey was updated in 1979-80. Therefore, with "wandering" livestock it is difficult to keep tree and wood-lot damage to a minimum, especially considering that villagers often keep more livestock than is commensurate with the land-carrying capacity.
On the smallholder farming land the situation is not much better. Most of the human and animal population is located here, and problems are compounded by the traditional land tenure used in some parts of Tanzania. In Kilimanjaro, for instance, under the "Kihamba system", land is normally inherited by sons and land fragments are continuously subdivided through generations. Land is now so fragmented that some villagers have to migrate to other regions. In fact, the Government gives some assistance to this migration. Under these circumstances, tree-planting, if considered at all, is pushed to rocky, infertile and swampy areas.
Finally, much of the land adjacent to villages in many heavily populated regions is legally reserved forests, wildlife habitats and national parks. Thus, most of such land is out of reach for local communities.
Wherever land is a limitation, villagers should be encouraged to "plant trees outside the wood-lot". They do not have to set aside specific areas: planting in built-up areas and planting along their farm boundaries are rational options. Tree-planting along roadsides outside their villages, as advocated by many foresters, should not be their responsibility. Who then would look after the trees? Local government and non-government organizations are better placed to perform this task. The stereotyped notion that standing trees must be cleared away to create new land for wood-lots must be changed. There are many cases in villages where the natural tree formation only needs to be "enriched" by planting in the gaps - possibly with indigenous species. This has been tried in Mbulu, Mpwapwa, and parts of Iringa and Mbeya. It works.
One of the main reasons tree-planting is failing among the Masai is that they are often given species only for firewood, like eucalyptus.
The inadequacy of transport is one of the major setbacks in tree-planting, I in terms of both availability and cost.
Planting
The existing procedure is that the Forest Division raises seedlings and distributes them to villagers, but still continues to provide extension services until the benefits are realized. It is not true, as Douglas et al. (1982) claim, that "social forestry [tree-planting in this case] stops at the seedling distribution stage in ... Tanzania".
Nevertheless, Tanzania's programme is not as successful as those in India, the Republic of Korea and China. One of the main problems in tree-planting, and especially in communal wood-lots, is the coincidence of this planting with agricultural crop plantings and their subsequent maintenance. How does one reconcile these two work schedules?
When there is a conflict, crop-planting is naturally a clear winner. The rainfall in many parts of the semiarid areas (Dodoma, Maswa, Ngugu and Magu districts and so on) is so unpredictable and unreliable that missing one right day for planting may mean curtailing the whole season's crops. Under the principle of "safety first" villagers therefore plant food crops before they plant trees. Villagers interviewed by Scutsch (1982) reported that there was no shortage of labour for tree-planting or maintenance. As will be seen below, a lack of adequate labour when it is needed is one of the causes of wood- lot failure in a number of villages.
In certain cases, targets for planting in the establishment of wood-lots are not realistic. For example, the World Bank Reforestation Project in Tabora to produce fuelwood for tobacco-curing has not fully succeeded, partly because of over-ambitious targets. Each village is supposed to plant 25 ha annually in addition to its tobacco-growing and processing activities (which are very time-consuming). Experience, however, indicates that a village can plant only 2-5 ha a year.
People's participation
People's participation is a magic phrase which appears in every rural development project or programme. It is used so often that many writers no longer bother to explain who is participating, at what level and for what purpose. In some instances, bureaucrats use participation cosmetically in order to popularize projects or for their quick approval by politicians or donors. Participation is frequently accomplished by meeting with villagers and setting up committees which rarely meet. It is through these committees and meetings that bureaucratic "top-down" decisions are blessed.
As a whole, however, such an attitude is not strong in the rural Tanzanian sector. The decentralized reforestation programme was formally started in 1967-68. The villages are the nuclei for the programme, though private organizations and individuals are also actively involved. Under the programme, the central and local governments raise tree and fruit seedlings and distribute seeds. They also supply extension services, including the occasional provision of loans and credit from the Tanzania Rural Development Bank and other agencies. The local communities participate in preparing the planting site, planting the trees and maintaining them. When the trees are mature, the villagers harvest them. They either share the fuelwood or sell it, in which case the money is often deposited in the common purse for other communal activities.
Local governments, especially the district councils, also play a key role in reforestation for energy and environmental reclamation. They own plantations in addition to distributing seedlings to villagers. Recently, non-governmental agencies, especially churches, have been active in distributing seedlings, establishing fuelwood plantations and teaching people how to care for trees. Primary schools have been particularly effective. Finally, certain foreign donors are also involved. The Swedish International Development Authority (SIDA), the US Agency for International Development, and the Oxford Committee for Famine Relief (Oxfam) are noteworthy.
The advantages of involving local organizations, especially villages, are obvious. In addition to raising the people's awareness of energy and environmental problems, this approach helps people to help themselves. In so doing, the country saves labour and money which can be used in other sectors (see table).
People's participation
Local participation is not, however, without limitations. First, weak village leadership contributes directly to delays over deciding whether to plant trees or not; and then, even if trees are planted, it can retard or neglect maintenance.
Second, in the village organization, as well as in some households, women are little involved in decision-making in tree-planting and other activities. This happens also in open meetings. For example, of the 257 villages surveyed in Dodoma in 1971-72, the meetings in about 89 percent were attended by women, but only in 7 percent of them did women participate in the discussions. Women's work is often so demanding that they barely have time to relax, let alone to plant trees.
Third, the national women's organization, Umoja wa Wanawake Tanzania (UWT), is fairly active in organizing local women for various projects, but it is hardly involved in any kind of fuelwood- or tree-planting.
Fourth, in the village set-up there seems to be no one charged with the responsibility of organizing tree-planting. Although it may not be feasible to form a committee on tree-planting, at least a subcommittee should be considered.
Last, the linkage and coordination among villages need strengthening. If, for instance, a village has a nursery, its should share seedlings with neighbours on whatever terms can be agreed upon.
Experience indicates that food, fuelwood and income are the major concern of the 1980s.
EUCALYPT SEEDLINGS READY FOR PUNTING are local species better?
Beyond Tanzania
Like many developing countries, Tanzania is facing a serious decline in forest resources which has, in turn caused shortages in fuelwood and its derivatives. Most people are aware of this problem. In Malawi it is reported that many farmers are now planting trees. The same has been reported in the Sudan and other Sahelian countries; India (Gujarat); Indonesia; Thailand; the Republic of Korea; China; and Peru, to mention but a few examples. A common denominator in these countries is that the farmers are involved. In fact, in most countries they are the main decision-makers.
Further, it is clear from the experiences of these countries that tree-planting is not so much a technical issue. Rather, it is a socioeconomic problem. And experience indicates that food, fuelwood and income are the major concern of the 1980s. So the fuelwood "crisis" must be solved in the context of broader issues. One of the principal focal points should be meeting food and agricultural needs through forestry.
The FAO/SIDA mission on Forestry for Local Community Development visiting some parts of Tanzania in 1982 reported that it was evident that there was "genuine official acceptance... and a real awareness of the needs of the people on both the political and technical levels of government in the area". Similar commitment has been observed in Mali, the Niger, Senegal, the Republic of Korea and China.
One fundamental difference between Tanzania and other countries, however, is that once seedlings are distributed in Tanzania, the government interferes little with villagers' activities. This is not to say it does not provide extension services. But it does not, for example, plant the trees for villagers and still call the result a "village wood-lot".
Also, the ujamaa village organization can be a unique base for people's participation, if properly utilized. It offers a two-pronged attack on the problem of tree shortages by encouraging planting by individual households as well as collectively by a village.
Recommendations
What do the farmers expect of us foresters? They expect us to respect their "household policies" upon which government policy is, or should be, based. In this case our major role should be to look for opportunities to help them rather than guarantees that tree-planting will always be successful. And the real challenge facing the foresters is to help the farmers until eventually they manage everything on their own.
In order to accomplish this ultimate goal the following steps are recommended:
 All efforts must be made to decentralize nurseries as much as conditions allow, so that they can be run, with advice from the government, by non-government institutions as well as the "model" tree-planters like those already operating in the Mbulu district.
 Wherever it is possible, villages should be encouraged to sell any surplus seedlings to their neighbours. This will primarily involve fruit seedlings, since most other seedling types are given away free.
 Attempts already under way to concentrate tree-planting, rather than trying it everywhere, should be continued.
 So far, tree-planting has not made use of the credits and loans given by various institutions such as the Tanzania Rural Development Bank. These credits and loans could possibly alleviate the problem of labour competition (e.g., between forestry and agriculture).
 Tanzania's 1978 Village Act allows villagers to retain the forest products fee so long as exploitation is done within their village. But this money is not ploughed back into forest activities. This is something that should be made a condition for the fee retention.
 At present the extension workers, especially those below district level, are not well motivated; they have no incentives at all. A study to find practical means to motivate them would help. In the meantime, they should be allowed loans for bicycles and motor cycles, since a large part of their extension service is greatly hindered by lack of transport.
 To serve the villagers better, the Forest Division must be further decentralized, with more responsibility going to the divisional and ward levels.
 Training has not been able to keep pace with farmers' extension needs. Between 1971-72 and 1982-83, only 858 certificate students, 691 diploma students and 150 graduates with degrees were trained. Expansion in training and education needs urgent attention.
 Finally, Nkonoki (1981) suggests the setting up of permanent rural energy committees to plan and advise on overall rural energy at village, ward, divisional and up to regional levels. Experience indicates that committees are over-enthusiastic at the beginning and later lose momentum. Since some committee members may not necessarily understand the intricacies of rural energy, such committees can become arenas for unnecessary arguments rather than practical working groups for solving people's problems. The more specific the assigning of responsibilities, the better.
It is easier to talk about such solutions than to implement them, but a clear notion of what is possible and what is not is an important first step. The United Republic of Tanzania has now made that step.
Bibliography
DOUGLAS, BARNES F. et al. 1982. Social forestry in developing nations. Resources for the Future discussion paper D.73 F. Washington, D.C.
FAO. 1980. Village afforestation: lessons of experience in Tanzania, by Elifandhili M. Mnzava. Rome.
FAO. 1982. Support to village afforestation in Tanzania, by David Brokensha. Survey of Wood Fuels Supply Needs, consultant's final report. Rome.
MORIS, JON R. 1981. A system perspective. In Managing induced rural development, p. 57-58. International Development Institute, Indiana.
NKONOKI, SIMON R. 1981. The pour man's energy crisis. In A report of the Tanzania Rural Energy Consumption Survey.
SCUTSCH, MARGARET. 1982. Why people don't plant trees, a case study of social forestry in Tanzania (draft report), pp. 1-10. Resources for the Future. Washington, D.C.
SWEDISH INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (WITH Ethiopian Forestry and Wildlife Conservation Development Authority) 1983. International Seminar on Community Development report, p. 1. Stockholm.
THOMSON, J.T. 1981. Public choice analysis of institutional constraints on fuelwood production in the West African Sahel. In Public choice and rural development Resources for the Future research paper R-21. Washington, D.C.
WINTERBOTTOM, ROBERT T. 1980. Reforestation in the Sahel: problems and strategies, p. 22., Paper presented for the African Studies Association Annual Meeting, Philadelphia.
<section>6</section>
Changes in shifting cultivation in Africa
FAO Forestry Department
This article has been adapted from FAO Forestry Paper 50, Changes in shifting cultivation in Africa. It is based on a comprehensive study carried out by the Forestry Department in 1982-83 and coordinated by a working group which included officers of the Agriculture and Economic and Social Policy departments of FAO, as well as a sociologist from the Overseas Development Institute, UK (Dr Clare Oxby).
 Shifting cultivation in a variety of forms has been practiced successfully and safely for centuries, fully adapted to the specific climatic and edaphic conditions prevailing in a given forest region. However, because of increasing population densities and escalating land pressure, this is no longer the case in most of tropical Africa. Changes in the patterns of land use, both spontaneous and planned, have taken place in which forestry and forest trees have played a vital role; yet further changes must occur if Africa is to avoid fatal soil degradation and produce the food its inhabitants require.
The term shifting cultivation has been applied to a wide range of cropping systems; here, following FAO convention, it refers to "a system in which relatively short periods of continuous cultivation are followed by relatively long periods of fallow" (FAO/University of Ibadan, 1982). It is thus distinguished from short fallow and permanent cultivation. By this definition, shifting cultivation is no longer as common in Africa as formerly; moreover, it is usually combined with other forms of agriculture. According to an FAO study, "the main humid area where shifting cultivation remains the dominant form of farming is the middle belt of West Africa, between the coastal tree belt and the more permanently farmed northern plains. It is also still found in sparsely populated areas of Tanzania, Zambia and northern Mozambique and in the empty area of the Zaire basin" (FAO, 1984, p. 9).
In areas where population density is high and land in short supply, shifting cultivation in its traditional forms is neither appropriate nor possible, for it requires the "luxury" of land that can be held in long-term fallow. It also commonly involves the frequently criticized practice of clearing by fire. From the farmer's point of view, burning has a number of positive features: it is labour-efficient, the ash produced is a valuable fertilizer, the leaching effect increases the availability of soil nutrients to plants, and it may kill fungal diseases and noxious insects. In addition, many farmers prefer to clear forest regrowth rather than high forest. When useful trees are involved, they normally protect or extract them before burning. Lassailly-Jacob (1982) is not alone in arguing that what is needed now is advice to farmers on how to use fire and control it more efficiently, rather than sweeping fire prevention.
Shifting cultivation and spontaneous change
Social change in Africa over the last few decades has been characterized by increasing population densities; the expansion of areas under cultivation, largely through the introduction and expansion of cash cropping; increasingly difficult access to land; and the increasing participation of small communities in regional, national and international markets. Changes in agricultural techniques can be understood in this framework, for what has been happening in Africa is that these techniques have been adapting fast (although in some instances not quite fast enough) to the changing circumstances, in particular the decreasing availability of land.
Since shifting cultivation involves long periods of fallow, a large amount of land is required per family, most of it unproductive at any one time. It is simply not possible to practice shifting cultivation when population densities rise and there is not enough land to leave a satisfactory period of fallow. However, just how high a population density shifting cultivation can support is a matter of some debate. While Ruthenberg (1980, p. 62) calculates that no more than 56 persons to the km can be supported, Lassailly-Jacob ( 1983) estimates that in Beumi, Ivory Coast, the present density of 83 inhabitants to the km could be raised to as much as 123 without destroying the environmental balance. It is therefore important to distinguish between absolute population density and population density in relation to the extent and fertility of cultivable areas.
SLASH-AND-BORN IN THE IVORY COAST part of the shifting cultivation cycle
There are many possible reactions to changing situations in rural areas; different agricultural techniques may be employed, or, more radically, rural exodus may occur. Faced with land shortage, farmers may turn to crop rotation as they have in Tiv, Nigeria (Vermeer, 1970), and Baoul, Ivory Coast (Lassailly-Jacob, 1983), or increase the intensity of cultivation by shortening the fallow period as has happened in northeastern Zambia (Lawton, 1982). This latter strategy, however, is rational only up to a certain point, beyond which any further decreases in the fallow period would result in soil degradation and decreasing yields. At this stage, a more radical change has to be made from fallow agriculture to permanent agriculture. Boserup (1965, p. 26) gives a general example:
A radical change in part of the area
A growing rural population does not produce additional food by increasing the number of times the land is ploughed or by weeding of fields under short-fallow cultivation which were hitherto left unweeded. Instead of such changes, which would not add much to total output, short-fallow cultivators are likely to take to annual cropping on a part of their land. This transition in its turn may call for the introduction of better ploughing, irrigation and weeding - or the shortening of fallow may have as its necessary concomitant the production of fodder crops for the animals. In other words, the additional labour is likely to be used as a means to undertake a radical change of the system of cultivation in part of the area, while no change is made in other parts of the area.
The first plots converted by this change to permanent agriculture are usually those nearest the house site; animal, vegetable and general household refuse is used to fertilize gardens around the house where all kinds of vegetables, root crops and fruit trees are grown. Together with more permanent forms of cultivation go more permanent forms of housing.
It has been demonstrated that the more intensive the agricultural technique, excluding mechanization, the worse the returns to labour.
The main purpose of the fallow period in shifting cultivation is simultaneously to improve soil fertility and the soil's capacity to resist erosion. There is evidence that the length of fallow period can be decreased to a certain extent without seriously compromising these functions (Jean, 1975). The actual length of time obviously depends on a variety of factors, such as soil and vegetation type, and intensity of previous cultivation of the area. Another factor is weed control: in wetter climates, to prolong the period of cultivation implies the need to apply more sophisticated weed management techniques or to spend more time on this work.
Given the increasing cultivation period and decreasing fallow period consistent with increasing land pressure, at a certain stage yields can only be maintained or improved by the use of fertilizer. If chemical fertilizers are too expensive or not available, if manure is not available because animals are not kept, if the use of "green manure" is found to be too labour-intensive, and so on, then there is a likelihood that increasing land pressure will result in soil degradation. If yields continue to decline under these circumstances, members of the farming households may look for paid jobs, often in urban areas, to contribute to family income; or some or all of the family may migrate to another area where land pressure is not so great.
There has been wide discussion on the reasons farmers frequently resist change until the process of decreasing yields and soil degradation has - often irreversibly - set in. Why can they not change before this happens? There are many explanations, some of which may apply to some areas and not to others:
 It has been demonstrated that the more intensive the agricultural technique, excluding mechanization, the worse the returns to labour (Boserup, 1965, and others since). Thus, for example, in Sierra Leone, a change from upland rice under shifting cultivation to swamp rice under permanent cultivation generally represents an increased labour requirement.
 In cases of soil degradation; it is often discovered that the farmers concerned have no long-term security of land tenure; in other words, they will not necessarily benefit from soil conservation measures - their landlords will.
 Switching to a new agricultural technique represents a risk which may be unacceptable to farmers who only just manage to satisfy their subsistence requirements. Such farmers will wait until others have tried and succeeded before they themselves try.
 Switching to a new agricultural technique may require capital investments which the small farmer cannot afford or which are difficult to obtain locally (fertilizers, improved seeds, etc.).
 Making the new technique profitable for the small farmer may depend on easy access to markets and access to transport; in some areas these conditions may not exist.
Some of these factors are illustrated by P. Richards (1977) in his description of the deteriorating conditions facing the farmers in the Ikale region of southwestern Nigeria where, between 1952 and 1963, the population growth rate was about 7 percent:
Something of a crisis in man-land relations
The conclusion is that although shifting cultivation may survive... for some years to come, something of a crisis in man-land relations is developing in both Idapomarun and Orisunmeta districts. Pressure on land has already led to far-reaching changes in the agricultural economy, but there can be little doubt that further change is called for. There are four probable directions in which such changes may occur. First, evolution towards permanent cultivation of annual crops must almost certainly take place, perhaps via a "compound land", farming system as practiced in parts of eastern Nigeria... Secondly, there is likely to be continued increase in the acreage planted to tree crops, especially oil palm. This is an understandable if not entirely satisfactory development since tree-crop plantations provide an assured cash income, are much less prodigal of land, and once established require less labour to maintain than annual-crop farms.
Thirdly, the number of farmers engaged in part-time trade and manufacturing and in plantation labour will continue to grow... Finally, the pressure of people on land remaining unabsorbed by these three kinds of changes will continue to seek an outlet in that long-established stand-by of an under-occupied rural labour force, migration - especially migration to the major urban areas.
Apart from rural-urban migrations, there can be a less obvious but equally important type of migration: that of farmers from areas of higher population density into neighbouring rural areas of lower population density. Such migrations vary according to the distance travelled and the extent to which the agriculture practised in the homeland differs from that practiced in the new lands. In some cases, such migrations represent an attempt to find farming conditions comparable to those found in the homeland.
In situations of change, it would therefore be inaccurate to think that farming systems are adapted only in the direction of intensification of agriculture. They usually are, but this is by no means always the case, for migration from high to lower population-density areas may be accompanied by an extensification of agriculture. Grossman (1974) cites the example of seasonal migrants in east Nigeria who travel to Nikemand, north of Enugu, where they take out yearly leases from local landlords to grow food crops. The Bemba of Zambia apparently learned their practice of shifting cultivation from local farmers when they left their previous homelands in Lubaland (A.I. Richards, 1939).
Another example of migration from high to lower population-density areas is the important migration route into the humid forest zone of West Africa from the subhumid and Sahelian zones in the north. Until recently, the southern forest zones were inhabited mainly by farmers in low densities practicing shifting cultivation. Rapid changes in land use were observed in Ghana during the 1940s, 1950s and 1960s, when much of the country's southern forest, opened up by logging roads, was turned over to the cultivation of cocoa (Hill, 1963); a similar process occurred in neighbouring Ivory Coast, with both large-scale and smallholder plantations of coffee, cocoa and oil-palm.
Such migrations and changes in land-use patterns have, of course, had profound consequences on the local farmers. Following the example of large-scale private and state perennial cash-crop plantations, in which they provided much of the labour-force, many of them have turned to permanent cultivation of perennial cash crops in addition to their subsistence farming. This suggests that the lack of roads and of access to markets can be an important factor in determining the local people's way of life, and that as soon as conditions change and they have access to markets, they may switch to a way of life that is more profitable to them.
It is incorrect to think that shifting cultivation in all its forms is an unsatisfactory form of land use.
The migrant farmers have sometimes been confused with the local farmers and misleadingly called shifting cultivators, since they plant food crops in the early years of plantation establishment. However, the term is inappropriate, because food crops are only tolerated as long as they do not rival the perennial agricultural crop species, and the latter are not grown to regenerate soil fertility for food crop production (de Rouw, 1979). One consequence of this change in land use from shifting cultivation to perennial cash crops is that the more forest land is cleared for plantations, the less is available for food crops. The local farmers are likely to suffer most in the long run, since once their land runs out they have nowhere to go, while the migrants often retain links with food-crop-growing relatives in their area of origin and, having moved at least once, may find it easier to move again.
Shifting cultivation and planned change
It is incorrect to think that shifting cultivation in all its forms is an unsatisfactory form of land use. Okigbo (1981) says that bush fallow systems can be stable, ecologically sound and efficient, while Nye and Greenland (1960) argue that, until now, there has been a failure to evolve a superior method of stable food cultivation in the tropics. It should be stressed that problems of land scarcity, soil degradation and diminishing yields are associated not so much with shifting cultivation as with short fallow cultivation in areas where shifting cultivation was once practiced but where conditions have changed; the result is that it is no longer possible to leave a long fallow period, and the fertilizer and other inputs needed for more intensive land use are too expensive or are unavailable.
Priority planning should therefore concentrate on those "crisis" areas of short fallow cultivation, not on those areas where it is still possible to restore soil fertility and forest vegetation by sufficiently long periods of fallow. One type of planning concerns the improvement of fallow cultivation; the other concerns its replacement with other forms of cultivation. In both cases the role of trees is of utmost importance, because planted as well as natural trees help control erosion, suppress or eliminate herbaceous and woody weeds, and restore soil fertility (Grinnell, 1975). Alternatives to fallow cultivation that have involved complete land clearance, including destumping, and a change to other forms of agriculture without trees - for example, annual crops - have often been unsuccessful.
Improvements to shifting cultivation
Jurion and Henry (1967) and Tondeur (in FAO, 1956) describe the attempt in the then Belgian Congo to regulate shifting cultivation by the "corridor system": delimiting strips of land which were to be cleared and then left fallow according to an overall plan for a particular area. These efforts failed for a variety of reasons (Ruthenberg, 1980). On the technical side, such a regular division of the land meant that it was impossible to respect the different parts of the land. On the socioeconomic side, these efforts lacked the cooperation of farmers. Many were forced to move to new villages associated with the scheme; in addition, since they were obliged to grow a certain quantity of cash crops like oil-palm, they saw these changes more as a method of social control, tax collection and cash-crop extraction than as a means of improving their agricultural techniques.
A second method for improving shifting cultivation - substituting artificially established woody legumes for natural bush fallow vegetation - is an old idea of proven value for edible varieties of pigeon pea, but the potential of the technique for other woody legumes which yield firewood and other byproducts, while at the same time contributing to the restoration of soil fertility, has yet to be explored (Raintree, 1981). However, there are a number of trees and shrubs that could help increase the speed of reestablishing soil fertility (Raintree lists 13 promising species).
Although a number of projects and field trials are being carried out in several countries, there is as yet little information on the implementation of planting in fallows and the acceptance of the principle by farmers. In Madagascar, a successful project has involved planting Grevillea during the fallow period after the cultivation of hill rice, maize and beans. In Benin, a government programme has encouraged small farmers to plant Acacia auriculiformis in their fallow land in order to enrich the soil and at the same time produce fuelwood quickly; however, farmers have been slow to accept the idea, because they have not yet appreciated the soil-enriching properties of the tree and still prefer teak and eucalyptus, whose stems are valued for their medicinal qualities. A major problem with the scheme is that rapidly increasing population increases pressure for food crops, so that the fallow period is gradually being reduced, and much of the soil-enriching contribution of the
acacia is being lost. The long-term aim of the project - to switch from fallow field areas to planting acacia in rotating rows with food crops - may be hindered by the lack of opportunities for marketing surplus produce (Tran Van Nao, personal communication, 1983).
A third method for improving shifting cultivation is to make better use of cleared vegetation. The assumption - which, as already suggested, is partly misleading - that burning vegetation is wasteful is the basis of a number of attempts to replace fire with other techniques of clearing. One such effort has been named "the Subri conversion technique", after the Subri Forest Reserve in Ghana where it was developed. Most of the cut vegetation is extracted as sawn lumber, some as charcoal, some as fuelwood, and some for small local industries like carving and basket-weaving. The remaining small branches and leaves are used as green mulch for the agricultural crop.
TOUAREG MIGRATION IN THE NIGER seeking a place to grow food
Although field trials have already been carried out within the forest reserve and results published (Earl, 1982), no effort has yet been made to introduce the technique to farmers outside the reserve. The field trials indicate that income exceeds expenditure; however, the direct costs are about 2.9 times those of ordinary cut-and-burn methods and require about 37 percent more labour (Earl, 1982). These last two facts probably mean that to the small farmer with limited capital and labour resources, the new technique is not a feasible proposition. Moreover, the trials comparing the Subri conversion technique with the cut-and-burn technique have taken into account forest tree production, not agricultural crop production, which is, of course, what the farmers are primarily interested in.
Finally, the vegetation to be cleared inside and outside the reserve is rather different. Therefore, the results of trials inside the reserve may not be applicable outside, where there is no high forest left and where vegetation is being cut after only a few years' growth. For all these reasons, farmers may have a cautious outlook in relation to any technique without burning, unless, of course, the farmers themselves are to make significant profits, for example from increased sale of charcoal, timber or food crops.
Alternatives to shifting cultivation
One of the alternatives to shifting cultivation is the taungya system of large-scale forest plantation establishment used by forest departments, in which food crops are interplanted with trees in the early years of the plantation. Two broad types of taungya can be distinguished, depending on the farmer's role: (a) "individual" taungya, or "own your own crop" (Olawoye, 1975), where the farmer plants trees in return for use of the land for a limited period of time; and (b) "departmental" taungya, or "farming for pay", where the farmer carries out jobs for the forestry department related to plantation establishment and agricultural crop production in return for a wage. While there are many accounts of the profitability of taungya from the point of view of forestry departments, which find it a low-cost system of establishing plantations, there are few accounts of how profitable or acceptable taungya is from the farmer's point of view.
Under a system of individual taungya, farmers are given access to plots of land on which they must plant trees which are the property of the forestry department. In return, they may cultivate the spaces between the trees with food crops, the produce of which is theirs. Depending on the crops and trees grown, and forestry department regulations, the farmer may cultivate the land with certain prescribed crops for between one and three years, after which time the trees will have grown enough to shade out any food crops. At this point, the farmer has no other choice but to move to another area. If the forestry department is continuing to plant trees in the same way at this time, and if the department is pleased with the way the farmer has looked after the saplings, it may offer another plot for use. If not, the farmer will have to search for land elsewhere.
As an alternative to shifting cultivation, this is likely to represent a move from greater to lesser security of land tenure for farmers accustomed to having permanent customary rights to land outside forest reserves. The farmer who is allocated one plot after another may have a certain illusion of security; in practice, however, reforestation programmes do not continue year after year, and there always comes a time when no more land is avail able for taungya. Furthermore, there may not be enough land in the forest reserve for everyone who would like access to it, so some farmers have to do without.
Since the farmer has no long-term rights to the land, there must be short-term incentives. One of these is access to arable land where such land is scarce. Ball and Umeh (1981) state that taungya has not succeeded where there is other fertile agricultural land available. The other short-term interest is in the one to-three-year agricultural crop. But since this crop is much reduced in relation to the area cleared because of the space and labour devoted to the saplings, it is clear that the farmer would choose this system only if there were no means of access to other, similar land.
Because of these factors, it is understandable that forestry departments have had problems administering the system. For example, when taungya was introduced in Togo in 1958, the combination of restrictions on the kind of crops that could be grown and the very principle of setting aside forest reserves to which people felt they had inalienable customary rights triggered off a wave of protests. These led to the system being suspended in the early days of independence (United Nations University, 1982). Taungya was reintroduced in 1972 with FAO assistance, but this time with added bonus incentives in cash and in kind. However, two problems were faced: first, the farmers objected to the fact that it was not possible to carry out crop rotations; and second, the plantations were far from the villages. Since there was no shortage of grassland around the forest reserves and nearer the settlements, the plantations were deserted in favour of the less fertile agricultural land.
In Nigeria, three types of bonuses were being considered in 1981: subsidized food obtained from departmental taungya; assistance with land-clearing, crop-processing and storage; and cash bonuses for successfully planted trees (Ball and Umeh, 1981). However, the effectiveness of even these bonuses remains uncertain.
Individual taungya was introduced to Ghana in 1928 in order to satisfy the farmers' demand for arable land in areas of land shortage and the foresters' desire to establish a tree crop at reduced cost; the farmers bore the cost of the major expenditure in plantation management - site-clearing. According to Brookman-Amissah (1978), success was not commensurate with effort since, as in Togo, the early plots were small, scattered and not easily accessible and did not constitute manageable plantation units. Moreover, the tending of the tree crop was inadequate, especially after the farmers had left the sites. In 1968, the forestation effort in Ghana was intensified, which meant a sudden increase in the amount of land available to the taungya farmers, perhaps more than they really needed for their subsistence agriculture or could cope with. One of the consequences was that taungya came to be dominated by big farmers, who found the large tracts suitable for commercial farming;
small farmers were being overlooked. In an attempt to solve these problems, the Forestry Department introduced a system of departmental taungya in 1969.
In Liberia, an alternative way of controlling the amount of land available to each taungya farmer was introduced by the Forestry Development Authority (FDA) in 1974. Land preparation, up to and including the phase of burning, is carried out by the FDA, and then the farmers come in to plant one rice crop at a nominal fee. A fee is charged to control the acreage given to each household and to help retain part of the cost for land preparation. The main benefits are reported as reduction in the cost of reforestation, as farmers perform the initial task of tending the plantations, and an increase in the production of upland rice through an increase in cultivated acreage and improved seeds (Appleton, 1982). From the farmer's point of view, this system looks like a yearly tenancy.
In Sierra Leone, there are two variants on individual taungya (one, unfortunately, only at the proposal stage and the other at an early stage of implementation), which have particular implications for the farmer. The first is similar to the Liberian example in that farmers would pay an annual rent, though it is not clear whether they would be helped in clearing the land. The difference from any other taungya system considered here is that the agricultural crops are not annuals but perennials such as coffee, cocoa and cola as understoreys in Terminalia ivorensis and Terminalia superba plantations. Providing that the arrangement could be renewed, this system could provide the farmers with a tenancy arrangement for at least 20 years, or as long as the life of the particular crop, thus providing a great deal more security of tenure than that connected with annual crops.
The second variant is a proposal for community fuelwood plantations and community forestry plantations to be established by Sierra Leone farmers under the taungya system. Farmers, however, would benefit not only from the food crops planted in the early years of establishment but also from the forest trees, for they would be allowed to keep the proceeds of any harvesting of such material that they undertake, subject perhaps to payment of a small licence fee ( FAO/World Bank, 1982). Because the farmer is to profit from the forest trees, this proposed system might be more appropriately considered agroforestry than taungya.
CLEARED FOREST PATCH IN GABON ready for planting
Departmental taungya
Departmental taungya is distinguished from individual taungya by the fact that the produce from any agricultural crop belongs to the forestry department, which rewards the farmer with a wage. From the farmer's point of view, therefore, departmental taungya is like other types of paid agricultural labour and radically different from individual taungya. Under the latter system, the farmers depend on their food crops for survival and thus are highly motivated to take care in growing it, whereas under the former system the paid labourers are only motivated to the extent that they will continue to collect their wages. It is therefore not surprising that forestry departments complain of "lack of discipline" among their taungya workers and that administrative costs are high.
A further difference between the two systems is that whereas individual taungya attracts mainly local farmers, departmental taungya may also attract people from other areas, and even from towns, who are in search of a wage. In cases where these workers are inexperienced farmers, it is understandable if agricultural crop yields are low.
Agroforestry
Agroforestry is already practiced by many African small farmers (Olofson, 1982). However, there is considerable agreement among scientists that it could, if practiced more widely, provide a solution to some of the problems experienced with fallow cultivation in conditions of rising population density and increasing land shortage (Vergara, 1981; Raintree, 1980). Indeed, this is the assumption behind much of the work of the International Council for Research in Agroforestry (ICRAF) in Nairobi. For example, both the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture and ICRAF are carrying out field trials with alley cropping of the fast-growing woody leguminous genus Leucaena (IITA: Hartmans, 1981; Okigbo, 1981. ICRAF: Raintree, 1980). Unfortunately, there is as yet little information on the acceptability of these techniques to fallow farmers, since these trials have been carried out in areas of permanent cultivation.
Work on the intensification of agriculture based on agroforestry techniques is particularly promising because it emphasizes the close relationship between the type of agricultural improvement on the one hand and the availability of labour and intensity of land use on the other. Below is a hypothetical progression from planted fallow to intensive multistorey intercropping suitable for maintaining or improving per caput yields on a fixed land base under conditions of population pressure and land shortage:
 In the initial stage, as land pressure converts long-fallow farmers into short-fallow farmers, the use of appropriate tree legumes as planted fallows can increase and sustain the productivity of the land at fairly low labour costs.
 Through the initial planting of fallow trees in appropriately spaced rows, the stage is set for the next phase of intensification, in which progressively shorter rotations eventually result in permanent cultivation in the alleys between the pruned hedgerows of vigorously coppicing trees.
 In the final, increasingly labour intensive stages, the installed green manure "fertilizer factories" can be maintained in place while additional upper-storey trees and intercropping practices are introduced to accommodate higher population densities; in other words, multistorey intercropping. This final phase offers the closest approximation to the characteristics of the tropical forests and is not at all a new idea. The innovation here is the incorporation of soil-improving economic tree legumes into the upper storey of the system and the choice of species with light or seasonal canopies which permit the system to extend to field crops. Raintree (1980) lists a number of species suitable for this purpose.
If the motivation exists, there is no reason why the scheme of intensification outlined here cannot be run "ahead of itself" to generate higher incomes for industrious rural families well in advance of population pressured necessity. The scheme likewise allows great flexibility in the combination of elements from different "stages" for the simultaneous production of optimal products for particular localities (Raintree, 1980, 1983).
Agroforestry is just one of many ways in which farmers faced both with the need to produce more food and with increasing scarcity of land and deteriorating soil can transform shifting cultivation into a more positive and productive cropping system which can be practiced in full harmony with the natural surroundings and the needs of their human occupants. Any changes should take into account local physical or socioeconomic constraints. There is need for more dialogue with farmers so that both foresters and agriculturists can learn from their considerable local experience, and so that alternatives proposed in particular areas may be well adapted to the particular needs and skills of the local inhabitants.
References
APPLETON, N.S. 1982. Some considerations for agro-silviculture development in the shifting cultivation areas of Liberia. Paper presented to the FAO/University of Ibadan Workshop on Shifting Cultivation, 4-11 July.
BALL, J.B. & UMEH, L.I. 1981. Development trends in taungya systems in the moist lowland forest zone of Nigeria between 1975 and 1980. Paper presented at the Workshop on Agroforestry in the African Humid Tropics, University of Ibadan. Ibadan, Nigeria, Federal Department of Forestry.
BOSERUP, E. 1965. The conditions of agricultural growth. London, Allen & Unwin.
BROOKMAN-AMISSAH, J. 1978. Agrisilviculture for production of wood and food crops in Ghana. Paper presented at the 8th World Forestry Congress, Jakarta.
DE ROUW, A. 1979. La culture traditionnelle dans le sud-ouest de la Cte-d'Ivoire (rgion de Tai): le systme Oubi confront aux pratiques agricoles des Baouls immigrs. Abidjan, Centre d'Adiopodoum, Office de la recherche scientifique et technique outre-mer.
EARL, D.E. 1982. Rainforest conversion: when cheap may be costly. In World wood, p. 22-23.
FAO. 1956. L'agriculture nomade, vol. I. Congo belge, Cte-d'Ivoire. FAO Forestry Development Paper N 9. Rome.
FAO. 1984. Institutional aspects of shifting cultivation in Africa. FAO Human Resources, Institutions and Agrarian Reform Division. Based on work by Dr M. Tiffen. Rome.
FAO/UNIVERSITY OF IBADAN. 1982. Recommendations arising from the Workshop on Shifting Cultivation and Extension. Rome.
FAO/WORLD BANK. 1982. Sierra Leone: Forestry Development Project preparation report. Rome.
GRINNELL, H.R. 1975. A study of agrisilviculture potential in West Africa. Ottawa, International Development Research Centre.
GROSSMAN, D. 1974. The affect of migratory tenant farming on food production in northern Iboland, Nigeria. Natn. geogr. J. of India, 20 (4).
HARTMANS, E.H. 1981. Land development and management in tropical Africa. Ibadan, Nigeria, International Institute of Tropical Agriculture.
HILL, P. 1963. Migrant cocoa farmers of southern Ghana. Cambridge University Press.
JEAN, S. 1975. Les jachres en Afrique tropicale. Interprtation technique et foncire. Mmoire de l'Institut d'ethnologie N 14. Paris, Muse de l'homme.
JURION, F. & HENRY, J. 1967. De l'agriculture itinrante de l'agriculture intensifie. Brussels, Institut national pour l'tude agronomique du Congo.
LASSAILLY-JACOB, V. 1982. Logique des agricultures itinrantes et cycliques: la reconstitution du sol par la jachre suit son exploitation par les cultures. In H. Dupriez. Paysans d'Afrique noire. Paris, Edition l'Harmattan.
LASSAILLY-JACOB, V. 1983. La charge de population en question: colonisation planifie des rives du lac de Kossou en Cte-d'Ivoire.
LAWTON, R.M. 1982. National resources of miombo woodland and recent changes in agricultural and land-use practices. Forest Ecology and Management, 4: 284-97.
NYE, P.H. & GREENLAND, D.J. 1960. The soil under shifting cultivation. Farnham Royal, UK, Commonwealth Agriculture Bureaux.
OKIGBO, B.N. 1981. Alternatives to shifting cultivation. Ceres (FAO), 15 (6): 41-45. Rome.
OLAWOYE, O.O. 1975. The agri-silvicultural system in Nigeria. Commonw. For. Rev., 54 (3/4): 229-236.
OLOFSON, H. 1982. An anthropological approach to social forestry: the study of indigenous agroforestry systems. Paper presented to the Monthly Forum in Social Forestry of the Bureau of Forest Development, Asian Institute of Tourism, Quezon City, Philippines.
RAINTREE, J.B. 1980. Conservation farming with soil improving legumes: a farming systems approach to tropical agroforestry. IITA Agric. Econ. Discussion Paper 9/80.
RAINTREE, J.B. 1981. Conservation farming with multipurpose tree legumes: an underdeveloped branch of tropical agroforestry research. In L. Buck, ed. Proceedings of the Kenya National Seminar on Agroforestry (12-22 Nov. 1980). Nairobi, ICRAF.
RAINTREE, J.B. 1983. Landuse and labour intensity: factors affecting the adaptability of conservation farming practices under conditions of population pressure. Paper presented for the Workshop in Conservation Farming, Colombo, 17-23 Jan. 1983. Nairobi, ICRAF.
RICHARDS, A.I. 1939. Land labour and diet in Northern Rhodesia: an economic study of the Bemba tribe. Oxford University Press, for the International Institute of African Languages and Cultures.
RICHARDS, P. 1977. Ideas, environment and agricultural changes: a case study from western Nigeria. Ph. D. thesis, University of London.
RUTHENBERG, H. 1980. Farming systems in the tropics. 3rd. (also 2nd ed., 1976). Oxford, Clarendon Press (see especially chap. 3, "Shifting cultivation systems").
UNITED NATIONS UNIVERSITY. 1982. Taungya practices in Togo, by O. Nadjombe. In L.H. MacDonald, ed. Agro-forestry in the African Humid Tropics. Tokyo.
VERGARA, N.T. 1981. Integral agroforestry: a potential strategy for stabilizing shifting cultivation and sustaining productivity of the natural environment. Honolulu, Hawaii, East-West Center, Environment and Policy Institute.
VERMEER, D.E. 1970. Population pressure and crop rotational changes among the Tiv of Nigeria. Ann. Ass. Amer. Geogr., 60 (2): 299-314.
FAO - FOREST RESOURCES/RESSOURCES FORESTIRES/RECURSOS FORESTALES
Subscribers to Unasylva will find enclosed in this issue a new FAO document, entitled Forest resources 1980. This offers the most accurate and up-to-date data currently available internationally on the world's resources (as of July 1985). The source of the data is an FAO assessment of tropical forests and the FAO/Economic Commission for Europe (ECE) assessment of forests in ECE member countries. Figures are given by region and by country for total coniferous and non-coniferous forest; for closed forest and other wooded land area; for total land area occupied by forest; and for fallows and shrubs not included in the forest area. Included are 26 four-colour, computer-generated maps and a brief descriptive text in three languages (English, French and Spanish). Figures are given for forest renewal for all countries and for loss of forest in the tropical countries. The document has been prepared in conjunction with FAO's International Year of the Forest.
Readers who have received this copy of Unasylva other than by subscription and who would like a copy of the document, and those interested in a copy with slides, may write to:
Mr Philip Wardle, Senior Forestry Economist,
Policy and Planning Service, Forestry Department,
FAO
Via delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy
<section>7</section>
FAO's field programme: The first 40 years
Maharaj K. Muthoo
Maharaj K. Muthoo is Director of the Operations Service, FAO Forestry Department, Rome.
 In 1953, only 32 years ago, FAO's field programme in forestry - which was then known as the Technical Assistance Programme - amounted to less than US$1 million a year. Fewer than 50 experts were employed in the field; in fact, the programme involved only about 30 work-years per year of fieldwork.
Today, the total value of FAO's field projects in forestry exceeds $180 million. More than 300 forestry-related FAO projects funded from extra-budgetary resources (for example, the United Nations Development Programme and Trust Funds) as well as from those of the Regular Programme (through the Technical Cooperation Programme) are in operation, with a foreign annual expenditure component of over $35 million managed by FAO. Projects are in operation in nearly every developing country in the world, covering areas as diverse as forest resource assessment and management, desertification control, rural development, improvement of fuelwood supplies, institutional strengthening, planning, appropriate forest industries, community forestry, watershed improvement and environmental management. In all, forestry projects now involve around 300 work-years per year of fieldwork.
Early beginnings. For the first 15 years of its existence, FAO's budget for field operations was somewhat lower than its Regular Programme expenditure. Field programmes were funded almost entirely from the UN Expanded Technical Assistance Programme (ETAP), and very occasionally by a Trust Fund donor. Field operations consisted essentially of advisory technical assistance missions and the granting of fellowships. Much of the budget was spent on demonstration and training equipment. Of the technical assistance requests received at that time from developing countries, about 60 percent were for improved forest management technologies, notably in logging and processing; about 30 percent for policy assistance; and some 1 0 percent for economic planning and resource surveys. This breakdown corresponds roughly to the structure of what was then FAO's Forestry Division, with its three branches for Forest Production, Forest Policies and Forest Economics.
However, the underlying philosophy of the forestry programme was very different from that of today. The programme was initially greatly concerned with inventory and survey, and the focus of work was on data collection. FAO's first survey of forest resources was published in 1948 and covered 97 countries. Three further world inventories were published, in 1953, 1958 and 1963. This activity, however, was not resumed on a major scale until the FAO/UNEP study of tropical forests, which was started in 1978 and completed in 1981.
The field programme was also different in style. It sought to develop forest management and forest industries in countries where there was very little, if any, of either. It is significant that in 1957, 75 percent of all forestry experts employed in the field programme were Europeans. Today, of course, the aim is to provide critical support to forest services and industries that are already established. And, increasingly, the tendency is to use forestry experts from developing countries to help their colleagues elsewhere. In fact, it is largely due to the success of earlier FAO forestry projects that technical cooperation among developing countries (TCDC) is now able to operate fairly effectively in the forestry sector.
By the end of the 1950s, the technical assistance programme in forestry had reached a value of $1 million, compared with a $0.7 million budget coming from the Regular Programme, and it employed about 60 forestry experts; the real period of growth was about to begin.
Table 1. Forestry field priorities, 1971-75
Category
No. of projects
% of total
No. of projects
% of total
Forest production
Forest protection
Recreation, wildlife and national parks
Utilization of forest products
Strengthening of forestry administration
Education
Research
Not classified, or multidisciplinary
Total
Note: Some projects are covered by more than one category.
The programme takes shape. In 1959, the UN Special Fund for Economic Development (UNSF) came into being, with an annual total budget of $25 million. According to a document of that era, it placed special emphasis on "projects which will demonstrate the wealth-producing potential of un-surveyed natural resources in underdeveloped countries", as well as on national training and research centres, and on surveys of limited cost which could lead to early investment. This was a significant event. The first forestry projects funded by UNSF in 1960 had a $2.5 million budget, and this figure soon increased sharply. It reached a peak in 1966, when $14 million of the Special Fund were in the forestry budget. By 1971, 56 UNSF-assisted forestry projects were in operation, with a total contribution rising to $57 million, spread over an average project duration of four to five years. This growth, however, was not at the expense of the much smaller and shorter technical assistance projects,
of which there were then 105, with a total budget of just over $5 million. Trust Fund projects had also begun to appear. By the end of 1971, 14 Trust Fund projects in forestry had been approved, with a total value of about $2 million, mainly in the fields of reforestation, logging and education.
The total value of the forestry field programme at this time reached $64 million, for some 175 projects. Over the past 14 years, the value of projects has nearly tripled, representing an average growth rate of more than 18 percent a year by value during 1971-85.
In 1970, the growth of FAO's forestry activities - it was inevitable given the requests for assistance - led to the transformation of the Forestry Division into a Forestry Department. Soon after this, ETAP and UNSF projects were merged into a single United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). Former technical assistance projects became known as UNDP small-scale projects, with budgets of less than $150000, and former UNSF projects became known as UNDP large-scale projects. UNDP introduced the idea of country programming, which fixed a ceiling for multilateral aid to any individual country for a five-year period. That ceiling was directly related to a country's programme for economic and social development. This quickly led to an improved and integrated approach to development, which replaced the former project-by-project approach. The innovation was not without its problems, of course, and those in charge of mounting field projects found they had to contend with increasingly
long lead times.
The first half of the 1970s was thus a period of rapid change. By 1972, there were field projects in 63 countries, a number which increased to 74 in 1975. Between 1971 and 1975, annual expenditure rose from about $12 million to $13.5 million but, more significantly, the nature of the programme also altered (Table 1). An analysis of the large-scale projects of that era is instructive: some of today's concerns are already discernible in this changing pattern. During the early 1970s, for example, decreasing attention was paid to forest production and forest protection emerged as a major activity. Requests for wildlife and national park management also increased significantly, mainly as a result of a booming tourist trade. However, this trend was not to continue. One reason was that political difficulties in Africa would soon lead to enormous depletion in many national parks. Tourist interest declined and has only recently begun to pick up again. Another reason was that in the
early 1970s, before the UN Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm. 1972), FAO was, unofficially, the leading UN agency for environmental matters. At that time, environment was widely identified with the conservation of wildlife and the preservation of national parks. Today, the term has acquired a far wider meaning, and the United Nations Environment Programme coordinates environmental action among all the specialized agencies in the United Nations system.
The most significant difference is undoubtedly the current emphasis on forestry for development.
The growing importance of strengthening forestry institutions is clear from the table, and this is a sector that has continued to grow - though today the emphasis is on Africa while formerly it was on Asia and Latin America. The largest growth sector, however, was the utilization of forest products, reflecting the beginning of a trend of major significance: about this time, the generation of employment began to be viewed as a development goal as important as increasing average per caput income - a purely statistical concept often unrelated to the life-style of the majority of a country's rural poor.
In many rural areas, forestry and, in some places, the textile industry are the only employment alternatives to subsistence agriculture. For this reason, the importance of forest resources as potential sources of jobs and extra income has steadily increased over the past few years. Increasing rural incomes and employment through the development of forest resources is now a major goal of the new forestry-for-development strategy. Table 2 shows the regional orientation of the programme during approximately the same period (current-year comparisons are also included). In the early 1970s, before the effects of the first Sahel drought became widely known, African forestry had not yet taken on the importance it has today, and the proportion of forestry projects in Africa declined slightly over the first few years of the decade. In Latin America it remained stable, largely because major new forestry institutions were already established in the early 1970s, and this partly accounts
for the declining rate of projects in this region during 1975-85. It fell in Europe and the Near East, as it has continued to do ever since. But the proportion in Asia and the Pacific region grew rapidly and keeps growing to this day.
One reason for this was the emerging importance of watershed management. In many areas, but particularly in Asia, uncontrolled felling on steep land had led progressively to severe soil erosion on the hills and widespread flooding in the valleys below. Reforestation of these slopes was soon to become a main concern of the field programme. This concern, together with several other factors, led to two of the programme's major current preoccupations: community forestry and rural development.
Several other major influences also began to be felt during the second half of the 1970s. One of the most significant was the financial difficulty that struck UNDP. Although this began about 1976, it did not make itself severely felt within the forestry sector much before 1981. In 1975, UNDP was providing about $15 million a year for forestry field programmes, as against the $3 million that originated from Trust Funds. The UNDP figure continued to increase in the early 1980s, when it peaked at over $24 million, and is being maintained at around the level of $20 million, as witnessed in 1984, with a slight upward trend, despite the cut-back in overall UNDP funding. The Trust Fund programme, meanwhile, has continued to expand, rapidly building up to a figure of more than $12 million by 1984. Thanks to this, the forestry field programme has been able to constantly increase its level of support through 1981-85. In fact, the size of programme handled by the Forestry Operations
Service has doubled during the decade, and its relative share of FAO's Field Programme has grown significantly.
Table 2. Forestry projects, 1971-85, by region (Extra-budgetary resources )
No.
% of total
No.
% of total
No.
% of total
Africa
Asia
Europe and the Near East
Latin America
Total
The shift toward development. The most significant difference between the field programme today and its predecessor is undoubtedly the current emphasis on forestry for development. Until the late 1970s, forestry programmes had not been explicitly concerned with questions of social equity. Their goal, broadly expressed, was to stimulate the growth of the total forestry sector. Where the benefits of that growth ended up was apparently an issue considered to be either of limited importance or beyond the direct concern of the forestry profession.
Several factors intervened to bring about decisive changes in the forestry programme. The most important was probably the Declaration of Principles and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development (WCARRD), which was organized by FAO in 1979. WCARRD played a pivotal role in convincing the aid agencies that tackling the problem of poverty in developing countries could no longer be deferred, and that the main arena for that attack should be rural areas. Trust Fund donors, notably Sweden, also played a key role in formulating a new strategy of forestry for development. Even before WCARRD, Sweden had agreed to fund a new $3.6 million FAO umbrella programme called Forestry for Local Community Development. As a result of it, the field programme could come to grips with the problems of community forestry. At the same time, the true dimensions of the fuelwood crisis were also becoming known, not least because of FAO work in quantifying
the issues involved. The Netherlands subsequently agreed to fund sizeable projects within another umbrella programme called Forestry and Rural Energy. Norway and Finland also joined in, by supporting social forestry projects aimed at rural development and environmental amelioration, an area in which Belgium and Switzerland are also funding FAO-executed projects.
Serious thought had, in fact, been given to many issues involved in reorienting the forestry programme toward rural development, even before WCARRD. One result was the preparation of a seminal paper, Forestry for development, which formed the basis of the new strategy of forestry for development. This strategy was endorsed at the Fifth Session of the FAO Committee on Forestry in May 1980, and subsequently by the FAO Conference. Regular Programme activities were then reorganized into four major programmes: these covered the key areas of forestry for development, forestry resources and the environment, forest industries and trade, and forestry institutions and investment.
The Forestry for Development programme includes three subprogrammes, on community forestry, fuelwood, and agrosilvipastoral systems. Each involves a number of field activities that encompass new approaches in the field programme. The most significant is probably the use of community forestry to increase local production of fuelwood, fodder, building-poles, fruit- and nuts, and other tree products. Large projects of this kind are currently in operation in Asia and Latin America, for example in Nepal and Peru, and there are many similar ones in Africa.
EROSION CONTROL IN HONDURAS a goal of many FAO projects
The community forestry component of the programme is growing in importance, and is likely to continue to do so. More than 200 million people still practice shifting cultivation; because of increasing population pressure and diminishing forest reserves, they have been forced to reduce the length of the fallow periods they formerly observed. The results are an increasing poverty and the widespread destruction of the tropical forest. FAO is searching for improved methods that will integrate agriculture and forestry and bring increased incomes and an improved environment to the affected areas. Promising projects have been carried out in both Asia and Central America.
A third major concern is increasing the incomes of rural people who live in or near the forest. Recent studies have underlined the importance of projects that improve the organization of the small-scale cooperatives which earn at least part of their living by gathering forest materials, producing honey or growing mushrooms, for instance. Projects of this kind are proving relatively quick and cheap, and their number is increasing. A typical project of this nature, in Papua New Guinea, is helping establish village-level crocodile farms; the villagers raise the crocodiles, which are not an endangered species in that part of the world, and sell their skins when the animals reach full growth. A project in Honduras, which has enabled associations of campesinos to participate in forest management, has increased incomes by as much as 400 percent.
Nearly half of FAO s field projects in forestry are concerned with forest resources and the environment. Many involve support to governments for the assessment, planning and management of forest resources - the traditional activities of the field programme. The largest project of this type, in Brazil, is already several years old. It has enabled and still does enable the country to take stock of its immense forest resources and develop and utilize them in a sustainable way.
A most important area of environmental action is undoubtedly watershed management. Action in this area typically involves large, integrated projects of which forestry forms only one component. At the end of 1984, FAO's Forestry Department was participating in 27 projects involving watershed management. One of the most complex is a regional project in the Fouta Djallon highlands of West Africa, calling for cooperation and coordination among several countries and institutions. Severe erosion is occurring in the highlands, and this disrupts the flow of rivers in the area, affecting 11 countries in all. The project is likely to lead to a number of investment projects.
Table 3. Forestry field priorities, 1984-85
No. of projects
% of total
Value (millions of US dollars)
Share of total value (%)
Rural development
Resources and environment
Industries and trade
Investment and institutions
Total
Note: Some projects are covered by more than one category
Table 4. TCP-funded forestry field projects, 1977-84 (Costs in thousands of US dollars)
Africa
Asia
Latin America
Europe Near East
Total
No.
Cost
No.
Cost
No.
Cost
No.
Cost
No.
Cost
Total
Trade and industry projects are essentially aimed at improving the use made of forest materials, notably but not exclusively in the pulp and paper industry. There is a great need for such projects, because half of the developing world's significant foreign-exchange costs are due to pulp and paper imports. Major projects in this area include an ambitious one in Bhutan designed to set up a forest industries complex capable of producing plywood and veneers, blackboard, sawn timber, joinery and furniture.
This article will deal later with forestry investment. But projects designed to strengthen national institutions deserve special mention here, because institutional weakness is still the major factor and a basic constraint preventing the satisfactory development and management of the world's forest resources. At least 50 operational projects included an institution-building component at the end of 1984. Many among them have training and education components concerning aspects of community forestry, which now requires foresters to act as extension agents in securing the participation of local people in planning and managing the development of their own forest resources.
Because Regular Programme and field programme activities are now so closely interwoven within FAO, it is convenient to analyse the changes that have occurred during this decade in the field programme in terms of the four components of the Regular Programme. Table 3 gives a graphic illustration of changing priorities.
The table shows the rather dramatic progress toward the new strategy achieved over the past five years. The Resources and Environment programme remains the largest of the four, but by far the most rapidly expanding area has been that of forestry for development. Over the past five years, the share in field programme expenditure of the four programmes has changed as follows:
 Rural Development: increased from 3 to 23 percent;
 Resources and Environment: decreased from 54 to 50 percent;
 Industries and Trade: decreased from 19 to 13 percent;
 Investment and Institutions: decreased from 24 to 14 percent.
The rapid increase in the rural development sector is largely due to support from Trust Fund donors, which overshadows the UNDP contribution in this area: about two-thirds of the costs of the Rural Development field programme are provided by Trust Funds. The situation is reversed in the other three sectors: in round terms. UNDP provides about 70 percent of support for Investments and Institutions, 80 percent for Resources and Environment, and 90 percent for Industries and Trade.
A number of other important components of the field programme merit further analysis. The first is the arrival of FAO's own Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP) in 1976, which added a new dimension to the programme. TCP now enables the forestry sector to execute quickly a number of small-scale, catalytic but crucial projects every year. These are proving especially useful in providing critical bridging support (between project phases, for example), helping in such emergencies as outbreaks of pests and tree diseases, preparing investment projects and supporting training. Since 1976-77, there have been 216 TCP forestry projects (Table 4). As might be expected, Africa had the highest regional share (80 projects), followed by Latin America and the Caribbean (57), Asia and the Pacific (51), and Europe and the Near East (28).
The UN/FAO World Food Programme (WFP), since its inception in 1963, has contributed substantial investment funds to forestry projects in the form of food for work, particularly in rural development programmes. During the period 196669, when WFP had considerable quantities of surplus food at its disposal, some 17 percent of its resources were devoted to the forestry sector. By the end of 1971, 48 WFP forestry projects had taken place, and 27, with a WFP input of $75 million, were still operational.
WFP has been active in a number of areas: forestry training and extension, land reclamation, range and watershed management, reforestation and forest conservation, village wood-lot plantations, sand dune fixation, and establishing windbreaks and green belts and fodder trees and shrubs. It is currently involved in some 85 forestry projects, with a WFP input of $207 million. Nearly half of these projects, by value, are in the Asia and Pacific region. Many of them are being carried out with technical support from FAO's Forestry Department.
Forestry investment projects have been left till last for the reason that investment projects are often the culmination of the field programme's work, much of which is of a pre-investment nature. There are many stages in forestry development, starting with forest inventories and assessments, progressing through the build-up of institutions, forestry education and training, and the testing and demonstration of new ideas for forest management and production, and culminating in the elaboration of schemes for investment follow-up. It is at this stage that individual countries begin to reap the rewards of their patient progress toward the full realization of their forest's potential.
Since 1979, FAO and UNDP have shared the costs of the systematic monitoring of projects with investment potential. In that year, three FAO forestry projects (in Brazil, Ghana and Morocco) were selected for investment monitoring. In the following year, five were selected. An increasing level of investment has continued ever since, thanks mainly to the role of the FAO Investment Centre in identifying and preparing suitable projects for consideration by the major financing organizations such as the World Bank and the Regional Development Banks.
Over the past decade, there have been 43 forestry investment projects, with a total investment of $2318 million and external investment of $810 million. This massive programme has been funded primarily by the World Bank and its soft-loan branch, the International Development Association, which together contributed nearly $600 million, in equal parts. Table 5 shows how the investment projects have been distributed by region and by project category.
Special mention should be made of the Investment Centre's relatively new role in finding finance for investment projects in the fields of fuelwood and community forestry. These include, for instance, a $10 million loan from the Asian Development Bank for a project to increase the supply of fuelwood, fruit and construction timber in Sri Lanka, an $11 million community forestry project in Bangladesh to replenish homestead wood-lots and strip planting along roads, canals and railways, and a $5 million loan for a similar project in Haiti. Three fuelwood projects have recently been financed in Africa: in Benin, Burkina Faso and Ethiopia. This last is a $24 million first-phase project to plant 15 000 ha to supply fuelwood and charcoal to the nation's capital, Addis Ababa.
This article is intended to provide a sketch of the work carried out by FAO's Forestry Department (formerly the Forestry Division) since 1950, when the Expanded Technical Assistance Programme, as the UN General Assembly instituted it at its First and Second Sessions, began to function within FAO and other agencies of the United Nations. It deals exclusively with the volume of forestry field projects and the evolution of FAO forestry aid policy over the past 35 years. Inevitably, the policy will continue to evolve, as new needs arise, and research finds new ways to satisfy them.
Table 5. Regional distribution of investment projects, by category, 1975-85
Africa
Asia
Latin America
North Africa/Near East
Europe
Total
Fuelwood and community forestry
Environment
Industrial plantations
Forest industries
Logging and roads
Total
<section>8</section>
Part of African culture
Mankoto Ma Mbalele
In a special issue of Unasylva in 1977 on "Game as food", Zaire's Mankoto Ma Mbalele, a member of his country's Institute for Nature Conservation and a former FAO Fellowship student at Canada's Laval University, discussed the importance of game-hunting in African life and the need for extensive game-raising. The article is reprinted here as part of the retrospective on 40 years of forestry at FAO; but its content is also relevant to the theme of this issue of Unasylva - forestry and the crisis in Africa.
 Throughout Africa, hunting for food constitutes the most extensive single form of wildlife utilization. It is carried out in a generally haphazard, uncoordinated way. In regions rich in wildlife where there are almost no other sources of animal proteins, the rational organization of a carefully studied hunting system could resolve, to a large extent, the problem of protein shortage.
This objective can be attained by adopting measures specifying the hunting zones, the species to be hunted and the hunting season by region and by species, based on biological and ecological knowledge of the species.
Game cropping is a controlled, but still extensive, method of wildlife utilization. One formula adopted in this type of utilization is to cull the annual surplus of animals in national parks and wildlife reserves - the culling being done only by responsible authorities. The meat is sold on the spot to the nearest dwellers. The bones are turned into fertilizer. The trophies and skins are auctioned off, usually to craftsmen who turn them into objets d'art or souvenirs for tourists.
Game farming or rational livestock-raising is an intensive and artificial form of wildlife utilization resembling animal husbandry. It is concerned only with certain particularly profitable species and requires a certain degree of organization:
 Choice of wild animal species suitable for ranching. Elements to be taken into consideration are high rate of reproduction, precocity, meat yield, resistance to disease, behaviour under controlled conditions, ease of rearing, the quality of the product, etc.
 Analysis of biophysical and socioeconomic conditions leading to selection of a pilot zone suitable for experimentation.
 Preparation of infrastructure (accessibility, provision of water, construction of enclosures and buildings) and installation of animal husbandry and sanitary equipment, together with the equipment essential for the preparation and storage of the products.
 Setting up of a collective facility for marketing of the products, social promotion of the project and the training of personnel.
 Dissemination of knowledge on production, processing and marketing methods, together with provision for the information and participation of the local populations so that they can benefit from this applied research.
The indisputable usefulness of national parks is here clearly seen: on the one hand they make possible the basic ecological studies necessary for obtaining the best returns from the regions around them; and on the other they provide the livestock raisers with the animal breeds best adapted to these regions. Seen from this angle, national parks constitute real natural laboratories for scientific study and the advancement of knowledge.
TANZANIAN WILDLIFE TRAINING wise management is essential
In addition to its usefulness for nutritional purposes, wildlife plays a far from negligible role in the national economy of many African countries, through the sale of collector's items or through tourism: hunting tourism (search for trophies) or visual tourism ("collection" through observation). And we know that the "hidden" contribution of tourism to the balance of payments through the hard currencies it brings in can assume enormous proportions, as in the case of Kenya and Tanzania.
In order to reduce the dangers of this commercialized aspect of wildlife utilization, control is essential.
Wildlife utilization consists, for practical purposes, in reconciling man's, recreational requirements with his nutritional requirements.
African wildlife could thus constitute a powerful natural factor in development. Yet the food potential of certain animal species - in Zaire, for example - is far from being exploited in a rational manner. Research aimed at making the best use of this potential could therefore help to solve the particularly acute problem of malnutrition.
The rational organization and utilization of "domestic game" would be of benefit, above all, to those living in rural areas, among whom many cases of protein deficiency are found, and who are usually exploited by urban profiteers.
This type of research is also justified by the fact that no work in this field is being carried out in Zaire, any more than in the other French-speaking African countries.
Encouraging progress has been made in experimental farms in southern and East Africa. In Zaire, projects are under study for the rational utilization of wildlife through organized hunting activities in the immense hunting reserve of Bili-Uere. Much of the basic infrastructure for this reserve has already been installed thanks to a Zaire/UNDP/FAO project. Wildlife inventories have been carried out and show the presence of abundant and varied wildlife. At a later stage it might be possible to undertake rational ranching of the large Derby eland, an antelope characteristic of this reserve.
A further justification for wildlife utilization is of a biological and ecological nature. In this respect, wildlife offers a number of advantages as compared with domestic livestock. Studies have shown that the biomass per hectare is much greater with wild ungulates than with domestic animals under extensive stock-raising systems.
According to Alain Monfort, in the Sudanese-Zambezian savannahs of East Africa the biomasses of wild ungulates are fairly stable and lie between 6 and 3 tonnes/km while in the same phytogeographic field, charges of barely 2.3 tonnes/km are obtained with traditional domestic livestock and an average of 4.6 tonnes/km in the managed ranches.
The reason for this difference is that the wild herbivores make better use of their habitat than do the domestic livestock, by utilizing fully all the food resources of the savannah. One may observe, for instance, that each one of several species feeds on a different part of the shrubs and explores different vegetative levels, thus avoiding considerable wastage of the nutritional possibilities of the environment. This is not the case with domestic cattle, which browse only on certain grasses, ignoring those for which they have no liking.
The big antelopes are infinitely better adapted to the African biotope. As a result of natural selection over a very long period of time, they are usually very resistant to diseases and withstand droughts better. Even if they cannot find anything to drink, the oryx, for example, manage to keep their weight.
Moreover, practical trials have shown that the large elands such as the oryx become as docile as cattle provided they are captured young and raised on the bottle. Africa's big fauna, through the play of death and birth, constitute a renewable natural resource that can be easily utilized, provided no inroads are made on its capital. Despite the massacres which have taken place, certain countries of Black Africa, including Zaire, still possess considerable wildlife potentials.
The fairly diversified network of national parks and associated reserves already in existence in Africa could provide the animal surplus needed for carrying out original trials on the raising of animals better adapted to our conditions. This would constitute a real "recourse to African authenticity".
The need is already being felt in the Sahelian countries, where the Sahara is steadily advancing, taking over the poor Savannah. This means that a plan of control should be established without further delay, and new methods of cultivation and livestock-raising should be adopted immediately, capable of guaranteeing higher food resources with species better able to withstand natural calamities (drought, famines).
But this does not mean, of course, that wildlife can resolve all the world's troubles. Wildlife is only one alternative among many others, and represents primarily a solution for the benefit of rural populations.
It is through wildlife management that we begin to see how African countries can find reasonable and inexpensive solutions in their search for ways and means to solve the problem of hunger and provide food for their peoples.
<section>9</section>
On the return of Unasylva
T.M. Pasca
The publication of Unasylva was suspended after issue 104 in 1972 and was resumed with issue 105 in 1974. The magazine's new editor, T.M. Pasca, who served in that capacity from 1974 to 1983, told the story of its revival in that first issue.
Unasylva
 With this issue, after an absence of two years, Unasylva resumes regular publication. We have our readers to thank for this.
Soon after it was announced that FAO was suspending Unasylva for economy reasons, letters and statements began to arrive urging that this decision be reversed and the magazine brought back. To these messages was added the important support of leaders of national forest services during the Seventh World Forestry Congress in Buenos Aires and the First Session of the FAO Committee on Forestry in Rome in 1972. To bring Unasylva back to life, however, required the formal approval of FAO's Member Governments. This was forthcoming at the FAO Conference of November 1973, where the necessary funds were appropriated.
The resumption of Unasylva is also due to Leslie J. Vernell, who was its editor since its second issue in 1948 and who retired last year. He, more than anyone else, made it a solid, respected and useful journal, and brought it a faithful following. He remains its editor emeritus.
In resuming publication, Unasylva's aim is to continue bringing its readers the kind of authoritative articles and information which are useful today and still worthy of being read years later in the forestry collections of libraries throughout the world. This has been Unasylva's strong point since it was founded 27 years ago. We will attempt to make it stronger.
If a magazine expects to be stimulating and pertinent, it should take account of the opinions of its readers. We look forward to having yours about anything we publish.
To those who have been inconvenienced or in doubt about its status during the time Unasylva did not appear, we apologize. And to all those who helped bring Unasylva back, we send thanks for the opportunity to continue serving international forestry and forest industries.
T.M.P.
<section>a</section>
The world of forestry
Appropriate technology in logging
Acorns: a crop for the future
World timber trade increases
Wood energy in dry countries
FAO promotes wood energy
Appropriate technology in logging
Logging operations in developing countries can be divided into two broad groups: those carried out in natural forests and those carried out in plantations. The natural forests still dominate in the tropical regions. It was in the natural forests that forest harvesting first began, and in many countries they still are the only or the main source of wood supply for the forest-based industries. Harvesting in these natural forest types is oriented toward a few large trees of high commercial value. With rapid depletion of much of the natural forest resources in developing countries and in light of the market pressures for wood products, there is now an increasing awareness of the importance of utilizing the lesser-known and underutilized species as well as more small-diameter trees, in order to be able to extend the forest resource base to meet present and future needs.
Plantation or human-made forests are increasingly being established in the developing countries for productive as well as protective purposes. Often they have been set up as buffer plantations for the industry, to decrease the negative impact of the receding natural forests. Short-rotation plantations have been established to supply the fibre requirements of new pulp and paper mills and for large-scale programmes of energy production, or as a source of fibre-wood or charcoal supply for the rural and urban populations. In some countries the established plantations have already been harvested on reaching their first or second rotation cycle, while in many others the human-made forests are gradually reaching their rotation age and decisions on the harvesting technology and systems have to he made.
The logging equipment used for large trees in natural tropical forests, such as heavy-duty wheeled and crawler tractors, yarders, trucks and loading equipment, is usually trig and costly, and many of these technology alternatives are inappropriate in the human-made forests. On the other hand, many of the single- or multipurpose logging machines currently used in the plantation forests of highly developed countries are just as inappropriate at present for use in most of the developing countries.
The described scenario of different forest formations - in addition to the various existing logging alternatives and the interaction of the climate, soil characteristics, and the morphological configuration of the terrain, among other variables, together with the wide scale of socio-economic conditions prevailing in the countries - is a clear indication that the choice of an appropriate logging technology is not easy.
LOGGING OPERATIONS IN NIGERIA
An appropriate level of mechanization should he adopted according to the conditions prevailing in each c country. To a large extent, this is determined by the cost ratio between labour and machines. With respect to the machines, it is not only the initial price of the equipment that is important tent hut also the operational costs and degree of operational efficiency that can he attained in each country. If, for example, spare parts are scarce and costly, mechanical repair shops are not readily available, and there are few trained operators, sophisticated logging equipment will not meet the requirement of the country hut will constitute a burden.
There is therefore a recognized need to develop or adopt the technology - high, intermediate or basic - best suited to a set of situations or combined effects related to characteristics of the raw material, the terrain and the level and quality of production: the degree of mechanization and efficiency of actual logging operations: the availability and cost of labour; occupational and safety levels; energy availability and cost; and socioeconomic as well as ecological conditions on site, among other things. As the above-mentioned conditions can vary greatly from country to country, the transfer of logging methods must be undertaken with a high degree of planning, work studies, research and training.
The switch to smaller trees coming from natural forests and plantations in many developing countries strongly indicates an urgent need to modify the traditional logging methods or systems and adopt appropriate logging technology together with efficient work organization. It is interesting to note that in many industrialized countries, smaller equipment is being reintroduced so as to reduce capital investment and fuel operating costs. An example is the use of the agricultural tractor with forestry attachments. This approach can also be applied in many developing countries.
The role of FAO. In order to assist developing countries in improving their harvesting operations, an important activity of the Forest Logging and Transport Branch of the FAO Forest Industries Division is to promote, undertake or participate in case-studies of selected logging equipment and methods to investigate and determine production and cost levels under specific working conditions through work and time studies. In addition, work organization is analysed and defined in the most efficient way. The results of the case-studies are widely distributed to the interested countries.
The basic or intermediate logging techniques considered for case-studies consist of oxen logging, forestry logging attachments for agricultural tractors small ground-skidding winches, plastic chutes, small mechanical loading cranes, trailers for wood transport and self-loading small trucks, among others.
The success of case-studies to he undertaken depends to a great extent on the direct assistance provided by the local institutions. The Forest Logging and Transport Branch would therefore be very grateful to hear from interested forestry organizations willing to give the necessary support in undertaking these case-studies in their countries on introduced or locally developed appropriate logging technology.
R. Heinrich
FAO Forest Industries Division
Acorns: a crop for the future
The acorns from oaks (Quercus) and tan oaks (Lithocarpus) have been used as food for many thousands of years. They occur in the early town sites in the Zagros Mountains and at Catal Huyuk (6000 BC) and were a staple food for many people until after AD 1900. Now they are used by only a few groups, most notably the Koreans - between 1 million and 2.5 million litres of acorns a year are harvested in the Republic of Korea. Mook is available in the United States at Korean delicatessens.
Acorns are a perennial "grain" crop that can play an important role in restoring degraded lands and feeding hungry and malnourished people. They provide up to 600 kcal and 8 g of protein per 100 g. They offer well-balanced amino-acids that are complemented by milk, legumes or meat, and they provide plentiful vitamin A (180 IU/g) and vitamin C (up to 55 mg per 100 g).
Many oaks will produce 500 litres of acorns per tree when mature. Acorn production of 3 500 kg a year is common in wild forests. Higher yields could be achieved in oak plantations. In many cultures, acorns were once the "grain" of choice. They can be again, in sustainable agroforestry systems.
Further study of all the oaks is needed to identify the sweetest, best-tasting acorns for food and the oiliest acorns for making acorn oil - which is very similar to olive oil.
LOGGING OPERATIONS IN TURKEY
LOGGING OPERATIONS IN INDIA a variety of appropriate logging technologies
Oak trees also provide fodder for animals (acorns and leaves); cork for insulation, bottle corks, and many other purposes; sugar from scale insects - the "manna from Heaven" mentioned in the Bible; food for wildlife, especially game species (deer, turkeys, and hears); erosion control excellent shapes and colours for use in landscaping and for shade; a variety of hardwoods for use in furniture and manufacturing; excellent wood, including fuelwood and food for silkworms. Oaks are also involved in several types of mushroom anti fungi production, including shitake and truffles.
ACORNS AND ACORN-MUFFINS a useful food source
They could he used for land reclamation and agro-ecosystem development in many areas of the world. The various species can tolerate a very wide range of climatic and soil conditions, including very hot or cold climates very saline or alkaline soil, and wet or intermittently flooded ground.
In the western United States, oaks were a vital element in the food chain for native Americans. They provided up to half a tonne of acorns a family every year. These could he gathered in 24 hours. They stored well, for several years, and made life easy.
Acorns contain ample amino-acids for nutrition in a balanced diet for people, cattle, pigs, sheep, and chickens. Unleached hitter acorns may cause problems if fed in high proportions, hut leached and sweet acorns present none. Acorn meal tastes somewhat like peanut butter corn meal and toasted almonds and can he mixed with flour in recipes as if it were corn meal
David Bainbridge Berkeley, California
World timber trade increases
The volume of world trade increases by some 8 percent in 1984, in contrast with the very modest pick-up in the preceding year, which had followed two years of stagnation and decline.
The import boom in the United States accounted for about one-half of the rise, but a considerable stimulus came also from the nearly 6 percent growth in imports into the Economic Commission for Europe (ECE) countries. Imports into the non-oil developing countries also picked up in 1984, though not enough to offset earlier falls, whereas those of oil exporters continued to contract.
All country groups, although to markedly different degrees, registered substantial growth in export volume in 1984, with especially rapid expansion coming in Japan, where exports rose at almost twice the average world rate. Exports from North America also increased very fast, owing largely to the dynamism of trade between Canada and the United States. US exports grew nearly as fast as those from Europe, though at less than one-third of the rate of import growth.
The uneven growth of world trade led to large imbalances, with opposite signs, in the United States and Japan. The continued widening of the United States deficit stemmed mainly from the upsurge in imports, while for Japan the spectacular growth in the surplus was caused by its strong export performance. In Europe - both Western Europe and the centrally planned economies - there were some improvements in current accounts, mainly because of favourable export developments.
The large share of intraregional flows in Western European trade makes the region very dependent on its own trade developments. Thus, though the volume of Western European exports to the United States rose by 39 percent in 1984, this increase accounted for less than half of Western Europe's export growth of some 7-8 percent. For the European centrally planned economies, the intraregional trade links are even stronger: a rise of over 50 percent in their exports to the US contributed only half a percentage point to the area's export growth.
There was also a large rise in 1984 in the volume of trade between the Eastern European countries and the USSR. This probably reflected fuel and raw-material deliveries to the Eastern European countries to support the upswing of production growth in the latter.
In 1984, East-West trade continued to expand. Western trade with Eastern Europe showed a pronounced pick-up, but Western trade with the USSR slowed substantially. In both cases, the pace of development appeared to speed up as the year progressed. At the same time, the Western trade deficit with the Eastern countries widened further (see table).
ECE and East-West trade: changes in trade volume (Percentages)
ECE exports
Developed market economies
Centrally planned economies
ECE imports
Developed market economies
Centrally planned economies
East-West trade
Western exports to Eastern Europe
USSR
Western imports from Eastern Europe
USSR
Source: ECE Economic Survey of Europe in 1984-85.
SHIP IN PORT-GENTIL, GABON world trade grew in 1984
In trade with Eastern Europe, the rapid growth of the Western markets and a strong export drive by the Eastern European countries contributed to the rise in Western imports from that region. In terms of commodities, manufactured and particularly semi-manufactured goods, primary products and fuels contributed to the rise. Western exports to Eastern Europe, which had stopped declining only in 1983, rose in 1984. The relatively slow growth of Western exports reflects Eastern European countries policies aimed at a further improvement of their financial positions. The growth in Western deliveries was concentrated in primary products. Semi-manufactures and consumer goods.
After the strong revival in 1984, the outlook for world trade in 1985 is now one of a more moderate increase reflecting in particular a reduced growth of imports into the United States. Western European imports will make a significantly higher contribution to world trade than in 1984, although no increase in their growth rate is foreseen. In most of the European centrally planned economies, improvements of the external balance remain an important policy priority. However, after the significant easing of the balance-of-payments constraint in the last few years, there should remain room for continued growth of imports from the West.
ECE report
Wood energy in dry countries
An FAO study carried out in 1983 attempted to assess the fuelwood situation now and up to the year 2000 in Morocco, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic and Tunisia and to recommend plans, plantation programmes and projects that could be undertaken to remedy the situation.
In the Sudan, Morocco and Tunisia, fuelwood (including charcoal) is the most important source of energy used for domestic purposes (cooking and heating). It is used by troth rural and urban populations. Charcoal and fuelwood substitutes such as fossil fuels and, to a lesser extent, electricity are increasingly being used in the towns. The poor, however, have even in towns to depend on fuelwood; in rural areas they use animal dung and agricultural residues. In the Syrian Arab Republic, fuelwood is not an important source of energy, because fossil fuels and electricity are extensively used instead. Thus, the contribution of fuelwood to total energy consumption for domestic purposes in the countries visited was found to he as follows: the Sudan, 85 percent: Morocco, 87 percent; Tunisia. 73 percent; and the Syrian Arab Republic, only 0.4 percent.
The sources of fuelwood - which are mainly the natural forests - are diminishing and degrading at a fast rate, mainly because of an alarming amount of overcutting and encroachment on the forests by agriculture (especially mechanized agriculture in the case of the Sudan) but also because of overgrazing, fire and a lack of means for proper forest management. The one exception to this is the Syrian Arab Republic.
Regarding the four countries visited, it can be said that the arid and semi-arid areas of the Sudan are in a situation of acute fuelwood scarcity: even with overcutting, the needs of the population cannot be met. In the remaining parts of the country, a deficit will evolve before the year 2000: needs will be met only by overcutting. All the other three countries are already in a deficit situation.
The total deficit per year is 16.2 million m for the four countries combined. The deficit in arid and semi-arid parts of the Sudan is 3.2 million m; in Morocco, 10.5 m: in Tunisia, 2.2 million m; and in the Syrian Arab Republic. 0.3 million m. The total consumption, and hence the deficit, of these countries is increasing in spite of the use of substitutes, because of increasing populations; it is estimated that their total deficit by the year 2000 will be over 19 million m a year.
It can be said in general that there are no technical problems (e.g., planting techniques, choice of species and production of seedlings) in solving the fuelwood problem of the region, though certain details of this aspect may be improved: for example. Tree-breeding and genetics and soil identification. The tree-planting policies and the laws relating to them are not an obstacle to solving the problem either, though some of their provisions could be improved.
The real difficulties in solving this serious problem are social and economic - a lack of awareness on the part of the people and politicians and hence a lack of political decisions aiming to stop the continued destruction and degradation of existing forests and providing the means for proper forest management. Proper management may more than double the present production of the natural forests. As is known, the continuing destruction of the forests will result not only in inadequate fuelwood supplies but also in a scarcity of other forest products, and in soil erosion, floods and environmental destruction.
On the basis of the existing deficit and that anticipated for the year 2000, a programme of plantations in the different ecological zones of each country has been prepared. It has been emphasized that the present rate of tree-planting is inadequate and cannot therefore solve the problem, has to he substantially accelerated, and without delay. A project proposal for the establishment of plantations for fuelwood production has also been prepared, and other projects, which donor countries may finance in the countries of the region, and which aim to remedy the situation, have been identified.
E.D. Michaelides
FAO promotes wood energy
Forest biomass is one of the most promising sources of energy for developing countries, troth because of the opportunity it provides to replace imported fuels and because intensified management of the forest resource helps to promote rural development and employment. The saving of foreign currency resulting from a reduction in imported energy provides an economic justification for investment in the technology needed to convert wood for use as industrial fuel. In this context, the Forest Industries Division of FAO is implementing a Wood Energy for Development Programme which aims to promote the development of dendro-energy projects using the "credit" from the replacement of imported fuels.
Through the Wood for Energy project carried out in Honduras and funded by the United Nations Interim Fund for Science and Technological for Development, the Division has shown that an investment of US$10 million will suffice to fund the equivalent of 60 000 tonnes of oil - worth US$13 million - annually creating 4 000 new job opportunities in rural sectors to produce charcoal which will he supplied to two cement factories. It has been calculated that the initial investment will he recovered in two and a half years.
This investment has not taken into consideration several additional and important benefits such as the rehabilitation of deforested lands: the control of soil erosion and the improvement of watersheds and wildlife habitats; a more productive use of marginal lands; the redistribution of national revenues toward rural sectors, with direct effects on general living conditions; and a more integrated, rational and efficient use of forest resources.
In the light of this experience, and others in Brazil, the investment of US$2 500 for each new job created seems attractive and has encouraged the adoption of wood energy in technologies in other countries of Central America and the Caribbean subregion, and also in Southeast Asia and Africa.
Similar dendro-energy projects are being implemented in Brazil, Canada, India, Paraguay, the Philippines, Sweden, the United States, Uruguay and Finland, where forest resources as an industrial and commercial source of energy are contributing significantly to the national energy balance and are expected to make a higher contribution in the future.
The Forestry Department's regular programme supports rural development based on the use of forest resources as fuel. Activities carried out by the Division in 1984, as in previous years, include the following:
1. The preparation of technical documents to enable new projects to benefit from existing knowledge and experience. Several papers have been published or are in preparation:
 Simple technologies for charcoal-making.
 Industrial technologies for charcoal production
 Wood and charcoal gasification and its potential contribution to energy generation.
 Small steam power plants for electricity generation.
 Timber-drying with wood based energy
 Energy conservation in mechanical forest industries.
2. Support for activities to develop appropriate wood energy conversion systems. The study "Combined production of charcoal and electricity through the pyrolysis of lignicellulosic material" is in preparation.
3. Participation in conferences, seminars and workshops, and support for cooperative networks concerned with wood-based energy.
M.A. Trossero
FAO Forest Industries Division
<section>b</section>
Books
Features of Mediterranean forests
Forests and the law
A focus on Zaire
Improving tropical genetics
Features of Mediterranean forests
La fort circummditerranenne et ses problmes. A Seigue. Paris. Editions Maisonneuve et Larose and Agence de coopration culturelle et technique. 1985. 502 pp.
In his preface to this authoritative work, the fifth in the Techniques agricoles et productions mditerranennes series, R.G. Fontaine (former Director of FAO's Forest Resources Division) offers some personal reflections on Mediterranean forests. Emphasizing their originality, whether they form "natural landscapes" or "humanized landscapes". Fontaine recalls how, in 1911, the Madrid forestry congress recommended the creation of an organization to cooperate in studying problems and possible solutions. This led to the birth in 1922 of the Silva mediterranea organization, whose activities were revived by FAO in 1948.
ANCIENT ROMAN OLIVE PRESS IN NORTH AFRICA evidence of a tree-filled past
It is the characteristic Mediterranean ecosystem that gives the landscape its typical appearance: plantations of fruit trees on terraces separated by low walls, plantations of poplars combined with vines, or the mixed agriculture Italians call promiscua, practised in hilly areas. This integration of agriculture, forestry and animal husbandry, as Fontaine says, means that it is difficult to solve the problems of forests without also tackling the human problems of the populations living in them.
Seigue devotes much of his effort to explaining these problems. They have, he says, no "radical solution" but they are not "totally insoluble".
By way of introduction, the author raises four questions. Is there a unity and uniqueness that make it proper to speak of Mediterranean forests? What are the climatic anti soil conditions that characterize them? What is the place of the Mediterranean forest in prehistory anti history? What are the limits of the Mediterranean forest'?
To answer these questions Seigue takes us with him through the maquis and the garrigue of Provence, the matorral of Spain, the xeronuvi of Greece, the ahrachd of the Arab-speaking countries, and the Italian macchia landscapes so characteristic that "in each country the Mediterranean native feels at home when encountering them".
Forest vegetation is closely linked to the complex Mediterranean climate, which explains its great variety. The author points to tropical influences in the summer, temperate and humid influences in the winter, the high pressure from the Atlantic which strengthens the cool rainy winds, the fairly frequent circulation of polar air - a climate, in short, not very favourable to forests. But al though flora is heavily dependent on climate, it also draws life from the soil, where lies "the hidden face of the Mediterranean forests".
A brief historical review dates the first appearance of the farmer - and therefor of the disturber of the Mediterranean forest - at 10 000 years ago in the Near East. Not only the rural people hut also the navigators made inroads the forest. Cretans, Phoenicians, Greeks - all timber producers - dominated the Mediterranean basin with their immense fleets, while people with little or no forest, like the Egyptians, depended on them. The author traces the major sea routes for the supply of timber from the exporter nations - the Maghreb, Spain and Sicily - to the shipyards in southern Syria, North Africa and Egypt.
Finally. Seigue defines the boundaries and the territorial distribution of the Mediterranean forest a delimitation that can be geographic, bioclimatic, or phytogeographic.
A major part of the work is devoted to Mediterranean flora: oaks, which have a chapter to themselves; other broad-leaved species, such as chestnuts, poplars, willows, ash trees, almond trees, olive trees and many others; and conifers (pines, cedars, firs, Junipers). The foreign species introduced are still quite frequently the subject of controversy, despite the fact that they have now become a familiar feature: eucalypts, with plantations covering 1 000 000 ha, and Australian acacias, usually constituting the understorey for eucalypts.
Seigue analyses the productive role of the Mediterranean forest, both for the people living on the edge of it and using it for subsistence, and for industrial purposes: fuelwood (mainly oaks, whose calorific value is very high, and olive trees); timber (eucalypts in Morocco, poplars in the Near East and Italy, conifers elsewhere); wood pulp, which some countries (Algeria, Egypt, Israel, Tunisia) do not produce although they have a very active pulp and paper industry; and lastly cork, resin, essential oils (extracted mainly from eucalypts) and edible products, foremost among them the highly prized truffle.
Diagrams, maps, tables and a very full bibliography complete this study. If, however, one reservation may be made, it is about the presentation of the many photographs illustrating the book, whose reproduction leaves much to be desired. This is a pity considering the variety of subjects represented. This detail will not, however, prevent this work from interesting all those - whether lay readers, specialists or simply "Mediterraneans" - who would like to learn something more about these forests.
Forests and the law
L'environnement et la fort. Strasbourg, Socit franaise pour le droit et l'environnement (SFDE). 1984. 307 pp.
This volume consists of papers presented at the symposium organized jointly by SFDE and the Association internationale des entretiens cologiques and held in Dijon from 13 to 15 March 1984. Participants studied the subject from various angles, which can be divided into two categories: the forest's protective, economic and social functions, and the forest and the law. The first part of the book is mainly devoted to the study of wood as raw material and energy source, as well as to forest management - a concept that here goes beyond the somewhat simplistic notion "controlled felling" to include the "need" and the "obligation" to manage. Also studied are agriculture and livestock-raising in relation to the forest, and the question of customary rights and local customs, rights from the past which are now gradually disappearing. A sociological analysis of forest utilization envisages two concepts of the natural resources, one "essentialist", advocating its conservation, and the
other "instrumental", wanting to see it transformed into a recreational area.
In the second category are a study of institutions and their role in the protection of wooded land, and a paper on the evolution of forest land-law structures and the ambiguity of the forest-soil relationship. Other authors consider the abuse of forests, against which "general penal law and forest penal law unite" to ensure the protection of the forest heritage, through fiscal provisions aimed at the conservation of wooded land. Other subjects covered are special systems of protection, particularly against large-scale exploitation, fires and natural disasters.
The symposium represented by this volume constitutes another laudable attempt to make the public more aware of its forests, not only for its own enjoyment but also, and above all, for the maintenance of the great biological balances.
A focus on Zaire
Premier Symposium sur Fort: richesse nationale a prserver. Department of the Environment, Conservation of Nature and Tourism (DECNT), Republic of Zaire. 1984. 439 pp.
"By drawing on a mere 10 percent of our potential, we could become a giant among Africa's wood producers." It was with this statement, which reflects Zaire's concern about its forest resources - so little utilized as compared with its mines (only 1.15 percent of the country's total export earnings are derived from timber, as against 83.2 percent from the mining sector) - that the first symposium on Zaire's forests opened in Kinshasa on 15 April 1984.
This publication, which contains 31 contributions by Zairian and non-Zairian participants, gives the reader a very clear picture both of the extent of Zaire's forest resources - almost half the country's total area - and of the enormous problems involved in developing them. The papers presented at the symposium range from the development of the wood industry in Zaire to the problems of forest utilization; from the concept of the renewability and permanence of the forests to that of their vulnerability (e.g., the forest of Mayombe; from the energy crisis in Zaire to means of overcoming it by recovering wood waste.
The first part of the book relates to the economic role of the forest. It opens with a statement on the present situation and future prospects of the forest industry in Zaire by the Secretary-General of DECNT, who describes the past situation, culminating in the period between 1960 and 1973 when fellers' main concern was to export logs to the detriment of the processing of forest products. This trend contributed to a dramatic fall in the value-added of wood products. The restrictions on the export of logs which followed, together with the "Zairianization" of the industry - an attempt to redress the situation by transferring most forest enterprises to nationals - encountered several snags: inadequate capital, lack of management experience, unskilled and hence not very productive labour ignorance of wood markets, and so on. Not until 1978 was the forestry sector finally able to begin moving along the path to development.
As regards trade in wood products, one of the authors informs us that while the Ivory Coast exports 3 million m a year, wood exports from Zaire are barely 120 000 m - a ridiculous figure when it is remembered that 60 percent of Africa's tropical forests lie within the boundaries of Zaire. The reasons for the low export figures are the absence of infrastructure (port capacity, transport facilities) anti a lack of large, high-technology plants.
Another constraint, one participant points out, is the overpricing of valuable sawnwoods, the only commodity competitive on the world market. Construction companies are now showing an increasing tendency to use substitutes like aluminium. It would therefore be advisable, he says, to encourage the veneer and plywood industries, which would use lesser-known species whose less-expensive products could more easily be sold on the local market.
Several authors deal with the energy crisis. In Zaire, as in most developing countries, wood is the only source of energy for 80 percent of the population. A simple estimate of consumption is stunning - 20 million m per year equivalent to 20 times the annual output of Zaire's forest industries. But solutions do exist: the recuperation for energy purposes of sawmill waste and logging waste, selective felling, and the creation of fuelwood plantations. In addition, both the combustion and the gasification of this biomass can be used on an industrial scale.
The second part of the publication is devoted chiefly to the ecological role of the forest, including deforestation and the effects on the environment of the suppression of certain forest ecosystems - as, for example, the progressive destruction of the forest of Mayombe. These partly explain the climatic disturbances observed in the subregion of Bas-Fleuve, a forest "delicately maintained by the ocean mists". Under the Unesco Man and the Biosphere Programme. Zaire has set up two biosphere reserves, at Yangambi and Luki, to protect its forest and wildlife resources.
Improving tropical genetics
Provenance and genetic improvement strategies in tropical forest trees. R.D Barnes and G.L. Gibson, eds. Proceedings of a Joint Work Conference on Provenance and Genetic Improvement Strategies in Tropical Forest Trees, Mutare, Zimbabwe, 9-14 April 1984. Commonwealth Forestry Institute. Oxford/Zimbabwe Forestry Commission. 1984. 662 pp. Price: 15 stg.
These conference proceedings contain the papers presented at a joint meeting of IUFRO working parties on Tropical Species and Provenances (52.02.08), Breeding Tropical Species (52.03.01), and Breeding Southern Pines (52.03.13), held with the collaboration of the Zimbabwe Forestry Commission. In addition to 86 voluntary papers on species/provenance trials and tree improvement programmes in it number of tropical countries, seven invited papers are included in the proceedings.
Also included are four papers prepared as a result of discussions during either the conference itself or the training course held prior to it.
The proceedings provide a useful summary of present knowledge, and state-of-the-art utilization of forest genetic resources. During the conference, some time was set aside for discussion, in small groups, of some of the problems and questions raised in the invited papers, followed by a general discussion in plenary.
This way of working, which allowed full, active participation on the part of all 60 participants (representing 28 countries), was found rewarding and stimulating.
The next meeting of these active working parties is planned for 1987, with the venue to be decided.
Copies of the proceedings are available from the Commonwealth Forestry Institute, South Parks Road, Oxford OK1 3RB, UK.
Christel Palmberg
FAO, Rome
<section>c</section>
Environment
World wilderness conference
NGOs meet in Nairobi
Engineering nitrogen fixation
World wilderness conference
To emphasize a theme of worldwide conservation, more than 3 000 wilderness and wildlife conservationists are expected to convene in September 1987 for the fourth World Wilderness Congress.
The international meeting will draw leading ecologists, industrialists, environmentalists, sports enthusiasts, artists, writers, psychologists, political and tribal leaders and other conservationists to Denver and Estes Park, Colorado.
The purpose of the congress is to bring together people with widely divergent views on conservation issues to heighten awareness of wilderness needs and environmental protection concerns.
UNDISTURBED AREA NEAR KILIMANJARO a world conference on wilderness
The Colorado congress will address such issues as tropical rain-forest conservation and oceanic parks and help develop international standards to deal with acid rain and other atmospheric problems in the world.
Natural resources experts will offer several three- to four-week short courses in conservation technology. Topics will include the administration of wildlife resources, and integrated resource planning and management.
Other activities include technical sessions, discussions, field trips, cultural events, presentations by prominent political and environmental leaders, a film festival and an international poster exhibition.
"Broadly speaking, the congress seeks to stimulate conservation actions toward a balanced stewardship of natural and human resources," said Vance Martin, congress executive.
Martin is president of the nonprofit-making International Wilderness Leadership Foundation, an education and research group that sponsors the world event every three or four years.
Martin added that many of the delegates will come to learn about the United States' wilderness protection efforts. More than 400 million ha in 120 countries are national parks or other designated natural areas, yet few of those countries have wilderness protection laws per se.
NGOs meet in Nairobi
A higher profile and new contacts with the world's conservation and development NGOs were some of the results of the participation of the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) in the Environment and Development Conference of Non-governmental Organizations, held from 4 to 8 February 1985 in Nairobi.
The conference, which was sponsored by the Environment Liaison Centre and funded by UNEP, brought together for the first time some 150 NGOs from 55 countries working in environment, development, or both.
Many top United Nations officials, including Dr Mostafa Tolba, the Executive Director of UNEP, and representatives from international aid agencies, attended the sessions, reflecting the international establishment's growing interest in closer ties with NGOs, because they are seen as working more closely with the people involved in conservation at a grass-roots level.
Dr Tolba told participants that despite a narrowing of differences between environment and development agencies, political conflict will continue to exist over the world's dwindling resources of oil, forests, fisheries, arable land and fresh water, unless there is more inter-agency cooperation.
He said NGOs could help by setting a good example: by working to combine food relief projects with tree-planting and soil and water conservation; and by designing and applying "alternative" development patterns, like pest management plans that lessen dependence on pesticides. He said they could work to bring about better understanding of the interrelationship between population, environment and development.
He encouraged NGOs to set specific date targets to reduce desertification in Africa, to stop tropical forest destruction in Southeast Asia, to find better ways to dispose of toxic chemicals, to define workable water-use strategies at the community level, anti to find ways to lessen the danger of environmental accidents, such as the disaster at Bhopal.
Many participants felt the greatest value of the conference lay in the opportunities it gave for establishing new contacts to extend the networking, information exchange, and joint action of many NGOs.
"There was less hard-core confrontation rhetoric in this meeting than most." the IUCN/World Wildlife Fund delegate said after the conference. "In general, there was an infectious spirit of enthusiasm, it search for practical steps to link up for greater strength and knowledge-sharing, and a willingness to listen to others."
IUCN Bulletin, 16 (1-3)
Engineering nitrogen fixation
According to a recent report on the state of the environment issued by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the cutting edge of the new miracle technologies is the work being done on biological nitrogen fixation.
Nitrogen - a key determinant in crop productivity - is the base of many fertilizers. Most plants are unable to draw nitrogen directly from the atmosphere but rely instead on fertilizers or on bacteria capable of fixing nitrogen from the air. If plants could tap that 70 percent of the atmosphere which is nitrogen, plant productivity could increase dramatically, and the need for energy-intensive fertilizers would fall away.
Just how great an impact on food production new "super" grains will have, few are willing to predict. Scientists are moving with caution in completely new fields like genetic engineering as the impacts of such technologies are evaluated. With some breakthroughs, such as biological nitrogen fixation, the side-effects appear to be unreserved beneficial.
In this technique, the most notable result would be the altered balance of nitrogen in the post-harvest soils. With most grains, the post-harvest soil is left depleted of its reserves of nitrogen, thus reducing fertility and forcing the rotation of crops or the abandonment of the land. The use of nitrogen-fixing strains, however, would reduce or eliminate such unproductive spells and leave the ground no less fertile than it was before sowing.
Other such promising technologies, however, might have less predictable or less beneficial side-effects. Doubts linger as to the possible adverse effects of releasing novel organisms into the environment. With hybridization, as with genetic engineering, drought-resistant cultivars could well lead to the cultivation of progressively drier regions where year-to-year rainfall variation can be enormous. In such areas, wind and water erosion could cause extensive crop damage and lead to irreversible soil degradation.
While the scientific community walks carefully on an unsteady tightrope, with the prospect of the drastic consequences of hasty commercialization, the UNEP report makes a case for urgent action.
Sustainable development occurs only when food supply not only matches population growth but leaves the productive capacity of the land free for continued growth and development. New technologies must be able to preserve the soils' life-giving fertility, while still giving the production yields needed in a world of burgeoning populations.
The challenge confronting development planners, the report claims, is not to have blind faith in the progress of science but to channel their resources into bringing the new technologies from the laboratories into the grain fields at the earliest possible moment.
UNEP has proposed a 19-point plan for national and international action. The plan - calling for a combination of environmentally sound planning, impact assessments and the development of tested technologies - draws a fine line between optimism and despair.
On the one hand, the report sees a new Agrarian Revolution as holding out hope of feeding a globe whose population is expected to pass 10 000 million by the middle of the next century. At the same time, however, the report cautions against complacency and calls on decision-makers to heed the ghost of Malthus pressing on their heels.
The only international forestry magazine
Unasylva
4 issues per year
Unasylva an international journal of forestry and forest industries
ORDER FORM to be mailed to: or to any of the FAO Sales Agents listed on the inside back cover.
Distribution and Sales Section FAO - Via delle Terme di Caracalla 00100 Rome - Italy
Please enter my subscription to Unasylva for a period of one year (price: $10.00*)
Name:.....................................
Street:.................................................................................
Occupation:.................................
City:.....................................
Country:........................
Edition required:
English
French
Spanish
Form of payment:
Cheque enclosed
Bank order
Unesco coupons
On receipt of invoice
For subscription rates in your currency check with your local FAO Sales Agent
The only international forestry magazine
Unasylva
4 issues per year
<section>d</section>
Where to purchase FAO publications locally - Points de vente des publications de la FAO - Puntos de venta de publicaciones de la FAO
 ANGOLA
Empresa Nacional do Disco e de Publica寤es, ENDIPU-U.E.E.
Rua Cirilo da Concei豫o Silva, N 7
C.P. N 1314-C, Luanda
 ARGENTINA
Librera Agropecuaria
Pasteur 743, 1028 Buenos Aires
Oficina del Libro Internacional
Av. Crdoba 1877, 1120 Buenos Aires
E-mail: olilibro@satlink.com
 AUSTRALIA
Hunter Publications
P.O. Box 404, Abbotsford, Vic. 3067
Tel.:(03) 9417 5361
Fax: (03) 914 7154
E-mail: jpdavies@ozemail.com.au
 AUSTRIA
Gerold Buch & Co.
Weihburggasse 26, 1010 Vienna
 BANGLADESH
Association of Development Agencies in Bangladesh
House No. 1/3, Block F,
Lalmatia, Dhaka 1207
 BELGIQUE
M.J. De Lannoy
202, avenue du Roi, 1060 Bruxelles
CCP 000-0808993-13
E-mail: jean.de.lannoy@infoboard.be
 BOLIVIA
Los Amigos del Libro
Av. Heronas 311, Casilla 450
Cochabamba;
Mercado 1315, La Paz
 BOTSWANA
Botsalo Books (Pty) Ltd
P.O. Box 1532, Gaborone
 BRAZIL
Funda豫o Getlio Vargas
Praia do Botafogo 190, C.P. 9052
Rio de Janeiro
E-mail: valeria@sede.fgvrj.br
Ncleo Editora da Universidade Federal Fluminense
Rua Miguel de Frias 9
Icara-Niteri 24
220-000 Rio de Janeiro
Funda豫o da Universidade Federal do Paran - FUNPAR
Rua Alfredo Bufrem 140, 30 andar
80020-240 Curitiba
 CAMEROON
CADDES
Centre Africain de Diffusion et
Dveloppement Social
B.P. 7317 Douala Bassa
Tel.: (237) 43 37 83
Fax: (237) 42 77 03
 CANADA
Renouf Publishing
5369 chemin Canotek Road, Unit 1
Ottawa, Ontario K1J 9J3
Tel.: (613) 745-2665
Fax: (613) 745 7660
Website: www.renoufbooks.com
E-mail: renouf@fox.nstn.ca
 CHILE
Librera - Oficina Regional FAO
c/o FAO Officina Regional para Amrica
Latina y el Caribe (RLC)
Avda. Dag Hammarskjold, 3241
Vitacura, Santiago
Tel.: 33 72 314
Fax: 696 1121/696 1124
E-mail: german.rojas@field.fao.org
Universitaria Textolibros Ltda.
Avda. L. Bernardo O'Higgins 1050
Santiago
 CHINA
China National Publications Import & Export Corporation
16 Gongti East Road, Beijing 100020
Tel.: 6506 30 70
Fax: 6506 3101
E-mail: cnpiec@public.3.bta.net.cn
 COLOMBIA
Banco Ganadero
Vicepresidencia de Fomento
Carrera 9^a N 72-21, Piso 5
Bogot D.E.
Tel.: 217 0100
 CONGO
Office national des librairies populaires
B.P. 577, Brazzaville
 COSTA RICA
Librera Lehmann S.A.
Av. Central, Apartado 10011
1000 San Jos
CINDE
Coalicin Costarricense de Iniciativas de Desarrollo
Apdo 7170, 1000 San Jos
E-mail: rtacinde@sol.rassa.co.cr
 CTE D'IVOIRE
CEDA
04 B.P. 541, Abidjan 04
Tel.: 22 20 55
Fax: 21 72 62
 CUBA
Ediciones Cubanas Empresa de Comercio Exterior de Publicaciones
Obispo 461, Apartado 605, La Habana
 CZECH REPUBLIC
Artia Pegas Press Ltd Import of Periodicals
Palc Metro, P.O. Box 825
Nrodn 25, 111 21 Praha 1
 DENMARK
Munksgaard, Book and Subscription Service
P.O. Box 2148
DK 1016 Copenhagen K.
Tel.: 4533128570
Fax: 4533129387
Website: www.munksgaard.dk;
E-mail: subscription.service@mail.munksgaard.dk
 DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
CUESTA - Centro del libro
Av. 27 de Febrero, esq. A. Lincoln
Centro Comercial Nacional
Apartado 1241, Santo Domingo
 ECUADOR
Libri Mundi, Librera Internacional
Juan Len Mera 851
Apartado Postal 3029, Quito
E-mail: librimul@librimundi.com.ec
Universidad agraria del Ecuador Centro de Informacin Agraria
Av. 23 de Julio, Apdo 09-01-1248
Guayaquil
Librera Espaola
Murgen 364 y Ulloa, Quito
 EGYPT
The Middle East Observer
41 Sherif Street, Cairo
Tel.: 393 97 2
Fax.: 360 68 04
E-mail: fouda@soficom.com.eg
 ESPAA
Librera Agrcola
Fernando VI 2, 28004 Madrid
Librera de la Generalitat de Catalunya
Rambla dels Estudis 118 (Palau Moja)
08002 Barcelona
Tel.: (93) 302 6462
Fax: (93) 302 1299
Mundi Prensa Libros S.A.
Castell 37, 28001 Madrid
Tel.: 914 36 37 00
Fax: 915 75 39 98
Website: www.tsai.es/MPRENSA
E-mail: mundiprensa@tsai.es
Mundi Prensa - Barcelona
Consejo de Ciento 391,
08009 Barcelona
Tel.: 301 8615
Fax: 317 0141
 FINLAND
Aketeeminen Kirjakauppa Subscription Services
P.O. Box 23, FIN-00371 Helsinki
Tel.: (358) 0121 4416
Fax.: (358) 0121 4450
 FRANCE
Editions A. Pedone
13, rue Soufflot, 75005 Paris
Lavoisier Tec & Doc
14, rue de Provigny
94236 Cachan Cedex
Website: www.lavoisier.fr
E-mail: livres@lavoisier.fr
Librairie du Commerce International
10, avenue d'Ina
75783 Paris Cedex 16
Website: www.cfce.fr
E-mail: pl@net-export.fr
WORLD DATA
10, rue Nicolas Flamand
75004 Paris
Tel.: (01) 4278 0578
Fax: (01) 4278 1472
 GERMANY
Alexander Horn Internationale Buchhandlung
Friedrichstrasse 34
D-65185 Wiesbaden
Tel.: 37 42 12
S. Toeche-Mittler GmbH Versandbuchhandlung
Hindenburgstrasse 33
D-64295 Darmstadt
Tel.: 6151 336 65
Fax: 6151 314 048
Website: www. booksell.com/triops
E-mail: triops@booksell.com
Uno Verlag
Poppelsdorfer Allee 55
D-53115 Bonn 1
Tel.: 49 (0) 228 94 90 20
Fax: 49 (0) 228 21 74 92
Website: www.uno-verlag.de
E-mail: unoverlag@aol.com
 GHANA
SEDCO Publishing Ltd
Sedco House, Tabon Street
Off Ring Road Central, North Ridge
P.O. Box 2051, Accra
 GREECE
Papasotiriou S.A.
35 Stournara Str., 10682 Athens
Tel.: +301 3302 980
Fax: +301 3648254
 GUYANA
Guyana National Trading Corporation Ltd
45-47 Water Street, P.O. Box 308
Georgetown
 HATI
Librairie 첔 la Caravelle
26, rue Bonne Foi
B.P. 111, Port-au-Prince
 HONDURAS
Escuela Agrcola Panamericana Librera RTAC
El Zamorano, Apartado 93, Tegucigalpa
Oficina de la Escuela Agrcola Panamericana en Tegucigalpa
Blvd. Morazn, Apts. Glapson
Apartado 93, Tegucigalpa
 HUNGARY
Librotrade Kft.
P.O. Box 126, H-1656 Budapest
Tel.: 256 1672
Fax: 256 8727
 INDIA
EWP Affiliated East-West Press PVT, Ltd
G-I/16, Ansari Road, Darya Gany
New Delhi 110 002
Tel.: 32 64 180
Fax: 32 60 538
Oxford Book and Stationery Co.
Scindia House
New Delhi 110 001
Tel.: 91 11 331 5310
Fax: 91 11 371 3275
Oxford Subscription Agency
Institute for Development Education
1 Anasuya Ave., Kilpauk
Madras 600 010
Periodical Expert Book Agency
D-42, Vivek Vihar, Delhi 110095
Bookwell
Head Office:
2/72, Nirankari Colony, New Delhi - 110009
Tel.: 725 1283
Fax: 91-11-328 13 15
Sales Office:
24/4800, Ansari Road
Darya Ganj, New Delhi - 110002
Tel.: 326 8786, 325 7264
E-mail: bkwell@nde.vsnl.net.in
 IRAN
The FAO Bureau, International and Regional Specialized Organizations Affairs
Ministry of Agriculture of the Islamic Republic of Iran
Keshavarz Bld, M.O.A., 17th floor
Teheran
 IRELAND
Office of Public Work
4-5 Harcourt Road, Dublin 2
 ISRAEL
R.O.Y. International
P.O. Box 13056, Tel Aviv 61130
E-mail: royil@netvision.net.il
 ITALY
FAO Bookshop
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Roma
Tel.: 06 57055688
Fax: 06 57055155
E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org
Librera Commissionaria Sansoni S.p.A. - Licosa
Via Duca di Calabria 1/1
50125 Firenze
Tel.: 055 64 54 15
Fax: 055 64 12 57
E-mail: licosa@ftbcc.it
Libreria Scientifica Dott. Lucio de Biasio "Aeiou"
Via Coronelli 6, 20146 Milano
 JAPAN
Far Eastern Booksellers (Kyokuto Shoten Ltd.)
12 Kanda-Jimbocho 2 chome
Chiyoda-ku - P.O. Box 72
Tokyo 101-91
Tel.: 03 3265 7531
Fax: 03 3265 4656
Maruzen Company Ltd.
P.O. Box 5050
Tokyo International 100-31
Tel.: 81 3 3278 1894
Fax: 81 3 3278 1895
E-mail: h_sugiyama@maruzen.co.jp
 KENYA
Text Book Centre Ltd.
Kijabe Street
P.O. Box 47540, Nairobi
Tel.: 330 342
Fax: 22 57 79
Inter Africa Book Distribution
Kencom House, Moi Avenue
P.O. Box 73580, Nairobi
Tel.: 21 11 84
Fax: 254 2 22 35 70
 LUXEMBOURG
M. J. De Lannoy
202, avenue du Roi
1060 Bruxelles (Belgique)
E-mail: jean.de.lannoy@infoboard.be
 MADAGASCAR
Centre d'information et de Documentation Scientifique et Technique
Ministre de la recherche applique au dveloppement
B.P 6224 Tsimbazaza, Antanarivo
 MALAYSIA
Electronic products only:
Southbound Sendirian Berhad Publishers
9 College Square, 01250 Penang
 MALI
Librairie Traore
Rue Soundiata Keita X 115
B.P. 3243, Bamako
 MAROC
La Librairie Internationale
70 Rue T'ssoule
PO. Box 302 (RP), Rabat
Tel./Fax: 212 7 75 01 83
 MEXICO
Librera, Universidad Autnoma de Chapingo
56230 Chapingo
Libros y Editoriales S.A.
Av. Progreso N 202-1 Piso A
Apdo. Postal 18922
Col. Escandn, 11800 Mxico D.F.
Mundi Prensa Mexico, S.A.
Ri Pnuco, 141 Col. Cuauhtmoc
C.P. 06500, Mxico, DF
Tel.: 533-5658 al 60
Fax: 514-6799
E-mail: 1015452361@compuserve.com
 NETHERLANDS
Roodveldt Import b.v.
Brouwersgracht 288
1013 HG Amsterdam
E-mail: roodboek@euronet.nl
Tel.: 622 8035
Fax: 625 5493
Swets & Zeitlinger b.v.
P.O. Box 830, 2160 Lisse
Heereweg 347 B, 2161 CA Lisse
E-mail: infono@swets.nl
Website: www.swets.nl
 NEW ZEALAND
Legislation Services
P.O. Box 12418
Thorndon, Wellington
E-mail: gppmjxf@gp.co.nz
Oasis Official
P.O. Box 3627, Wellington
Tel.: (+64) 4 499 1551
Fax: (+64) 4 499 1972
E-mail: oasis@clear.net.nz
Website: www.oasisbooks.co.nzl
 NICARAGUA
Librera HISPAMER
Costado Este Univ. Centroamericana
Apdo. Postal A-221, Managua
 NIGERIA
University Bookshop (Nigeria) Ltd.
University of Ibadan, Ibadan
 NORWAY
Swets Norge AS
P.O. Box 6512, Etterstad
N-0606 Oslo
Tel.: (+47) 2297 4500
Fax: (+47) 2297 4545
E-mail: nicagen@swets.nl
 PAKISTAN
Mirza Book Agency
65 Shahrah-e-Quaid-e-Azam
P.O. Box 729, Lahore 3
 PARAGUAY
Librera Intercontinental Editora e Impresora S.R.L.
Caballero 270 c/Mcal Estigarribia
Asuncin
 PERU
INDEAR
Jirn Apurimac 375, Casilla 4937
Lima 1
Universidad Nacional "Pedro Ruiz Gallo"
Facultad de Agronoma, A.P. 795
Lambayeque (Chiclayo)
 PHILIPPINES
International Booksource Center, Inc.
Room 720, Cityland 10 Tower 2
H.V. de la Costa, Cor. Valero St
Makati, Metro Manila
Tel.: 817 9676
Fax: 817 1741
 POLAND
Ars Polona
Krakowskie Przedmiescie 7
00-950 Warsaw
 PORTUGAL
Livraria Portugal, Dias e Andrade Ltda.
Rua do Carmo 70-74
Apartado 2681, 1200 Lisboa Codex
 SINGAPORE
Select Books Pte Ltd.
03-15 Tanglin Shopping Centre
19 Tanglin Road, Singapore 1024
Tel.: 732 1515
Fax: 736 0855
 SLOVAK REPUBLIC
Institute of Scientific and Technical Information for Agriculture
Samova 9, 950 10 Nitra
Tel.: +42 87 522 185
Fax: +42 87 525 275
E-mail: uvtip @ nr.sanet.sk
 SOMALIA
Samater
P.O. Box 936, Mogadishu
 SOUTH AFRICA
David Philip Publishers (Pty) Ltd.
P.O. Box 23408, Claremont 7735
Tel.: Cape Town (021) 64-4136
Fax: Cape Town (021) 64-3358
E-mail: dpp@iafrica.com
Website: www.twisted.co.za
 SRI LANKA
M.D. Gunasena & Co. Ltd.
217 Olcott Mawatha, P.O. Box 246
Colombo 11
 SUISSE
Buchhandlung und Antiquariat Heinimann & Co.
Kirchgasse 17, 8001 Zurich
UN Bookshop
Palais des Nations
CH-1211 Genve 1
Website: www.un.org
Van Diermen Editions Techniques ADECO
41 Lacuez, CH-1807 Blonzy
 SURINAME
Vaco n.v. in Suriname
Domineestraat 26, P.O. Box 1841
Paramaribo
 SWEDEN
Wennergren Williams AB
P.O. Box 1305, S-171 25 Solna
Tel.: 46 8 705 9750
Fax: 46 8 27 00 71
E-mail: mail@wwi.se
Bokdistributren
P.O. Box 301 61, S-104 25 Stockholm
Tel.: 46 8 728 2500
Fax: 46 8 31 30 44
E-mail: lis.ledin @ hk.akademibokhandeln.se
 THAILAND
Suksapan Panit
Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue
Bangkok
 TOGO
Librairie du Bon Pasteur
B.P. 1164, Lom
 TUNISIE
Socit tunisienne de diffusion
5, avenue de Carthage, Tunis
 TURKEY
DUNYA INFOTEL
100. Yil Mahallesi
34440 Bagcilar, Istanbul
Tel.: 0212 629 08 08
Fax: 0212 629 46 89
E-mail: dunya@dunya-gazete.com.tr
Website: http://www.dunya.com
 UNITED KINGDOM
The Stationery Office
51 Nine Elms Lane
London SW8 5DR
Tel.: (0171) 873 9090 (orders)
(0171) 873 0011 (inquiries)
Fax: (0171) 873 8463
and through The Stationery Office Bookshops
E-mail: postmaster@theso.co.uk
Website: www.the-stationery-office.co.uk
Electronic products only:
Microinfo Ltd.
P.O. Box 3, Omega Road
Alton, Hampshire GU34 2PG
Tel.: (01420) 86848
Fax: (01420) 89889
Website: www.microinfo.co.uk
E-mail: emedia@microinfo.co.uk
 UNITED STATES
Publications:
BERNAN Associates (ex UNIPUB)
4611/F Assembly Drive
Lanham, MD 20706-4391
Toll-free 1-800-274-4447
Fax: 301-459-0056
Website: www.bernan.com
E-mail: info@bernan.com
UN Bookshop
The United Nations Bookshop
General Assembly Building Room 32
New York, N.Y. 10017
Tel.: 212 963 7680
Fax: 212 963 4910
Website: www.un.org
E-mail: bookshop@un.org
Periodicals:
Ebsco Subscription Services
P.O. Box 1943
Birmingham, AL 35201 -1943
Tel.: (205) 991-6600
Telex: 78-2661
Fax: (205) 991-1449
The Faxon Company Inc.
15 Southwest Park
Westwood, MA 02090
Tel.: 6117-329-3350
Telex: 95-1980
Cable: FW Faxon Wood
 URUGUAY
Librera Agropecuaria S.R.L.
Buenos Aires 335, Casilla 1755
Montevideo C.P. 11000
 VENEZUELA
Fundacin La Era Agrcola
Calle 31 Junin Qta Coromoto 5-49
Apartado 456, Mrida
Fundacin para la Investigacin Agrcola
San Javier
Estado Yaracuy, A.P. 182, San Felipe
Fax: 054 44210
E-mail: damac@diero.conicit.ve
Fudeco, Librera
Avenida Libertador-Este
Ed. Fudeco, Apartado 254
Barquisimeto C.P. 3002, Ed. Lara
Tel.: (051) 538 022
Fax: (051) 544 394
Telex: (051) 513 14 FUDEC VC
Librera FAGRO
Universidad Central de Venezuela (UCV)
Maracay
Librera Universitaria, C.A.
Av. 3, entre 29 y 30
N 29-25 Edif. EVA, Mrida
Fax: 074 52 09 56
Tamanaco Libros Tcnicos S.R.L.
Centro Comercial Ciudad Tamanaco
Nivel C-2, Caracas
Tel.: 261 3344/261 3335/959 0016
Tecni-Ciencia Libros S.A.
Torre Phelps-Mezzanina
Plaza Venezuela
A.P. 20.315, 1020 Caracas
Tel.: 782 8697/781 9945/781 9954
E-mail: tchlibros@ibm.net
Tecni-Ciencia Libros, S.A.
Centro Comercial
Av. Andrs Eloy, Urb. El Prebo
Valencia, Ed. Carabobo
Tel.: 222 724
 ZIMBABWE
Grassroots Books
The Book Caf
Fife Avenue, Harare;
61 a Fort Street, Bulawayo
Tel.: 79 31 82
Fax: 70 21 29
 Other countries/Autres pays/Otros pases
Sales and Marketing Group
Information Division, FAO
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy
Tel.: (39) 06 57051
Fax: (39) 06 57053360
Telex: 625852/625853/610181 FAO I
E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org
