<title>Water for animals AGL/MISC/4/85</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
This book is intended to outline water, plant, man and animal relationships for those concerned with obtaining water for animals. It has been found that simply obtaining a water supply for animals often makes a difficult situation worse. This book is planned to include enough about water, for example, to help the animal or pasture expert at least go in the right direction. On the other hand, limited but important animal and pasture aspects are included for the expert in water and clearly are not comprehensive. This book attempts to cover the situation in the Sahelian zone of Africa and regions which are similar.
<section>2</section>
1. Introduction
1.1 Rangelands and livestock
1.2 Water is a necessity for livestock
1.3 Man, livestock, water and rangeland are components of the same system
1.4 Suggestions for use of the book
1.1 Rangelands and livestock
Various definitions of rangeland exist but it is commonly described as an area of shrub and/or grass receiving less than about 750 mm of annual rainfall. Within this definition rangeland may vary from mild sub-arid wooded savanna to desert.
In terms of land use, rangelands constitute the greatest land area in the world. This natural resource is used primarily for extensive livestock production mostly through nomadic and transhumance systems well represented in the Sahelian and Sub-Sahelian zones of Africa and in the equivalent areas of the Near East.
1.2 Water is a necessity for livestock
However palatable and plentiful the forage or range may be, the livestock using it must have all the water they need, or they will not thrive. Water at regular intervals, as well as ample supply of forage, is essential if livestock are to be turned off in a marketable conditions.
Water is the major component of the animal organism (65 to 70 percent of its weight). Deprivation of water quickly results in loss of appetite, and death occurs at the end of a few days (3 to 5 days for zebus, 6 to 10 days for sheep, and 15 days or more for camels) when the animal has lost between 25 and 30 percent of its weight.
Inadequate stock water development in range areas not only contributes to an unstable livestock industry and serious livestock losses, but prevents profitable utilization of badly needed grazing areas and encourage destructive overgrazing in the vicinity of existing water supplies. The prime objective in developing a rangeland water supply may therefore be summarized as the provision of adequate clean water to enable an even utilization of the forage available without affecting the fragile equilibrium of the rangeland ecosystem.
1.3 Man, livestock, water and rangeland are components of the same system
Providing adequate water for livestock on range is not merely a question of developing enough wells and springs and ponds to supply water needed by livestock. A proper distribution of stock water in relation to the available forage is equally important.
The problems associated with the rational utilization of grazing land and water resources involve ecological situations within a region, and in one or several countries, so that the identification and definition of the actions to be taken seem to be extremely complex. However the various elements (biological, ecological, sociological, economical, animal, etc.) to be taken into consideration are all mutually inclusive and interconnected. For example, the distribution of the watering points cannot be fixed independently of the characteristics of the rangeland and of the herds; the type of water lifting devices to be installed on the wells cannot be decided without taking into account the maintenance capacity and the wishes of the future users.
Man, water, livestock and rangeland have therefore to be considered as elements of the same system, interacting one on each other in such a way that their interrelations must be used as a background for planning any livestock development project in arid and semi-arid countries.
1.4 Suggestions for use of the book
Chapters 3 and 4 are intended for the water expert who wishes to begin to know about animal water requirements and the importance of rangelands. Chapter 5 is intended for those not already familiar with surface water development while chapter 6 is for those unfamiliar with groundwater.
<section>3</section>
2. Objectives of the manual
It is not always possible to obtain at the right time the professional studies and expertise that might be desired to plan all of the components of livestock project. It is not unusual that the water specialist has to plan the water resources development component of a livestock project independently of the livestock and rangeland experts. It happens also that a livestock expert has to plan a stock raising project without the help of a water specialist. In both cases the experts must know the basic elements of the field for which they are not specialists.
More generally, anyone who is preparing a livestock development project needs to know all the water related aspects involved in the stock raising activities as well as all the constraints connected with the livestock watering which will affect the water resources development aspects of the project.
This manual was therefore prepared to help the water specialist in understanding the livestock watering problems and the livestock and rangeland specialists in understanding the water resources development and management problems. It is not intended to replace technical literature or professional advice when available at the right time, but to serve as a helpful substitute when those sources of information are unobtainable or as a guide to topics on which further information is needed.
This manual essentially deals with the problems related to the improvement of the traditional migratory systems of animal production through a more adequate water supply to livestock over the rangelands. Very little will then be discussed about the livestock production systems like enclosed farms and ranches, in which the management of animals, range, water and all related resources are, or should be, fully integrated and well coordinated. Very little will be discussed about the watering problems of livestock in the areas where agriculture is the prevailing activity.
<section>4</section>
3. Interrelations between the components of the system (man, water, livestock, rangeland)
3.1 Man and water
3.2 Man and livestock
3.3 Water and livestock
3.4 Livestock and rangeland
3.5 Concluding or summary statement
3.1 Man and water
3.1.1 Creation or improvement of water supplies
3.1.2 Water lifting devices and maintenance
3.1.3 Cost of water
3.1.4 Water and rangeland management
3.1.1 Creation or improvement of water supplies
Natural water supplies (small ponds during the rainy season, permanent lakes or rivers during the dry season) are the main source of water for livestock belonging to the extensive migratory animal production system. However, as a consequence of the growing number of livestock, artificial watering facilities have been created either for enabling livestock to graze larger areas and make full use of the forage resources of the rangelands or for watering livestock along the transhumance routes.
The different techniques of water development will be examined in chapters 5-6.
3.1.2 Water lifting devices and maintenance
While the main function of the pumps and water lifting devices, which is to produce water, and especially groundwater, to make it available to livestock, they should also suit the habits and preference of the human users as well as their capacity to maintain mechanical devices and water structures. Some common devices are discussed in Chapter 6.
3.1.3 Cost of water
In an agricultural environment, water users are usually sensitive to the cost of water even in developing countries. The small farmer in Tunisia or the vegetable producer in an oasis of Mauritania are perfectly aware of what their well and their pump cost and how many litres of fuel they need to irrigate their garden every month. But in a rangeland environment of a developing country, cost of water is an abstract concept, since it is usually not related to a price stockbreeders have to pay to water their animals. Most of the investment and operating costs are borne by the national budget.
On the other hand cost of water is commonly used as an indicator to judge the economical feasibility of water development. Physical parameters (depth to water, type of rock to be dug or drilled) affect the cost of water. Costs are closely related to local conditions and to the proper financial and technical management of the project. It is often misleading to draw general conclusions on correlations between cost of water and hydrogeological or hydrological situations. This is the reason why this aspect of the water development is not discussed in this manual. In normal practice this analysis should be carried out for each case, especially when alternatives (surface water or groundwater, dug or drilled wells) are available.
3.1.4 Water and rangeland management
Until recently it was considered that good management of a system including rangeland and water supply could only be attained through a single agency or authority, which would take care of the maintenance and repair of the water supply and pumps as well as of the conservation of the rangeland.
The disappointing results obtained so far by many of these organizations have led livestock development planners to use informal groups of livestock owners, pastoral associations or cooperatives as a channel for some of the development activities including partial financing of wells, maintenance and repair of pumps, and conservation of rangeland (fire protection essentially). The direct involvement of the population concerned is expected to improve the efficiency of the livestock development projects and in the meantime to lighten the financial weight of large projects on the national budgets. This trend observed during the last few years to assign more responsibility to the pastoral communities in managing their wells, pumps and rangelands, is unfortunately too recent to allow positive results to be observed. Additional creative efforts in this field are still needed. For example, why not to assign the task of monitoring ground-water (water level fluctuations, water use) to
stockowners' groups or cooperatives?
3.2 Man and livestock
The relationship between livestock and the human population is important and has considerable bearing upon the use of the rangelands and the type of distribution of the watering facilities.
There is a range of situations from the truly nomadic herdsmen who move with the animals together with their families and possessions, to the sedentary situation where the stockbreeder and his family has a permanent home, usually associated with a village. However, in order to stay within the general purpose of this manual, only the pure pastoral and semi-sedentary systems which include important movements of the herds will be considered.
a. Purely pastoral system
The purely pastoral system concerns the extensive migratory animal production system in use within the Near East, Sahel, Sudan and Sub-Saharian zones of Africa. The traditional pastoral communities own and manage the great animal resources in these regions. In this situation the herds constantly move in search of grazing areas and water. During and immediately after the rainy season, livestock move northwards (in Sahel area) in order to exploit the meagre grazing resources of the Sub-Saharian areas. When the dry season is well set up, herds move southwards in order to eventually stay for the rest of the dry season in the vicinity of the permanent water supply points. The permanent dry season water supply may come from the large river systems (Niger, Senegal, Chart, Logone) or permanent lakes (de Guiers in Senegal, Rkiz in Mauritania, Lake Chad). Permanent ponds are common in wetter regions while occasionally deep wells, either artesian or equipped with pumping facilities,
may be used.
It is clear that the planning of the water supply layout must take into consideration the seasonal movements of the livestock as well as the possible competition between farmers and stockbreeders for the utilization of the watering facilities during the period in which the herds have to enter the agricultural areas.
b. Semi-sedentary system
In the areas where the average annual rainfall exceeds 350-400 mm, stockbreeders progressively settle and become agro-pastoralists. Their way of life based on the interaction between stockbreeding and agriculture includes four different periods:
i. as soon as the first rains take place - usually in June in the Sahel area), the herds move towards the high lands (plateaux) which are not used for agriculture. One herd is usually conducted by only one shepherd who may be either a stock owner or a wage earner. This period is commonly called "petite (small) transhumance" in the French literature;
ii. immediately after harvesting - mid-September in Sahel area - part of the herds come back to the villages to eat the residues of the crops during approximately one month;
iii. when the crop residues are exhausted the livestock is taken back to the grazing areas which may be as far as 30 to 40 km away from the village. This period is commonly called "grande (great) transhumance" in the French literature, usually lasts until December-January when most of the natural ponds dry up;
iv. during the 4-5 months preceding the rainy season, the livestock uses the grazing areas located close to the villages and is watered from the village wells.
3.3 Water and livestock
3.3.1 Water quality
3.3.2 Water requirement
3.3.3 Location of the water supplies
3.3.4 Watering facilities
3.3.1 Water quality
a. Salinity tolerance in livestock varieties
Livestock needs fresh drinking water for normal health and high production. The total salt content of water is the most important characteristic in determining the suitability of water for stock and it is also the easiest water quality data to obtain even in the field. Other quality characteristics are usually of secondary importance.
Excessive intake of saline water may cause sickness and death. Adult sheep appear to be fairly tolerant, and indeed are often given free access to salt licks, obviously in circumstances where they do not ear enough to cause ill effects. Cattle are less tolerant than sheep but more tolerant than pigs and poultry.
The standards at present considered to be safe upper limits of total salts in water for stock in Western Australia are indicated in Table 1.
Table 1: UPPER LIMITS OF TOTAL SALT CONTENT OF WATER FOR LIVESTOCK
Livestock
Total dissolved solids (in g/l)
Poultry
Pigs
Horses
Cattle (dairy)
Cattle (beef)
Adult dry sheep
While most animals can therefore tolerant fairly high levels of total salts, the amount of magnesium in the water may be critical. The following concentrations of magnesium in water are considered to be safe upper limits for stock on dry feed. Higher levels can be tolerated when pastures are green and succulent:
Lactating cows and horses
0.25 g/l
Dry cattle and weaner sheep
0.40 g/l
Adult sheep
0.50 g/l
Another useful guide to animal water supply is shown in Table 2. This table is primarily intended for human drinking water, since people often drink the same water as animals.
b. Effect of excessive water or feed salt content on livestock
The amount of salt in the feed or water which will produce symptoms of salt poisoning in the various domestic animals are Indicated in Table 3.
Table 2: WATER QUALITY STANDARDS FOR ARID REGIONS
Suitability for permanent supply
good
fair
moderate
poor
Colour
colourless
colourless
Turbidity
clear
clear
Odour
odourless
hardly perceptible
slight
slight
Taste at 20°C
none
perceptible
pronounced
unpleasant
Total dissolved solids (mg/l)
EC m S/cm)
Na (mg/l)
Mg (mg/l)
Cl (mg/l)
SO[4] (mg/l)
Source: Schoeller (1977)
Table 3: TOTAL QUANTITY OF SALT PRODUCING SYMPTOMS OF SALT POISONING
Livestock
Total amount of salt per day (in g/l)
Poultry
Pigs
Cattle
Sheep
The main symptoms in sheep and cattle are excessive thirst, abdominal pain, loss of appetite, diarrhoea and increased urination.
c. Deterioration of water quality
The water quality can deteriorate over the years (mainly groundwater) and even from season to season, and it is wise to check suspect water before letting stock have access to the supply.
During the warmest months, high evaporation increases the concentration of salt in the water standing in troughs or in ponds for a long time and it may be advantageous to place the water troughs in the shade to limit the water temperature.
d. Bacteriological water quality
Where possible animals should be given water which is bacteriologically clean as well as chemically satisfactory.
3.3.2 Water requirement
a. Factors affecting the water requirements
The water requirement of livestock is the total quantity of water required by animals for their metabolic processes as well as for the heat regulation of their body. They vary according to a number of factors such as the food intake, quality of the food, and air and water temperature.
b. Food intake
The demand for food varies according to the type and class of animal and the particular functions occurring such as during pregnancy, in lactation or whilst being fattened. Moreover the food requirement may be affected by the quantity of energy consumed by animals, mostly to reach the water supply from the grazing areas. The values of dry matter intake indicated in Table 4 correspond to a minimum requirement level for maintenance of animals on rangeland.
c. Quality of the food
Natural pastures are usually thought to be dry, but in many instances individual plants, or part of plants, remain green for long periods after rain has ceased and this moisture is of benefit in reducing the dependence of animals on water supplies. During the growth period (wet season), grass may contain as much as 80 percent water. The moisture content progressively decreases until the straw contains only 10 to 15 percent water. The green pods of Prosopis may supply an important part of water requirement of animals even under desert conditions.
Vegetation in arid areas may, unfortunately, have a high content of salt. The water consumption of sheep grazing on saltbush is two to three times greater than that of sheep on grasslands, and the importance of salt free water is greater.
d. Air temperature
The water requirement related to dry matter intake increases with air temperature. Table 4 shows the effect or air temperature on water requirement.
Table 4 WATER REQUIREMENT AND AIR TEMPERATURE
Air temperature (in °C)
Water requirement (in l/kg of dry matter consumed)
-17 to +10
10 to 15
15 to 21
21 to 27
more than 27
In the case of pregnant cows the quantities are multiplied by 1.5 and for lactating cows they are increased by 0.87 l per kg of milk produced.
Source: Agricultural Research Council (1965)
e. Voluntary water intake
The voluntary water intake is the quantity of water which has actually to be supplied to animals and corresponds to that part of the water requirement which cannot be provided by the moisture content of the forage. This is the parameter to be taken into account when planning a water supply system for livestock.
Table 5 summarizes the effect of the various factors governing the water requirement and gives an estimate of the voluntary water intake corresponding to the three main seasons in the Sahel.
The voluntary water intake has been calculated from the water requirement by assuming a water supply from the plants corresponding to:
i. 70 to 75 percent of moisture content of the plants during the wet season
ii. 20 percent of moisture content of the plants during the dry and cold season
iii. 10 percent of moisture content of the plants during the dry and hot season.
Table 5: ESTIMATED WATER REQUIREMENT AND VOLUNTARY WATER INTAKE OF LIVESTOCK UNDER SAHELIAN CONDITIONS
Tropical
Mean
Daily dry
WET SEASON Air temp 27°C
DRY COLD SEASON Air temp from 15-21
DRY HOT SEASON Air temp 27°C
Animal
Livestock Units (TLU)
live-weight in kg
matter intake in kg
total water req. in l/day
volun. water intake in l/day
total water req. in l/day
volun. water intake in l/day
total water req. in l/day
volun. water intake in l/day
Camels
Cattle
Sheep
Goats
Donkeys
Note: One Tropical Livestock Unit (TLU) is equivalent to an animal of 250 kg liveweight on maintenance. It corresponds to the "Unité Bétail Tropical (UBT)" of the French literature. In the Sahelian countries, 1 TLU is approximately equivalent to 1.4 cattle or to 10 sheep or goats.
3.3.3 Location of the water supplies
The spacing of water supplies across the land is partly dependent on drinking frequency, but also affected by the walking ability of the animals, a requirement for uniform utilization of the forage resources and the maximim daily discharge of the water supply.
In terms of vegetation utilization, productivity is reduced by wider spacing because the areas close to water become overgrazed and those further from the water are undergrazed. In Australia, areas of 17 000 ha (circle of 7.35 km radius) for cattle and 4 000 ha (circle of 3.5 km radius) for sheep may be grazed from one water source, although shorter distances would seem desirable for maximum production and uniform use of vegetation.
In Sahelian countries, it is usually considered that cattle can walk 6 to 10 km from the grazing area to water and sheep and goats can walk 3 to 5 km from the grazing area to water.
These figures have however to be considered as rough optimal averages since livestock can easily walk twice as far in case of necessity.
Drinking frequency is another debated question among the stockbreeding specialists. It is usually thought that a daily water intake for cattle is necessary during the hot season while sheep and goats may be watered every second day only and camels can afford to stay without drinking for 4 to 5 days.
However recent observations made in Niger have proved that water intake every second day may be profitable for cattle too when the distance from the grazing area to water exceeds 5-6 km. Observations were made on two similar herds (Serres 1980) using grazing areas located 10 km away from the water supply. For the herd which was watered daily, an important part of the day was spent for the walking activity. Grazing has to take place partly during the night and very little was remaining for rest and ruminating. Table 6 shows the main results of the observations. For the herd which was watered every second day, the daily grazing time was increased as well as the time for ruminating, therefore facilitating the digestion of the straw. Moreover the animals which spent less energy for walking were less tired and could walk faster as shown on Table 6.
Table 6: RESULTS OF OBSERVATIONS MADE IN NIGER ON TWO SIMILAR HERDS ONE WATERED EVERY SECOND DAY AND THE OTHER ONE EVERY DAY
Activity
WATER INTAKE EVERY SECOND DAY
DAILY WATER INTAKE
Time spent first day
Time spent second day
Daily average
Percent of total time
Time spent
Percent of total time
Grazing
6h 40
9h
7h 50
6h 30
Walking
7h
2h
4h 30
8h 30
Ruminating
4h 50
5h 40
5h 15
3h 30
Rest
5h 20
7h 20
6h 20
5h 20
Watering
0h 10
0h 05
negligible
0h 10
TOTAL
24h 00
24h 00
24h 00
24h 00
Source: Serres (1980)
3.3.4 Watering facilities
a. Design and organization
The design and organization of a watering facility for permanent use must usually be different from that for temporary or seasonal use. The drying up of a pond or reservoir can be used to control grazing, while permanent boreholes may ensure overgrazing in a considerable area around the borehole. Control methods near boreholes must be based on locally available thorn shrubs which are used to make paths to the borehole. Permanent installations may provide a basis for one or a few families to settle if the borehole produces enough water for gardening as well as stock. Considerable efforts are needed to resolve the problems related to design of the watering facility and for the organization to operate and maintain it, since it must be an integral part of the animal production system.
b. Watering troughs
In order to allow livestock to drink easily and in order to avoid crowding around the watering place, the use of watering troughs properly build and set up is advisable even if the water source is an impounding surface reservoir or a simple dug well.
Shape
Circular and rectangular troughs are commonly used for cattle. Circular troughs provide the greatest storage capacity per unit of material used, while rectangular troughs give the greatest drinking space in proportion to their capacity. V or U shaped troughs are commonly used for sheep.
Material
If properly constructed, reinforced concrete troughs are usually the most satisfactory for permanent use because of their durability.
Wooden troughs constructed from 5 cm thick material, well braced and preferably painted with non-toxic paint are satisfactory if they are not exposed to frequent drying out.
Reinforced galvanized metal troughs are durable, lightweight and usually of moderate cost.
Installation
Substantial masonry foundations are preferable for most troughs, for they provide support, anchorage and alignment. All stock troughs should be anchored sufficiently to prevent livestock from moving them or tipping them over.
Drinking space
In order to avoid crowding, sufficient drinking space should be provided at troughs to water without undue delay the full number of livestock that come to drink at any one time. About 0.7 to 1.0 m of drinking space should be provided for each cow and only 0.3 to 0.4 m to each sheep or goat. When the water source is a dug well from which water is drawn by hand or with animals, the number and distribution of the troughs around the well should be in relation to the maximum expected discharge of the well. Modern dug wells in pastoral area are usually equipped with six circular troughs one metre diameter made of concrete and distributed around the well.
Height
Cattle troughs range from 0.5 to 0.7 m in height, the lower height being preferable for calves and other young livestock.
Ordinarily, sheep troughs should not be more than 0.3m high.
Width
Troughs with a top width of 0.7 m or more can be used from both sides if properly located. Wide troughs should be provided with suitable guardrails to prevent livestock from stepping or being crowded into the trough.
c. Storage tank
Adequate storage facilities are particularly needed when discharge is smaller or greater than the requirement during watering times. The usual conditions of low discharge requiring storage will be wells equipped with pumps operated by windmills, and low yielding springs and free flowing wells. When wells are operated by motor driven pumps and the discharge is much higher than the daily average water demand for watering livestock, storage is needed to avoid wasting of water.
The capacity required for the storage tank will depend largely on the flow available from the water supply, the number of livestock and the dependability of the pumping unit; where windmill power is used for pumping, it is desirable to provide sufficient storage for about one week because calm periods may prevent windmill operation for several days at a time.
If storage requirements are relatively small, combination storage and drinking tanks are usually the most satisfactory and cheapest.
If greater storage is required, wooden, steel or concrete tanks are commonly used.
For very large storage capacity, an excavated earth reservoir may be the cheapest solution.
3.4 Livestock and rangeland
3.4.1 Rainfall and rangeland resources
3.4.2 Stocking rate and carrying capacity
3.4.3 Overgrazing problems
3.4.1 Rainfall and rangeland resources
The forage production from the rangelands will be examined here only in those aspects which affect the water supply design (distribution and quantity) aiming at an even utilization of the forage available.
The biomass annually produced by the rangelands depends mainly on the absolute availability of the growth limiting factors and is therefore strongly influenced by both the quantity of precipitation and the quality of the soils. In the Sahel countries, for the same value of annual rainfall, the actual response of the rangelands in terms of forage production shows a great variability according to the quality of the soil and the availability of nitrogen and phosphorus. There is evidence that soils with higher rainfall tend to be lower in nitrogen and phosphorus. While weight of forage is higher in wetter conditions the nutrient value of the forage may actually be lower. It is therefore impossible to give a simple and general relationship between rainfall and forage production. However various authors have given tentative representations of the variations of the dry matter production of rangelands as a function of rainfall.
Figure 1 shows an estimation of relationship between mean annual rainfall and dry matter production in Somalia. The wide range of precipitation taken into account for representing the variations of productivity Indicates the great uncertainty prevailing in this field.
For the preparation of the 2nd phase of a Livestock Development Project in Mali, J.J. Boudet, rangeland specialist consultant for FAO, developed an exhaustive picture of the variations of the dry matter production of rangelands in relation to annual rainfall and its variability. Figures 2 and 3 graphically summarize the data included in FAO's report.
While Figures I through 3 can provide a rough estimate of rangeland productivity, it is preferable Co have actual assessments by pasture specialists for the particular area of concern. Such specialists may use actual testing of pasture but often are forced to assess by eye using their experience.
Productivity of grazing lands can be improved by controlled grazing, sowing to increase groundcover, introduction of legumes to increase fertility, control of brush, water conservation, reduction of wind erosion, removal of weeds and application of fertilizers. However, many of these methods are too expensive for some extensive grazing areas.
3.4.2 Stocking rate and carrying capacity
Carrying capacity is commonly expressed as number of animal units per hectare when speaking of intensive ranching or dairy operations, but when referring to extensive nomadic grazing carrying capacity is usually hectares per animal unit. The carrying or grazing capacity of a rangeland is defined in the following paragraphs as the amount of grazing land which should be made available to a Tropical Livestock Unit so that it can be maintained without deterioration of the natural resources of the area over the long term. Other definitions include the necessity of efficient production (milk or meat) but it is believed that under arid and semi-arid area conditions, the main purpose of grazing over a large part of the year is the maintenance of the livestock.
Stocking rate is defined as the amount of grazing land actually available to a Tropical Livestock Unit. The correct stocking rate should always be less than the carrying capacity.
Fig. 1: Relationship between mean annual rainfall and rangeland productivity in Somalia (Hunting Services, 1976)
Fig. 2: Relationship between dry matter production and annual rainfall in Sahel environment (Data derived from Table 3 Annex 5 of Livestock Development Project, 2nd phase, Mali, Cooperative Programme FAO/World Bank)
Fig. 3: Relationship between carrying capacity and annual rainfall in Sahel conditions (Data derived from Table 3 Annex 5 of Livestock Development Project, 2nd phase, Mali, Cooperative Programme FAO/World Bank)
Fig. 4: Rainfall probability under Sahelian conditions (Data derived from Cocheme and Franquin 1967)
The carrying capacity or ability of an area to feed stock is primarily a function of the dry matter production of the considered rangeland. It is therefore related to rainfall as well as to the soil quality.
Figure 3 shows the relationship between carrying capacity and annual rainfall for Mali. For each value of rainfall the carrying capacity may vary from a maximum corresponding to bad quality soil and low nutrient content to a minimum corresponding to ideal soil conditions. It should be noted that the lower the annual rainfall, the wider the range between the maximum and the minimum carrying capacity. This is normal since the dry matter production of rangelands tends towards zero for small values of rainfall and bad soil conditions.
In assessing the carrying capacity of rangelands from data on dry matter production, several factors are taken into account including the slow deterioration of forage quality over the dry season (decrease of protein content) and the increasing risk of forage destruction as time goes on.
The purpose of these remarks is to emphasize the uncertainty which prevails on the actual determination of the carrying capacity of rangelands and the difficulty of giving a simple relationship between the most commonly available data - the rainfall - and the grazing capacity of an area.
Attention should also be drawn to the variability of rainfall over a given area from year to year. The simple knowledge of the average annual rainfall is not sufficient to predict the range of variations of the carrying capacity of an area. Figure 4 shows the probable occurrences of rainfall under Sahelian conditions.
As an example, an area receiving an average annual rainfall of 300 mm may receive only 200 mm in one year out of five and as much as 400 mm in one year out of five. This also means, according to Figure 3, that an area with 300 mm average rainfall may have NO carrying capacity at all one year in ten on all the medium Co bad quality soils.
A much simpler table (Table 7) presents grazing capacity with the generally accepted assumption that 50 percent of the forage production is utilized.
Table 7: GRAZING CAPACITY
Mean annual rainfall mm
DM production t/km^2
Grazing capacity ha/TSU
3.4.3 Overgrazing problems
In a Sahelian rangeland, the seeds produced by the grasses (graminaceae) reach their maturity and fall onto the soil at the end of the rainy season. The seeds are then buried by the trampling of the livestock and thus protected during the dry season. They can germinate 8-9 months later when the rain comes back again. The conservation of the rangeland depends therefore directly on the seeding process and more precisely on the quantity of seed produced which requires a normal development of the plants.
When the vegetative cycle is disturbed by overgrazing, the plants react by accelerating their rhythm of development which affects the quality of the seeding process. Repeating this phenomenon during several consecutive years may lead to the disappearance of certain species, to the benefit of other species usually less palatable for livestock and sometimes not eaten at all by the animals. This modification of the vegetation may therefore result in an important decrease of the grazing capacity of the rangeland as a consequence of overgrazing during the vegetative period of the grass.
When stocking rate is excessive during the dry season, the vegetation may also temporarily disappear but this will generally not affect the germinating capacity of the seed buried into the soil and the range should resume after the next rainy season approximately at the same level as before for the same amount of rainfall.
3.5 Concluding or summary statement
The provision of water for animals under extensive grazing or nomadic systems is one element of the man, animal, environment situation. The relations are basically simple but are fraught with variations, exceptions, special conditions which make generalizations unsatisfactory. This means that each area or region needs to be studied in an integrated manner so that physical additions, such as watering points, will have a positive rather than negative effect on the people concerned and on the region. The brief outline of this chapter, however, at least provides a starting point for those who are faced with estimating water requirements.
Chapter 4 attempts to show how the information in this chapter or from other sources may be further used for selection of type of water supply.
<section>5</section>
4. Selection of the type of water supply and distribution
4.1 Water source
4.2 Distribution of water supplies
4.1 Water source
The first question a planner may ask when dealing with livestock watering problems on rangeland areas is whether surface or groundwater will be used. In many circumstances there is no choice since only one source of water can physically or economically be developed. But assuming that both ground and surface water can be considered, Table 8 may guide the planner in tentatively selecting the most convenient source of water on which to concentrate the investigation efforts.
Water harvesting techniques, although they are briefly described in this manual, are not mentioned in Table 8 since they can be considered only if neither surface nor groundwater can offer a solution.
Table 8: TENTATIVE SELECTION OF THE MOST SUITABLE WATER SOURCE
Presence of shallow aquifer
Period of use of water supply
Topography
Rainfall
Morphology Soil characteristics
Suggested water source to investigate
SHALLOW CONTINUOUS AQUIFER
GROUNDWATER (dug wells)
Permanent rangeland (throughout the dry season)
flat to moderate slopes
GROUNDWATER
moderate to steep slopes
200-300 mm
GROUNDWATER
300-600 mm
No suitable sites for surface water mobilization
GROUNDWATER
- Marked valleys
- Narrow sections + wide impervious possible pond sites
SURFACE WATER (impounded reservoirs)
NO SHALLOW CONTINUOUS AQUIFER
temporary rangeland (2-3 months after the rainy season)
flat slopes
GROUNDWATER
moderate slopes
Sandy soils
GROUNDWATER
Clayey and sandy soils
SURFACE WATER (excavated reservoirs)
rocky soils
SURFACE WATER (impounded reservoirs)
steep slopes
SURFACE WATER (impounded reservoirs)
4.2 Distribution of water supplies
It is clear that one of the criteria for location of the water supplies will be the availability of water but it is also a good practice to set up a preliminary layout of the water supply system in order to ensure an even utilisation of the forage resources, and plan the additional investigations necessary for siting the water supplies.
The layout will simply consist of fixing the average distance that should occur from a water supply to another in order to allow all the livestock that can be fed 5 years out of 10 from a given rangeland, to be suitable watered. The following procedure is suggested to determine the distribution of the water supplies over the considered rangeland.
a. First check if a 20 km interval between water supplies is feasible
The distance of 20 km corresponds to twice the average walking capacity of cattle under semi-arid conditions. Over an area of 30 000 ha (circle of 20 km diameter), the number of Tropical Livestock Units (TLU) which should be watered from each supply is equal to 30 000 divided by the carrying capacity (C[cap] in ha/TLU) corresponding to the average rainfall year.
Assuming maximum daily water intake of 40 l/TLU, the maximum daily requirement (V[maxday], in m^3/day) to be met by each water supply will be
V[maxday], should then be compared to the amount of water expected, Q[exp] in m^3/day, that each water supply can deliver in 12-16 hours daily operation. If V[maxday] is less than Q[exp], then take 20 km as an average distance from one water supply to another.
b. If the maximum daily water production Q[max] of one supply is not sufficient to meet The requirements of the livestock which an be fed by a 30 000 ha rangeland area (circle of 20 km diameter), then determine the optimum interval between water sources according to the following procedure:
Using the same symbols as before, the maximum number of TLU which can be watered from each supply will be:
The rangeland area (in ha) necessary to feed N[TLU] will be N[TLU] x C[cap] and eventually the maximum interval D[max] between water supplies will be approximately:
Example:
Determine the optimum distance between water supplies on a rangeland with a carrying capacity of 10 ha/TLU and assuming that average daily water production from each supply cannot exceed 20 m3/day.
V[maxday] = 1200/10 = 120m^3/day
Since V[maxday] is more than the maximum daily discharge of an average water supply, the distance will be less than 20 km and comes:
D[max] = 0.6 20 x 10 = 8 km
This example is for cattle and would be modified accordingly for other animals.
<section>6</section>
5. Surface water resources development for rangeland
5.1 Surface water utilization and development
5.2 Excavated reservoirs
5.3 Impounded reservoirs
5.4. Rainwater harvesting techniques
5.5 Concluding statement
5.1 Surface water utilization and development
Surface water is usually the main source of water for purely pastoral livestock in semi-arid regions. During the rainy season, precipitation over limited catchment basins runs off and concentrates in natural ponds where the soils are sufficiently impervious to prevent leaking. Most of these ponds dry out a few weeks after the end of the rainy season, due to the combined effect of evaporation and seepage. During the dry season, a great part of the livestock moves towards permanent surface water such as large rivers or permanent lakes or ponds. This method of utilization of surface water only requires leading the herds to water and is always preferred to groundwater by stockbreeders. However, sedimentation and location often make the rational use of surface water difficult and the improvement of the natural storage conditions desirable. Sanding up of ponds decreases their storage capacity until it becomes negligible so that the actual number of usable poinds is smaller every
year. This phenomenon is aggravated by overgrazing and resulting desertification which makes the upper soil layers more sensitive to the wind and water erosion. The remoteness and uneven distribution of the permanent lakes and rivers during the dry season results in the overgrazing of the pasture lands surrounding the water supplied. Moreover the agricultural area increases to the detriment of the rangelands which become smaller while the livestock population tends to grow every year.
The main purposes of surface water development will be to increase the storage capacity of natural ponds to extend their period of utilization, and to create new surface water reservoirs in order to better the rangeland resources.
However, permanent water supplies will rarely be desirable because of the following factors:
a. In arid and semi-arid regions, runoff coefficients vary in the opposite direction with the size of the basin; the bigger the catchment basin, the lower the runoff coefficient. Therefore the quantities of water which can be collected by intercepting the runoff are usually small.
b. Evaporation is high and may exceed 2 m/year which corresponds to the maximum depth of most of the ponds even after deepening.
c. Seepage also contributes Co loss of water in the surface reservoirs and the techniques of lining (with plastic or rubber sheets) are too costly in developing countries.
d. If significant permanent water supplies can be established they will probably be used for agriculture which is a much more profitable activity than extensive stockbreeding.
e. Permanent surface reservoirs in a hot climate are often subject to health hazards while parasitic diseases are much less common around non-perennial ponds.
Some general guidelines for excavated and impounded reservoir location design and construction follow for those who are not civil engineers. Ref. 14, 19, 21 and 63 are recommended for those wishing more detail. It is clear that larger excavated and impounded reservoirs are "water harvesting" devices broadly speaking, but the term is generally used for smaller storages where the tributary runoff area is treated to increase runoff. The basic methods to choose a drainage area and a storage volume are the same.
There is essentially a continuum in gradation between large reservoirs and cisterns. The subdivision of reservoirs which follows is arbitrary but the reader will observe that there are reservoirs which are excavated in one part to form an embankment, depending on topographic conditions. The arbitrary division is only for convenience. Small reservoirs are known by other names in many areas, particularly in Asia where they are usually called tanks.
5.2 Excavated reservoirs
5.2.1 Advantages and conditions of use
5.2.2 Selection of sites
5.2.3 Construction
5.2.4 Stock watering and protection of the pond
5.2.5 Maintenance
5.2.6 Case study and cost
5.2.1 Advantages and conditions of use
An excavated reservoir is one of the simplest to construct and the only type of earth reservoir that can be constructed economically in relatively flat terrain. The fact that the capacity of these reservoirs is obtained by excavation limits their practical size, and they are best suited to locations where a comparatively small reservoir is sufficient, a small amount of runoff is expected, and impervious soils prevail.
Since they expose a minimum amount of surface area in proportion to their volume, they are advantageous in areas where evaporation losses are high and water scarce. Under such conditions, livestock can utilize a greater part of the available water. The ease with which they can be constructed, their compactness, their safety from flood-flow damage, their flexibility of location and their low maintenance requirements make their use popular in most of the semi-arid areas where extensive stockbreeding is the main activity. Improved natural ponds are also included in the same category of surface water storage system.
Excavated reservoirs are preferably located in the topographically low area of small closed drainage basins or in upland watersheds where the drainage divide is low and the topography is gentle. In some areas ancient sand dunes, now fixed by vegetation, form ideal closed areas.
In some regions excavated reservoirs reach the groundwater table and may become more or less permanent.
5.2.2 Selection of sites
The location of stock watering reservoirs or ponds within a rangeland area is essentially determined by the nature of the soils and the hydrological conditions.
a. Nature of the soils
An adequate depth of impervious soil which can be easily excavated is essential for excavated reservoirs. If there is any doubt as to the nature of the soil, numerous test auger holes should be bored over the proposed reservoir area to determine the suitability of the soil and particularly the permeability of the sub-soil strata. Sites with porous soils or with underlying strata of sand, gravel, fissured limestone and other porous materials should not be selected unless such strata are not of sufficient magnitude to cause trouble. Actually the easiest way for identifying possible sites for an excavated reservoir with the best probability of success is to select an area where water naturally accumulates or has accumulated and where clayey deposits cover a large area. In any case the thickness of the clayey layer has to be checked by test holes before deciding on the suitability of the site for excavating a reservoir or deepening a natural pond. However, it is possible to
select a site even in case of insufficient clay thickness provided that during the construction work, the clay is carefully put aside and then spread again and compacted over the bottom of the reservoir after excavation.
If hard rock is found costs of excavation will increase greatly.
Where there is no opportunity for studying the characteristics of the soil with adequate apparatus, some indication of the permeability of the soil can be obtained by filling test holes with water or by forming suitable containers from samples of soil and filling them with water. The holes or containers may be filled several times or puddled if necessary to represent conditions at the reservoir site. Observation of seepage will indicate what may be expected from the planned reservoir.
The fact that a reservoir may lose considerable water Immediately after excavation does not necessarily mean that it will be unsatisfactory: frequently new reservoirs do not retain water satisfactorily until they become sealed. This may require several months or even a year or more, depending on the soil type and on the quantity of fine material transported by the runoff water.
b. Hydrological conditions
Before undertaking the excavation work, it is necessary to estimate the probability of filling the reservoir by the expected water supply (usually runoff water). The hydrological investigations which can yield reliable information are usually lengthy and expensive so that, if such studies are envisaged, it should be checked that their cost does not exceed a fraction of the total construction cost. This is likely to happen only in the case of large reservoirs which may justify preliminary hydrological studies. In most cases the preliminary investigations will be limited to an enquiry with the local inhabitants and, in the case of already existing ponds, to a careful survey of the trails of mud which give evidence of the water extension during the wet season.
Where possible the drainage area should be chosen to minimize sediment runoff into the pond and the drainage area should be relatively small.
5.2.3 Construction
a. Shape
Although excavated ponds can be built to almost any shape desired, a rectangle is commonly used in relatively flat terrain. The rectangular shape is popular because it is simple to build and can be adapted to all kinds of excavating equipment.
The side slopes should be as flat as possible for easy access of the livestock unless the pond is planned to be fenced and equipped with external watering troughs. In that case a slope ranging from 2/1 to 3/1 may be acceptable. If one or two sides are of firmer material their slopes could be steeper.
b. Building the pond
The reservoir area should first be cleared of vegetation. The next step is to mark the outside limits of the proposed excavation with stakes indicating the depth of cut from the ground to the pond bottom.
In semi-arid areas where water is unlikely to accumulate in the excavation during the work period, any kind of available equipment can be used. Normal tractors equipped with a bulldozer blade or simple bulldozers are generally used. But if the waste material has to be transported far away from the excavation, additional equipment (power shovel and trucks) may be needed. For small reservoirs located in areas where manpower is not a constraint, hand operation can be envisaged at least for the digging work, while the transport of the waste material may be assigned to animals like mules or donkeys.
If the thickness of the impervious upper layer is insufficient when compared to the planned depth of the pond, the topsoil should be temporarily stockpiled for later use as sealing layer over the bottom of the pond. In that case, the clayey material should be properly compacted after it has been spread and moistened.
5.2.4 Stock watering and protection of the pond
Complete fencing of the reservoir is usually recommended to avoid damaging by trampling and water pollution by livestock. When the pond is fenced a watering system has to be installed outside the fenced area and may consist of several troughs set up around a well fed through a water supply pipe that runs below the bank of the pond. The water inlet inside the reservoir should be protected against clogging by a strainer made of a piece of screen. The pipe itself may be of small diameter, 2 inches for example, arid made of steel or plastic. Figure 5 shows a typical water piping and trough system for stock watering from a fenced pond (from Techniques Rurales en Afrique - BCEOM/IEMVT, 1973).
Although fencing ponds for stock watering is highly recommended in all handbooks dealing with extensive stockbreeding, it should be mentioned that the advantages usually derived from fencing ponds in developing countries are often more than offset by the increasing cost and maintenance requirement and by the fact that fewer animals can water at one time. Moreover, it is extremely difficult in hot climates to prevent livestock (and sometimes herders) from destroying fences which they consider as an unjustified obstacle to reach water when they are thirsty.
5.2.5 Maintenance
A pond, no matter how well planned and built, must be maintained in order to preserve its storage capacity as well as a proper functioning of the watering facilities, if any, throughout its expected life. When fenced, a pond needs a permanent maintenance in order to ensure the integrity of the fence during the whole period of presence of water in the reservoir, but this constraint is so costly that watching and maintenance are not sufficient and the fences disappear a few weeks after the pond has come into operation. This experience usually results in the planner giving up the fencing of ponds.
In the case of non-fenced ponds, the main objective of maintenance is to remove the wind or water transported material which accumulates and decreases the storage capacity of the pond. This operation is necessary every 4 to 5 years.
5.2.6 Case study and cost
An example is given for excavated reservoirs (natural pond improvement) in Mali, within the 6th Region. The main characteristic of that region is the presence of a large area inundated by the Niger river covering 38 000 km^2 This particular area called "Delta Interieur du Niger" plays an important role in the livestock management of the 6th Region since it contains important vegetal resources (essentially an aquatic grass known as "bourgou") which is exploited from November to May - i.e. during the dry season - by as many as 1.6 million bovidae representing 25 percent of the total livestock in Mali. Immediately after the beginning of the rainy season most of the cattle transhumes to the Northwest, North and Northeast in order to exploit from June to October, the natural ponds and rainfed fodder resources of the Sahelian rangelands. When moving from the Delta to the Sahel or from the Sahel to the Delta, the herds always take fixed itineraries, well visible on aerial
photographs and even on satellite imagery since these axes of transhumance may be 200-300 metres wide. Along these routes, the livestock need watering and a programme of a first phase of pond improvement including 20 sites located west of the Delta was established in 1975 and implemented in 1978-79.
An enquiry carried out in 1979 on 7 ponds out of the 20 which were dug indicated that in one season about 638 000 cattle and 187 000 sheep and goats have watered during a total of 569 days corresponding to an average of 1120 cattle and 328 sheep and goats per day and per pond during 81 days.
In 1978-79, the cost of deepening the 20 existing ponds by a private contractor was Malian Francs (FM) 206 166 344. The preliminary studies and the supervision of the work were carried out by the Malian Administration (Service du Genie Rural) and cost FM 22 700 000. The total cost of the 20 ponds, each one of 2500 m^3 average useful capacity, amounted therefore to FM 228 866 344 in 1979 - i.e. approximately US$ 380 000 or US$ 19 000 per pond.
Figure 5: Watering facilities outside the reservoir area
A new programme of pond improvement was established in 1983 including 45 sites located West and East of the Niger Internal Delta. The average capacity of the ponds is expected to be 5000 m^3/pond - i.e. twice as much as for the ponds deepened in 1979. Table 9 shows a summary of the estimates costs for the preliminary surveys, the excavation work itself and the supervision. The total amount as estimated in the Preparation Report for the 2nd Phase Project (FAO 1983) corresponds to approximately 972 million FM - i.e. US$ 1.6 million or US$ 36 000 per pond. The average cost per pond is therefore twice as much as in 1979, but the average cost per cubic metre capacity is approximately the same.
Table 9: COST ESTIMATE FOR DEEPENING 45 PONDS IN MALI (FAO 1983)
Quantity of work
Unit price in Malian FR
Total cost in 1000 FM
Unit
West Delta
East Delta
Gourma sud Seno-Mango
Total
Number of ponds
Unit
Average capacity/pond
M3
Description of Work
Clearing of brushwood
M2
Removing stumps and root
Unit
Digging
M3
Digging hard soil (add)
M3
Spreading material
M3
Banking up
M3
Removing rocks
M3
Compacting
M3
Transporting material
M3/100M
Moving track
km
Equip site out of track
km
to site diffi ground
km
Pumping water
M3
Mob/demob to operat area
Unit
Sub total in 1000 FM
Supervision (4% cost of work)
Preliminary surveys (lump sum)
TOTAL in 1000 Malian Francs
Equivalent in US dollars
Average cost per pond in US dollars
This example shows the main items to be considered for preparing a cost estimate for excavating surface water reservoirs. The unit prices of course will differ.
5.3 Impounded reservoirs
5.3.1 Main characteristics
5.3.2 Selection of sites
5.3.1 Main characteristics
An impounded reservoir, also called embankment pond, is made by building an embankment or earth fill across a narrow valley so that, while excavated reservoirs usually consist of improving an existing situation (natural ponds), the impounded reservoirs create a completely new surface water storage structure.
Excavated reservoirs are preferably located at the lower end of small and closed watersheds which may be part of longer catchment basins cut in several isolated sub-basins by natural weirs usually made of ancient fixed dunes. On the contrary, the impounded reservoirs are intended to intercept runoff from open watersheds. This important difference has the following consequences for the impounded reservoirs. The volume of runoff water is often bigger than the capacity of the reservoir itself so that it is usually necessary to provide a spillway to bypass surface runoff after the pond is filled. The implementation of impounded reservoirs requires a more accurate estimate of the surface runoff than for excavated reservoirs since both the embankment and the spillway have to be designed accordingly.
In semi-arid areas the reservoirs built for watering livestock are necessarily of small capacity for the following reasons:
a. if natural conditions make it possible to build a large artificial reservoir, its water is certainly going to be used for agriculture rather than for extensive stockbreeding;
b. if for any reason agriculture is not feasible, an easy access to water for a great number of animals is not to be recommended because of the risk of overgrazing the nearby rangelands.
Therefore the impounded reservoirs for watering livestock in semi-arid countries will usually have a small to moderate capacity (from a few thousands to a few tens of thousands cubic metres) and consequently be usable only part of the average year (from a rainfall point of view). They rarely can be the only source of water supply for livestock on permanent rangelands. Limiting the size of ponds is one way of providing some degree of management of the grazing resources.
5.3.2 Selection of sites
Selecting a suitable site for the impounded reservoirs is important and preliminary surveys are needed before final design and construction. However, this manual is not intended to be an exhaustive handbook for dam construction and the purpose of the indications given hereafter is just to draw the attention to some important points which have eventually to be studied by a specialist.
a. Morphological characteristics
A good site is where a dam can be built across a narrow section of a valley, the side slopes are steep and the slope of the valley floor permits a large area to be flooded. Sites where water may expand over large areas under shallow depth should be avoided since they would expose a large surface of shallow water to high evaporation.
b. Adequacy of the drainage area
The contributing drainage area should be large enough to fill the reservoir at least 8 years out of 10. However the drainage area should not be so large than expensive overflow structures (spillways) are needed to bypass excess runoff during storms. Where rainfall is not too variable the drainage area can often be chosen to have a minimum cost overflow. However, in many semi-arid areas this is not the case and irregular, high intensity storms of short duration may cause extensive damage if proper spillways are not constructed.
The amount of runoff that can be expected from a given watershed depends on so many interrelated factors that no set rule can be given for its determination. The physical characteristics that directly affect the yield of water are relief, soil infiltration, evaporation rate, plant cover and surface storage.
c. Nature of soils in the ponded area
Suitability of a pond site depends on the ability of the soils in the reservoir area to hold water. The soil should contain a layer of material that is impervious and thick enough to prevent excessive seepage. However, the presence of a surface layer of sand or other permeable material does not necessarily mean that the proposed sites should be abandoned; these pervious layers may just be an alluvial deposit covering an impervious bedrock.
In most cases detailed investigations including auger holes and laboratory tests should be carried out.
d. Foundation conditions
Particular attention should be paid to the nature of the soils at the proposed dam location in order to ascertain that the foundation would ensure stable support for the structure, and provide the necessary resistance to the passage of water.
Good foundation materials, those that provide both stability and imperviousness, are a mixture of coarse and fine textured soils like gravel-sand-clay or sand-silt-clay mixtures.
When the soil beneath the dam location is able to ensure the stability but not the imperviousness, a cut-off core of impervious material must be installed under the dam.
e. Fill material
The availability of suitable material for building a dam is a determining factor in selecting a pond site. Enough suitable material should be located close to the site so that placement costs are not excessive.
Materials selected must have enough strength for the dam to remain stable and be tight enough when properly compacted, to prevent excessive or harmful percolation of water through the dam.
The best material for an earthfill dam contains particles ranging from small gravel to fine sand and clay in the desired proportions. The material should contain about 20 percent by weight of clay particles. Though satisfactory earthfills can be built from soils that vary from the ideal, the greater the variance, the more precautions needed.
As for the foundations, if the material selected for the earthfill is pervious, a core of clay material has to be placed in the centre of the fill.
f. Spillway requirements
The function of a spillway is to pass excess storm runoff around the dam so that water in the pond does not rise high enough to damage the dam by overtopping.
Emergency spillways for small dams in semi-arid countries should have the minimum capacity to discharge the peak flow expected from a storm of a frequency of 1 year in 10 and a duration of 24 hours. As a very rough estimate it is possible to use the following formula (derived from Figure 15 of Agricultural Handbook No. 590, USDA) corresponding approximately to the most usual situation in semi-arid countries. For a small drainage area (from a few hectares to a few square kilometres) with moderate slope over the drainage area and with moderately permeable soils,
D = 1.84 x A^0.675
in which D is the peak discharge in litres per second per millimetre of maximum daily rainfall with a frequency of 1 year in 10 and A is the drainage area in hectares.
In mild climates, the protection of the spillways against erosion is obtained by installing herbaceous vegetation on the bottom of the spillway. This solution cannot apply in semi-arid climates where the spillways are usually of two different types. One type is the natural spillway, a secondary drainage which runs parallel to the main valley and needs only minor adjustments to bypass the excess storm water (see Figure 6a). The other is the lined spillway where no natural saddle is found. An artificial spillway has to be excavated beside the dam and then lined with stones, concrete or asphalt (see Figure 6b). The lined spillway is more expensive than the first one.
The ideal solution might consist of selecting a site or oversizing the dam in such a way that a spillway would not be required. But, because of the great variability of rainfall and consequently of runoff, such a solution is rarely feasible in the more arid areas. Either the catchment basin has to be very small and for most years the reservoir would remain empty or the benefit gained by eliminating the spillway would be more than offset by the increased cost of the dam.
g. Design of the dam
The detailed design of a dam, even if it is small, cannot be treated here in the framework of this manual. The main points which have to be taken into consideration are:
i. a water supply pipe through the dam is needed for the stock water troughs;
ii. cutoffs through the foundation and the dam itself may be needed in order to ensure tightness;
iii. the top of the dam should be wide enough to ensure the stability;
iv. side slopes upstream and downstream should be low enough to prevent collapse.
5.4. Rainwater harvesting techniques
5.4.1 Preliminary considerations
5.4.2 Methods for improving catchment runoff efficiency
5.4.3 Building water storage tanks
5.4.4 Case study and cost
5.4.1 Preliminary considerations
Water harvesting consists of collecting and storing water from an area that has been treated to increase precipitation runoff.
A water harvesting system is composed of a catchment or water collecting area, a water storage structure, and various other components such as piping, evaporation control and fencing.
Assuming that 65 percent of the precipitation water can effectively be harvested, the quantity of water (V) which can be collected and used, after deduction of losses, from a catchment area (A) with an average annual raingall (P) can be estimated by the following formula:
If the annual water requirement for one adult cattle is assumed to be approximately 15 m^3, including the losses around the watering troughs, the corresponding catchment area A can be estimated by the proceeding formula rewritten as follows:
For example, in an area receiving an average annual rainfall of 200 mm, the catchment necessary to collect enough water 1 year out of 2 for one adult cattle would be 115 m^2. If the same water supply has to be reliable 8 years out of 10, the value of rainfall taken into account in the formula should be 100 mm instead of 200 (see Figure 4 Rainfall probability) so that the catchment area required would become 230 m^2.
FIGURE 6: DIFFERENT TYPES OF SPILLWAY
Natural spillway
Lined spillway
In general the use of water harvesting techniques in semi-arid areas of developing countries is limited because of the cost involved for treating large catchment areas and for building water storage facilities. Where hard rocks are exposed, collection of rainwater in cisterns has been used for centuries in North Africa in the 100-150 mm rain zone. In these areas the rock is hard at the surface but softer below so that cisterns are easy to excavate.
5.4.2 Methods for improving catchment runoff efficiency
The methods used to increase runoff include vegetation management, land alteration, chemical treatment and soil cover.
These methods are widely used in Australia and in United States. Vegetation management is, for obvious reasons, not applicable in semi-arid countries, while treating soil surfaces to prevent infiltration is too costly for developing countries. However, areas of bare rock require minimum treatment, mostly to channel the water to a cistern.
a. Land alteration
Collecting banks and contour drains
Land alteration is often the simplest and least expensive method of water harvesting when it involves nothing more than building walls or ditches to collect runoff from existing or manmade catchments such as rock outcrops or roads.
The purpose of the dykes is to increase the catchment area corresponding to the planted storage.
A similar method consists of digging drains almost parallel to the natural topographical contours with the purpose of draining water from a bigger catchment area. Figure 7 illustrates this method.
FIGURE 7: CONTOUR DRAINS
Roaded catchments
In the roaded catchment (Fig. 8) the soil is compacted by heavy rollers to make it more impervious. Each road is 8 to 10 metres wide and is separated from the next one by a Vee drain running parallel to the roads and collecting the water to the main drain o directly to the tank. When properly shaped from suitable materials the best roaded catchments can be almost as effective as bitumen surface. The efficiency of roaded catchment is due partly to the camber (degree of slope from crest to trough) and partly to the water shedding ability of its surface: the steeper the camber and the more impermeable the surface, the more readily will the catchment shed water. Usually it is not possible to achieve a camber steeper than 1 to 4 and it is undesirable to have it less than 1 to 8. Although this method is claimed to be very cheap (Carder 1970), it does not seem to be applicable in semi-arid areas of most developing countries. Difficulties include:
i. soils should be such (sand and clay) that they become impervious by. compaction and allow ater to be conveyed through unlined drains;
ii. fencing of the whole catchment is necessary;
iii. permanent maintenance of the catchment is necessary to preserve the efficiency of the system.
FIGURE 8: ROADED CATCHMENTS
b. Chemical treatment
The paraffin-wax treatment is being used at selected installations in the hotter regions of Arizona for providing livestock with drinking water. This treatment consists of applying a low-melting pount paraffin-wax, usually sprayed onto a prepared catchment surface in a molten form. The wax when heated by the sun penetrates the soil to a depth of 1 to 2 cm, coating each sol] particle with a thin wax film and creating an efficient water repellent surface.
Although paraffin-wax treatment has proved to be relatively low in cost in the United States and remarkably efficient when properly applied on well prepared catchments, the wax does not provide significant soil stabilization and needs a careful permanent maintenance. Moreover the whole catchment should be fenced in order to avoid trampling by livestock. This method therefore is also not applicable in most developing countries.
c. Soil cover
Before installing a catchment soil cover, the soil surface should be cleared, smoothed and compacted. Dykes around the perimeter of the apron are usually necessary to collect water and direct it to the storage. Several types of soil cover are in use mostly in Australia and the United States. Although these techniques are not easy to extrapolate to developing countries because of the high level of maintenance required, a short description is given hereafter of four methods. Details on the material and installation procedures can be found in the Handbook of Water Harvesting (Frasier and Myers 1983).
Asphalt-fabric membranes
This is a field-fabricated membrane of an inert fabric saturated in-place on the prepared catchment surface with a water-based asphalt emulsion. The water in the asphalt emulsion partially softens the fabric, allowing the membrane to conform to the irregularities of the catchment surface. The asphalt emulsion soaks through the fabric Co bond a layer of soil to the underside of the membrane, which provides additional weight to the vovering. During the curing process, the asphalt hardens, forming a semi-rigid membrane with high tear strength. The asphalt cements the fabric threads and seals the pore spaces.
Properly installed and maintained, asphalt fabric membranes are highly resistant to mechanical damage and deterioration by weathering processes. The asphalt hardens slowly and, within 6 to 12 months, the membrane becomes semi-rigid and cattle can walk on Its surface without causing damage. This may not apply in the case of very hot climates where the asphalt may soften.
The material with a proper maintenance has a projected life in excess of 20 years, but new asphalt emulsion coats for the entire catchment (1 to 1.5 litres/m^2) are usually required at 3- to 5-year intervals.
The initial cost of material in 1981, including the seal coat asphalt was approximately US$ 1.75 to 2.00 per m^2 in the United States. It is clear that costs of material and installation might be much higher in developing countries (perhaps multiplied by a factor of 3 to 4).
A disadvantage of this method is that the runoff water from the asphatic surface is often discoloured by asphalt oxidation by-products in low rainfall areas with high solar radiation.
Gravel covered sheetings
The treatment consists of a waterproof membrane such as polyethylene or roofing tar paper on the prepared catchment surface and covered with a shallow layer of uniform-sized gravel. In some installations an asphalt emulsion tack coat is used to bond the membrane to the soil and/or the gravel to the membrane. The purpose of the gravel is to protect the membrane from sunlight weathering processes and to provide some resistance to minor mechanical damage.
When properly installed and maintained, the gravel covered membrane treatment is rather resistant to weathering deterioration and has a projected life of 15 to 20 years.
The main disadvantage of this treatment is due to its extreme susceptibility to mechanical damages so that fencing of the whole catchment is necessary, but even with this precaution, a continuous maintenance is required to repair holes and punctures from rodents or mechanical sources.
Artificial rubber membranes
Artificial rubber (butyl) fabrics are flexible membranes relatively easy to install but have disappointing performances due to high susceptibility to mechanical damages of any origin, including:
i. holes caused by rodents or birds,
ii. wind vibrating the membrane against the ground,
iii. stress deterioration due to surface irregularities.
In conclusion the artificial rubber membrane treatment is not easily applicable in developing countries because of so many constraints related to installation, protection and maintenance as well as cost.
Sheet metal coverings
This type of covering is mentioned here although very limited applications can be considered in developing countries for the following reasons:
i. high cost of material and installation,
ii. careful installation required and coating of metal to prevent rusting,
iii. high level of maintenance required to permanently ensure that sheets are held firmly in place and do not allow wind to penetrate underneath.
Concrete
Because of high cost of material arid labour required for installation, concrete covers can only be considered for very small artificial catchments.
5.4.3 Building water storage tanks
a. Steel rim tanks
These tanks consist of a vertical wall, cylindrical steel rim with a waterproof membrane liner inside. Typical capacities range from 20 to 300 m^3 (1 to 5 m high, 5 to 15 m diameter). They are used for aboveground or semi-buried installations.
The tanks are usually formed from flat or corrugated steel sheets pre-rolled to the required radius of curvature and zinc coated to prevent rusting. The sections are bolted or welded together on the prepared site.
The tightness of tanks may be ensured by placing an asphaltic mastic joint sealer in all seams, but the usual method of sealing is to place a flexible or semi-flexible membrane liner inside the tank. The bottom of the tank is made either of the levelled and compacted existing soil if suitable or if the tank is intended to be lined, covered with a waterproof membrane or with poured concrete.
Reported 1981 costs of the material in USA are as follows:
steel rim
US$ 15 to 25/m^3 capacity
liner
US$ 4 to 8/m^3 capacity
poured concrete bottom
US$ 5 to 20/m^2 of bottom area.
Extrapolations to remote areas of developing countries should take into consideration the costs of transport and installation that may multiply the original figures by a factor of 2 to 3.
Maintenance requirements for this type of tank are low.
b. Plastered concrete tanks
The plastered concrete storage tank consists of a thin (8 to 10 cm thick) vertical circular wall of reinforced concrete with a dense plaster coating on the inside and outside surfaces. The bottom of the tank is of poured concrete. Maximum tank dimensions are 2 m high and 10 m diameter (150 m^3 capacity). These storages have been used in semi-buried as well as aboveground installations.
Properly constructed and Installed on a well prepared site, plastered concrete tanks are very durable and require limited maintenance.
Reported 1981 on-site costs of plastered concrete tanks in the USA range from US$ 5 to 10/m^3 of tank capacity but the same remarks apply as for steel rim tanks in the case of cost extrapolation to developing countries.
c. Cisterns
Cisterns are covered storage tanks. They have been in use for many centuries all around the Mediterranean sea. In Egypt, Libya and Tunisia they were typically excavated as described below. However, in Roman times they were constructed both below and above ground where cap rock did not exist and were made of concrete, stone and brick with either arched concrete or wooden beam roof.
The typical North African cisterns of older design consist of a vertical shaft section excavated from ground level through the top soil and through the hard cap (if any). The most suitable soils for traditional cistern construction are made of clayey silt or soft marls. This material is excavated and removed to form the storage volume. Storage shapes are irregular depending on the subsurface material and can be round, square, rectangular or in the form of narrow galleries. Cisterns are 6 to 7 metres deep and storage volumes reputedly vary from 30 to 500 m^3. The cisterns are generally lined with a cement mortar to improve the impermeability and stability of the soil. Water is removed by bucket and rope through the vertical shaft. Experience has shown that about 400 sheep can be watered during the 2 to 3 months that pasture is available near each cistern.
Cisterns of more modern design are constructed of reinforced concrete of regular shape and incorporate such geatures as silt trap, inlet chamber, trash rack. access hatch and ladder, outlet pipe and watering trough. Typical storage volumes are 300-500 m^3. Some examples of cisterns currently being built in Libya will be examined in the next paragraph (5.4.4 Case studies and cost).
Old Islamic open reservoirs known as birkahs are found in many regions of Saudi Arabia with remnants of wing walls to divert water. Most of these were for village water supply along trade routes. Modern birkahs and renovated ancient birkahs are still in common use. The water gathering principles were similar to the north African cisterns, that is channels or dykes or walls were used to gather water by gravity for the reservoir.
5.4.4 Case study and cost
The inland and coastal lands which comprise the Central Wadi Zone and the Gulf of Sirte areas generally have an extremely low and unreliable rainfall. Average annual rainfall varies from a maximum of some 200 mm near the coast to 50 mm at the southern extremity of the project area.
Poor rainfall characteristics, combined with unsuitable soil and topography make these rangeland areas generally only suitable for livestock grazing for 2 to 3 months a year. Since 1977 the Libyan Government realized the importance of this grazing source and sponsored the implementation of a rangeland development programme. Project activities commenced in 1978 with the major objective to continue to assist and strengthen the efforts of the Government to improve the pastures of the central rangelands and develop the livestock industries in the area. Water supply to the livestock immediately appeared to be an important problem to be solved. Oligo-Miocene aquifer occurs along the coast of Sirte and consists of limestone and dolomitic limestone alternating with marls but water is usually saline (more than 6 g/l) except in recharge areas in the wadi beds. Water harvesting became therefore the only possible solution for stock watering. In the study carried out in 1982 within the
Central Wadi Zone, Australian Consultants (Ashley L. Prout and Antony Middleton) recommended that water points be provided every 3-4 km and be of sufficient size to supply water to the average flock (220 equivalent adult sheep) and the stockbreeder families - i.e. 500-600 m^3/year.
To increase the size of the existing catchments feeding the planned storage facilities, low concrete or stone walls were constructed as wings extending from the entry of the tank to a distance of 50-60 m on both sides.
The cisterns built in the framework of the project are of 2 types. The large 1000 m3 capacity reinforced concrete types are built under contract to the project. The small 200 m^3 capacity types are being built by local farmers who are subsidized by the Secretariat of Agriculture on the basis of US$ 10 200 per cistern of 200 m^3 minimum capacity.
The actual cost of these cisterns (Prout, and Middleton 1982) is estimated at US$ 85/m^3 of storage for the small cisterns (200 m^3 capacity) and US$ 204/m^3 of storage for the large cisterns (1000 m^3 capacity).
5.5 Concluding statement
There is a wide range of surface water possibilities for stock water supply. Where conditions are ideal one or more methods may be considered. However, many of the techniques used in more developed countries may be too costly for the less developed countries. Care is therefore needed when planning to use surface water. The most likely locations for extending drinking water are where natural ponding already occurs. Care in reservoir sizing is also needed to avoid overgrazing of the fodder resources.
<section>7</section>
6. Groundwater resources development for rangelands
6.1 Occurrence of groundwater
6.2 Groundwater exploration techniques
6.3 Groundwater development techniques
6.4 Water lifting devices
6.5 Groundwater monitoring
6.6 Case study and cost
6.7 Conclusion on groundwater development
6.1 Occurrence of groundwater
6.1.1 Continuous and discontinuous aquifers
Groundwater originates for all practical purposes from infiltration of rainfall below the root zone, either directly on the soil or in ponds, lakes and river beds. The rocks of the earth may be classified most simply as sedimentary, intrusive and metamorphic. The sedimentary formations are of particular interest for groundwater and include unconsolidated and consolidated sediments. A special kind of sedimentary rock is limestone which is relatively easily soluble and therefore often has extensive systems of openings in which groundwater may move and be stored.
Hydrogeologists further classify rocks as to their ability to yield water to wells. Thus an aquifer is a rock which is permeable enough to supply water to wells, while an aquiclude tends to be very poorly permeable.
The groundwater is found in the pore spaces between the solid rock or solid rock particles. In unconsolidated and poorly consolidated sediments the pore spaces are simply the openings between the grains. Weather rock is in this respect similar to sediments.
Some rocks have essentially no such pore spaces, but instead may be fractured or dissolved for several reasons. Examples of rocks with "fracture" permeability are hard solid rocks in a fault zone, basalt flows fractured during the cooling process and limestone fractured and further dissolved by groundwater. Ancient metamorphic rocks tend to consist of fine crystalline materials which weather easily to clay near the surface and which often do not contain open fractures. Coarse granite, however, has the useful property of fracturing within 90 m or so of the earth's surface and these fractures can carry groundwater. The great internal crystal pressures when the crystal was formed at great depth. Removal of the overlying rock eventually results in load release fractures.
6.1.1 Continuous and discontinuous aquifers
In the French literature on groundwater in Africa aquifers are often called continuous or discontinuous. in reality there is a general gradition from one to the other and absolute sealing of an aquifer from other areas is relatively rare. from the point of view of low discharge wells usually needed for animal water supply, however, the concept may be useful.
a. Continuous aquifers are those aquifers in which all points are connected hydraulically through a porous medium (sand, gravel, clayey sand, sandstone, calcarenite etc.).
b. Discontinuous aquifers are those aquifers in which hydraulic connections are discontinuous and no correlation is possible from one well to another. groundwater occurrence is exclusively related to weathering or fracturing of the rocks and the matrix of the rock is almost completely impervious. this type of aquifer usually occurs in crystalline rocks (igneous or metamorphic) like granite, basalt, gneiss, crystalline schists etc., or in sedimentary rocks such as quartzitic sandstones, crystalline dolomites and occasionally hard and massive dolomitic limestones.
In many tropical regions the depth of weathering of the rock is considerable. On the positive side some rocks weather to reasonably permeable material. Unfortunately the weathering usually makes it difficult to determine what underlies the weathered zone.
6.2 Groundwater exploration techniques
6.2.1 General approach
6.2.2 Purpose of preliminary survey
6.2.3 Preliminary hydrogeological survey - methodology
6.2.4 Additional investigations required for continuous aquifers
6.2.5 Additional investigations required for discontinuous aquifers
6.2.1 General approach
The operations to be carried out for a groundwater development project may be subdivided into:
- a preliminary survey at a regional scale
- a detailed survey to select the best well locations.
6.2.2 Purpose of preliminary survey
The main objective of a preliminary survey is to minimize the cost of groundwater development. Planning a preliminary groundwater survey includes minimizing the total cost of study and implementation of the groundwater development project. It is essential to keep this concept in mind in order to avoid oversizing the study in relation to the expected final groundwater development. The importance of the exploration phase of the project should not be neglected, particularly in areas of discontinuous aquifers where little information is available.
The results to be expected from a preliminary survey are summarized below:
a. Identification of aquifers and estimation of their characteristics:
- geological setting,
- hydraulic continuity,
- groundwater quantity and quality assessment and expected water demand,
- depth to water from the ground,
- physical characteristics of the formation to be penetrated to reach water.
b. Identify appropriate development methods:
- performance of dug or drilled wells,
- well depth, diameter, and where wells are open Co aquifer,
- construction methods,
- technical specifications,
- use of local or imported techniques,
- costs.
c. Selection of pumps or water lifting devices.
d. Assessment of the risks of failure.
A preliminary survey may identify the groundwater conditions and, taking these and other conditions into account, a reasonable basis for choice of groundwater development may be obtained. Identifying groundwater conditions includes determining the location and physical properties of the aquifer, estimating the quantity and quality, and determining depth to the water table from the surface. The groundwater conditions will determine what kinds of wells may be constructed. Depending on these possibilities and on the local resources and economics, costs are compared and a choice may be made. Finally typical technical specifications for the wells and pumps may be prepared.
6.2.3 Preliminary hydrogeological survey - methodology
a. Review existing geological and hydrogeological information
In most countries geological and hydrogeological maps of a scale ranging from 1/200 000 to 1/1 000 000 exist or are in the process of preparation and can provide essential information on aquifers, their extension, their boundaries and their lithology, and on the depth to water level. This information is usually sufficient to determine whether or not the aquifers are continuous within the area considered for the livestock water supply project. In addition to the classical geological and hydrogeological maps, satellite images may provide complementary information on geological formations and structures. Aerial photographs may also be available and geophysical sueveys have been made for many regions.
b. Water well inventory
Information from an inventory of water wells is the basis for a more accurate identification of the aquifer(s) which will then be tapped in the framework of the future groundwater development project. From the data collected on the existing dug and drilled wells it will be possible to establish the hydraulic continuity of the aquifer and to map the depth to water, the distribution of the good wells (the discharge of which exceeds a minimum value admissible for the considered purpose) and water quality. In the case of discontinuous aquifers, the data collected should also include dry wells (dug or drilled) in order to establish a correlation between as many parameters as possible. Well discharge is usually correlated with:
i. the nature of the water bearing formation;
ii. the formation fracture characteristics, if any (from air photo interpretation);
iii. the distance to important tectonic structures (from satellite imagery and air photo interpretation); and
iv. the depth of penetration of the wells into the aquifer.
In many countries this information has already been collected by the Service responsible for the Water Resources Inventory in which case the additional field investigations required will be limited to updating the inventory or checking questionable information.
6.2.4 Additional investigations required for continuous aquifers
a. Purpose
For continuous aquifers there is usually no need for additional investigation since extrapolations can be made from the data collected in the existing wells to predict the results of new wells. With regard to regional groundwater resources and the possibility of over-exploitation of the aquifer in relation to the expected use of water for the livestock, the risk is usually small in the case of continuous aquifers since the water demand is extremely small when compared to potential aquifer recharge. For example a rangeland area receiving 300 mm annual rainfall and located in a zone where a continuous aquifer can be exploited may have the following characteristics:
i. a carrying capacity of 10 ha/TLU;
ii. for 1 km^2 there might be 10 TLU corresponding to a potential water demand, including losses at the watering places, of approximately 100 m^3/year;
iii. over the same area, the average amount of precipitation will be 300 000 m^3/year and may be as low as 150 000 m^3 one year in ten;
iv. in the case of low rainfall, the water demand for livestock represently only 0.07 percent of precipitation;
v. the recharge of the aquifer is very likely to be higher than 0.07 percent of precipitation.
In the case of continuous aquifers, a preliminary survey of the area, which is often limited to the study of the existing information (geological and hydrogeological maps and well inventory), is usually sufficient to prepare the water supply project. The location of each watering place will then be based essentially on non-hydrogeological criteria (good grazing area, spacing between wells to avoid overgrazing, proximity of a village or of a transhumance route). However, additional investigations may be necessary in areas lacking wells and near the boundary of the sedimentary basin or in the vicinity of an area of unacceptable water quality.
b. Investigations in the vicinity of basin boundaries
The problem usually consists of determining the extent of the aquifer or the extent of the saline water intrusion into the aquifer in order to locate future production wells successfully and avoid deterioration of the water quality with time.
Electrical soundings distributed along profiles perpendicular to the limit of the basin and calibrated on reconnaissance boreholes or test wells are usually sufficient to solve this kind of problem.
c. Investigations in areas lacking wells
This problem may arise in subsaharian areas where the surface geology indicates the likely occurrence of aquifers but no data are available to prepare the ground-water development project.
There is no precise method for solving this problem since investigations will essentially depend upon the geological subsurface structure. The investigation programme may therefore vary from one single reconnaissance borehole for the entire area where geological structure is flat and gently dipping, to a sophistocated survey involving geophysics and several reconnaissance boreholes where the geological structure is complex.
Planning additional investigations in areas lacking wells should be handled by a competent groundwater specialist.
6.2.5 Additional investigations required for discontinuous aquifers
a. Remote sensing methods
Satellite imagery
The digital nature of the satellite image allows computer manipulations of the image to conform any desired map projection and to enhance or extract specific levels of information. It is therefore advisable, when a high definition of the ground elements is required, to use enhanced imagery especially processed to identify and locate accurately:
i. hydrographic networks which may indicate the thickness and characteristics of the weathered zone as well as subsurface tectonic structure,
ii. vegetation which may give information on shallow groundwater occurrence, and
iii. lineaments connected with geological structure.
Aerial photographs
Aerial photographs are of great help for siting new wells in discontinuous aquifers. They are probably the most efficient and cheapest tool to identify the small tectonic structures which may result in fracture of the bedrock and ground-water occurrence. Moreover the use of air-photos does not require particular skill: the fractured zones of the bedrock are usually clearly visible, sometimes indicated by vegetation alignment (because of the presence of water underground) and occasionally marked by sills or dykes of different rock types.
b. Geophysics
Geophysics may be necessary in three main categories of situation:
i. when more recent deposits, usually continental, cover the bedrock and are thick enough to hide its structure,
ii. when weathered or fractured zones are poorly identified by remote sensing, and
iii. when groundwater occurs within the weathered zone of bedrock and productivity of wells depends upon the thickness of the weathered zone.
Four geophysical techniques can be used for the detailed investigations of discontinuous aquifers:
i. the weathering of fractured bedrock zones results in the development of clay pockets which have a much lower electrical resistivity than the surrounding bedrock. This geological structure due to the preferential effect of the weathering on the tectonized axes can easily be located by electrical resistivity profiles method;
ii. the increase of total porosity of the granite, gneiss or sandstones in connection with the weathering process, may result in the development of an aquifer thick enough to alter the electrical resistivity of the formation according to Archie law:
Rf/Rw = P^-m
being:
Rf - the resistivity of the formation
Rw - the resistivity of the water
P - the porosity of the formation
m - the cementation factor ranging from 1.5 Co 2 according to the nature of the rock.
When P increases the resistivity of the formation decreases and may offer sufficient contrast with the resistivity of the underlying bedrock to be identified by electrical sounding;
iii. the speed of longitudinal waves is notably reduced in correspondence to the fractured zones of the hard rocks. The presence and location of a fractured zone can be determined by the seismic refraction method;
iv. fractured zones of bedrock are often intruded by basic rocks like dolerites which have a magnetic susceptibility significantly different from that of the bedrock. This may create a magnetic anomaly which can be identified and located by electromagnetic methods. These methods although little used in hydrogeology may be helpful to indirectly locate the fractured zones of the basement, provided that the weathered zone or the sedimentary overburden are thin.
While almost anybody can apply remote sensing techniques after a few days training, geophysical methods require high technical skill. Many developing countries have created their own geophysical services which are able to apply electrical methods (resistivity profiles and electrical soundings) at a much lower cost that the expatriate specialized companies.
Figures 9: Groundwater occurrence in granite and gneiss weathered and fractured zones
Figure 10: Groundwater occurrence in three typical quartzitic sandstone cross sections
Figure 11: Groundwater occurrence in two typical crystalline schists cross sections
Note: For describing the recommended methods for selecting the best locations of well sites, capital letters indicate the leading method which may even be sufficient in most cases.
Figures 9, 10 and 11 illustrate cases of groundwater occurrence in discontinuous aquifers under different situations and show some hypothetical wells. Below each figure the recommended methods for locating well sites are also indicated.
c. Reconnaissance boreholes
In almost all situations, reconnaissance boreholes are necessary before establishing the production wells in discontinuous aquifers. The objectives of reconnaissance boreholes are to determine the groundwater occurrence and the depth to water which affects the choice of both the production wells and the pump or water lifting device, and to determine the hydraulic characteristics of the aquifer in order to predict its yield and behaviour.
Three drilling methods commonly used are cable tool, rotary and down-the-hole-hammer.
A brief description of these drilling methods is given in section 6.3.3 (Drilled wells).
d. Groundwater resources in discontinuous aquifers
While the water demand for livestock is usually extremely small when compared to the potential yield of a continuous aquifer (see paragraph 6.2.4a), the problem deserves more careful attention in the case of a discontinuous aquifer. The amount of water in storage, which is limited to the fractures and fissures of the bedrock or to small pockets of weathered formation, may not be sufficient to supply water to wells for the duration of the dry season and may be very sensitive to the interannual rainfall variations with the result that wells dry out during drought period. This of course depends on rainfall since in wetter areas the weathered zone usually contains considerable water. In dry regions, the annual recharge of the aquifer may occur only over its actual extent usually limited to the fractured zones a few metres wide. Where the zone corresponds to the bottom of a valley which concentrates the rainfall it can be recharged from a wider catchment basin.
Unfortunately there are no completely reliable methods for evaluating the groundwater resources of discontinuous aquifers since investigations are usually carried out with the objective of looking for the most productive zones without attention to the vertical and horizontal extension of the aquifer which actually governs its storage capacity.
However the production tests (aquifer tests) performed on reconnaissance boreholes may give clues to the response of the aquifer to water abstraction and may guide the water planner in predicting the long term behaviour of the aquifer.
6.3 Groundwater development techniques
6.3.1 Selection of the type of well and pump
6.3.2 Dug wells
6.3.3 Drilled wells
6.3.4 Well cistern associated with a drilled well
6.3.5 Springs
6.3.1 Selection of the type of well and pump
The first factors to be considered for selecting the type of well and pump are the expected depth to water and depth of the well. When both depths are less than 10 m the most suitable solution in pastoral areas consists of digging wells from which water will simply be extracted by hand or animal powered lifting devices. At the other extreme, when both depths are greater than 70-80 m the only solution consists of drilling wells which will be equipped with motor driven pumps.
In between these two extremes all solutions are possible and other criteria have to be considered to decide whether to dig or to drill the wells and which pumps to install on the wells. Table 8 proposes a classification based on two additional criteria:
i. the maintenance capacity of the country which will determine whether mechanical solutions can be proposed;
ii. the hardness of the formations to be penetrated to reach the aquifer which determines the difficulty of drilling wells.
It is clear that the solutions proposed in Table 10 should only be considered for preliminary selection of the most suitable well and pump according to technical criteria, but other parameters may be introduced which will modify the choice. Among the various factors which affect the final selection, the following should be considered:
i. the preference of the users - as an example, in the 6th region of Mali, certain ethnic groups (Touaregs) clearly expressed their preference for dug wells while in the same area (west of the internal Delta of Niger River), the Fulanis were ready to use, maintain and even buy complete pumping equipment with diesel engines to be installed on reconnaissance boreholes recently drilled by the Malian administration;
ii. the economic considerations - one contractor drilled well in very hard rock (quartzite, granite) costs three to four times less than a contractor dug well in the same formation and it may be cheaper to set up a pump and engine maintenance service than to dig a number of wells.
In general, drilling boreholes into hard rock requires heavy and sophisticated equipment and therefore costs are nearly the same regardless of availability and cost of labour. Larger diameter dug wells, when carried out with heavy equipment, tend to be more costly because of the larger number of people and the longer time involved. When the water table is relatively shallow, however, wells are dug by local people when the formation is soft. Even in the harder rock use of hand methods to break out blocks of rock can be relatively inexpensive provided the labour is provided by the farmer.
Table 8: SELECTION OF THE TYPES OF WELL AND PUMP OR WATER LIFTING DEVICE
Depth to water level
Depth to water bearing formation
Hardness of formations to be penetrated to reach the aquifer
Maintenance capacity of the country
Recommended well
Recommended water lifting method
less than 10 m
less than 10 m
soft to hard
not applicable
from 0 to 70-80 m
from 10 to 70-80 m
soft to medium
poor
dug wells
hand/animal powered water lifting device
good
drilled wells
wind/solar/motor pump
hard
poor
dug wells
animal pow. wat. lifting
good
drilled wells
motor driven pumps
more than 70-80 m
soft to medium
poor
well cistern associated
animal powered
hard
poor
with drilled well
lifting device
good
drilled wells
motor driven pumps
more than 70-80 m
more than 70-80 m
soft to hard
good
drilled wells
motor driven pumps
6.3.2 Dug wells
In this method the hole is constructed by digging to the desired diameter and depth with hand or power Cool (air hammer, explosive...). The dug out materials are 42 removed by lifting them from the hole in some type of container. The hole is shored, lined or cased as the depth is increased. For shallow depth and when casing is used, a common practice is to add casing (metallic or cement shaft) at the surface, allowing it to sink of its own weight as the hole is excavated below the bottom of the casin.
One of the limitations of the traditional well digging is the difficulty of penetrating far enough into the aquifer to ensure an adequate depth of water in the well at all times in the future. The difficulty is made worse by the fact that the water table fluctuates seasonally and may even drop considerably at the end of a long dry period.
A system known as "telescoping" has been devised for modern wells to minimize this drawback. This consists of constructing the production section of the well (that located below the water level) separately from the upper part. When the well reaches the water, the diameter is reduced and a concrete perforated shaft is used to line the part of the well which is under water at the time of the construction. The material is excavated within the smaller tube to allow it to sink under its own weight and new shafts are added on top until a sufficient depth of water is reached. If by chance the water level drops down at the end of a dry period, water production can be resumed simply by digging deeper and adding new concrete perforated shafts.
Fig. 12: Dug well
In the case of very hard formations, lining the well may not be necessary over the whole section as indicated on Figure 12. Weathered rock is generally fairly easy to excavate and for very large wells stairs may be formed during excavation. Excavation of solid rock below the weathered zone requires the use of wedges, bars and hammers to break out blocks. This can usually be done by hand to two to five metres below the weathered rock. Sometimes the solid rock appears to be unfractured but careful inspection will show minute cracks where wedges may be driven. Use of explosives in hard rock is of course possible, but the objective is the opposite of rock quarrying where large unfractured blocks are desired. Instead the blocks should be broken and the remaining walls fractured as much as possible.
6.3.3 Drilled wells
Water well drilling is a difficult technique requiring a long experience, which cannot be gained by reading a few lines of a textbook. This paragraph is simply intended to provide the range and animal experts with the basic information needed to understand the major components of a drilling programme.
a. Drilling methods
The cable tool of percussion method of drilling is based upon the principle of applying sufficient energy to pulverize the soil or rock by percussion. The energy applied is varied by controlling the length of the stroke and the weight of the drill stem and bit. The bit is connected to a cable and, by means of a rocker arm on the drill rig, it is raised and released to exert its energy on the bottom of the hole.
In cable tool drilling there are basically three major operations: first drilling of the hole by crushing the rock or clay or other material by the impact of the drill bit; second, removing the cuttings with a bailer as cuttings accumulate in the hole; and third, driving or forcing the well casing down into the hole as the drilling proceeds.
Cable tool is the simplest drilling method which is designed primarily for medium hard rock and cobbly or bouldery materials. However the method can apply in many cases, the major constraint being the extreme slowness of the operation. On the other hand this method does not require large investment in purchase of rig and tools nor does it need lengthy training for operating the machine. Small private enterprises should be encouraged to use cable tools capable of drilling at low cost.
Conventional mud-rotary drilling is accomplished by rotating a drill pipe and bit by means of a power drive. The drill bit cuts and breaks up the rock material as it penetrates the formation. Drilling fluid, usually made of mixed water and special clay (bentonite), is pumped through the rotating drill pipes and holes in the bit. The fluid swirls into the bottom of the hole, picking up the drill cuttings, then flows upward in the well bore, carrying the cuttings to the surface. The cuttings settle out of the mud in puts before the mud is recirculated.
In the rotary drilling method the well casing is usually not introduced into the hole until drilling operations are completed, the walls of the hole being supported by the weight of the drilling fluid.
The mud-rotary method is effective for drilling most rocks. Drilling is rapid in all except the hardest rocks. Difficulty may be encountered in penetrating loose, hard boulders. The rotary method is best suited for deep wells (deeper than 200 m), for wells aimied at developing artesian aquifers (aquifers under pressure) and for reconnaissance wells except in hardest rocks.
The air-rotary and down-the-hole-hammer methods are usually associated in the drilling of the same well since air-rotary is applied in the soft and slightly consolidated part of the borehole (usually the upper part, corresponding to the weathered formation) whereas the down-the-hole-hammer method is used in the hardest formation (usually corresponding to the basement). Air-rotary is similar to mud-rotary in principle, the main difference consisting of substituting mud with air and consequently mud pump with air compressor. Down-the-hole-hammer drilling consists of using air to drive a percussion hammer set at the lower end of the drilling string. Therefore air has two purposes: to drive the hammer and to carry the cuttings to the surface. Air consumption varies with the bit diameter and air pressure. In order to ensure the proper upward transportation of the cuttings it is usually considered that the vertical air velocity should be equal to 15 m/s minimum. Foam is sometimes
added to the air in order to help carry up the cuttings and to limit the erosion of the wall of the borehole by the air flow.
The main advantage of the down-the-hole-hammer method is rapidity of drilling in very hard formations: a penetration rate of 15-20 metres per hour is not exceptional. On the other hand the diameter of the hole is limited by the air velocity required to carry up the cuttings: most of the rigs commonly used can drill with a maximum diameter of 8½" which needs an air discharge of 27 m^3/minute with 3½" diameter drill pipes.
The reverse circulation method is used for drilling very large diameter boreholes in unconsolidated formations to obtain highly productive wells for irrigation purposes. This method does not suit the usual requirements of groundwater development in rangeland areas (limited discharge of the wells in order to avoid overgrazing around the water supply).
b. Casing selection
Diameter
The minimum diameter of the casing should primarily be selected in relation to the expected or requested discharge of the well. Larger diameter may be necessary because of particular drilling conditions requiring the installation of a casing in the upper part of the well (risk of collapsing or artesian pressure in the aquifer), but in most cases of wells drilled in rangeland areas, casing diameters ranging from 6" to 8" are sufficient to set pumps of a capacity varying from 0 to 50 m^3/h (see Tables 11, 12, 13 and 14).
Table 11: SIZE AND WEIGHT OF API CASINGS USED FOR SHALLOW TO MEDIUM DEEP WATER WELLS
Outer diameter
Wall thickness
Inner diameter
Weight
inch
mm
inch
nun
inch
aim
kg/m
Table 12: SIZE AND WEIGHT OF WIRE-WOUND SCREENS USED FOR WATER WELLS
Nominal
Outer diameter over socket
Inner diameter
Weight
inch
mm
inch
mm
kg/m
Table 13: PVC CASING AND SCREENS CHARACTERISTICS - STANDARD WALL THICKNESS FOR WELLS UP TO 100 m DEPTH
Nominal diameter
Outside diameter over socket
Wall thickness
Inside diameter
Weight
inch
mm
inch
mm
inch
mm
inch
mm
kg/m
Table 14: SIZE AND CAPACITIES OF DEEP WELL PUMPS
Nominal diameter
VERTICAL TURBINE PUMPS
SUBMERSIBLE PUMPS
Outside bowl diameter
Discharge range
Minimum diameter of tubewell
Nominal diameter
Outside bowl diameter
Discharge range
Minimum diameter of tubewell
inch
inch
mm
m^3/h
inch
mm
inch
inch
mm
m^3/h
inch
mm
Material
Casing maintains the hole through loose, caving or flowing materials and seals out contaminated or undesirable waters. It must be strong enough to resist earth pressure and, depending upon method of placement, may have to withstand considerable shock and compressive stress. Casing should also be sufficiently resistant to corrosion to last 25 to 50 years.
Until recently drilled wells were cased with steel or wrought iron pipe casings using welded or threaded and coupled joints.
For the last 10-15 years, plastic (PVC) pipes have proved to be very convenient because of their lightweight and their high resistance against corrosion. PVC pipes can be used for wells to 300 m depth, however the standard wall thickness allows a maximum setting depth of approximately 100 m. For deeper wells specially manufactured thicker pipes should be used.
Table 13 shows an example of PVC pipe characteristics for shallow wells similar to those which are drilled in alluvial aquifers or in the basement.
c. Screens
The most important part of any well is that area where the water flows from the aquifer into the well. The proper construction and development of this section of the well is essential for the efficient production of the optimum amount of groundwater.
Consolidated rock aquifers may often be completed as open hole, that is, no perforated casing or screen is required. In unconsolidated sand and gravel aquifer and more generally in all water bearing formations likely to cave or collapse when water flows, a screen or perforated casing is necessary to allow the water from the aquifer to enter the well and to stabilize the aquifer material.
Screens are manufactured according to several designs and from a variety of corrosion resistant material.
Tables 12 and 13 show the main characteristics of two types of screens commonly used in water wells - wire-wound screens and PVC screens.
If the water bearing formation is unconsolidated and fine (sand), it is usually necessary to install properly sized gravel behind the screens in order to prevent the finest elements from entering the well. If the aquifer formation is such that it may collapse or cave, gravel pack may also be needed to stabilize the wall of the well. The grain size distribution of the gravel pack is selected in relation to the slot opening of the screens and the grain size distribution of the aquifer. formation.
d. Well development
Well development is the process of removing clay, silt, fine sand, drilling mud and other detererious material from the vicinity of the well screen and from behind the gravel pack. This operation increases the permeability of the material surrounding the screen, thus increasing the well efficiency.
The most commonly used methods for well development are as follows:
- surging
- backwashing
- jetting
- air lifting
- overpumping
- acidizing
- use of dispersing agents (polyphosphates).
These different procedures are described in detail in the specialized literature on water well drilling.
e. Pumping test
The pumping test is an important operation to be carried out after completion of the well and has two main purposes. The first is to determine the characteristics of the well in order to select the proper pumping equipment, and the second to determine the characteristics of the aquifer in order to estimate the effect of the planned programme of water development on the aquifer.
The procedures of the test are slightly different according to the purpose to be reached. When the wells are drilled in the framework of a large programme of water development, short duration tests aiming at the selection of the suitable pumping equipment are usually sufficient for most of the wells. More sophisticated tests are performed only on a few wells selected by the hydrogeologist.
6.3.4 Well cistern associated with a drilled well
This technique consists of using a large diameter lined well to extract, with traditional drawing methods, water coming from a nearby drilled well connected with the large diameter well. Although the corresponding investment is high (cost of a dug well + cost of a drilled well), the well cistern has proved to be convenient for water production in areas where mechanical water lifting devices cannot be installed because of their maintenance requirements.
The well cistern/drilled well technique is suitable when the following conditions are met:
a. either when the aquifer is confined and cannot be exploited by dug wells because it is too deep (more than 80 m) or because water is under pressure;
b. or when the water bearing formation consists of hard rocks in which water flows through fissures and from which bigger discharge can be obtained by drilled wells tapping a deeper aquifer section than dug wells.
Figure 13 shows a typical drilled well and a well cistern.
Fig. 13: Well cistern associated with a drilled well
It is also common practice to pore the drilled well inside the dug well, but it is difficult to keep the dirt and debris in the dug well from entering the borehole and reducing its efficiency.
6.3.5 Springs
Springs with a significant flow of water - say over 20 m^3/h have usually been developed long ago and are currently used for either irrigated agriculture or human needs, but smaller flows are often overlooked as potential sources of water for livestock consumption, mostly in arid and semi-arid countries where a small water flow immediately evaporates if not properly collected and conveyed. A spring discharge of less than 0.5 m^3/h does not usually show any flow. Water disappears by evaporation and evapotranspiration in the middle of the vegetation which naturally develops around the spring. Properly collected and distributed the same water could meet the requirements of 300 to 400 cattle.
a. Small spring sites
Small springs usually occur as outflows of catchment basins of limited extension and with poor hydraulic characteristics in mountainous areas. Examples may be found in Mauritania (small springs flowing out of very compact Cambro-Ordovician quartzitic sandstones all around the Plateau of Tagant which received 200 mm average annual rainfall) and in Niger (small springs of the Air mountains).
b. Discharge measurements
A simple and accurate way to determine flow volume of small water supplies is the 90°"V" notch. A "V" notch suitable for determing flows up to 10 m^3/h can easily be made from a piece of flat metal measuring 40 x 25 cm from which a triangular notch with a right angle has been cut out. The graduations Co be written on the side of the notch opening are shown on Figure 14a. The positions of the graduation referred to the bottom of the notch are as follows:
Graduation (discharge m^3/h)
Vertical distance in mm from the bottom of the notch to the graduation
The "V" notch is placed in a channel through which all the water from the spring is forced to flow. On the spring side a small level pool of water, at least one metre long should be formed as shown on Figure 14b. After positioning the "V" notch and making sure Chat all the water is flowing through it, flow readings are made. For design purposes, flow measurements should preferably be made at the end of the dry season or when the spring discharge is lowest.
c. Selection of the diameter of the delivery pipe
Once the location of the water troughs has been fixed, two parameters should be determined; one is the distance (preferably measured horizontally) from the spring to the water outlet, and the other is the vertical difference or head between the spring and the outlet.
Figure 15 can be used to select the smallest pipe diameter to carry the desired discharge as shown in the following example:
spring discharge = 0.5 m^3/h
distance spring-outlet = 30 m
elevation difference between the spring and the outlet = 3 m
the hydraulic gradient is the elevation difference divided by the distance or 3/30 =0.1 (this gradient is equivalent to 10 m of drop per 100 m of pipe)
Figure 15 shows that the pipe diameter necessary to convey 0.5 m^3/h under 10 m drop per 100 m of pipe is between 3/4 inch (19 mm) and 1 inch (25 mm). Therefore a one inch pipe would be selected, since the 3/4 inch pipe is too small.
d. Spring development
The most important point to remember is "DO NOT increase the water level of the spring". The normal water level of the undisturbed spring should be marked and no attempt should be made to increase or lift this level for any reason. If the water level is increased, the extra pressure may cause the spring to flow out through another outlet which may be far away from the present one.
The Figures 14c, d, e show the steps to be followed for the development of small springs, using only local material. After the position of the undisturbed water level has been marked, the spring should be excavated to approximately one metre below the old water level and a drain constructed in order to channel the water outside the spring area. The drain can then be used to install the delivery pipe. The pit dug at the spring location should be large enough to allow for the installation of a collection chamber made from concrete pipe 30 to 50 cm diameter and 1 m long, and filling of the space around the collection chamber with stones, so that water can flow into the chamber.
Figure 14a: SPRING DISCHARGE MEASUREMENT WITH A 90° "V" NOTCH
Figure 14b:90° "V" NOTCH GRADUATION
Figure 14c: THE UNDISTURBED SPRING
Figure 14d: PREPARATION WORK FOR SPRING DEVELOPMENT
Figure 14e: COLLECTION CHAMBER USING A CONCRETE PIPE
Figure 14f: COLLECTION CHAMBER AND OVERFLOW ENTIRELY MADE OF STONE
Fig. 15: PIPE FLOW CHARTS
An overflow is needed to divert the excess flow from the spring. A seepage seal should cover the spring and extend so that surface seepage does not enter the spring. The chamber should have a tight cover so that sunlight cannot enter through the opening and allow algae to develop.
Should the concrete pipe not be available locally, a chamber can also be constructed with only stones and clay as shown on Figure 14f.
6.4 Water lifting devices
6.4.1 Main requirements
6.4.2 Different types of water lifting
6.4.3 Man or animal powered water lifting devices
6.4.4 Motor driven pumps
6.4.5 Wind powered pumps
6.4.6 Solar pumps
6.4.1 Main requirements
The ideal water lifting device for groundwater production in rangeland areas of developing countries should be capable of delivering a minimum of 20-30 m^3/day - the amount necessary to meet the daily requirements of 500-700 cattle, be able to be operated by only one person if necessary, and should require little or no maintenance.
In fact there are no devices which can meet all these conditions and the solutions proposed can only take into consideration one or two of the above conditions and be as close as possible to the third one. For example, hand water lifting does not require any maintenance, can be carried out by one person but can deliver 20 m^3/day only under very restrictive conditions - i.e. water level depth not exceeding 10 m and 5 to 6 people drawing at the same time. Another example may be the animal powered water lifting which can meet the discharge requirements (5 to 6 animals working at the same time can easily draw 20-30 m^3/day even if the water level is very deep) and does not require any maintenance, but cannot be operated by a single person.
It is clear also that the water lifting method should suit the type of well (dug or drilled) already existing or planned.
6.4.2 Different types of water lifting
Many types of water lifting devices are in use in various parts of the world for irrigation, domestic supply or livestock watering. Those which may be envisaged in rangeland areas can be classified as follows:
a. man or animal powered water lifting devices
· traditional devices for dug wells
· hand or foot pumps for drilled wells
b. motor driven pumps
· diesel engine and vertical turbine pump
· generator and submersible pump
c. wind powered pumps
d. solar pumps
The possible uses of each type of water lifting method in association with suitable water work are suggested in Table 10 in relation to various hydrogeological criteria and maintenance capacity of the country. More detailed information is given hereafter.
6.4.3 Man or animal powered water lifting devices
a. Traditional water drawing
In pastoral areas a skin or rubber bucket is hung on a rope and operated either manually or with the help of an animal (usually bullock or camel). Traditional water lifting is suited to large diameter dug wells where 5 to 6 people or animals can draw water at the same time provided that the well supplies enough water. Well cisterns associated with a nearby drilled well are built with the intention of being exploited by traditional water drawing, mainly by animal powered water lifting. The graphs in Figure 16 show the range of maximum discharge attainable by 5 to 6 people or animals in relation to the depth of the water level. In the case of hand water drawing, the discharge decreases rapidly with the depth of water but when animals are used the discharge is not very sensitive to the increase of water depth. This is due to the fact that the duration of each elementary operation in a complete drawing cycle is not equally affected by the variation of the water depth as
indicated in Table 15.
Fig. 16: Hand and animal powered water lifting - Discharge range from one well
Table 15: OPERATING TIMES OF ANIMAL POWERED WATER DRAWING FROM A WELL
Operations
Depth to water
40 m
70 m
Getting up and down a 40 1 bucket
1' to 1' 30"
2' 30" to 3' 30"
Surface operations (emptying the bucket)
2' to 3'
2' to 3'
Filling the bucket
Total
4' to 5' 30"
5' 30" to 7' 30"
The operating times measured in several locations in Niger and Mali show that increasing the depth to water affects the time necessary to get the bucket up and down which represents only 26 percent (40 m depth) to 45 percent (70 m depth) of the complete cycle.
It is therefore rather easy to attain a daily water production of 20-30 m^3 of water from a single well, whatever is the depth to the water level, provided that the hydraulic characteristics of the well are such that it can effectively supply that amount of water, and that 5 to 6 animals are used at the same time.
The only difficulty with animal powered water drawing is that it requires two people, one for emptying the bucket and one for guiding the animal. This particular condition may not be compatible with pastoral customs of certain ethnic groups. During the transhumance period, the Fulani shephers, for example, are used to being alone with their herds.
Hand drawing for watering livestock is used when the water level is very shallow, and in sedentary areas where the density of the wells is sufficient to reduce the number of animals to be watered from each well.
b. Hand and foot pumps
The graphs of Figure 16 clearly show the important progress represented by hand or foot pumps when compared with the simple drawing of water, since one or two people operating a hand or foot pump can produce as much water as 5 to 6 people or 3 to 4 animals drawing water with a bucket. The graphs of Figure 16 have been obtained by plotting the theoretical performances of the pumps as indicated by the manufacturers, and corresponding to new pumps operated by one or two men in excellent physical condition.
The power delivered by the average man is estimated at 0.08 hp which corresponds to a water discharge of:
- 2.16 m^3/h if the water level is at 10 m
- 0.72 m^3/h if the water level is at 30 m
- 0.43 m^3/h if the water level is at 50 m
- 0.27 m^3/h if the water level is at 80 m
when assuming a mechanical efficiency of the pump of 1/1.
Actually, because of the decreasing efficiency of the pumps with their state of wear (especially the tightness rings) and with the depth of water, and because of the unequal power of the pump operators, the discharge of a hand pump over several hours operation rarely exceeds 0.7-0.8 m^3/h even for shallow water level.
Moreover, there are few hand pumps capable of working at depths exceeding 50-60 m.
In arid and semi-arid rangelands environment of developing countries, the hand or foot pumps present several disadvantages since they cannot deliver more than 8-10 m^3/day which is not sufficient for a normal water supply in rangeland area. If the utilization of hand pumps is nevertheless envisaged, the density of wells should be considerably increased in order to supply the required quantity of water to the livestock. In addition, pumps require regular maintenance in order to keep their efficiency at an acceptable level. The maintenance operations may require truck mounted lifting equipment when the pumps are installed at depths exceeding 20-30 m: the weight of a piston pump with 30 m transmission rods may indeed reach 200-250 kg for those operated through a lever and 450-500 kg for those operated through a wheel and a handle. Proper maintenance is a prerequisite for reliable hand pump based water supplies.
However, in spite of these major disadvantages, hand pumps are certainly a technical solution to be considered in very hard rocks which make the digging of large diameter wells time consuming while drilling by down-the-hole-hammer method requires only a few days to complete a 100 m borehole. Hand pumps are also appropriate in poorly permeable aquifers which cannot be developed by dug wells widely scattered over a large area but would be better exploited by a denser network of drilled wells. Hand pumps are preferred to motor driven pumps because of the small well discharge which would not justify the cost of motor driven pumps.
But again, this solution - drilled wells and hand pumps - whichever technical justification is put forward, may be acceptable ONLY IF proper maintenance of the pumping equipment is guaranteed.
6.4.4 Motor driven pumps
a. When should motor driven pumps be considered?
Motor driven pumps installed in a drilled well are the only technical solution for producing groundwater in areas where both water level and water bearing formation are deeper than 70-80 m. If the water level comes closer to ground surface other solutions than motor driven pumps are technically feasible and have schematically been presented in Table 10. The motor driven pump solutions should always be considered in the case of high quality rangeland extending over an area offering substantial groundwater potential. Indeed with the assumptions of a daily water requirement of 40 l/TLU during the hot season, water production by animal powered drawing of 30 m^3/day from one well (either dug well or well cistern associated with a drilled well), and 10 km walking capacity for livestock from the grazing area to water supply, corresponding to a total area of approximately 30 000 ha which might be grazed from one water source, then one well can water 750 TLU. This means that the
animal powered well is convenient only if the carrying capacity of the considered rangeland is less than 40 ha/TLU.
In the case of rangeland offering better carrying capacity - say 20 ha/TLU - the solution for watering all the livestock which could graze over that rangeland would consist either of 2 dug wells with animal powered drawing or 1 drilled well equipped with motor driven pump. Perhaps this example is not really feasible since most probably 2 drilled wells with their pumping equipment would also be necessary for security reasons (in the case of engine or pump failure, water has still to be made available for livestock). But let us imagine the case of an excellent range-land with a 5 ha/TLU carrying capacity so that 6000 TLU would have to be watered. The solution would be EITHER 1 (or better 2 for security reasons) drilled wells with motor driven pumps OR 8 dug wells.
b. Selecting the discharge of the pump
The maximum quantity of water to be pumped every day V[maxday] usually depends upon the carrying capacity of the rangeland. Assuming a walking capacity of the livestock of 10 km and a drinking requirement of 40 1/TLU, V[maxday] in m^3/day would roughly be equal to 1200 divided by the carrying capacity in ha/TLU.
During the pumping test carried out on the well after its completion the exploitable discharge of the well Q[exp] would be determined. If Q[exp] is such that the daily maximum water requirement - V[maxday] - can be pumped in less than 12-16 hours, then the discharge - Q[pump] of the pump to be installed can be fixed in such a way that the maximum daily pumping time will range from 5-6 to 12-16 hours. If Q[exp] is not sufficient to pump V[maxday] m^3 in less than 12-16 hours, then drilling an additional well has to be considered.
The internal diameter of the casing limits the size of the pump bowl which may be a constraint to selecting the pump discharge, but for wells to be used in a rangeland environment, the maximum discharge required rarely exceeds 25 m^3/h and a 6 inch (150 mm) diameter casing is sufficient in most cases to accommodate a suitable pump. However it is recommended whenever possible to select the casing diameter of the well before drilling starts according to the expected required discharge, i.e. for discharge ranging from 5 to 15 m^3/h plan 6 inch casing minimum and for discharge ranging from 15 to 40 m^3/h use preferably 7 to 8 inch casing minimum.
c. Vertical turbine pump with diesel engine or electrical submersible pump with power generator?
Both solutions have advantages and inconveniences:
i. installation and removal of submersible pumps are easier since only the pump and the column has to be set down or removed while vertical turbine pumps also require a shaft and bearings and are more delicate to install;
ii. if a submersible pump is to be used the well may be located outside the shelter of the power generator. This may be considered as an advantage since any repair on the well or on the pump is made easier;
iii. electrical submersible pumps require sophisticated systems of automatic control and security which need periodical visits by a good electrician for maintenance and repair;
iv. the electric pumping unit, which consists of a pump, an electric motor, a generator and a diesel engine, is more expensive and more energy consuming than a mechanical pumping unit consisting of only a pump and an engine.
It therefore seems that in spite of inconveniences connected with a more delicate installation, vertical turbine pumps are preferred for the equipment of wells located in remote areas lacking electrical maintenance facilities.
d. Determining the main characteristics of the pumps and engines
Efficiency of the pumping units
The two systems in use for equipment of pumping stations are schematically issultrated in Figure 17 which also indicates the average efficiency of each component and the overall efficiency of each system.
Fig. 17 Efficiency of turbine pump and diesel engine compared to that of submersible pump and power generator
Vertical turbine pump
The only parameters to be provided for ordering the pump are:
a. the well casing inside diameter which will determine the maximum size of the pump bowl;
b. the requested discharge;
c. the total vertical water lift.
The total vertical lift is the sum of the following elements:
- depth to water level below ground under static conditions,
- maximum seasonal or interannual water level fluctuation,
- drawdown corresponding to the expected discharge (from pumping test results),
- elevation of the storage tank above ground in order to allow water to flow out to the watering troughs when needed.
On the basis of these data, the manufacturer will calculate the total dynamic head corresponding to the sum of the total vertical water lift and the friction losses at the given discharge and or different pump and column characteristics. The total dynamic head will determine the number of pump stages required.
Diesel engine for vertical turbine pump
Although the characteristics of the motor will be determined by the manufacturer as a function of the expected discharge, the total dynamic head and the pump efficiency, it may be useful for the water project planner to estimate the required power of the engine, first to check the offer of the manufacturer, and then to calculate the expected energy consumption necessary to determine the operating cost of the pumping station.
Defining:
P[mot] as the power delivered by the engine in HP,
Q[pump] the discharge of the pump in m^3/h,
H[lift] the total vertical water lift in m from pumping level in the well to point of delivery in the tank. Assuming the friction losses equal 15 percent of h[lift], the total dynamic head would correspond to 1.15 x h[lift].
Defining: Te[ff] as the efficiency of the pump and the diesel engine (0.48 according to Figure 17)
A simple formula to estimate the nominal power of the engine would therefore be as follows:
Submersible pump and power generator
The same data as for the vertical turbine pumps are required to order the submersible pumps. These are well casing inside diameter, discharge and vertical water lift.
The manufacturer will usually take care of calculating the power required to run the motor of the pump and the characteristics of the generator as well as the power of the engine which will drive the generator. However it may be useful for the water project planner to estimate the characteristics of the various components of the system in order to check the offers of different manufacturers and also to calculate the likely energy consumption of the pumping station.
The power required to run the electrical motor of the pump is estimated as follows:
P[mot]: the electrica1 power absorbed by the motor of the pump in kW
Q[pump]: the discharge of the pump in m/h
H[lift]: the total vertical water lift in m from pumping level in the well to point of delivery in the tank; assuming the friction losses equal 15 percent of H[lift], the total dynamic head would correspond to 1.15 x H[lift],
T[eff]: the efficiency of the turbines
M[eff]: the efficiency of the electrical motor
or simply, if assuming T[eff] = 0.8 and M[eff] - 0.9 (see Figure 17),
However, starting an electrical motor requires additional power which may be estimated as 15 percent of the power calculated by the proceeding formula. Eventually the power P[motgen] of the engine associated with the generator will be:
G[eff] - is the efficiency of the generator
D[eff] is the efficiency of the diesel engine
or simply, if assuming G[eff] = 0.9 and D[eff] = 0.6,
Hence, by comparing the power required for a given discharge and head by the system - vertical turbine pump + diesel engine with that required by the system -submersible pump + electrical motor + generator + diesel engine it clearly appears that the latter will consume more energy for the same output.
6.4.5 Wind powered pumps
a. Wind energy
With the help of windmills, wind energy can be converted into mechanical or electrical power. The power which can theoretically be supplied may be estimated by the following formula:
P[th] = K x A x V^3
where:
P[th] is the power in kW
A is the area swept by the rotor in m^2
V is the wind velocity in m/s
K is a coefficient depending on the density of the air and the characteristics of the rotor; for a rough estimation of P[th], K may be made equal to 0.00064
Since the power relation with the windspeed is cubic, it is very important to obtain reliable windspeed data in the project area for a sound evaluation of the technical and economical analysis of the windmill water lifting project.
b. Wind analysis
To evaluate the possibilities of windmill for supplying water to livestock in rangeland areas, an analysis has to be made of the wind. This study should cover the following items:
i. Average annual windspeed
Wind speeds should be measured 10 m above ground surface in order to reflect the actual wind characteristics to be used by the mill. The wind velocity in secondary meteorological stations is usually measured at much lower heights, and corrections can be made with the following empirical formula:
where:
V^10 = average wind velocity at 10 m above ground (m/s)
V^h = average wind velocity at height h (m/s)
h = height of windspeed measuring device (m)
a = surface roughness coefficient ranging from 0.2 and 0.25 in open areas on land
The technical feasibility of a windmill project can be roughly evaluated from the average annual windspeed as indicated in Table 16.
Table 16: TECHNICAL FEASIBILITY OF A WINDMILL PROJECT IN RELATION TO THE AVERAGE ANNUAL (OR SEASONAL) WINDSPEED
Average annual or seasonal windspeed (m/s)
Technical feasibility of a windmill project
less than 2.5 m/s
generally not feasible
2.5 to 4 m/s
technically possible but may be doubtful from an economic view point
more than 4 m/s
generally feasible
ii. Average monthly windspeeds
For water project planning connected with rangeland development it is important to know whether windspeed will be sufficient and that, consequently, water will be available during the months of presence of the animals on the considered rangeland area. To evaluate this factor, the average windspeeds are plotted on graphs.
iii. Daily wind pattern
In general, windspeeds are not constant throughout the 24 h of a day. Often there is little wind at night, wehreas strong winds may blow in the afternoon. In any case the windspeed distribution over the day will most probably not correspond to the likely distribution of the water demand for watering livestock. It is therefore necessary to associate a storage tank to any wind powered pumping system.
iv. Windless periods
If windmills are being considered for supplying water to livestock in rangeland areas, windless periods are one of the most important items of the wind analysis. If the probability of having one lull period of more than 2 consecutive days during the dry and hot season exceeds 20 percent -a 2 day lull period will probably occur during the hot season 2 years out of 10 - then the water project has to be seriously reexamined. Storage tanks may possibly help to overcome the difficulty of the lull periods but the cost of one water supply may rapidly become excessive.
c. Windmill pump performance
The maximum extraction efficiency of the theoretical wind power cannot exceed 59.3 percent. Actually the efficiency of the conversion of wind energy into mechanical energy ranges from 15 to 40 percent according to the type of windmill. If the pump efficiency is also taken into consideration, then the overall efficiency of a. windmill-pump will be ranging from 10 to 30 percent only.
P[usable] = (0.1 to 0.3) x K x A x V^3
The total power output of a specific windmill-pump combination can therefore be predicted from the windspeed frequency distribution over the different period of the rear (months for example) corresponding to the rangeland occupation plan. However another two parameters should also be taken into account to determine the expected performance of the system: the cut-in and cut-out windspeed. The cut-in windspeed or starting windspeed is the minimum windspeed required for the mill to start running, depending on load and starting torque. The cut-out windspeed or maximum windspeed is the speed above which the windmill is designed to be governed out of the wind for safety reasons. Usually the cut-in speed is around 3 m/s while the cut-out speed is around 8-10 m/s. It is obvious that only the windspeed frequency distribution figures between these 2 limits should be used for the performance calculations.
Actually the windmill performance is difficult to assess accurately under real field conditions. Moreover the figures presented in manufacturers manuals are often difficult to adjust to local conditions and sometimes are rather optimistic. However, when the windmill and the pump are well designed and well keyed to one another, there should not be much difference between the performances of the various makes, and these should all correlate with figures derived directly from theoretical formulas.
Table 17 (Van Vilsteren 1981) gives an indication of average windmill-piston pump performance for the most common combinations available on the market.
Table 17: GENERAL WINDMILL-PISTON PUMP PERFORMANCE FIGURES FOR DIFFERENT ROTOR DIAMETERS AND DIFFERENT ELEVATION HEAD (Cut-in windspeed 3 m/s; V[design] 3 m/s; Cut-out 10 m/s)
DISCHARGE IN m^3/h
Total elevation head m
Rotor diameter m
W
I
N
D
S
P
E
E
D
(m/s)
Table 17 shows the practical limit of pumping depth when windmills are expected to supply water to livestock in rangeland areas. If elevation of the storage tank and friction losses all together are taken equal to 5 m and if a discharge of 5 m^3/h is considered as the minimum required, it appears from Table 17 that with 5 m rotor diameter the maximum pumping depth will be in the order of 15 m (20 m total head), while with 7 m rotor diameter, the maximum pumping depth may possibly reach 35-40m. The practical limit of piston pumps, however, is 25-30m. For greater depth the rods used for transmission of the vertical movement to the piston may be subject to frequent breaks.
d. Maintenance requirements
Like any mechanical device, windmill-pump equipment requires maintenance (lubricating, change of piston leather of the pump, checking of the cut-off device). In remote areas of developing countries the maintenance requirements of windmills even if limited are an important constraint.
In the Eastern part of Mali (south of Gao) 38 windmills were installed in 1956-60 in rangeland areas and also close to villages. From 1959 to 1962 the windmills were periodically visited by mechanics belonging to a contractor in charge of the maintenance and worked perfectly during all that period of time. Later on, the lack of spare parts and the difficulty of ensuring a continuous maintenance resulted in a rapid decline of the efficiency of the windmills which broke down one after another.
6.4.6 Solar pumps
The use of solar energy in developing countries is now seen as a serious and worthwhile endeavour. Various governmental and international agencies as well as commercial firms are involved in research and development, including water lifting of the various methods for harnessing solar energy; the most promising is the photovoltaic system, which directly converts solar energy into electricity. Up to now the main limiting factor to the utilization of solar energy was the excessive investment required but it cannot be excluded that a technological breakthrough similar to that of microprocessors in electronics may be achieved and that thereby solar powered devices may become highly competitive in water lifting at least for irrigation. When water is to be used for watering livestock in remote areas, an additional constraint is the maintenance requirement of such sophisticated devices.
6.5 Groundwater monitoring
6.5.1 Need for groundwater monitoring
6.5.2 Rainfall observations
6.5.3 Water level fluctuations
6.5.4 Water abstraction
6.5.1 Need for groundwater monitoring
In principle a groundwater project designer should always be in a position to predict the long term behaviour of the aquifer in relation to the planned programme of water abstraction and to the possible climatic fluctuations which may affect the recharge of the aquifer. Water wells should be designed in such a way that in no case the water level would drop down out of the reach of the designed water lifting devices. This means for example that dug wells should be deep enough to always contain sufficient water for the users to draw it. This means also, in the case of the drilled wells, usually much deeper than the water level, to design the pumping equipment in such a way that no risk would occur for the pumps to run dry and either to be damaged or to let thousands of animals without water.
The problem of water resources has already been discussed in paragraph 6.2.4 for the continuous aquifers and 6.2.5 for the discontinuous aquifers. While the water resources of a continuous aquifer are relatively easy to estimate and in most cases they are, by an order of magnitude, bigger than the water demand for extensive stockbreeding, the problem may become serious in the case of discontinuous aquifers. Because hydraulic extrapolations are hazardous in discontinuous aquifers, the classical methods of groundwater resources evaluation do not apply and therefore the water project should be designed on a step by step basis in such a way that each new step of water development would be designed and implemented on the basis of a careful analysis of the effect of the previous step on the aquifer. This is possible only by planning, together with the water development operations of the project, a careful monitoring of the rainfall over the area concerned, the water level
fluctuations in selected wells (possibly all if they are far away from each other) and the quantity of water withdrawn every year from the wells.
Although less important in the case of continuous aquifers, it is worthwhile, also in that case, to follow the fluctuations of the precipitations and of the water level in selected wells in order to be able to notice any abnormal drop which may affect the utilization of the wells.
6.5.2 Rainfall observations
In a rangeland area, a rainfall observation network is usually planned in order to correlate precipitation and dry matter production and thus to predict the carrying capacity of the area during the next dry season. The same rainfall observations can be used for groundwater recharge monitoring.
6.5.3 Water level fluctuations
In an area where wells are scattered and where no hydraulic connections exist from one well to another but statistical correlation's, water level observations should be made on almost any well, at least during the starting phase of the project. The observations should be made twice a year, one of them being made during a period of non-utilization of the wells (usually the end of the rainy season).
When water level has to be measured during the period of intensive water drawing, the measurements should possibly be made early in the morning and the situation of the well (whether or not in production) should be noted together with the water level.
In the case of continuous aquifers, the drilling of a few piezometer holes should be considered if the corresponding marginal increase of the total project cost is reasonable (say less than 5 percent of the total cost of the water project). Well protected piezometers are the best way for observing the fluctuations of the water level without being disturbed by the local depression due to water abstraction from the well itself.
6.5.4 Water abstraction
This is the most difficult parameter to be determined but at least in the case of discontinuous aquifers it is important to estimate the quantity of water withdrawn from the wells.
If by direct counting (for vaccination) or by statistical sounding, the number of animals which either transit or stay in the considered area is known, the estimation of the water abstraction is quite easy.
If no information is available from the Animal Husbandry or Veterinary Service a tentative estimation of the number of animals watered by the wells should be made once every three or four years, by counting the animals watered during a full day by randomly selected wells (one over ten). The well inventory should have been completed befrehand so that to know at least the number of wells supplying water in the area and to make extrapolation of sounding results possible.
6.6 Case study and cost
6.6.1 Well construction
6.6.2 Water lifting
Before going through a few examples and their costs, it is worth mentioning that all construction works related to groundwater development carried out in rangeland areas, and all water lifting equipment are much more expensive than when the future water users are sedentary people living in villages. The two main reasons for the higher prices are distance and maintenance difficulties. When the well sites are far away from the capital and from the main roads, they are often not accessible with normal vehicles. The water users are often not the same from one day to another so that any involvement of the population in the construction works as well as in the maintenance of equipment is difficult.
6.6.1 Well construction
a. Dug wells
The unit cost per metre for digging and lining large diameter wells depends on the depth of the wells, the hardness of the formation, the difficulty of access and the distance from the capital. It is therefore difficult to give one single price for well digging even within one country.
Moreover, in discontinuous aquifers, it is always necessary to drill a reconnaissance borehole to ascertain the presence of water before digging a well, and the cost of the drilling should obviously be added to the construction cost of the dug well. However, in the following examples dealing with groundwater development programmes in discontinuous aquifers, the cost of the reconnaissance boreholes will not be considered.
In Mauritania (Burgeap 1982b), the average prices in 1980 are as indicated in Table 18.
Table 18: AVERAGE 1980 COSTS OF 1 m OF DUG WELL, 1.8 m DIAMETER EXECUTED BY THE MAURITANIAN ADMINISTRATION (DIRECTION DE L'HYDRAULIQUE) (Exchange rate: US$ 1 = 50 UM)
Area
Trarza
Afrar Tagant
Assaba-Hodh
Nature of the rock
soft
hard
hard
Maximum depth
40 m
30 m
30 m
Distance from Nouakchott
200-300 km
600-800 km
700-1000 km
Average UM
cost/m US$
Actually, according to the new policy of the Administration, 35 percent of the cost of dug wells are provided for in nature (unskilled manpower, material, fuel) by the local collectivities.
In Niger, a special authority (OFEDES) is responsible for the construction of the wells. In 1982 the prices charges by OFEDES for digging wells in Maradi-Zinder area (600-800 km from Niamey) were as indicated in Table 19.
Thus a well, 30 m deep, crossing 20 m of soft formation, 5 m of hard rock and penetrating 5 m into the aquifer, would cost in equivalent US dollars:
Moving equipment
Digging and lining
25 x 202
Supplement for hard rock
5 x 383
Concrete shafts
5 x 107
Ring shoe
Table 19: UNIT PRICES FOR WATER WELL DIGGING BY OFEDES IN MARADI-ZINDER AREA (NIGER) IN 1982 (Exchange rate: US$ 1 = 285 CFA Francs)
Description of work
Unit
Unit price
FCFA
US$
Moving equipment and preparation of well site
Unit
Digging and lining in soft terrain
0 to 30 m
m
30 to 50 m
m
50 to 70 m
m
70 to 90 m
m
Price increase for hard rock
m
Supply and installation of concrete screened
shaft and gravel pack
m
Supply and installation of the ring shoe
Unit
Digging below water level (max 10 m)
m
Curb and surface anchorage
Unit
Supply and installation of surface super structure (block-holder)
Unit
Supply and installation of water troughs for livestock
Unit
Pumping test
Unit
Digging below water level
5 x 255
Curb
Water troughs (5)0
5 x 74
Pumping test
Total
in US$
Average cost per metre
in US$
In Mali, data have been collected on cost of dug wells executed either by foreign contractors or by the local administration (Opération Puits).
In 1979, 11 wells totalling 637 m were dug by the Administration in the area called Senomango located in the 6th Region. The formations which had to be crossed are extremely hard (crystalline dolomite) and explosives had to be used. The Livestock Development Project in Mopti Region (ODEM) bore all related expenses which amounted to:
373.4 million Malian Francs (FM) for equipment
293.0 million FM as operating cost.
Even if only 3/5 of the expenses for equipment are taken into consideration the 11 wells costed 517 million FM (approximately US$ 860 000) - i.e. 8000 000 FM/metre in 1979 (approximately US$ 1350/m) without taking into account the cost of the reconnaissance boreholes which were drilled on each well site before digging the wells.
In 1983 a second phase of the Livestock Development Project in Mopti Region (ODEM) was prepared by a FAO team (Investment Centre) and was later on financed by the World Bank. In front of the excessive costs of well digging, other alternatives were examined. The most attractive one included a major involvement of the future users grouped in pastoral associations in the construction work as well as in its financing, and the participation of local traditional well diggers properly assisted by one expatriate foreman. A similar approach is successfully being experienced by Non Governmental Agencies working in nearby areas (Bandiagara Plateau, North Tombouctou) where actual costs of well digging have been brought down to 250 000-350 000 Malian Francs per metre (US$ 350-500/m). The figure eventually adopted in the economic appraisal of ODEM Phase II for the cost of well digging down to 70-90 m in very hard rock was FM 500,000/m (US$ 715/m).
In Upper Volta, 1982 costs for hand dug wells are reported to stand at a much lower level than in the 6th region of Mali - i.e. US$ 171/m. This important difference in cost is probably due to the fact that the rocks are softer (weathered granite in most cases), the depths are usually smaller (20-40 m) and local well diggers can easily work without air compressor and explosives, and most of the wells are dug for villages which actively participate in the construction work.
b. Drilled wells
In the case of discontinuous aquifers, reconnaissance boreholes are always necessary to ascertain the presence of water before realizing the production works which are much more expensive and must be undertaken only after being sure of water occurrence. When the results of the reconnaissance borehole are satisfactory, it is usually converted either into a production well, where the cost increase is mostly related to the casing and screen supply and installation, or into a dug well, the cost of which is a completely new item to be added to the cost of the reconnaissance borehole.
However, it happens very frequently that one reconnaissance borehole is not enough to identify the best location for water production and another borehole has to be drilled.
Being:
r: the rate of success in percent - i.e. the number of productive wells over 100 drillings,
DC^+: the cost of a productive well - i.e. capable of delivering a minimum discharge of 1 m^3/h, completed with casing and screens (if necessary), developed and pump tested,
DC^-: the cost of a dry reconnaissance borehole,
PDC: the actual cost of one production well including the cost of the unsuccessful boreholes which were necessary to identify the best location,
The formula clearly shows how sensitive the actual cost of a production well is to the rate of success, which should be called probability of success when planning a water development project - i.e. before implementing the project. It is therefore extremely important when dealing with the economical aspects of a water project in an area of discontinuous aquifer to collect the data necessary to establish the probability of success of the wells to be drilled.
In Mali, an Important programme of drilled wells in the Western part of the country was financed by the Saoudi Development Fund and the Fonds d'Aide et de Coopération (France) and was carried out from 1980 to 1982. More than 200 wells were drilled, mostly in the basement formation (discontinuous aquifer) with the down-the-hole-hammer drilling technique. Drilling costs were accurately collected and analysed by BURGEAP (BURGEAP 1982a). The cost of unsuccessful boreholes averaged Malian Francs 51,500 per m - i.e. approximately US$ 103/m. The actual cost of production wells including the cost of unsuccessful boreholes is summarized in Table 20.
Table 20: COST OF PRODUCTION DRILLED WELLS IN THE BASEMENT IN RELATION TO THE NATURE OF THE GEOLOGICAL FORMATION - WESTERN PART OF MALI (BURGEAP 1982a)
Nature of formation
Coefficient of success (%)
Average depth of productive well in m
Average cost of one production well in US$
Average cost of one metre of production well in US$
Granite
Schist
Kayes sandstone
Nara sandstone
Claystone
Tillite
Pelite (Kayes)
Pelite (Nara)
Dolerite
Notes:
- A well is considered as productive if it can deliver a minimum discharge of 1 m^3/h under a stable drawdown.
- The cost figures were originally given in Malian Francs and have been converted to US$ by using a constant exchange rate (US$ 1 = 500 Malian Francs) for comparison purposes with other countries.
In Upper Volta a programme of 260 drilled wells was financed by the European Fund of Development. The cost of a production well, 50 m deep, drilled in basement hard rock from 20 m to total depth, amounted to CFA Francs 2,700 000 (end of 1981), including the cost of negative boreholes (35 percent rate of success). Assuming a rate of exchange of 210 CFA for US$ 1 in 1981, the unit cost of a production well was 257 US$/metre. In Mauritania a programme of 19 drilled wells for a total of 870 m was carried out in 1979 in Afollé region, at 600 km away from Nouakchott. The drilling of hard to very hard formation made it necessary to use the down-the-hole-hammer technique. The unit cost of a production well averaged 427 US$/m.
In continuous aquifers it is usually not necessary to drill a reconnaissance borehole before undertaking a production well (either drilled or dug); the probability of success of any well is high enough to take the risk of drilling or digging the production well directly. But in spite of the better probability of success, the unit cost of production well is usually higher than in the case of wells drilled in hard basement rocks, essentially for two reasons:
i. the wells are drilled by rotary method which requires a much heavier equipment as well as a sufficient water supply for preparing the mud. Since the well sites for watering livestock are usually located in remote areas of difficult access, the cost of transporting the drilling equipment and all necessary items (fuel, water, spare parts, etc.) becomes an important item in the budget of the well construction;
ii. the programmes of well drilling in rangeland areas are usually limited to the areas where the aquifer is deep and out of reach of hand dug wells. As a consequence of this limitation, the drilling programmes in continuous aquifers, usually include a small number of wells among which the high mobilization cost has to be shared.
In Mali, a programme of 10 wells 150 m deep and located 300 km away from Bamakowas was carried out in 1979-80. The wells were drilled in a clayer and sandy continental formation and their cost (1980) averaged 668 US$/m.
c. Well cistern associated with drilled well
The cost of a well cistern is simply the sum of the cost of the production drilled well and the cost of the dug well. As the production well and the well cistern will not be equally deep it is meaningless to indicate a cost per metre.
In Mali the figures adopted by a FAO team (Organisation des Nations Unies pour l'Alimentation et l'Agriculture 1983) in the preparation of the second phase of a Livestock Development Project in Mopti Region (ODEM) are summarized in Table 21.
Table 21: ESTIMATED COST OF A WELL CISTERN ASSOCIATED WITH A DRILLED WELL IN 1983 IN MALI (Exchange rate US$ 1 = 700 Malian Francs)
Description
Cost in Malian Francs
in US$
a. Drilled well (120 m deep) Successful production well
70% cost negative borehole
b. Well cistern (65 m deep) Digging, lining and connecting
Sub total
Contingencies (10%)
TOTAL
It should be noted however that the very high cost estimated in Table 21 may not be representative of an average situation since the well cistern is supposed to be dug in extremely hard basement rock.
6.6.2 Water lifting
a. Hand pumps
The most recent review of the existing hand and foot pumps is dated 1978 (BURGEAP 1978) and the prices - ex factory - collected in this study should be multiplied by a factor ranging from 1.5 to 2 to approximately correspond to the present prices. The pumps reviewed by BURGEAP were all designed for a piston setting depth of 30 m for comparison purposes. The main results of the study are given in Table 22.
Table 22: AVERAGE 1978 EX FACTORY PRICES OF HAND AND FOOT PUMPS
Type of pump (all pumps designed for 30 m pump setting depth)
Average 1978 ex factory price in US$
Piston pump hand operated through a level
Piston pump hand operated through wheel and handle
1800 to 2800
Piston pump foot operated with hydraulic transmission
b. Motor driven pumps
Motor driven pumps are usually imported and their actual cost including supply, transport, insurance, taxes and installation may be much higher than the price FOB claimed by the manufacturer. The following examples illustrate the price increase resulting from the various manipulations of the pumping equipment from the factory to the well site.
In Mauritania the African Fund of Development financed the equipment of pumping stations in pastoral areas. The wells had been previously drilled in the framework of a programme financed by the European Fund of Development. The pumps and engines were purchased in 1979 and installed on the wells in 1979-80. Detailed information is available on the cost of supply and installation of the equipment which consists of either vertical turbine pumps and diesel engines, or submersible pumps with generators.
A total of 25 pumping stations were equipped. A good correlation was established between the cost of pumps, engines or generators and the product pump discharge in m^3/h by vertical lift in m. For comparison purposes the costs including supply and installation have been converted into US$ with an exchange rate of 46 UM for US$1 (approximately exchange rate in 1979).
The following symbols are used in the formulas:
Q = pump discharhe in m^3/h
H = vertical lift in metres
For the vertical turbine pumps the costs including the installation are related to the product H x Q according to the following formulas:
Cost of pump in US$ = 0.85 x H x Q + 14 900
Cost of an engine in US$ = 0.75 x H x Q + 3790
Cost of a shelter in US$ = 13 200 (for one well)
Cost of the superstructure (tank, troughs) in US$ = 20 670 (for one well)
For the submersible pumps the following relations were established.
Cost of a pump in US$ = 1.3 x H x Q + 16 900
Cost of a generator in US$ = 2.3 x H x Q + 7340
Cost of a shelter in US$ = 13 200
Cost of the superstructure (tank, troughs) in US$ = 20 670
However it should be mentioned that in the particular case of the above equipment installed in Mauritania, the motors and the generators were oversized by a factor 2 to 3 and this may partly explain the excessive price of all this material when referred to the physical pumping conditions.
In Mali two wells were equipped in the framework of a Livestock Development Project in Mopti Region in order to experiment motor driven pumps for watering livestock in rangeland environment. Available figures expressed in Malian Francs do not include transport and installation and have been converted into US$ for comparison purposes on the basis of the average 1979-80 exchange rate (US$ 1 = 432 MF). A vertical turbine pump with a diesel engine capable of delivering 10 m^3/h under 26 m head costs the equivalent of US$ 4900 in 1978. The same equipment with transport and installation would have cost US$ 19 100 according to the formulas established in Mauritania. A submersible pump (10 m^3/h for a vertical head of 50m) with a power generator driven by a diesel engine costs the equivalent of US$ 9880 in 1978-79. The same equipment with transport and installation would have cost US$ 26,040 according to the formulas established in Mauritania.
The main purpose of these examples was to draw the attention of water project planners to the huge difference which may occur between the prices FOB of pumping equipment and the actual cost of the same equipment after all expenses (transport, insurance, taxes, installation) have been paid.
c. Wind powered pumps
FOB prices of windmills may also be very misleading since the actual cost of the equipment on the well site including tank construction, transport and installation may be much higher than the price claimed by the manufacturer. The following examples should therefore be considered with care if prices have to be extrapolated to real situations in remote areas of developing countries.
An Italian manufacturer offers windmills at 1984 prices indicated in Table 23 (prices in Italian Lire have been converted into US$ on the basis of the average 1984 exchange rate of US$ 1 = 1650 Italian Lire):
Table 23: PRICES (1984) FOB OF WINDMILLS PRODUCED IN ITALY (Tower height = 12 metres; pumping capacity is estimated for a vertical pumping lift of 15 m and an overall efficiency of the system (windmill, pump and transmission) of 15%)
Rotor diameter in m
Power in kW for an average windspeed of 6 m/s
Pumping capacity in m^3/h
Price FOB in US$ (1984)
In Mali a windmill was purchased in 1977-78 in the framework of the already mentioned Livestock Development Project in Mopti Region. The windmill and pump cost the equivalent of US$ 7050; the installation alone costs the equivalent of US$ 3500.
d. Solar pumps
Technology is now clearly oriented towards photovoltaic/electrodynamic rather than thermodynamic transformation of the solar energy into mechanical energy. Therefore only costs of photovoltaic systems are examined here.
Consultants (Sir William Halcrow & Partners) working for the World Bank and funded by the UN Development Programme tested 12 pump/motor systems and 6 types of solar panels in 1982-83. Among the various systems tested, one category (20 m3/day output through 20 m design static head) may correspond to a livestock watering situation. Costs and results of the tests are thoroughly analysed in their reports as well as in a short note of World Water (World Water 1983); they are summarized in Table 24.
There is room for improvement of efficiency of the photovoltaic system (pump and motor) which will tend to decrease the cost related to unit solar energy taken as 5 kWh/m^2/day by the UNDP/World Bank Consultants. The cost of solar cells is expected to decrease in the future mainly as an effect of volume increase in production. The prices indicated in Table 24 are FOB and in the case of installation of solar pumping unit in a remote area of Africa for example the transportation and installation cost together with taxes and miscellaneous expenses may possibly double the original supplier price.
Table 24: COSTS AND RESULTS OF SOLAR PUMPS TESTED AT SIR WILLIAM HALCROW 7 PARTNERS TESTING FACILITY
Supplier (country)
Complete system tender price FOB (US$ (1982)
Volume delivered in m^3 for 5 kWh/m^2/day at design static head
claimed
observed
Grundfos (Denmark)
Wm Lamb (USA)
Sofretes (France)
Trisolar Corp (USA)
6.7 Conclusion on groundwater development
Unless an important effort is made by developing countries to improve their maintenance capacity of mechanical and electrical devices, the traditional water drawing (possibly with animals) from large diameter wells (associated or not with drilled wells) is still and will likely remain for several years the most reliable way for supplying water to livestock in remote rangeland areas.
Cost of dug wells is usually high whichever approach has been chosen for their construction, either by contractors or by state organization. However, involvement o£ the users in well digging has proved to be an efficient way for lowering the cost of groundwater development in the case of village water supply. When the water users are constantly moving from one well to another, it is clearly difficult to get them involved in the construction works and well maintenance. Nevertheless in many African countries, stockbreeders tend now to organize themselves through associations or cooperatives which may be financially involved in groundwater development works. Properly guided, traditional well diggers may also contribute efficiently to lower the cost of well or well cistern construction.
<section>8</section>
References
APPLETON B. World Water - Published monthly by Thomas Tedford Ltd, property of the Institute Of Civil Engineers - London U.K. ISSN: 0140-9050
BANQUE MONDIALE, 1980 - Situation et perspectives de l'élevage - Mali - Mission régionale en Afrique de l'Ouest, Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire.
B.C.E.O.M. - I.E.M.V.T., 1973 - Techniques rurales en Afrique - Hydraulique pastorale - Secrétariat d'Etat aux Affaires Etrangères Chargé de la Coopération -Paris, France.
BERNEY O., 1982 Approvisionnement en eau pour abreuver le bétail en cas de graves sécheresses - FAO, Consultation d'experts sur la sécurité des approvisionnements en produits d'alimentation animales en cas de crise - Rome, Italy.
BLAIR RAINS A. and KASSAM A.H., 1979 - Land resources and animal production - FAO/UNFPA - Land resources for populations of the future - Consultant's working paper No. 8 - AGLS, FAO, Rome.
BRANSON F.A., GIFFORD G.F., RENARD K.G. and HADLEY R.F., 1981 - Rangeland and Hydrology - Society for Range Management, Denver, Colorado - Kendall/Hunt Publishing Company, Toronto, Canada.
BRGM, 1976. Carte de planification des ressources en eau souterraine des états membres du CIEH de l'Afrique Soudano-Sahélienne - Série hydrogéologique - Comité Interafricain d'Etudes Hydrauliques (CIEH), Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso et Agence d'Etudes de Géologie Appliquée à l'Etranger, Orléans, France.
BRGM, 1980. Principales méthodes de reconnaissance milieux fissurés - 80SGN855EAU - Service Géologique National - Etat des connaissances - Département EAU, Orléans, France.
BRGM, 1981. Hydrogéologie de l'Afrique de l'Ouest - Bulletin du BRGM, 2ème série, "Hydrogéologie - Géologie de l'Ingénieur" Section III, No. 4 pp. 268-382.
BURGEAP, 1978. L'équipement des villages en puits et forages en fonction des conditions hydrogéologiques dans les états ACP d'Afrique - Commission Economique Européenne, Direction Générale du Développement - BURGEAP, Paris, 157 p., 9 annexes.
BURGEAP, 1980. La construction des puits en Afrique Tropicale - Ministère de la Coopération et du Développement (République Française), Paris.
BURGEAP, 1982 (a). Enseignements de la campagne de forages de Kayes Nord et Nara Est 1980-1982) pour la programmation de futurs travaux d'hydraulique pastorale dans le Sahel Occidental - Mission d'appui au volet hydraulique du projet de développement de l'élevage au Sahel Occidental finance par le FAC - République du Mali - Rapport interne BURGEAP NT.1289 - E.1120, 19 p., 3 annexes.
BURGEAP, 1982 (b). L'hydraulique villageoise dans les pays membres du CILSS - Situation en Mauritanie - Enquêtes et propositions en vue d'une gestion rationnelle de l'eau - Etudes financées par le FAC et le FED dans le cadre du CILSS. et du Club du Sahel - Paris, décembre 1982.
CARDER D. J., 1970. Roaded catchments - A method of increasing runoff into dams and reservoirs - Western Australian Department of Agriculture - Technical Bulletin No. 5, May 1970.
CARDER D. J. and SPENCER G. W., 1971 - Water conservation handbook - Soil conservation service - Western Australian Department of Agriculture, 68 p.
C.I.E.H. - BURGEAP, 1983 - Forage d'eau - Matériel et techniques mis en oeuvre en Afrique Centrale et de l'Ouest - Ministère des Relations Extérieures, Coopération et Développement (République Française) - Paris.
CLUB DU SAHEL, 1981 - Village hydraulics and rural development in the Sahel and organization for economic cooperation and development - BOAD, Lomé.
CLUFF C. B., 1974. Engineering aspects of water harvesting - Research at the University of Arizona - Proceedings of the Water Harvesting Symposium - Phoenix, Arizona, USA.
CLUFF C. B., 1979. The use of compartmental reservoir in water harvesting agrisystems - Proceedings of the International Arid Land Conference on Plant Resources - Texas Tech. University, USA.
COMITE INTERAFRICAIN D'ETUDES HYDRAULIQUES, 1979. - L'utilisation des ressources en eau et en terres des régions de savane: vol. 1: Rapport, vol. 2: Dossier de cartes. CIEH-USA-T.A.M.S. Engineers & Architects, New York, USA.
COWICONSULT, 1981. Rehabilitation of rural water reservoirs - Feasibility study report - Somali Democratic Republic - UNCDF Project SOM/79/003, 70 p.
C.R.C., 1983. Spring water - FAO project ETH/81/003.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY, 1976. - Manual of water well construction practices - Office of water supply - EPA 57019-75-001 - Washington D.C., USA.
DEMIRUREN A.S., 1976. - The improvement of nomadic and transhumance animal production - systems - FAO, AGA/MISC/74/3, Rome.
FIELD D.I., THOMAS R.G. and FERGUSON W., 1982. - FAO/UN Draft report on range development and water supply - Prepared by the Plant Production and Protection Division in collaboration with the Land and Water Division and the assistance of Animal Production and Health Division - Rome.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS, 1981. - Ecological management of arid and semi-arid rangelands (EMASAR) - Prepared by the Grassland and Pasture Crop Group, the Crop and Grassland Production Service and the Plant Production and Protection Division of FAO - Information Note No. 2, Rome.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS, 1981. - Proceedings of the FAO/DANIDA Workshop on Water Lifting Devices in Asia and the Near East, held at Bangkok (4-14 Dec 1979) - Water Resources and Management Service, FAO, Rome.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS, 1982. - Proceedings of the FAO/UNDP/CHINA Workshop on Water Lifting Devices and Water Management held in China (2-26 Nov 1981), 240 p.
FRASIER G.W. and MYERS L.E., 1983. - Handbook of water harvesting - United States Department of Agriculture, Agriculture Research Service - Agriculture handbook No. 600, 45 p.
FRITH J.L. and NULSEN R.A., 1971. - Clay cover for roaded catchments - Reprinted from the Journal of Agriculture of Western Australian Department of Agriculture - Bulletin No. 3824, 3 p.
FUJIMURA F.N., 1982. - Rain water cistern systems - Proceedings of the International Conference (15-17 June 1982) - Water Research Center at Manao, Honolulu, Hawaii 96822.
GALATY J.G., ARONSON D., SALZMAN P.C. and CHOUINARD A., 1981. - The future of pastoral peoples - Proceedings of the Nairobi Conference 4-8 August 1980 -International Development Research Center, Ottawa, Canada.
GEOHYDRAULIQUE, 1979. - Programme d'hydraulique villageoise et pastorale dans les états de la CEAO - Rapport de synthèse, 85 p. - Communauté Economique de l'Afrique de l'Ouest (CEAO), Secrétariat Général - Géohydraulique, Paris, France.
JOHNSON DIVISION, 1980. - Water and wells - 6th printing - Saint Paul, Minnesota, USA.
KOEGEL, R.G.. 1977. - Self-help wells - FAO/UN Irrigation and Drainage Paper No. 30, Rome.
LESAGE F. and CATEL, 1979. - Jefara Plain Project (Libya) - Solar desalination of sea and brackish water - Tripoli, Libya.
MALOTY G.M.O., 1973. - Water metabolism of East African ruminants in arid and semi-arid regions - Department of Animal Physiology, University of Nairobi, Kenya - Zeitschrift fuer Tierzuchtung und Zuchtungsbiologie Vol. 90, No. 3.
MARC A.D., 1981. Amélioration de la production et de la commercialisation du bétail et de la viande - Projet MLI/76/007 - Rapport de mission au Mali - FAO Aménagements hydrauliques, Rome, Italy.
MIDDLEMAS J.P., 1981. - Irrigation dams - Reprint from Farmnote No. 12/81 - Western Australian Department of Agriculture - Bunbury, Australia.
NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES, 1974. - More water for arid lands - Promising technologies and research opportunities - Washington D.C., Second printing, Feb 1976.
NISSEN E. and PETERSEN, 1982. - Rain catchment and water supply in rural Africa - A manual - Hodder and Stoughton, Bungay, Suffolk, U.K.
ORGANISATION DES NATIONS UNIES POUR L'ALIMENTATION ET L'AGRICULTURE, 1982. - Projet de développement de l'élevage au Sénégal Oriental et en Haute Casamance "Sénégal" - Rapport de la mission de préparation - Programme de Coopération FAO/Banque Mondiale, Centre d'Investissement, rapport No. 17/82 CP SEN 10 (18.8.82), Rome. 37 p., 5 annexes.
ORGANISATION DES NATIONS UNIES POUR L'ALIMENTATION ET L'AGRICULTURE, 1983. - Projet de développement de l'élevage, deuxième phase "Mali" - Rapport de préparation - Programme de Coopération FAO/Banque Mondiale, Centre d'Investissement, rapport No. 18/83 CP/MLI.7 (8.2.1983), Rome, 66 p., 11 annexes.
PARSONS R.A. and FAIRBANK W.C., 1975. - Windmills and wind generators - Leaflet 2386 - Division of Agricultural Sciences, University of California, Dec. 1975.
PETERSON R.A., 1969. - Technical Conference on grassland production and fodder management in Africa South of the Sahara - Nairobi, 1-7 Sept 1969 - Analysis of pastoral problems - Pastors and Fodder Crops Branch - FAO, Rome, Italy.
PONTIN J.M.A. and WOOLDRIDGE J.M.A., 1978. - 1978 - A study of Haffir lining in Darfur Province, Western Sudan - Report No. OD/10, August 1977. Second impression August 1978 - Crown copyright - Hydraulics Research Station, Wallingford, Oxon, U.K.
PROUT A.L. and MIDDLETON A., 1982. - Water harvesting for the grazing in the Central Wadi Zone and Gulf of Sirte, Socialist Peoples Libyan Arab Jamahiriya -United Nations Trust Fund Programme, Food and Agriculture Organisation of the UN - Western Australian Overseas Projects Authority, 77 p.
SCHOELLER H.J., 1977. - Geochemistry of groundwater - Supplement No. 3 to Groundwater Studies - UNESCO Tech. Papers Hydrol. 7 - UNESCO, Paris.
SCHULTZ R.S. and AL AUSTIN T., 1976. - Estimating stock water use in rural water systems - Reprint of Journal of the Hydraulics Division - Proceedings of the American Society of Civil Engineers, Vol. 102, No. HYI January 1976, pp. 15-28.
SCOTT V.H. and SCALMANINI J.C., 1970. - Water wells and pumps: their design, construction, operation and maintenance - University of California, Davis, CA, USA.
SOCIETE DE CONSEIL, D'ETUDES ET D'lNGENIERIE (SEMA), 1980. - Evaluation des énergies renouvelables pour les pays en développement - Ministère de la Coopération/Commissariat a l'énergie solaire - Collection "Technologies et Développement" - 437 p., Paris, France.
SOCIETE GRENOBLOISE D'ETUDES ET D'APPLICATIONS HYDRAULIQUES (SOGREAH), 1978. - Les pompes et les petites stations de pompage - Ministère de la Coopération (République Française) - Paris, France.
SERRES H., 1980. Politiques d'hydraulique pastorale - Presses Universitaires de France, Paris.
SOLAGES S., 1980. Techniques de forage - Description et mise en oeuvre d'un nouveau type d'appareil de forage destiné au fonçage des puits à grand diamètre - Service Géologique National - Département Eau - BRGM-Ministère de l'Industrie, 80 SGN671EAU - Orléans, France.
SQUIRES V.R., 1973. Distance to water as a factor in performance of livestock on arid and semi-arid rangelands - Department of Range Science, Utah State University, USA - Water-Animal Relations Proceedings, Kimberley, Idaho, USA, pp. 28-33.
STRANGE L.R.N., 1980. - African pastureland ecology with particular reference Co the pastoral environment of Eastern Africa - FAO/Pasture and fodder crop studies No. 7 - Rome, Italy.
UN/FAO WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME, 1981. - Report on the WFP/FAO/ILO Interim evaluation and appraisal mission. Project ARE 2270 "Agricultural development in the Northwestern coastal zone of Egypt" (18-28 March 1983) - FAO/UN, Rome, Italy.
UNITED NATIONS ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL, 1983. - Measures to reduce the cost of rural water supply - Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific - Committee on Natural Resources, Tenth Session, 25-31 October 1983, Bangkok. 33 p. E/ESCAP/NR.10/4, 13 June 1983.
UNITED STATES DEPARTEMENT OF AGRICULTURE, 1982. - Ponds - Planning, design, construction - Agriculture Handbook No. 590 - Soil Conservation Service - Washington D.C., USA.
VAN VELDHUIZEN L.R. 1982. - Windmills for small scale irrigation - International Institute for Land Reclamation and Improvement/ILRI, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
VAN VILSTEREN A., 1981. - Aspects of irrigation with windmills - Tool technical development with developing countries - Steering Committee for Windenergy in Developing Countries, Amersfoort, The Netherlands, January 1981.
WALTON J.D. Jr., 1980. - Solar energy for rural development in the Asia and Pacific Region - FAO report prepared for the Symposium on Solar Science Technology held in Bangkok (Nov 25 - Dec 4, 1980) - Bangkok, Thailand.
WATSON J.E. and GRASBY J.C., 1968. - Planning new farm dams - Excavated earth tanks - Western Australian Department of Agriculture, Bulletin No. 3596, 10 p.
WATT S.B. and WOOD W.E., 1976. - Hand dug wells and their construction - Intermediate Technology Publications Ltd. - London, England.
WEST AFRICAN TECHNICAL REVIEW, 1980. - Borehole maintenance problems and solutions - Reprint of West African Tech. Review, April 1980, pp 65-68.
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN DEPARTEMENT OF AGRICULTURE, 1975. - How to build roaded catchments with a road grader - Construction Instructions No. 3 - Soil Conservation Service, Narrogin District Office - WAGDEX751, 2 p.
WHO INTERNATIONAL REFERENCE CENTRE FOR COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY, 1979. - Handpump testing and evaluation - Report on a international working meeting held at Harpenden, Hertfordshire, U.K. - Bulletin No. 15, The Hague, The Netherlands.
WORLD WATER, 1983. - Sunpumps may soon compete with handpumps say testers (Robin Wiseman) - World Water, September 1983.
