<title>ADCP/REP/86/23 - Observations on International Technical Assistance to Aquaculture</title>
<section>1</section>
1. BACKGROUND
1.1 The Purpose of Aquaculture
1.2 The Role of Aquaculture in National Policies
1.3 The Options of Aquaculture and their Constraints
1.1 The Purpose of Aquaculture
The rationale for the culture and management of aquatic animals and plants has remained unchanged for centuries. Fish farming has been a traditional means of producing food intended for immediate consumption at the village level. This requirement for locally-produced animal protein still persists in landlocked countries, or rural areas which do not have ready access to fish supplies, and there is still considerable scope for further development of simple non-industrial fish farming. Several countries (particularly in Africa and Latin America) have policies which give high priority to the promotion of improved food supplies for the poorest segment of the rural population.
The reasons for the recent and rapid development of aquaculture as a modern technology in the last 40 years are numerous. Fish and other aquatic animals remain the cheapest sources of animal protein. They do not necessarily provide the calories of meats but their high protein content and nutritional efficiency make them in popular demand for general health. They are widely recommended for basic nutrition, preventative medicine, and recuperative diets. Fish in particular have the highest feed conversion rates of the animal groups. Weight for weight, fish require fewer units of energy, demand less gross space, and have a higher productivity than all domestic farm animals, including poultry. However, that being said, comparisons of aquaculture with agriculture are not particularly relevant as these ecological, biological and technical efficiencies are not closely related to economic efficiencies or advantages.
Modern aquaculture practices are now more advanced and have been progressively developed to produce cash-crop surpluses for sale in nearby villages or accessible urban areas. Others have been integrated with agricultural activities. In recent years, through the attention of specific biological research and development, some technologically involved operations have been developed in response to the increasing demand for high-value species in both domestic and international markets. Many of these enterprises are highly engineered and sophisticated. Thus, parts of modern aquaculture - like modern terrestrial farming - have become very industrial requiring substantial capital investment and risk management; but other parts remain little evolved from their traditional simple origins.
1.2 The Role of Aquaculture in National Policies
1.2.1 Food security and nutritional improvements
1.2.2 Increase trade and foreign exchange
1.2.3 Increase producers' incomes
1.2.4 Increase employment objectives
The activities of aquaculture production usefully fulfill many governmental development policies (which frequently embrace capture fisheries as well as agriculture). Most policies embody the diverse objectives of securing supplies of fish for domestic consumption; increasing foreign exchange earnings; increase producers' incomes; and providing employment opportunities. These development objectives do not necessarily compete, but the options for different aquaculture systems of production and product are many and the inherent nature of each favours the realization of some objectives more than others.
1.2.1 Food security and nutritional improvements
Most governments give priority to aquaculture for food products for domestic consumption in their development plans for food security and improved nutrition. This is equally important for land-locked countries with little or no access to fish, and countries with productive marine and inland fisheries which are perhaps already exploited at a high level. Countries which may not (or need not) give priority to aquaculture are generally those with natural fish resources which are as yet relatively underexploited.
1.2.2 Increase trade and foreign exchange
Governments of some developing countries do not have nutrition or food security problems, and do not anticipate them arising as populations increase. Many give priority in their policy objectives to the export of cultured fish and fish products for the purpose of earning foreign exchange. Others which do experience animal protein shortages also give priority (albeit at the same level as that given to domestic food supplies) to export earnings. This is not necessarily incongruous motivation as the products of certain aquaculture systems (e.g., intensive shrimp farming) could not, with odd exceptions, provide a solution to domestic food security problems to any extent, and markets are more lucrative abroad.
1.2.3 Increase producers' incomes
Many countries give a measure of priority in their policies to increasing or maximizing fishermen's and fish farmers' incomes. This is an eminently sensible objective because the more profitable a particular aquaculture system is, the more likely it is to develop and establish itself on a sustainable basis. For this reason it is perhaps the most important objective. All worthwhile aquaculture systems are based on practices which are profitable to the producer (i.e., they provide a real rate of return, whether in kind or in cash), and therefore not only provide but hopefully increase incomes.
1.2.4 Increase employment objectives
Many governments make reference in their policy statements to increasing employment opportunities. This is the most difficult goal of aquaculture and cannot be considered a very realizable objective. In general terms, fish farming is not labour-intensive.
In summary, aquaculture does not play an individual or independent role in the achievement of national socio-economic goals but is an important component of broader sectors which do, such as fisheries and agriculture. As a producer of animal protein food and an earner of foreign exchange, its contribution is small in many countries when compared with those from capture fisheries. As it is not labour-intensive it provides few employment opportunities. However, it has the vital attribute of being able to produce fresh animal protein within communities where it is greatly in demand. Furthermore, it must be recognized that aquaculture is a relatively new and growing sector, the importance of which will undoubtedly increase as production from the capture fisheries sector decelerates or declines. Such importance may, indeed, already be apparent in the inland and rural regions of Africa, Latin America and Asia, where perhaps aquaculture represents the only means whereby people may
obtain fish.
1.3 The Options of Aquaculture and their Constraints
Notwithstanding its present relatively minor political role, most governments frequently refer to one or more of these four objectives in their development policies. However, in executing their policies to achieve or give priority to one objective more than another, they do not always focus their institutional development capacity and support services on the most appropriate aquaculture activities which will achieve the desired goals. The range of options for aquaculture development are complex and inter-related, being dependent on the economic and social settings for the systems of production and the biological environments for the species to be produced.
Aquaculture is defined as the husbandry of aquatic animals and plants at numbers which are greater than those found under natural conditions. This distinguishes the practice from capture fishing operations. Whilst the reference to aquatic animals relates almost exclusively to fish (including finfish, molluscs and crustaceans), it includes amphibians (frogs) and reptiles (turtles, alligators and crocodiles) farmed for meat and other animal products, and also includes aquatic plants.
Present-day aquaculture methods can be broadly categorized into three basic systems based on the intensity of production. In accordance with the following interpretations, these are:
- extensive aquaculture, for organisms cultured in low densities, dependent on natural productivity for food but possibly assisted by fertilization of the substrate;
- semi-intensive aquaculture, for cultured organisms at higher densities (than would be the case in extensive culture), and dependent on both increased productivity, using fertilizers or other waste resources, and receiving supplementary artificial feed;
- intensive aquaculture, for cultured organisms in high densities, and dependent on artificial feed for their nutritional requirements.
The principles of the three basic methods for aquaculture production can be simply defined, but the biological and engineering techniques which can be used to apply them are manifold. Furthermore, the techniques can overlap each other creating a vast matrix of options and alternatives, and all acted out within a three-dimensional medium (water) which can be freshwater, saltwater, or something in between (brackishwater).
One main purpose of aquaculture in the developed world is to make a financial profit by the production of a marketable commodity. The emphasis has therefore been on the technologically-advanced intensive systems, requiring large yields per volume of water in terms of either space or flow, or multi-species production in well-managed natural environments.
Because of the economic advantages of these intensive systems, specifically the large volumes of product from small areas of land, silos, raceways, cages, and net pens are appropriate technology in the developed countries and similar urban areas of Asia, etc. In the densely populated developed countries there is strong competition for land between several industrial sectors, and there is always a shortage of suitable sites for aquaculture, particularly around the coasts. There is also the need to protect the high investment from the many man-made problems in industrial regions, especially water-borne and air-borne pollution. On the other hand, the investment and operational costs are high and so is the risk, and therefore management and operational efficiencies must be constantly monitored. Such farms are ideal for the business acumen of owners/non-operators, and best restricted to the purview of corporations to invest in such large profit/high risk ventures.
The alternative for avoiding some of the high risks and high investments of the intensive system is the semi-intensive system. The evolution into semi-intensive farming has been both by orderly advanced progression based on trial and error, but also by the retreat of intensive operators who have preferred to spread the many risks which still exist. Semi-intensive systems have the advantage in that artificial feed is only a supplement to a diet of natural food organisms encouraged to grow in the systems, and these live foods can supply the stock with missing amino acids, vitamins, and trace elements.
Semi-intensive systems are typically based on the use of large regularly-shaped ponds, or pen structures which enclose a body of water. There are also few restrictions on size.
Many farmers endeavour to increase the yields from these semi-intensive ponds by increasing the natural productivity through the addition of nutrients. These may be in the form of inorganic fertilizers, organic composts, dry and wet human sewage, or the waste products from other animal and poultry production units. Integrated aquaculture/agriculture farming has proved to be advantageous for both the large- and the small-scale investor. Because of the need for close management of highly inter-dependent operations, the fish ponds are usually small, often 0.5 ha or less. The most advanced integrated systems can be found in China and Thailand. Such integrated farms are now in many African counties, including Zambia, Central African Republic, Ivory Coast and Egypt.
A primitive practice of integration is fish with culture of rice. Although this type of farming is very seasonal, it is well suited to the smaller fish species which are prolific breeders. Fish-cum-rice farming, as it is called, remains one of the most useful farming systems for remote rural areas.
The same advantages of enclosures also apply to another semi-intensive production system, namely that of farming fish in permanent or temporary barrages. Use of these barrages for the farming of tilapia is being made in many African countries such as the Ivory Coast, Nigeria, and Cameroon. Not all such barrages are inland, and several coastal barrages have been created as parts of irrigation and water conservation projects, as in India and China (used for carps). Barrages have proved to be useful communal farms requiring minimal attention other than stocking of fingerlings and regulated harvesting.
All semi-intensive systems require varying amounts of investment capital for construction, the annual supply of seed for stocking, and the purchase of quantities of suitable feed to supplement the productivity induced by compounded fertilizers. As many farmers are unable to purchase all or even one of these important inputs, there is still a significant place in aquaculture for the simple extensive system. Simple owner/operator practices, which may be one man with one pond no more than 1 are in size, exist throughout most African countries, Latin America, Central America and the Caribbean. They have changed little through the centuries and are exposed to all the vagaries of floods and drought, or predation and theft. It is fortunate that they are ideally suited to the African tilapia species which require little attention, and survive a wide range of natural conditions and breed prolifically. The continuous demands on these rural fish ponds and the harvesting of undersized
individuals makes typical yields hardly enough for a single-pond owner and his family. Fortunately, the cost is little more than his time to dig the pond and to seed it with some breeding adults. There are, however, good possibilities for moderate improvement, especially with extension assistance, both through composting and similar means of increasing productivity, and by more careful attention to culling and harvesting techniques.
It is evident that there has been a large number of technical and biological options for aquaculture development, each with its constraints. However, the growth of aquaculture has not been dependent on the correct selection of a specific permutation with the least number of constraints but rather on the two main beneficiaries. These are: (a) the consumers of aquatic products, and (b) the individuals who farm. More than anything else, these two groups continue to determine the future of aquaculture in any country, yet their interests and involvement in aquaculture development activities have been widely overlooked.
<section>2</section>
2. THE BENEFICIARIES OF INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE TO AQUACULTURE
2.1 The Consumers as Beneficiaries
2.2 The Producers as Beneficiaries
2.3 The Communities as Beneficiaries
The benefits of international assistance of aquaculture development accrue directly to two prime groups of individuals. These are:
(1) CONSUMERS, who gain directly from the increased availability of (more) aquatic products for food, and to a small extent from increased opportunities for employment;
(2) PRODUCERS or FARMERS, who benefit in terms of increased or maximized incomes, and to a small extent by auto-consumption of products and family employment.
Benefits are also obtained directly and indirectly by:
(3) COMMUNITIES AS A WHOLE, including governments, which fulfill commitments in plans and policies, and institutions which participate to achieve goals and objectives.
For the most part, the prime target groups, the consumers and producers, have not been participants in the planning or the execution of international assistance projects in aquaculture. The success or failure of assistance is influenced more by the strength of the commitments within the sector, and the organization and management abilities of the government and institutions concerned which should provide the links to the producers and consumers.
2.1 The Consumers as Beneficiaries
Intended beneficiaries of international assistance for aquaculture development within the public sector are the consumers, particularly among the rural poor. Fresh aquaculture products, especially the native freshwater and brackishwater fishes, continue to be a prime source of fresh animal protein for this main target group as they are farmed and marketed (sold or bartered) within the village communities. The quantifiable evidence of this traditional market is difficult to confirm, specifically because rural village markets are not organized and structured and no records are maintained of their volumes or values; also because there is considerable barter between farmers as well as auto-consumption and theft. It is difficult to differentiate between farm produced and wild-caught fish. The main evidence of the nutritional benefits of aquaculture in rural areas is that fish farming is widely practised and that there is production. Quantifying the nutritional benefits of
aquaculture production among the rural poor remains a priority for assistance organizations to determine.
So far, true marine farming of high-value fish and crustaceans contributes little or nothing to the nutrition of the rural poor, with the exception of the organized collection and consumption of molluscs from natural stocks.
Larger volumes of animal protein, including fish and shellfish (molluscs), are consumed by the urban poor, but there is no consumer or market distinction between captured or cultured aquatic products. Urban markets are supplied more by products from capture fisheries because of the larger volumes required and the cheap prices demanded by the limited spending power of the people. The products are usually frozen and from marine or imported resources. Markets of the urban poor have limited potential for fresh cultured fish and are poor targets for assistance projects in aquaculture because of their inability to absorb the quantities and regularity of delivered products at prices demanded by production costs. On the other hand, markets of the wealthier urban groups and centres of population have greater ability to absorb and pay for fresh high-value cultured products, including marine fish, crustaceans, and molluscs, in addition to poultry, pigs and vegetables which are often
grown in systems integrated with aquaculture production. The international markets can only accommodate high-value or specialist products, and these are limited in potential because of exporting costs and the demands on quality control and hygiene standards.
The recognition that aquaculture produce, even among the communities of the rural poor, has to be marketed in some way has been largely neglected in UNDP/FAO technical assistance projects to date. This is unfortunate, since the viability and scale of projects and selected systems cannot be realistically assessed unless use is made of information relating to market demand and price limitations. The marketability of certain aquaculture products and consumer resistance are realities of all markets and may constrain the development and growth of the industry. It is therefore in the interest of projects to carry out in-depth marketing investigations at any level, and also to investigate the value of alternate product forms, for example, refining the derivates of seaweed before exporting the raw product. This is an appropriate area for UNDP/FAO technical assistance, preferably during or prior to the implementation of pilot-scale projects, as well as assisting projects with
post-harvest and processing procedures; for example, products which need to be treated if cultured in contaminated or polluted waters, such as the depuration of shellfish or extending the 'shelf life' of certain products to enter more distant markets, both domestic and export.
The public does not derive much benefit from aquaculture as an industry for employment. Extensive farming practices are predominantly owner-operated, usually one man and his immediate family. Furthermore, not every man in a village community has the desire to farm fish in addition to his other agricultural pursuits. Semi-intensive farming systems have potential for employment, but the evidence is that such owner/non-operators prefer to co-opt their immediate family members so that the farms, particularly farms integrated with animal and plant husbandry, receive continuous attention. The intensive farming systems, with the possible exception of individual owner/operators of cages and net pen enclosures, have the greatest potential for employment. However, as intensive farms are profit-oriented, labour costs are kept minimal and many farms prefer again to employ families or to use incentive schemes based on production, or provide alternative compensation such as housing and
food. There is little information on labour utilization by the many aquaculture systems from region to region, and this is a priority for assistance organizations to determine. Similarly, the employment of women in the sector requires identification.
The sub-sector of the aquaculture industry which provides the greatest opportunity for employment is the handling and processing of the products which, as in the capture fisheries industry, can and is using women. For the most part, the opportunities for such labour are with semi-intensive systems producing high-priced or specialist products.
2.2 The Producers as Beneficiaries
The main targets of international assistance in aquaculture continue to be the producers, particularly the existing or potential 'small farmers' in the rural poor areas of the world. The purpose is to increase the incomes (in cash or In kind) of such individuals. This is not often clearly stated in UNDP/FAO projects and the assumption appears to be chat the industry of farming itself is the benefit rather than the income it must generate, or the products for barter, or for feeding the farmer and his family.
Increasing a farmer's real income through extensive aquaculture practices is difficult to achieve. The evidence is that among these poor communities, and even among those where fishing is traditional, only certain individuals accept the financial burdens of constructing and operating a fish pond in addition to their other pursuits for survival. The reasons are several. Managing a fish pond usefully demands the daily attention and commitment which are often not part of the social behaviour and cultural backgrounds of the people; and inputs can be costly. Poor management practices result, such as over-harvesting, and thefts reduce production and profit for the farmer and his family. Furthermore, the social structure may limit the extent to which increased productivity of the farmer can result in personal gains.
At the other end of the scale for maximizing income, certain intensive and semi-intensive systems with high-value species are assumed to be so financially rewarding that they will produce export earnings or reduce costly imports.
Such projects have been supported by international assistance, and the target producers in these cases have been the governments themselves, or government-selected entrepreneurs. The evidence is that governments and government-nominees for the appropriate development loan, which are part of assistance projects to prepare sites and to purchase costly inputs, prove to be poor producers. Few benefits, if any, in terms of export earnings or food accrue to the country. For the most part, governments are owner/non-operators with little commitment to the continuous management and operational needs of the projects, and do not perform within the right business environment which compels them to maximize or increase income.
Not all governments make poor producers or production managers. The exceptions have been countries with a centrally planned economy, such as Hungary, Cuba and Yugoslavia, which have been able to establish an aquaculture sector and increase marketable production annually through directed research and development, and cooperatives and independent government organizations. However, most of these organizations use bonuses and 'profit-sharing' schemes to provide incentives for motivation, and compensate for the lack of increased financial incomes.
Between governments and the rural poor as producers are the semi-intensive farm operators who are exemplified by the systems which they pursue - namely, the maximizing of efficiencies of inputs and resources. This group offers the best opportunity for achieving the objectives of increasing or maximizing real incomes for themselves, and for producing marketable quantities of products which will feed more than their immediate families. As a specific target group, the small semi-intensive farmer has largely been overlooked by international assistance, although this is now being rectified with the deserved interest in integrated farming, producing fish and shellfish with animal and plant husbandry.
UNDP/FAO have assumed too much in the generalization and massing of target groups. This is due to the mistaken belief that aquaculture is simple and appealing work, and therefore ideal for the poor rural communities to undertake en masse. This is not true.
To succeed, projects have to be selective and to use those individuals who are prepared to commit themselves to farming. The composition of the target group, in terms of which individuals have the desire to farm fish and shellfish, is of prime consideration for future assistance, especially within communities without much tradition in fish culture or fishing. Quantifying the potential farmers within a community is an important socio-anthropological task, as well as analyses of projects to determine the success/attrition rates of typical target communities being introduced to new technologies such as aquaculture. These are priorities to assist UNDP/FAO project planning for the sector.
Careful identification of the potential producers is important for all three aquaculture systems, namely, extensive, semi-intensive and intensive farming, and each system has its own demands. For example, although the managerial and technical capabilities are fewer for extensive systems, the number of individuals required for one man/one pond farms, who are needed to make up a significant development project, is very large. The demands on the owner/operators and owner/non-operators of semi-intensive systems, particularly when integrated with animal and crop husbandry, are high on both managerial and technical ability, but the number of such individuals for any large project will be relatively few. For the intensive systems, where few or even only one individual is required for a project, the demand is for managerial ability and wealth to hire the necessary technical competence.
Certain communities have greater potential for adaptation to fish farming. The incidence of successful and established farmers is higher in communities with some tradition in fishing than in purely rural agricultural and pastoral living. For example, a number of lake fishermen have adapted readily to fish cage farming, and coastal small-scale fishermen have become shrimp farmers. But there is always a natural selection of good farmers, and an attrition of disinterested individuals.
Auto-consumption amongst the producer and his immediate family for extensive farming practices is high, together with other relations in the community who share or steal his fish. This high auto-consumption and total utilization of the production from rural fish ponds is the alternative rationale to increasing real incomes for most international assistance in the aquaculture sector, namely producing benefits in kind. Because of the simplicity of the extensive system, that is, one man with perhaps only one pond demanding few inputs, and the potential for large numbers of such units, fish farming will continue to be an important rural practice for producing animal protein within many rural communities for immediate consumption. Auto-consumption among producers who adopt semi-intensive systems is also high among their immediate families who, for the most part, provide their labour in exchange. Similarly, certain intensive farms provide the product in exchange for wages or
benefits. However, on the whole, semi-intensive and intensive fanning practices offer little for alleviating the nutritional requirements of large numbers of individuals as producers, as the labour requirement of such operations is small.
Unfortunately, the producers of farmed fish and shellfish for either increased income or for the nutritional benefit of their immediate families do not operate their appropriate systems in isolation. They are competitors among their neighbours for land and water. They compete not only with other culturists but also with terrestrial farmers. Together they may also compete for the same resources as other industries including recreation and urban development, and consequently for energy, labour, and all necessary equipment and materials. According to the levels and pressures from the components of this dynamic milieu, the would-be producer must assess his overall risk and react accordingly.
2.3 The Communities as Beneficiaries
2.3.1 Local infrastructure level
2.3.2 National infrastructure level
2.3.3 National sector management
2.3.4 Global and regional management
The communities as a whole benefit from inputs at four different levels, namely:
- Local infrastructure level
- National infrastructure level
- National sector management
- Global and regional management
2.3.1 Local infrastructure level
This level is the recipient of much of development assistance to aquaculture, primarily because it concerns the supply of inputs to the producers. These are biotechnical inputs, such as the supply of seed, feeds, and fertilizers, but also the associated inputs of credit at the local level, transportation, energy, information through an extension service - all of which are directed at producers to enable them to increase production.
Direct assistance to produce or maintain inputs readily realizes effects. At the biotechnical level, aquaculture systems do not function without attention to regular and reliable supplies of seed, feeds, and fertilizers. However, different aquaculture systems require these inputs to varying degrees. For farmers who produce extensively, these inputs must cost little or nothing and such resources must be available locally. Extensive farming practices cannot be sustained by the costly inputs from hatcheries or feed/fertilizer plants. On the other hand, farmers who produce semi-intensively or intensively will not survive without such reliable inputs, but at the right prices.
Assistance at the biotechnical level for these and other inputs remains a priority, but with careful attention to the real needs of the target groups. Too many projects have developed the resources for such inputs, that is, constructed hatcheries or supplied feed mills, without concern for the economic and social constraints of the farmers. The same problem is reflected in projects which supply non-technical inputs, such as credit and extension services. Local credit has been made available calculated on the projected costs of inputs from such industrialized facilities. The collateral for such credit has been beyond the ability of the small farmer and the economics of his particular system. Fortunately, few small farmers take advantage of such credit, either because it is beyond their means, or the procedures are complicated, or the terms of the agreement poor. Local credit does not appear to be in short supply and, while the terms may appear less favourable, it is better
adapted to the local social circumstances.
Extension services are essential for aquaculture projects working at the farmer level. Many extension projects, responding to the increasing demands of governments, have undertaken too much and became over-stretched. Monitoring of extension activities is important to maintain a cost efficiency of the service. This is necessary for the governments to know as the service is absorbed into the appropriate agency. The appropriateness of the agency is important for an efficient and permanent extension service, specifically avoiding those agencies which have other regulatory functions such as game wardens.
Different extension service systems respond to different aquaculture systems. The training and visit system appears to be the most appropriate for projects concerned with large numbers of small farmers, together with frequent refresher courses for the extension workers. It is possible for agricultural extension workers to participate in aquaculture extension provided that the systems in both fields are not complex. They are not practical if the agricultural worker is practising with specialist crops.
All the modern extension aids are invaluable for fish farmers at all levels, and remain a vital part of the extension workers needs. Preference should be given to cheap aids which can be left with the farmers, as well as use of the more costly video films for use in class and group instruction.
Demonstrations at model farms are more practical and useful than either demonstrations at government farms or research centres. Extension work based on the use of model farmers must be encouraged. Model farms have the advantage in that they are directly allied to real production and sales.
2.3.2 National infrastructure level
Together with the local infrastructure level, the national infrastructure is the other largest recipient of assistance within the sector. It includes training, particularly at a high level, research and development, and the organization behind the production and supply of the inputs as already detailed, for example, credit, biotechnical resources, etc.
Assistance to aquaculture through the support of high-level training is productive and rewarding, particularly the long-term training programmes for 30-35 candidates organized through the regional programmes awarding academic qualifications and diplomas through the cooperation of local institutions. Results with long-term training for 2-3 individuals through national projects are also successful. A recurring problem is to find suitable candidates for training, especially candidates from countries with no background in aquaculture, and the right place to train. Good candidates can come from many other disciplines, including fishery biology, veterinary science, agricultural biologists. A background in aquaculture is useful for high-level training candidates, but not essential.
One difficulty associated with aquaculture training, particularly at the higher level, is subsequent job placement. Many countries readily overestimate the real need for such trained personnel, who then become lost to the sector. Of high priority for the assistance agencies is to identify the real needs for such advanced level trainees. At the present time, unlike agriculture, aquaculture does not have any information which can describe the disposition of professional and non-professional individuals who make up a sector supporting a specific aquaculture industry. This is a priority for the planning of future support to high-level training.
The 2-3 week short-term training programmes, which are organized by UNDP/FAO regional and national programmes, and the programmes of other organizations and agencies, are greatly in demand. The quality of both trainer and trainee in short term courses in aquaculture is now high. Typical training courses accommodate 20-24 individuals and may have 10-12 specialist teachers. Short-term training courses are better if restricted to special aquaculture topics, such as hatchery technology, diseases of aquaculture animals, fish breeding, etc., and cater to such practitioners already. There is no complication with post-course placement for participants.
Increased emphasis must continue to be placed on the short-term specialist training course, together with courses for the middle-level managers and leaders. Although the numbers of such individuals remain to be quantified, they are not small and cannot be accommodated through international training courses. Such training must be done at the national level. This will require an intensive effort to train effective national trainers first, and to monitor the national training programmes which they will handle.
The results of assistance to aquaculture research and development are not always productive unless carefully monitored and directed. Emphasis has been on applied biotechnical research, and this must continue especially where the work is directed towards increasing production. However, there is also a need to undertake more broadly-based research, working on problems associated with economic analyses, marketing, social and cultural backgrounds of target groups, labour analyses, etc. For the most part these have been neglected by assistance projects.
Applied research features strongly in the programmes of many government agencies responsible for the development of aquaculture. This is important in countries with limited research capacity (facilities, equipment and trained manpower) and efforts must be channelled into productive work to resolve problems and remove constraints in the development of production systems,
In general, applied research conducted as a part of a multi-function project produces more usable results, especially when actively integrated with production and demonstration functions, and particularly when carried through to marketing and sale of products. But it is necessary to distinguish clearly the different role of the two components, even though closely associated. Problems can arise when production takes preference over research data, with the loss of valuable time and investment.
The logical progression from applied research, through pilot trials and demonstration to commercial production, with supporting promotion, training, and extension, is rarely recognized and detailed in project document preparation. As a result, much activity is out of synchrony for orderly and sequential development of a viable technical package instigated by applied research. This is particularly true when technology is transferred between countries. Invariably some further research applications are required for local conditions before the progressive stages of development, but often this research and the intermediate phases are missed out.
Assistance agencies have contributed significantly to the capacity-building of countries in the area of aquaculture research. As a result, most countries have a nucleus of aquaculture expertise which, with additional inputs through assistance and government agreement, can be usefully deployed to national centres where there are facilities. Regional linkage of such centres becomes possible with added benefits. However, it is important to recognize that applied research in aquaculture, for many reasons, is a slow business, and therefore, projects designed to build up research capacity require lengthy commitments of 5-10 years. On the other hand, even though governments must recognize the importance of research to the development of aquaculture, the support must be in line with the size and potential of the sector, and importance in the national economy. In most countries, this will require a concentration of effort in few facilities. In this regard, the value of 'on farm'
research using model commercial farms must be recognized.
National sector infrastructure includes also the controlled and reliable production of a variety of inputs to aquaculture, including the availability of land and water, construction of facilities, resources for the manufacture of feeds, the supply of seed (fry and fingerlings), and the supply of credit. As the majority of these inputs are in demand by other national sectors, especially in inland agricultural regions of developing countries, the importance of a national policy and plan to state priorities is apparent.
Assistance projects directed towards the primary beneficiaries, namely, the producers and consumers, must work in regions where the farmers own the land (or have free and legal right to space on lakes, rivers, coastlines, etc.) and that there is no disruptive competition for water. The primary inputs of seed and feed (and possibly fertilizer) must also be readily available and appropriately priced. Without these inputs, farmers are either unable to obtain credit for capital or operational purposes, or do not wish to avail themselves of bank credit with its unattractive repayment terms. At the present time, rural farmers continue to prefer the village credit system for their investments in aquaculture.
2.3.3 National sector management
National sector management, specifically policy making and planning, has received little attention and assistance from the development organizations. The reasons for this neglect are not clear, but this has been a major omission, particularly as aquaculture is a new sector and few governments comprehend all its components. Few, if any, developing countries have declared policy statements related to aquaculture practices or even capture fisheries, although the latter are to be found if the sector is of significant size. Few, if any, developing countries include the word 'aquaculture' on any of their statutes.
Government recognition of the aquaculture sector as a productive and economic entity, with a clearly defined policy focusing on national issues, provides a vital basis for development. It encourages direct investment by the private sector; it guides indirect investment by the peripheral industries, the manufacturers and the suppliers of services; it justifies and assists donor agencies in their allocation of aid; and, last but not least, it rationalizes the scope of the sector so that investments in personnel, time and money (especially that of the government itself) are proportionate to its immediate needs and to its carefully projected growth.
Aquaculture has proved itself to be a difficult sector for governments to comprehend. Because of its confusion of obvious benefits but with a complexity of problems, most governments find it difficult to develop a coherent policy toward realistic development, and to evaluate its potential contributions rationally so that national priority and investment are in proportion to that potential. It is therefore imperative that governments have some declared policy related to the aquaculture sector, albeit a simple statement of intent which indicates priority objectives in terms of contributions to domestic food resources, increased incomes for producers, employment opportunities, and foreign exchange earnings. Consequently, it is important that government development plans and programmes are clearly linked to these priority objectives. This is necessary to direct investment in favour of those activities which will best achieve the set objectives, and to prevent wasted investment
or unnecessary competition for limited national resources.
It is appropriate for assistance agencies to work with developing countries in the appraisal of the aquaculture sector. It is also appropriate and important to collect and provide information which will determine the sector's scope for growth, and thereby direct investment in its broadest meaning. The broad definition of the term 'investment' dictates that not only prime beneficiaries are considered, namely consumers and producers, but also secondary beneficiaries, such as manufacturers, suppliers of seed and feed, services, research and development, and the utilization of facilities and human resources. As a result, the capacity of the sector is immediately built up, and no single sector component advances too rapidly or is omitted, as has happened in the past. It is also appropriate for assistance agencies to prepare national aquaculture plans on behalf of governments, although more preferable to assist them to prepare the plans themselves thus adding to their own
capacity. However the national plans are prepared, aid agencies prior to providing assistance should ensure that any project is in line with government planning and appropriately addresses over-riding socio-economic problems. Because of the novelty of aquaculture in many countries, assistance may have to begin with producing information and giving advice to governments regarding policy-related options for development and the preparation of a national plan.
Unfortunately, the resources of expertise to assist agencies to provide policy and planning advice are weak throughout the field as a whole. Professional planners in aquaculture do not exist. The compromise at the moment is to create planning teams with key disciplines in the field (such as biotechnology, engineers, economists, food technologists, marketers, etc., working with planners) who can be used by governments. The use of such teams by governments is not limited to planning, and their services can be maintained for continuing advice to government on policy and law, the viability of investments, environmental issues, etc. Providing the country with the capacity to undertake these tasks with its own resources of expertise is a primary role of assistance in aquaculture at the present time.
Good evident national sector management has been discouraged by lack of cooperation between assistance agencies, or between assistance agencies and the international/national development banks. At times the multiplicity of development projects, all operating independently to achieve their own philosophical objectives or target levels of financing, have totally overwhelmed governments to the detriment of individual projects and the sector as a whole. As aquaculture is a new sector for most developing countries, cooperation and coordination between donors are imperative to prevent overinvestment in facilities, research and development, in training the human resources needed by the sector, and especially for the utilization of the new nationals who are qualified and who must be the nucleus for growth. A national plan, if observed, assists coordination between organizations and institutions.
2.3.4 Global and regional management
Coordination of aquaculture activities, and the collection, analysis and distribution of information are the prime global and regional responsibilities. Successful achievement is dependent on a large network of institutions and individuals with initiative to use the resources made available, and also to contribute to their growth.
Because of the diversity of aquaculture, and the substantial differences between geographic regions (which can be grouped into North, Central, and South America; the Caribbean; West and Central Africa, East and South Africa; the Mediterranean; the Near East; Asia, China and Southeast Asia; Oceania), these activities are best achieved through regional structures. The responsibilities of global management then become inter-regional communication and coordination, instigating new initiatives which have inter-regional benefits, promotion of TCDC activities, and the promotion of trade of aquaculture products between the regions. Assistance agencies are the most appropriate organizations for supporting these global responsibilities, because of their international mandates and apolitical roles. However, for global management to be accepted and used effectively, any organization responsible requires a permanency and stability which assistance agencies cannot guarantee. Global
management has an important place in aquaculture development, particularly through these formative years, but if one individual programme (such as UNDP's Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme) is to have that responsibility then donors must coordinate their resources to provide it with sufficient long-term support and recognized authority.
Regional programmes in aquaculture development have contributed most through technical training, and little through their work in research and information exchange. There have been several modalities applied to 'regionalism'. The most productive has been networking of recognized lead centres, in anticipation that secondary networks will be structured at the country level. Networking is flexible and responsive to limited and fluctuating financial support, and all participants are active. The least productive has been the fixed regional centre supporting a multi-disciplinary team of aquaculture specialists. National regulations governing operations and management prevent such a centre from being upgraded to a regional centre of excellence. As a national centre, it does not attract financial support from members and the programmes do not generate regional vitality as some member nations have no active participation other than sending candidates for training each year.
The alternative to this type of regional centre is the independent international centre, based on the model developed by the Consultative Group for International Agricultural Research for agricultural research. Although such a model has not been tried for aquaculture, it is now more probable that specific networks for individual topics in a well-coordinated regional programme will be more productive than the fixed and costly international centre.
Regional programmes can work with both the public and private sectors with encouraging results, although care is necessary to provide only regional and not individual assistance; and aquaculture is well-suited in principle to integrate with regional fisheries and agricultural programmes (as well as national projects) but results so far are mixed. The most successful are those where the aquaculture component is well planned and a sector exists on which to build. Where aquaculture is a new introduction, they do not achieve good results. There are obvious advantages in combining aquaculture activities with rural development and it is right for assistance to give more encouragement to it, provided that the aquaculture component is recognized individually and receives appropriate attention.
Finally, the number of international and regional organizations and programmes presently active in aquaculture (particularly in Asia) are proliferating to a degree where there is confusion at all levels from governments to producers. Although the time required to develop a new organization or a regional programme differs from region to region, and there are often clear difficulties which prevent some from ever becoming useful and lasting, UNDP/FAO do establish competing programmes within the same region. There is also a certain amount of competition or overlapping responsibilities between new regional programmes and the long-established UNDP/FAO fisheries commissions. Obviously funding for these programmes is a major constraint, but the modus operandi of UNDP to create regional programmes which are then appropriately financed by the regional participants themselves is dubious at best. The regions cannot afford all these programmes, particularly as some of their activities
overlap and also involve the same national representatives. It is important that UNDP and the assistance agencies review their objectives of regional programmes, and not only those involving aquaculture.
<section>3</section>
3. THE ROLE OF INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE
3.1 General Considerations
3.2 Policy and Strategies
3.1 General Considerations
International assistance to aquaculture development has been responsible for much of its 'modernization' within the last decade. It is an appropriate time for such assistance to be redirected as the evaluation conducted by UNDP, FAO and the Government of Norway indicates evidence of imbalances between the aquaculture sectors from region to region and from country to country, and also within the aquaculture sectors between its many components. Assistance must therefore be more selective in its considerations for the next decade.
On a regional basis, Asia (all sub-regions) continues to be the vanguard of aquaculture development, although some countries remain weak. The private sector is well-established and growing in strength. Assistance continues to be required to underpin sectoral components which lag behind production, specifically national sector management and national infrastructure. Of particular importance are inter-governmental and governmental planning; applied research on certain marine species, such as crustaceans, molluscs and algae; the introduction of some selected new culture systems but with appropriate concerns for their impact; all aspects of marketing aquaculture products; legal provisions and regulations; and interactions with other competing or impacting activities. With increased attention to these sectoral components, Asia will have the capacity to provide TCDC support throughout the sector. TCDC is already active in biotechnology training to low-level managers (researchers)
and extension workers.
Latin America (South and Central America) remains weak in aquaculture development, but the potential is considerable. The traditions for consumption of cultured products are not strong and will continue to compete with meat and fish from natural resources. Consequently, priority will be with the higher-value products and therefore semi-intensive systems. The private sector is willing to underwrite production. Production priorities for assistance will be fisheries enhancement projects in lakes and reservoirs. Support of the individual owner/operator farmers is constrained by the inability of these individuals to obtain land and water rights. Assistance to Latin America has to be increased at all levels within the sector, with priority for policy making and planning, and training and extension services. Research and development priorities must be production-oriented and confined to a few locations to maximize investment in facilities. Consumer marketing is of high priority.
Opportunities for TCDC remain limited to biotechnical exchanges, but significant advances can be made through active regional programmes (Latin American regions and the Caribbean) and inter-regional cooperation.
Africa (West and Central, East, and South regions) requires continuous assistance at all levels. Priorities are policy making and planning, and the needs of producers and marketing, although attention to all components cannot be neglected. The inland fisheries merit the greatest support, and this includes both fisheries enhancement in lakes, reservoirs and the temporary water barrages, and fish pond production. Opportunities exist for integrated farming but with careful selection of producers and proximity to markets. Research and development are important but must be restricted to low technology applications, and efforts confined to a few well-supported centres participating in networks. Development with brackishwater and marine farming, most of which require costly inputs, must be at private sector expense with support from governments limited to removing administrative constraints and providing incentives.
The Mediterranean and the Near East regions, if they can sustain strong regional cooperation between the North African, European and Arabic countries, require only selective support. The greatest contribution from assistance could in fact be to sustain regional management thus encouraging further regional cooperation. Policy making and planning are high priorities for the North African countries, and infrastructure at both national and local levels is important in all, particularly training and extension services, and supplies of inputs. Marketing is a primary concern as all countries produce the same species and target export markets in Western Europe are limited. National markets must be given priority, thus attention must focus on developing appropriate national production systems which are economic. Priority species are the prime Mediterranean fishes and certain shellfish, all of which can be developed by the private sectors. Opportunities exist for increased fish
production from the many coastal lagoons by improving lagoon management, and in the inland freshwaters, and by improving local infrastructure in the support of existing pond farmers.
The island communities (Caribbean and Oceania) require assistance but based on specific needs. Island communities cannot compete in international markets for aquaculture products, with the exception of some very specialized and high-priced products. Production is therefore for national consumption, including the tourist trade. In the larger populated islands of the Caribbean the priority remains freshwater fishes. In Oceania the most profitable investment is improved reef management with enhancement through aquaculture where necessary. Priority is for improved policy making and planning to identify needs and opportunities and to limit investment to a rational level. The private sector must carry production in Oceania with conducive conditions provided by government. The public sector will carry the burden in populated Caribbean islands but limiting support to freshwater fisheries. All island communities are in need of infrastructure in training and extension services, and
for developing inputs from local resources. Research and development are not a priority except for local application of introduced techniques. The island communities will benefit from regional cooperation, particularly at the levels of upper and mid-level management.
3.2 Policy and Strategies
As a general policy, UNDP and other assistance agencies must direct (and coordinate) their efforts towards regional and national capacity building. This requires conscious support of projects which advance the aquaculture sector on a broad front, or correct existing imbalances in the sector.
The assistance agencies must recognize individual levels within the sector, and their respective sub-components which may require support.
3.2.1 At the level of primary beneficiaries, attention must be given to the consumers. The marketing of aquaculture products (including post-harvest handling, processing, packaging, etc.) has been totally neglected and requires immediate support together with associated marketing components of transportation, storage, and public health. These are government responsibilities which need assistance to develop, but professional input from the private sector must be involved. More emphasis must be given to projects which involve producers, where results are measured in product sold on local markets. Projects must be limited in scope in order to monitor production and consumption, rather than quantifying ponds and farmers. Encouragement must be given to the 'private' sector for production. This includes the one-pond owner/operator entrepreneur in rural areas: cooperatives: multi-pond owner/operators; and producers integrating farming with agricultural practices.
Owner/non-operators, who can develop large volumes of product, must not be overlooked. The public sector should not be active in production projects at the farm level, with certain exceptions (in countries with centrally planned economies). On the other hand, the public sector needs assistance to be actively involved in producing cheap seed resources (fry and fingerlings) for enhancement projects stocking lakes, reservoirs and seasonal barrages, and this is a high priority.
It is not necessary for assistance agencies to have absolute preferences for some aquaculture animals/plants, or for certain types of production systems for their support, although freshwater fish and extensive systems have high priority. Firm evidence of markets and real indications of economic feasibility based on existing technology are good justifications for project support.
Assistance agencies must avoid projects which 'blanket' target groups, such as lake fishermen or women, or rural communities. It is necessary to be specific about identifying individual entrepreneurs within such groups.
3.2.2 More attention from assistance is required at the level of local infrastructure, namely field-level organization behind producers. High priority must be given to projects which produce direct inputs required by farmers, specifically resources of cheap seed from hatcheries or government production stations: resources of cheap feed preferably made from locally available materials; and resources of cheap inorganic fertilizers together with alternative options for using organic fertilizers from integrated agricultural wastes or from composting.
Extension projects continue to have priority for assistance, both training new extension workers and renewing skills of existing ones. Simpler and better extension materials for the farmers are required to reverse the trend towards production publications which become status symbols; and more use should be made of model farms. Greater attention is needed to monitor their cost-effectiveness.
Assistance agencies must avoid all-purpose projects which attempt to service the entire sector - as has happened. Assistance projects, for example, cannot be expected to meet the needs of the country. Projects which are supplying inputs should be limited in scope so that monitoring will produce information which can be extrapolated for sector support and growth. For example, information on numbers of farmers supplied with seed from a station, and the ratio of extension workers to farmers and their cost-effectiveness.
Credit for farmers at the present time does not appear to be a constraint although monitoring is necessary so that a future lack of credit does not restrain growth.
3.2.3 Support for national infrastructure, which has received considerable attention in the past, requires more carefully selected and justified support. Training remains the highest priority but short-term training courses are more useful now than long-term academic-oriented courses. International short-term training courses are useful (but costly) and in certain regions still necessary, but the direction must be towards international training courses for individuals who will become trainers in their own countries. They will be able to support the national short-term training courses which must be emphasized in all projects in order to increase trained manpower quickly and cheaply. Emphasis must also be placed on non-biotechnical courses to increase the number and capabilities of mid-level managers.
Assistance is necessary to help transfer the responsibilities of long-term academic training to national universities. This includes preparation of course materials and teacher training.
Research and development are always important but priority must be given to the support of production-oriented projects where results can be measured in product sold on local markets. Less emphasis is required for biotechnical projects which yield little in the way of reliable and repeatable results.
Because of the lack of suitable research facilities in most countries, support is better limited to a few selected tasks which will make significant advances in the sector. Where fundamental biotechnical research is justified, the support must be long-term. When research results are produced which are applicable to further development of technology, attention must be given to the logical progression through pilot and demonstration phases.
The need for assistance providing credit and credit management is not clear. At present there appears to be no shortage of credit, but this may be because the sectors in each country are small. The situation must be monitored continually.
3.2.4 Assistance to strengthen national sector management has high priority. Neglect in providing governments and institutions with technical information and financial help to develop national policies and prepare national plans has been a major omission. As a result, the organization and management of the aquaculture sector in most countries has been weak and results of investment in the sector by all concerned, including assistance agencies themselves, have not been as profitable as they might have been. Greater attention to organization and management will also solve other constraints at this level; for example, cooperation and coordination between all investors (including government agencies, the assistance agencies, the international and national development banks, and the entrepreneurs) is of paramount importance. Unfortunately, human resources for strengthening organization and management through assistance are not readily available, but attention has to be given to
this component of the sector.
3.2.5 Support for global and regional management of aquaculture requires further policy consideration by assistance agencies. Global and regional programmes serve useful functions for governments and top-level management. However, for maximum effectiveness and efficiency, global programmes require long-term support to merit acceptability and to establish authority to lead and guide global issues. Regional programmes assist both regional and national capacity building, but the long-term purpose of regional programmes and the need for self-supporting organization and management has to be resolved, especially by UNDP. Already there is evidence of duplication of effort among regional programmes (new and old), as well as among international organizations which both finance and execute projects in aquaculture.
<section>4</section>
4. SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Aquaculture is recognized as a growth sector increasing rapidly in importance. Assistance resources cannot sustain the proportionate investment in the sector as it expands. It is therefore imperative that the best modalities of assistance projects for aquaculture are selected and used.
Information projects continue to make the maximum use of assistance funds and benefit the largest number of individuals. Specific information has to be directed at each specific level of the sector, and it is therefore best handled by projects which have the responsibility of working at the appropriate level.
General information about aquaculture relevant to decision-making remains the greatest need for upper- and non-technical mid-level management. The sector is weak in these informed human resources, and that includes assistance agencies themselves. Notably absent are experienced individuals in policy making and planning; organization and management; financial investment and credit; legal applications; risk management; marketing organization; directing research and higher education. The need is for written and spoken material from conferences and workshops, and through experience in short-term courses. FAO and the inter-regional programmes should take responsibility for providing this general level of information, including the methodologies for planning and other fundamental activities in association at times with regional programmes.
A second highly technical level of information and experience is required by other managers. These are mid-level managers in technical fields, such as teachers, researchers, managers of service companies, farming cooperatives, etc., together with lower-level managers, such as hatchery and farm managers, owners and operators, extension leaders, etc. For the most part, large numbers of these experienced individuals exist and they have access to technical information and training from innumerable public and private sources. However, their geographic distribution is skewed, and their numbers and opportunities are greatest in developing countries and in the major aquaculture region in Asia. The need is therefore to redress the balance. In addition to more published information, the interchange of experience can be achieved through TCDC using resources in Asia and the other regions where possible, and also sending experts and volunteers from developed countries. FAO and the
regional programmes should take responsibility for organizing and standardizing short-term training courses in technical topics, and the national projects for the use of experts.
Practical information, particularly brief manuals and teaching aids, continues to be needed by the producers and the consumers. National projects which have components of extension can undertake this responsibility, preferably in association with other field organizations such as the NGOs, the UNVs, and the many national volunteer services which operate effectively throughout developing countries.
Action-oriented projects in the field must continue to receive assistance, but project identification and preparation need greater consideration. Priority should be given to those national projects to which governments have a serious commitment and which demonstrate an identifiable need. Preparatory assistance is appropriate to establish these projects. Action projects must be directed towards national capacity building, and thus sector components other than biotechnical activities must be included in the spectrum of support.
Countries with an active aquaculture sector require only short-term assistance with projects which support government initiatives; for example, help to establish a marketing organization for aquaculture products, or expertise and some equipment to upgrade a field station to supply fingerlings to farmers. Countries with weak aquaculture sectors, or no sector at all, require traditional project support of technical teams with volunteers resident in-country, and long commitment.
Projects concerning production have to be considered at locations which exemplify farming conditions. Projects involving the construction of large new farms and facilities have to be treated with caution because of the high capital and operations costs. This is especially true of hatcheries, which are in great demand but may not be economic to operate. Greater use must be made of model farms and on-farm projects for realistic production.
Projects concerning research and development require long-term commitment and therefore efforts must be concentrated at a few selected centres. Facilities for good research and development work are in short supply. Although single national centres for aquaculture development may have inter-departmental difficulties for management, most countries cannot justify more than one main focal point. More use must be made of on-farm research. More cost-effective and quicker research and development results can be obtained through networking, and this should be encouraged. Where appropriate, for example, with some fundamental research priorities in fish nutrition, pathology, genetics, reproductive physiology, etc., institutions in developed countries can be included in these networks.
Umbrella projects have many organizational and management advantages if well-coordinated, and provided that each component is prepared individually. Good coordination is possible if the approach to development in each component is identical. The same is true of regional projects which have to date explored a number of approaches to aquaculture development. Umbrella and regional projects which have practised linkages and networking have had the most positive results and should be continued. Greater assistance and long-term commitments must be given to the coordination core to establish its stability and leadership. However, caution is necessary to avoid the creation of too many such projects which then have problems with duplication and overlapping responsibilities. It is also important to identify the long-term purposes of such projects. Although it may be in the interests of the funding agencies to pass management and fiscal responsibilities to the participants, it is not
necessarily in the interests of the participants even though the projects are justified and useful.
M/S2761/E/3.87/1/500
