<title>The paradigm of communication in development: from knowledge transfer to community participation-- lessons from the Grameen Bank, Bangladesh</title>
<section>1</section>
contents next
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This Case Study forms part of a series which the Development Support Communication Branch, of FAO's Information Division, is preparing. It will be used as background material for an Expert Consultation on Development Communication which FAO plans to hold in June 1987, as well as for general information and briefing on communication activities in the field which seem to be of special interest and potential value to rural development and communication specialists.
We express our gratitude to Dr. Muhammad Yunus, Managing Director of Grameen Bank, for allowing us to study the Bank's work and for the encouragement and practical support we enjoyed from him and his many colleagues.
Any errors or misrepresentations are our responsibility. The opinions expressed are also ours and do not necessarily reflect those of FAO or the Grameen Bank.
Boroya, Norway
Andreas Fugelsang
Dale Chandler
Poor people know what they must do to get out of the rut.
But the people who make decisions refuse to put faith
in their ability. Muhammad Yunus
1.O CHANGING PERCEPTIONS
1.1 Outline of a history
Communication has been around for a long time as a paradigm in development theory, although some experts, advisers or field workers are still in the process of discovering it as a practical issue. It is now possible to think of communication in terms of the contemporary history of development policies and to trace some of the main features in its evolution. Sometimes it is fruitful to look back in order to find a new bearing forward.
In the 1960s, development meant a process of modernisation modeled on the industrialised societies of the North. The measure of progress in this direction was economic growth. Industrialization and cash crop agriculture were the means to achieve it. Programmes and projects were shaped as interventions in the economic and social structures of the South which, in themselves, were considered inimical to development. In this period, the paramount paradigm was knowledge transfer and rural people were considered ignorant, conservative, even intransigent. At the same time, the industries producing mass-media and educational technology increasingly looked to the South to find markets for their products. The myth of the power of the mass media to transfer knowledge arose. Social sciences sustained the myth by turning their attention to media and communication research. The notions were that technology would replace the teacher. The passing of traditional society was inevitable. The
issue was diffusion of lnnovations. (Lerner 1958 and 1967, Pye 1963, Rodgers 1967, Schramm 1964) The idea of the opinion leader in social theory was brushed up and renamed the progressive farmer. (Lazars-feldt and Katz, 1955) Converted into an agricultural extension strategy, with the richer farmers as a target, it was considered a potential breakthrough in the diffusion of knowledge to trigger rural development e
As time passed, however, evidence accumulated which indicated that more complex socio-economic forces were at work. While the progressive farmers became richer, the presumed adopters remained poor and the gap between them widened. (Coulson, 1977). Irrigation schemes, farmers' cooperatives, rural credit banks or new industries--a mounting number of evaluation reports revealed that centrally planned interventions ultimately did not benefit the intended beneficiaries, the poorest. Population growth became a matter of grave concern. Income-distribution appeared as an issue in the discussions of economic growth. The basic needs approach, first introduced by ILO, received increased attention. The least developed countries (LDCs) were identified and listed. The quality-of-life aspects of development came to the fore embodied in programmes for improvement of nutritional status, maternal and child health care and later primary health care.
The idea that we should be involved in a two-way process was beginning to emerge. Communication became the new angle of looking at social development. Universities converted their departments of creative writing, journalism, film making, radio or mass media into schools of communication. The audience was telescoped and audience research became the focus. Out of this grew the notion that the audience was not just a mass of individuals, but structured in groups. Attitudinal and behavioural changes were not attributed solely to the medium, but to reinforcements within such groups as a consequence of exposure to the medium. Group animation became the new methodology in extension and communication activities. The concept of Radio Farm Forums evolved from experiences in agricultural extension work in Canada and later was sponsored by FAO in countries in Asia and Africa. Eventually, the opinion leader theory was replaced by network analysis. It was realized that information does
not flow from top down. On the contrary, it flows horizontally between equals in networks of shared interests. (Cerha, 1967) Although interventionist economic development policies continued unabatedly, there was a growing understanding that people living on the margin of society had opinions about development that should be taken seriously. Expressed needs should be solicited and considered.
Early in the 1970s, UNDP launched the concept of project support communication (PSC). Agencies such as FAO and UNICEF followed suit and -established in time development support communication branches or units. The intention was that operational communication components should be worked into programme and project documents and budgets. Yet, it soon became evident that the funding made available was not commensurate with the verbal commitments. In the initial stages of these programmes, too heavy an emphasis was placed on providing communication equipment and producing films and other educational materials without understanding their impact. Awareness increased that oral cultures developed special perceptual and conceptual skills in people and that transition to a written culture required training in other such skills. (Fuglesang, 1973) During the same period, conscientization was introduced as the essence in a process of communication with the poor. (Freire, 1970) It was
based on the idea that the poor were unable to conceptualise and express their real needs. The poor could not be empowered unless they underwent an educational process, the methodology of which was prescribed.
The notion of conscientization was a leap forward in the social insight of most educationists and communication professionals. In particular, it became the basis for the Latin American approach to popular education which also integrated the use of mass or group media in the process. Despite reservations and criticism, the Radiophonic Schools in Colombia were startling achievements in communication. (Beltran, 1975) Similarly, interesting experiences were made with the use of interactive video in Chile and Peru (Fraser, 1981) spearheaded by FAO support.
As it became apparent that technological media had been overestimated, the attention was turned to the potential for utilizing indigenous or traditional media to involve people in the process of development. Folk media such as theatre troupes or town criers, for example, were used in family planning campaigns. Traditional institutions, communication channels and decision-making practices were scrutinised with this purpose in mind. (Kidd and Coletta, 1980) The potential for manipulation was hotly debated and the simmering notions of the dignity and human rights of indigenous peoples surfaced as powerful issues. The process of vulgarisation that flowed from mass-media dominated by the North was realized by concerned individuals. The idea that the world needed and should treasure its rich cultural diversity rather than-succumbing to the onslaught of a mono-culture bred by the media was gaining recognition.
In the beginning of the 1980s, there were signs that communication was being perceived as an interaction between two or more cultural partners of equal stature. And the notion of inter-cultural or cross-cultural communication appeared. The governing idea was that communication was a mutual learning process from which each cultural partner could derive knowledge valuable for its own development. (Fuglesang, 1982) Parallel with this were signs of an appreciation of indigenous knowledge systems. For example, research revealed that traditional subsistence farmers in many cases had known better than the agricultural experts what cultivation methods were appropriate in their own environment. (Brokensha, et al., 1980) The myth of people's ignorance, created unwittingly perhaps by Northern scientists, educationists and communicators in unison, was and still is, in the process of being dispelled. (Fuglesang, 1984)
The Northern ideas of knowledge transfer and communication spring from the assumed power of mass media and educational technology. It is further fuelled by the frustrations of those who assume they are more knowledgeable than others. The concept of crosscultural communication in the context of the competence, validity and legitimacy of all lifestyles and cultures has led more recently to the idea of participatory communication. Already, this concept is gravitating towards the much larger issue of community participation. For example, social analysis and conscientization facilitated through popular theatre approaches recognise that communication is participatory action. A mounting number of convincing cases of community action for development in Latin America, Asia and Africa have been described. (Boar, 1979; Bappa, 1981; Kidd, 1982)
The issue of community participation should not be regarded as a result of the drive for communication only. Historically, it has evolved along a parallel but converging path starting with Saul Minsky's trail blazing work as a community organiser in the ghettos of black and other minorities in the United States after the second World War. (Alinsky 1969) His efforts coincided later with the social unrest in the 1960s which found an analysis in social philosophers such as Habermas, Mattelart, Chomsky and Gunder Frank.
While Freire's process-oriented theory inspired the work for people empowerment in Latin America, Minsky's more confrontational method made its imprint on community
participation activities in India, the Philippines, Sri Lanka and other Asian countries. His credo was organising through conflict with the oppressive forces. At this time, the scene is characterised by a change in the use of technologies and methods. Regarded earlier as instruments of communication, now they were seen as ways to facilitate participatory processes in the community. Case studies and examples of community-controlled radio stations, popular theatre, interpersonal facilitation and community animation, community-controlled use of video interaction, even community produced slide series are well documented. (Fuglesang and Chandler, 1985)
This short outline of the evolution of the concept of communication in development can hardly be more than impressionistic. Any attempt to write history always raises the question of whose history it is. Our hope is that this outline at least demonstrates how professional perceptions and opinions change over time. Professional thinking is largely controlled by powerful concepts and verbal images which subsequent experience so often proves to be misguided. However, the benefit of hindsight should not lead us to the mistaken view that our predecessors erred and that we know better. More than ever it is important that communication practitioners demonstrate a capacity to question their own assumptions. More often than not, it is by querying the self-evident that we find new and better directions.
1.2 Shared interests, credibility and trust
Very early the advocates of mass communication claimed that their media had an exceptional power to change human behaviour. This contention was subjected to scrutiny by many researchers who suspected it might be otherwise. In fact the myth was debunked decades ago. (Klapper, 1960) Klapper formulated several generalisations on the effects of mass media which still stand. Initially, he investigated more than 1000 research reports, studies and essays on mass communications. He used 270 of these as a basis for his formulations, maintaining that the main tendency of the research findings is as follows:
"Mass-media ordinarily does not serve as a necessary and sufficient cause of audience effect, but rather functions among and through a nexus of mediating factors and influences."
"These mediating factors are such that they typically render mass-communication a contributory agent, but not the sole cause, in a process of reinforcing the existing conditions."
On this basis, Klapper goes on to describe the main mediating factors which he considers responsible for the functions and effects of mass communications.
Selective exposure
is people's predisposition to expose themselves to those mass communications which are in accord with their attitudes and interests. Selective perception and retention are people's predisposition to dispose the meaning of mass communication messages in order to bring these messages into accord with their already existing views. The fact that people interact as members in social groups usually increases the reinforcing effect of the factors mentioned above. The group sees to it that the individual member does not deviate from its norm of behaviour. This group pressure reduces the effect of mass communication to a sort of accompaniment. The group context causes the individual member to be confronted by certain messages, but not by others, and also causes him or her to interpret the former in a group conformant way.
The fact that people communicate with each other, influences their behaviour in many matters more than mass communication and, moreover, it influences them in favour of constancy and reinforcement. An additional factor is that person to person communication is more effective than communication through various types of mass-media. It should be borne in mind that Klapper does not pretend that his generalisations are absolutely valid. He considers them to be formulations of predispositions; of tendencies likely to occur or usually occurring. His material is also taken from industrial societies. It remains to be researched to what extent the generalisations are relevant for audiences in countries of the South.
Klapper's notions of selective exposure and selective perception were deepened by other researchers, notably in Sweden. (Cerha, 1967) In a mammoth sample of 50,000 adults, Cerha found that shared interests are the channels through which communication flows. People's interests control the flow of information in society. People communicate when they share an interest in a given topic. Furthermore, Cerha points to the importance of the limitations of the human brain to process information. With a capacity to store and handle only 5000 words our brain is simply inadequate to cope with the enormously differentiated information complexity of the world. The only mechanism our brain has to solve this problem is selective perception. The implication of this is that the individual becomes specialized, selecting a few topics according to his or her interests, and concentrating on these through the available information source-be it a mass medium such as a newspaper or in personal
conversation. In a sense, it is ironic that it takes a mammoth study to assess what any alert person in a party or an informal meeting can observe: people quickly sort themselves out in couples or groups conversing about topics of mutual interest. In other words, people's shared interest are topical. In Sweden, topical interests include cooking, music, art or outdoor life. They may range from more mundane topics such as petrol or cigarettes or more sophisticated ones such as religion, human rights or thermodynamics. In a different culture, topical interests would be different but several would be the same. As a rule, the general topics in a society would activate the interest of many, while special topics would activate the interest of few. Expanding on Klapper, Cerha arrived at the following conclusions:
-With increasing topical interest, there is increasing exposure to topical information, but not to information in general. In other words, a man who was very interested in outdoor life would expose himself selectively and extensively to sources giving information on that topic, such as outdoor magazines, newspaper items on camping, television programmes featuring outdoor life and, of course, those people interested in outdoor life.
-The study confirms that increased exposure is relatively independent of the type of medium. Exposure to personal as well as to mass communication increases with increasing interest. Therefore, there is little basis for claiming particular persuasive powers for the mass media.
-Both the advising and the seeking activity of a person increase with increasing interest in a topic. We are not justified then in considering the individual as a passive recipient of messages, The individual is an information processing unit in an active give-and-take interaction with his or her information environment. This point explains the notion of shared interests.
What clearly emerges from these conclusions is that shared interests are the cohesive force in social networks or larger social formations and can explain the evolution of such formations. Whatever human beings endeavour to do with their societies, they can succeed in doing so only through sharing. Sharing of interests, however, cannot be superimposed. It will emerge only from an open, free and unimpeded information flow in society. Shared interests highlight the strength of homogenous and egalitarian corporate groups and expose the weakness of hierarchical formations. Ultimately, the ideal sharing of interests is expressed by the achievement of a social consensus, state of mutual trust.
Intuitively, we recognise there is a close connection between the concepts of topical and shared interests and the more colloquial notions of credibility and trust. Credibility has been studied occasionally by communication researchers. It should be no surprise to us that the effectiveness of a medium or a communicator hinges on their credibility in the eyes of the audience. While researchers and practitioners for decades have been preoccupied with ascertaining the effectiveness of media, it has escaped us that human beings indeed do not communicate through media technology but through trust. Communication succeeds only through a gained trust of people and a genuine trust in people. Trust becomes the decisive factor in communication, as it is in the issue of community participation and social transformation. Adult educators or communication practitioners have never been particularly interested in trust. Yet, it may be more important to know about trust, than to know about
educational standards, pedagogical methods, media technology or communication benchmarks. There may be need for a wider perception of what communication is, and what it is not. We may start by asking more pertinent questions such as: What kinds of social environments are conducive to producing trust in people? How do we go about creating such social environments? What are the important means of communication in creating them? In the following we shall describe and analyze a development initiative which may show us some directions that respond to these questions.
contents next
<section>2</section>
back contents next
2.0 THE CASE OF GRAMEEN BANK
2.1 Background: The economy of poverty
Bangladesh has one of the highest population densities in the world. Close to 100 million people live on its 55,598 square miles which means that 1763 people attempt to survive on each square mile. Eighty-five percent of the population live in the rural areas of the country. About 45% of the land holdings are smaller than 2.5 acres; 37% are between 2.5 and 7.5 acres, but over 60% of the population are landless or near landless. (Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, 1985) This large majority constitute the poorest of the poor. They survive mainly as agricultural wage labourers for the landowners. By and large the poor are underemployed and attempt to eke out a living through various kinds of service occupations: buffalo carting, rickshaw or cart pulling, spice processing, mustard oil preparation, weaving, mat making, vegetable trading, cattle fattening among others.
The economy of poverty is characterized by a high degree of labour division. In the endeavour to survive, human ingenuity appears inexhaustible. One can easily list 350 to 400 income-generating activities the poor undertake with skill and perseverance. Despite its labour and skills, however, the economy of poverty is at the losing end of the rope. The resources base is too narrow. Poverty is poverty because it cannot, on its own, overcome the inherent and chronic gap between production and consumption. Much less can it start and sustain the process of accumulation that is a premise for progress. (Yunus, 1982)
The poorest have no land or a very limited access to land. They have no access to credit or only to credit which is highly exploitative. They are underpaid for their work and this cycle of degradation is compounded by the inadequacy of food intake which depletes their only remaining resource, their labour.
In the economy of poverty, prices, profits, wages, interest rates, shortages or famines are not functions of quantifiable economic variables, but results of powerful social processes which can be described better in qualitative terms. Another factor is nature, which intervenes frequently and erratically in the system. (Fuglesang and Chandler, 1986)
2.1.1 Human manipulation. Although famine is triggered by events beyond human control, this does not explain entirely the severity or delay in food distribution. Natural factors such as drought, pests, tidal waves or river flooding may disturb the complex and intense cropping cycle in Bangladesh and create local or widespread food shortages. However, the poor are quite aware of the human manipulation which aggravates the famine situation. The social structure in the villages prevents the suffering from the famine to be borne equitably by all members. Food shortages are aggravated by stockpiling. The larger landowners tend to act in concert and maintain an informal monopoly control of the food supply. In times of famine, it is not uncommon that the price of a family's daily rice supply is five to six times higher than the daily wage rate of a labourer.
2.1.2 Moneylending. Faced with desperation, the final recourse for the poor is to pawn or sell the miniscule piece of land they might possess. Other meagre possessions such as household utensils, furniture, or a coveted piece of jewellery soon line the coffers of the moneylenders. Their acute need for cash to buy food for the family, forces the poor to borrow from the moneylenders who usually are rich landowners. Pawning is preferred to selling their last possessions. Taking full advantage of the situation, the moneylender has the sovereign power to set the price for the item pawned--normally half or one third of its market value. The interest charged ranges from 300 to 400 percent annually.
With these crippling interest rates, the poor virtually have no chance of repaying the principal of the loan in the allotted time. The loan transaction becomes a means of establishing a social and economic relationship based on the permanent dependence of the poor on the moneylender.
2.1.3 Social discontinuity and distrust. Famine tears up the cohesive social elements that exist among the poor. Groups that normally eat together, split apart. An increasing unwillingness to share with siblings and relatives can be observed. Cordiality, mutual respect and trust deteriorate. Quarrels, petty theft and serious crime are more prevalent.
The Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee has analyzed the situation of discontinuity and distrust as it operates in the villages. (1984) In rural Bangladesh, although the individual household is the production unit, extended family units are not uncommon. At this level most decisions are taken regarding the cultivation system, deployment of labour, cropping technique and similar matters. This does not exclude, however, that several households will tend to associate in clusters or groups. In Bangla, such groupings are referred to as dal. These are informal social formations based on proximity and/or political allegiances that often play an important role in regulating inter-household cooperation. For our understanding, the term faction might be more descriptive. The degree of cooperation and interaction is high among households aligned with the same faction. However, the effect of vertically-dominated factions among the poor is to minimize their horizontal linkages. The
feeling of solidarity and common cause observable among the members of a faction contrasts sharply to the lack of solidarity and cooperation between factions. This social discontinuity and distrust blocks out horizontal and large-scale attempts of cooperation among the poor in economic or social affairs. The conflict generated takes the forms of inter-household disputes and hostility, barriers to a free-flow of reliable information, and subsequent suspicion and lack of cooperation towards development efforts directed to the poor.
Rural factions are another dimension of a social relationship configured by dependence and exploitation. Factions arise and expand as a result of vested interests and rivalry between its leading members. Often the fight between these personalities is fierce. Violence, intimidation and trickery are commonly-used means to gain ascendancy and control of the local resource situation. Relief operations directed to the poorest are exposed to the cynicism that derives from a viciously competitive milieu. The local leaders, or leaders to be, systematically gather support and expand the power of their faction by holding out the promise of benefits or economic support to the poor who will give their allegiance. The highly unequal distribution of limited resources in the rural areas of Bangladesh, along with their control and use by a few, is the socio-economic source of a relation of dependence. The exploitation materializes in the grossly unequal economic exchanges we have described.
The connection between natural disasters and socio-economic processes is essential for an understanding of rural poverty in Bangladesh.
2.1.4 The negation of women. The two words purdah and bari are entry points to gain an understanding of the social norms that contribute to a marginalization of women. In general, purdah requires that women should not be seen by men outside of the family. The logical extension of this norm is that women are largely restricted to work which can be carried out within the family homestead, i.e. bard. This places limits on the types of income-generating activities open to women. When travel is necessary for any reason, women must rely on husbands, brothers, sons or other male relatives for assistance.
A time allocation study shows that the average peasant woman spends 43% of her time on activities related to farm production, about the same on household work, and about 11% on childcare and other family matters. (Westergaard, 1983) This is the situation when the household owns or leases some land. Women in landless families face a different situation. In Bangladesh, rice accounts for about 75% of all food grains grown. It is a highly labour-intensive crop and most of the processing operations are undertaken by women. In the busy harvest season, women in households with one or two acres of land tend to be over-employed. By comparison, the landless and poor women were up to 36% underemployed. The most common complaint of the poorest which applies most acutely to women, is the lack of employment opportunities. Those who find paid employment work almost exclusively as domestic labourers in nearby wealthier baris.
In rice processing, women use a traditional mortar with a foot-operated pestle, a dheki. With the introduction of diesel-operated rice-husking mills, this work is disappearing. Husking by mill is cheaper than by traditional technology. The result is a worsening of the situation of poor families dependent on the supplementary income from this source. Again, wealth is transferred to households which are already wealthier and to the ricemill owners. For women, ownership of ricemills becomes a primary development issue.
Poor women are increasingly being marginalized in the labour process. This is accompanied by a pervasive devaluation of women which, unfortunately, ends in complete social negation. It starts with the female child who is less well fed, less looked after and receives less medical attention. Women in Bangladesh have a higher mortality rate than men. Child brides and premature deliveries are common. While sons are perceived by parents as the future source of social security, daughters are viewed as a cost from which others will benefit eventually. Violence against women is not uncommon and appears to be increasing.
The final and very dominant issue in the negation of women is dowry. Parents must provide the bridegroom-to-be with a payment in cash and/or in kind for marrying their daughter. The practice of dowry correlates with the decreasing size of land holdings and the resultant decline in the importance of female labour in agriculture. The decreasing demand for wives is accompanied by an increasing demand from potential grooms for higher payments. Dowries of 10,000 take are not uncommon. For the poor, such a sum is a crushing burden, propelling a vicious downward spiral which tosses the family deep into debt and dependency.
2.1.5 Through the women to the poor. Donor agencies, development planners and-programme implementors are constantly lamenting that projects do not get through to the poorest of the poor. And in that dilemma, women are the hardest to reach. A mounting number of evaluation reports confirm this. At the same time, there is an emerging rhetoric about women as the socially most legitimate venue to development. However, operationalizing this in a practical programme has not been achieved on a large scale. It is well acknowledged that there is a clear connection between the social and economic status of women and the nutritional and welfare status of their families. There can be little doubt that development initiatives should address the women among the poor directly as a priority. But the 'how' of it and the scale of the need have presented seemingly insurmountable hurdles.
2.1.6 Rural credit for the poor. Various attempts have been made to provide the poor with credit as a catalyst to development. Some commercial banks in Bangladesh are obliged to offer rural credit programmes. Specialized rural credit banks exist as well. Loans are given on the basis of collateral surety in land or other assents. Invariably, this means only those with assets get loans. The poorest of the poor--65% of the population--are bypassed. The result is that the wealthier farmers benefit from such credit schemes. Even more disturbing is the fact that these schemes suffer from very low repayment rates by their privileged clients. In some banks, only 40% of the loans are relayed. There are even cases of repayment rates as low as 10%. It appears the defaulters may get away with it since the judiciary does not have the capacity to handle the large number of foreclosures implied. Therefore, rural credit banks are hesitant to take legal action and the situation remains
uncertain. If funds do not revolve, mortgages are of little help to banks. This situation in Bangladesh's rural credit schemes demonstrates how enormously important it is to restore and ensure social and economic accountability.
2.2 From action research project to bank
In 1976, Professor Muhammad Yunus launched an action research project in Jobra village near the university in Chittagong. The objectives of the project were to extend credit to landless poor men and women, to eliminate the exploitation of moneylenders, to create opportunities for self-employment among these vast but underutilized human resources, and to bring the poor within the folds of some organizational format which they can operate for mutual support and benefit. (Yunus, 1982; Grameen Bank, 1986)
The project was extended to several villages in Chittagong and, over the period 1976 to 1979, demonstrated its strength and viability. With the collaboration of Bangladesh Bank and other nationalized banks, the Grameen Bank project was extended to Tangail District in 1979. Success in Tangail led to further extension of the project's services in the districts of Dhaka, Rangpur and Patuakhali. In 1983, the project was transformed into an independent bank. It is called Grameen Bank which in Bangla means Village Bank.
It is important to realize that the Bank has evolved as the result of a long learning process. At the time of writing, it has 200,000 members, 71% of whom are women. There are 248 branch offices which disburse 4.0 crore take or 1.3 million U.S. dollars in loans per month. The average loan size is about 2000 take only. Normally, the biggest loan for an individual does not exceed 5000 take. The Bank's recovery rate is extraordinary. Close to 98% of its loans are repaid--and on time. As mentioned, the members undertake more than 400 income-generating activities based on skills they already have.
As Grameen Bank members gain experience and prove their reliability, they may take out loans for joint enterprises. The loan amounts for joint enterprises are much larger and may be upto 500,000 take. More than 100 different kinds of joint activities are financed in this way. Most joint loans are for activities in agriculture and forestry followed by activities in livestock and fisheries and the running of mills and factories. By the middle of 1986, the Bank had disbursed 5.0 crore taka or about 1.6 million U.S. dollars.
Well established Grameen Bank members can also borrow upto 18,000 take for building a house. Houseloans are repaid over 10 to 15 years. To date, more than 1800 houses have been built with these loans.
All loans are repaid in weekly instalments. The current national rate of interest (16% per annum) is charged for loans. Financially, the Bank is almost self-sufficient, even running with a small profit. To its members, Grameen Bank is much more than a bank in the conventional sense. Through a variety of programmes it supports activities to improve sanitation, health, nutrition, education, family planning, dowryless marriages and mutual help among its members. The Bank makes vegetable seeds and seedlings available at cost price. By end of June 1985, about 1 million seed packets and 1 million saplings were sold and distributed by the Bank. School textbooks for primary school are also sold at cost price. (Grameen Bank, 1986)
Many evaluation studies qualify that Grameen Bank's activities are beneficial for the poorest of the poor and especially for women. It is well documented that the Bank reaches the poor who are defined as those having 0.5 acre of cultivable land or less, or other assets of corresponding value. Over a period of time, a borrower's income increases substantially and her/his asset base widens. It is now recognised that the Bank clearly contributes to an increase in the wage rate for agricultural labour in the areas where it operates. Through their groups, the Bank's members own 75% of the paid-up share capital. Four landless poor--two women and two men--are members of the Grameen Bank Board of Directors.
Figure 1
Grameen bank's operation is characterised by many types of interacting functions. In our description we follow this figure type step-by-step.
Figure 2
This overview shows the various management units and the categories of staff attached to those operating at the field level. The enlarged circle represents one centre with its 30 members. It shows how members organize themselves according to their groups in rows of five at the weekly centre meeting.
Grameen Bank is a very successful development effort in a dynamic process of expansion. It expects to have 500 branch offices in operation by 1988 and close to 500,000 members.
For more information on the Bank's merits as an economic development initiative, we refer the reader to the attached bibliography. Our purpose is to describe and analyze the communicative features of the Bank's organization and functioning which have played such a significant role in its success. By this we mean Grameen Bank's approach to external and internal communication and information processing, its methods of information, management and decision-making.
2.3 A socio-economic formation
To describe the Bank in terms of relations between sections or departments that are presented in an organizational chart would not adequately explain the communication processes it sets in motion. It does not conform to the typical bureaucracy of an agricultural extension agency for example, which operates as an entity cognitively different from its social environment. Grameen Bank is a dynamic organizational reality better characterized by the term, socio-economic formation. It is a cluster of interacting organizational functions which absorbs more and more of the social environment in itself, recreating it in a process of continuous transformation. The Bank is formative in the sense that people create a new social and economic environment for themselves through it. Such a 'formation is expressed both in physical or spatial arrangements and in the thinking, the feeling, the attitudes and the behaviour of the participants, right down to their body language.
Figure 1 provides an overview of three main types of functions carried out through this socio-economic formation. They are:
2.3.1 Centre functions. The centres are comprised of the landless poor who carry out responsibilities and activities as part of their work to further their own development, individually and collectively.
2.3.2 Development facilitation functions. If the situation of the poor is to be met effectively, three inter-related processes have to be set in motion. We characterize these processes as three functions which serve to facilitate the development the landless poor endeavour to achieve through their work. These are: the banking and economic development function which makes credit available, the social development function which makes information and supplies available, and the organization development function which engages in development and management of the socio-economic formation as a whole. This aim is to ensure that the Bank is appropriate for its purpose of serving the poor.
2.3.3 Service functions. Specialized operations are required which carry out a variety of services directly or indirectly related to the social and economic development of Grameen Bank members. We are familiar with descriptors such as General Management and Accounting, Monitoring and Evaluation, Auditing, Personnel Administration, Research and Development and Training. All these functions have easily identifiable purposes.
Figure 2 illustrates the various management and supervision units in Grameen Bank. At the time of writing, there are in operation 5 zonal offices, 20 area offices, 248 branch offices and 8850 centres, of which 6524 are female. In total, the Bank has 3000 employees. Approximately 2500 constitute various grades of bank staff, referred to in this paper as bank workers, who are directly engaged with the centres. The development facilitation functions and the service functions are operationalized through these units in interaction with the poor in the centres.
2.4 Communicating through trust
In Grameen Bank, all work springs from and focusses on the activities of the landless groups and their centres. People organise themselves in groups of five. Then six groups of five members join together to form a centre. Therefore, a centre usually comprises 30 members. The name, centre, derives from the obligation of the six groups to construct a meeting-centre, a house or shed where they can discuss their concerns and conduct their business with the Bank.
2.4.1 Groups of five landless. The poor who want to become members of the Bank are encouraged to form groups by finding five like-minded people who are in a similar economic condition and enjoy mutual trust and confidence. Whereas group members must be inhabitants of the same village, only one member of a household may be in a group. If several people from a household want to join the Bank, they must take membership in different groups in the centre, or in another centre entirely. Similarly, relatives must not be in the same group. Membership in groups and centres is according to gender. Women comprise their own groups and centres and so do men. It is crucial that this group formation process is an autonomous one in which the people involved identify and recognize each other as having shared interests and agree that participation is to mutual benefit.
Each group elects a chairperson and a secretary who hold office for one year only. They cannot be reelected before all other members have had the same learning experience that accompanies the responsibilities of these positions. The group chairperson is responsible for the discipline in the group. Members conduct their business with the Bank through her or him at weekly meetings. All members are obliged to attend these meetings and to be fully aware of the rules governing the activities and procedures of the group.
When a new group is formed, it is kept under close observation for a month by bank workers and other staff to see if the members are conforming to the discipline of Grameen Bank. For a minimum of seven days the members participate in a training programme.
Part of the training is to establish trust among the members. Each member must contribute one take a day to a cash savings fund which is entrusted to the members in turn. The money is kept first by the chairperson, then by the secretary and finally by each remaining member. This procedure demonstrates to the group an individual's capacity for honesty and reliability with an asset held in common and-is the first step towards establishing a relationship of accountability. If the training is satisfactory, two members will receive their loans and be observed for a month or two to ascertain if they pay their instalments regularly. Only then will the next two members be eligible for loans. The fifth member of a group will receive her or his loan when the second set of loanees have established their reliability. Usually, the group chairperson and secretary are the last to receive their loans.
New loans are not approved before the individual accounts of each group member are settled. Thus, the group members interact in a micro-network of mutual accountabilities. The individual is kept in line by a considerable amount of peer pressure. Equally, an individual is sustained by a considerable amount of peer support. This is the whole basis for the singular fact that Grameen Bank can give loans without demanding a collateral surety. The credibility of the group as a whole--and its future benefits in terms of new loans--is in jeopardy if one member defaults on loan repayments. In practice what often happens in the case of financial difficulties is the group arrives at a private arrangement to pay a member's instalment. This is one of the reasons the Bank has a repayment rate as high as 98%.
The group decides -its business on a consensus basis. The chairperson is expected to be the spokesperson who voices the group consensus at the centre meetings. Therefore, the homogeneity of the group is clearly essential.
2.4.2 Trial and error. After various experiences, the Bank has settled on a group size of five. Initially, loans were given to individuals, but this procedure quickly proved itself uncontrollable for Bank staff. Then the idea of peer control was introduced and groups of 10 or more were organized. However, these were found too large to be effective. The necessary self-discipline and mutual trust did not emerge and the meetings became clumsy to conduct. Agreement was slow to take place and the chairperson's overview of the group's situation was complicated by its size. In the end, five members turned out to be the most practicable size. Corresponding to the five digits of a hand, it is also an easy figure to communicate.
In the early stages of Grameen Bank's development, group formation on the basis of specialized activities was monitored for its effectiveness as a cohesive element. It was found that groups based exclusively on specialized activities such as cow fattening or rickshaw pulling did not function too well because the members came from different places and could not meet easily. The spatial and social closeness of being from the same village emerged as a major premise for a well-functioning, cohesive group.
If a group member behaves in an undisciplined manner, for example, by not attending meetings or by not repaying loans regularly, the remaining members may, by unanimous decision on, impose a fine. The fine is deposited in a group fund for mutual benefit. In the same way, they may decide to expel a member for chronic breach of discipline. In such cases, the member to be expelled must repay the total loan before leaving.
A member may leave the group at any time as long as any loan is fully repaid. If a member leaves without repaying the entire loan, the responsibility for paying the balance falls to the remaining group members. Any person may join a group if its members unanimously agree and the person meets the qualifying criteria set by the Bank.
2.4.3 Centre meetings. The regular centre meeting coincides with a weekly repayment of instalments. Early in the morning, the six groups meet in the centre house and are assembled before the bank worker arrives. During the meeting, current issues of interest to the members are discussed, various problems are raised, repayment of loans and other bank business is conducted, and decisions of concern to the centre are taken on a consensus basis.
Over time centre members have arrived at a seating arrangement which makes it possible their meetings more effectively and efficiently. The six groups assemble in rows of five. Each row is one group. Each chairperson sits on the far right of her or his group followed by the secretary and then the remaining members. Normally, the centre chief's group will occupy the first row. (See Figure 2) Although the number of people in a centre may vary, more and more the optimal size of 30 members is the practice. Larger centres do not allow for the same degree of participation by individual members and eventually divide to form two centres as necessary. During the meeting, the group chairpersons conduct the business on behalf of their respective members.
From among themselves, the group chairpersons elect a centre chief and a deputy centre chief who hold office for one year only. It is a rule that new centre officers must be elected after a year has expired, and bank workers are increasingly supervising to see the rule is followed. Even a particular month of the year is specified for the elections so the whole process can become a standard matter of practice.
Centre chiefs ensure attendance at the weekly meetings, payments of loan instalments, overall discipline and generally conduct the programme of the meetings. If a centre chief regularly breaches discipline, she or he can be removed according to certain rules and a new person will be elected. Almost on a daily basis, both the group chairpersons and the centre chiefs are involved in the essential task of supervising if members are utilizing their loans appropriately. Any misbehaviour in this regard is reported to the centre meeting. Office holders in groups and centres are not paid for their work. The groups and the centres are the basic decision-making units in Grameen Bank. The service functions and the management of the Bank see it as their primary task to respond effectively to the decisions taken there.
One of the most significant features of the centre meetings is that all bank business is conducted openly in front of the members. There are no private transactions, much less any shady deals. Every member knows what is happening and can assess her or his own position in relation to others. Carrying out all transactions in public and dealing with problems together, combined with the rotation of officeholders by obligatory yearly elections, severely mitigates the entrenchment of vested interests and generation of distrust. At the same time, the openness of the procedures- prohibits individuals from misbehaving. The fear of public exposure is a heavy disincentive for inappropriate actions. Thus the centre meeting reinforces a relationship of accountability that is established in the groups. What starts out as an essentially economic accountability, evolves into a much wider social accountability and a state of mutual trust. The individual members are very aware that they enjoy
the benefits of membership only if they play by the rules of the game. They know that as long as they stick to the rules they can trust each other.
2.4.4 Straighten your back. In a social environment characterized by discontinuity, uncertainty, starvation and frequent violence, the centre provides its members with much more than economic support. It provides continuity, protection, power, communal support and unity of purpose. The physical manifestation of poverty is in the bent back, the lowered glance and the almost inaudible voice. The bank workers constantly reinforce the growing self-confidence of the centre members: "Whether you stand straight or handle your money straight, it is the same thing." "Speak up, straighten your back, you can be proud you have improved your assets by your own work."
We have visited many centres, attending their meetings and interviewing members. Here are a few stories which reveal the social significance of the centres:
* Walking home one evening with his newly-purchased goat, a man was stopped by the police who falsely charged that he had stolen it. They wanted a bribe and proceeded to take the man to jail. By chance, a zonal manager was passing and immediately the man gave him a Grameen Bank style salute. Recognizing that he was a Grameen Bank member, the zonal manager stopped to find out what was happening. At once the zonal manager contacted the branch manager who quickly alerted the centre. Soon after, the man's centre colleagues turned up in large numbers to vouch for him and he was released without delay.
* In another centre, a member's house was burgled, but the police refused to investigate the case. Centre members joined forces with the man and together they went to the police station demanding action which promptly followed.
* A member's house burnt down leaving the family with their small children destitute. The centre members came together, decided the family needed help and organized the speedy rebuilding of the house.
* A local official had a candidate he wanted accepted by the nearby centre. However, the members refused on the basis that the candidate was not qualified according to the Grameen Bank rules. Although the official pressured them hard, the members stood their ground. In retaliation, the official arranged having two of them severely beaten and they were taken in bad condition to the hospital. Two hundred members, both men and women, from six centres turned up in front of the official's house. "Why", they demanded, "did you beat them?" and "Where is the money for the hospital expenses?" Hurriedly, the official handed over 6000 take in compensation for the incurred medical expenses of the two men.
It is a remarkable experience to observe how forthright and open is the communication taking place among the members themselves and between bank staff and members. It is especially notable in the behaviour of women who only a few years ago would have regarded this as unacceptable. The discussion is orderly and to the point and often peppered with good humour. Personal conflicts in the community are solved within the social framework of the centre, sometimes with the assistance of the bank worker. However, the emphasis is on the centres finding solutions to their own problems.
The bank workers become trusted by the members and even regarded with affection. A strict discipline, though, guides their relationship to members. For example, they are not allowed to receive any gifts from members, no matter how humble. Also, the bank workers are rotated so that at intervals they are responsible for new centres.
In our many visits to Grameen Bank centres, we had ample opportunity to observe how members take great pride in being honourable and making their payments on time. When a centre does well in its activities and in implementing its development decisions, each member has a share in the communal pride. The accomplishments of individual members, which would never have been possible without having access to credit, are also a source of pride. The spirit of solidarity and mutual trust has very tangible consequences for individual members.
Throughout Grameen Bank the prevailing attitude is that the group must progress as a whole. If one member is lagging economically behind and another is forging ahead, the prospering member's new loan will be delayed until the others achieve the same standard. Field staff are sensitive to the issue of differences in economic status arising in the groups or centres. They use every occasion to reinforce the message, "You must go forward together and help each other." Senior staff are very concerned with the possibility of acquired wealth by its members, modest as it is in relative terms, leading to any exploitative relations developing vis-a-vis other landless. Shared interests and mutual trust are the basis for communication about issues, as it is for the social contract as a whole. It is such a self-evident truth, that it is almost shameful communication theoreticians and practitioners need to rediscover it.
2.5 The oral culture--the mouth as a medium
What makes us give priority to the marginalization or disadvantages of the poor at the expense of recognizing the value and distinctiveness of their own culture? All cultures develop special skills in people, so does the culture of poverty. In a very literal sense of the word, it is a sub-culture. When we assume that people are disadvantaged, we rush to create a development programme to deal with their disadvantages, instead of a programme based on the skills people have at their fingertips.
The poor have always been researched, described and interpreted by the rich and the educated, never by themselves. Still today, development literature largely assumes that poor people must change their attitude and behaviour before they can take the first step out of poverty. Surely the inference is that poverty is a self-inflicted, self-generating phenomenon? The focus then is placed on what the poor are doing to themselves, rather than on what an oppressive economic system is doing to the poor.
It is time the social and communication sciences seriously question the assumptions behind the models of attitude and behaviour modification. These have splintered poverty into myths that are quite damaging in their attributions about the poor: The poor lack innovativeness, surrender to mutual distrust, have no empathy, are apathetic. They do not have quite the same feelings as 'us', lack aspirations and motivation, are intransigent, unwilling to take risks, cannot conceptualize progress, and finally, are handicapped by not understanding the larger political context. In other words, the poor are mentally stunted and ignorant. They have no skills and are inept problem solvers. The poor must be the recipients of new knowledge, through more and more effective communication programmes utilizing the latest in media technology, preferably satellites in stationary orbits. Enlightenment shall be beamed down on the poor around the world, around the clock. Why don't we attempt to find
out what the culture of poverty is, rather than what it isn't?
2.5.1 The assets and skill" of poverty. In the South, the culture of poverty is oral in the sense that the technology of writing is used only by a few. Oral cultures develop two very important skills in people. Listening is taken so much for granted that it is rarely considered a skill. Yet, it is a perceptual and conceptual ability or capacity to 'read' reality through the ear. People develop listening skills acutely when they rely exclusively on oral communication. This capacity extends beyond reading the sounds of the natural environment and into the skills of social intelligence, the ability to perceive and interpret social situations. In daily life, it means applying the spoken word deftly to participate and survive in the community. An oral culture is a communal culture in a very special sense: it does not survive without the spirit of the community. (Fuglesang, 1982)
When people have no other means of storing information and knowledge, they develop an excellent memory. As a skill, this is
glibly overlooked. The folklore of puns, euphemisms, colloquialisms, proverbs, songs and stories is more than folksy fun. These various and entertaining forms have special functions in an oral culture. Eloquence and subtlety are valued, a well-phrased statement is remembered. People listen for hours to a good storyteller. Particularly older people use proverbs to enlighten or comment on the happenings of the day. Proverbs are ingenious mnemonic devices for communicating the insights and experiences won in the past.
There is a price to pay for acquiring the skills demanded by the technology of writing. It is the deterioration of listening and remembering skills. We can all recognize that we still belong to an oral culture, but it is quickly receding.
In general, poor people have remarkable survival skills and vocational skills. There is a high degree of labour division which is expressed in skills ranging from spice-processing to broom making, from hide preparation to weaving. Common to such skills is the high level of competence involved if people are to make a living from it. Most remarkable perhaps is people's general skill in resource utilization. Every source of energy, every material object, every resource available, is explored for its particular qualities and applications. Always, an available resource is utilized in a remarkable variety of ways and combinations to maximize its potential. The evidence of this endeavour is everywhere in the culture of poverty: utilization of land, water, crops or building materials. Observers from affluent societies have reason to feel deeply ashamed of their incompetence in the skill of resource utilization. Certainly the slum dweller's shelter of rusty iron flakes, cardboard
boxes, newsprint and plastic sheets is a heap of leftovers. It can also be seen as a masterpiece of resource utilization. Saying this does not deny that development is necessary and urgent. The point is: the poor are very capable of making appropriate use of resources made available to them in appropriate ways. This also concerns information resources.
Our emphasis on the many skills of the poor does not mean training in new skills is not necessary. People willingly acquire a new skill and easily utilize an information resource when they recognize its benefit. The point is simple: a self-reliant development can be initiated and generated only from the skills people already have. Training in new skills is part of the ongoing process once it has started. All too often we overlook that people enjoy and gain self-confidence by utilizing the skills they already master.
2.5.2 Memorizing decisions. Grameen Bank has managed to employ people's skills, and in particular people's communication skills, as they are. Certainly, writing is essential in keeping the banking business in order, but that is largely done by Bank staff. The only requirement of members is that they each learn to write their signature.
Figure 3
THE SIXTEEN DECISIONS
1. THE FOUR PRINCIPLES OF GRAMEEN BANK -- DISCIPLINE, UNITY, COURAGE AND HARD WORK -- WE SHALL FOLLOW AND ADVANCE IN ALL WALKS OF OUR LIVES.
2. PROSPERITY WE SHALL BRING TO FAMILIES.
3. WE SHALL NOT LIVE IN DILAPIDATED HOUSES. WE SHALL REPAIR OUR HOUSES AND WORK TOWARDS CONSTRUCTING NEW HOUSES AT THE EARLIEST.
4. WE SHALL GROW VEGETABLES ALL THE YEAR ROUND. WE SHALL EAT PLENTY OF IT AND SELL THE SURPLUS.
5. DURING THE PLANTATION SEASONS, WE SHALL PLANT AS MANY SEEDLINGS AS POSSIBLE.
6. WE SHALL PLAN TO KEEP OUR FAMILIES SMALL. WE SHALL MINIMISE OUR EXPENDITURES. WE SHALL LOOK AFTER OUR HEALTH.
7. WE SHALL EDUCATE OUR CHILDREN AND ENSURE THAT THEY CAN EARN TO PAY FOR THEIR EDUCATION.
8. WE SHALL ALWAYS KEEP OUR CHILDREN AND THE ENVIRONMENT CLEAN.
9. WE SHALL BUILD AND USE PIT-LATRINES.
10. WE SHALL DRINK TUBEWELL WATER. IF IT IS NOT AVAILABLE, WE SHALL BOIL WATER OR USE ALUM.
11. WE SHALL NOT TAKE ANY DOWRY IN OUR SONS' WEDDING, NEITHER SHALL WE GIVE ANY DOWRY IN OUR DAUGHTERS' WEDDING. WE SHALL KEEP THE CENTRE FREE FROM THE CURSE OF DOWRY. WE SHALL NOT PRACTICE CHILD MARRIAGE.
12. WE SHALL NOT INFLICT ANY INJUSTICE ON ANYONE, NEITHER SHALL WE ALLOW ANYONE TO DO SO.
13. FOR HIGHER INCOME WE SHALL COLLECTIVELY UNDERTAKE BIGGER INVESTMENTS.
14. WE SHALL ALWAYS BE READY TO HELP EACH OTHER. IF ANYONE IS IN DIFFICULTY, WE SHALL ALL HELP HIM.
15. IF WE COME TO KNOW OF ANY BREACH OF DISCIPLINE In ANY CENTRE WE SHALL ALL. GO THERE AND HELP RESTORE DISCIPLINE
16 WE SHALL INTRODUCE PHYSICAL EXERCISE IN ALL OUR CENTRES WE SHALL TAKE PART IN ALL SOCIAL ACTIVITIES COLLECTIVELY
 Formulated in a National Workshop of one hundred women centre chiefs in March 1984, the 16 Decisions might be called the social development constitution of Grameen Bank. All Grameen Bank members are expected to practice and implement these decisions.
As part of its social development programme, the Bank is organizing workshops for female centre chiefs who, during 7 intensive days, are exposed to a whole range of development issues. The centre chiefs return to their centres with the purpose of communicating the knowledge to the members and, together with them, implement action-decisions. This whole process is entirely oral. At the end of the workshops for women, it has become the practice to draft a set of decisions that the women would implement on return to their respective centres. In 1984, a national workshop took place which was an historic occasion in the Bank's development. The 100 participating women representing the five zones agreed upon 16 Decisions which they committed themselves and the general membership of Grameen Bank to implement. These 16 Decisions have become the social development constitution of Grameen Bank. It has become the focus for the participatory process whenever members meet. (figure 3)
Members may rearrange priorities or give different emphases to the various decisions, but the list remains the major guideline for household or community action.
The '16 Decisions' are no abstract ideological resolution. Quite the opposite, they constitute a concrete document for action arising from and expressing the needs of the landless. Grameen Bank 's role in the manifestation of the 16 Decisions has been its preceding years of facilitating development around the general values of solidarity, health, education and work. In this document, social and economic distinctions overlap. Solidarity and mutual help are as much a practical concern as building a pit latrine or drinking tubewell water. Saving and investment- in collective enterprises reflect the same spirit as tree planting or growing vegetables. Abolition of dowry payments is linked with the issue of discipline, physical exercises and courage with the quest for social justice. Environmental sanitation is as important as children's education. The subject matter of the 16 Decisions has become the major focus for a comprehensive process of change.
With a starting point in the 16 Decisions, Grameen Bank members create their own slogans according to their own interests and priorities. These slogans are iterated in unison at the opening and closing of centre meetings and every day at the workshop sessions. Bank staff are continuously checking the members' knowledge of the 16 Decisions, and arrange oral memorizing sessions if they are not satisfied. This applies as well to the general rules and regulations of the Bank. Frequently the slogans are accompanied by exercises in the centres and in centre schools.
It is an energizing experience to observe the fervor and vitality with which the slogans are repeated. The mouth is the medium. Below we list a ream of slogans as they might appear:
* Our motto is unity, work and discipline We want strength and solidarity!
* We will never hesitate to do physical exercises! It reflects the good health of Grameen Bank!
* Everyone of us recognizes that women-involved in Grameen Bank's activities are intelligent. The Bank stands for the liberation of women!
* We are determined to build ourselves new house and to use pit latrines!
* We will produce more vegetables to pay for our children's education! We will eat more vegetables ourselves!
* The future is ours Long live Grameen Bank!
How does this oral process of memorizing succeed in communicating information from the bank workers through the centre chiefs to the individual members? It should be noted, of course, that the issues in the slogans are followed by a body of factual information also communicated orally. Moreover, this information is backed up by the Bank's provision of tangible services which facilitate implementation. For example seed packets with instructions for growing vegetables, oral rehydration packets with directions for use, and cement slabs for latrines with the necessary installation steps provided are all offered through the Bank.
Two separate evaluation studies found that Grameen Bank members had very high scores on a number of development and participation issues. One study shows that 92% of the members knew how to prepare a saline solution for the rehydration of infants compared to 52% in the control group. Sixty-four percent do use birth control methods; 90% are not prepared to marry off their daughters in child marriages or give dowry. Awareness of the larger social context and the exploitative powers is also high among members. With respect to voting in the last election, a significantly larger percentage of women in loanee families had cast votes: 73% in contrast to 46% in the control group. In regard to the 16 Decisions, only 17% of the women and 26% of the men were incapable of memorizing any of them. However, 23% of the women and 17% of the men could memorize them all. Most loanees remember some of the decisions and women memorize better than men. In trying to gauge whether members were
practising the decisions the behaviour around drinking water was isolated for assessment. The tenth decision states, "We shall drink tubewell water. If it is not available, we shall boil water or use alum." It was found that 76% of female loanees drink tubewell water and 71% of the men. Of those who do not have access to a tubewell, 60% of the female loanees responded that they boiled the drinking water compared to 42% of male loanees. (Rahman, A., 1986 and Rahman, R.I., 1986) More interesting than these impressive figures is the fact that the members are themselves involved in a continuous evaluation process, the mediation of which is oral.
2.6 Communication is participation
Grameen Bank has managed to initiate participatory evaluation through the mechanism of exchange visits between women in various centres. Women attend each others centre meetings and the process of communication takes place in a practical and familiar context. Exchange visits are seen as an indispensable way of internalizing and gaining knowledge and opening new perspectives. They combine three powerful reinforcing elements: peer learning, peer motivation and peer solidarity. When a group of women visit
other centres to assess implementation of the 16 Decisions, not only do they learn from the experiences of their sisters, but their presence as guests has a considerable supervisory effect. When the bank worker notifies about the intended exchange visit the hosts--like hosts everywhere--take great pride in being well prepared. The message creates a flurry of activity and excitement.
Exchange visits between centres take place in the same branch or different branches. Sometimes, the visits are connected with the development of joint enterprises and may even take place between zones. The social development officers are usually involved in both planning and implementing the visits and ensure that the information communicated is relevant.
A centre exchange visit is for three days. The women stay as guests in their sisters' houses, participate in the centre meetings of the hosts and inspect their income-generating and social development activities. On return, the women must report the results of their visit to their own centre and bank staff. A little later, the three-day visit is exchanged and the roles reversed. The branch manager reports to the zone' office on the results of the exchange. At this point, the otherwise oral process of communication is converted into written reports for management and planning purposes.
The example of exchange visits illustrates a process of action, evaluation and learning. It brings forward a simple and pertinent point: Successful communication is participation. The essence and ultimate purpose of communication is participatory action. The groups and centres with their autonomous networks of shared interests, their homogeneity and mutual trust, are communicative units of great potential for people's participation in development.
All too often communication practitioners focus on the effect of media. Which medium is most cost-effective? What media-mix is best? The starting point for our professional judgements are more often the presence of technology than the primacy of people. If we could forget about media for awhile, we might start asking more fruitful questions. Isn't it time to consider: How do we create the social environment that is most conducive to people's participation? What kind of organization is capable of doing it? In the process of answering such questions it is likely we will learn how useful media can really be.
2.7 Some organizational modes of thought
Although not stated explicitly, Grameen Bank appears to process information, promote communication and participative decision- making according to the following generative modes of thought.
- Errors are absorbed as experience and converted into opportunities for learning.
- Decisions are advance adaptations to changing circumstances. Plans are tentative outlooks, but with a strong sense of direction.
- Creativity is actively promoted. Conformity is discouraged. Attitudes and talents are not considered to be by inheritance alone: staff become good performers by virtue of what their organizational environment allows them to learn and realize.
- Social accountability and participation emerges from discipline and supervision.
- The more equal people are the better do they communicate and collaborate.
To observers of Grameen Bank it is striking how the management and staff members communicate and work creatively together, comporting themselves with openness, perceptiveness and self-confidence. It is an atmosphere very different from that in a typical hierarchical bureaucracy with the stagnancy derived from prevailing factors such as fear of authority, inefficiency and corruption. The driving force in Grameen Bank's progress for the benefit of the poorest is undoubtedly person-to-person communication. By 1988, the Bank expects to nearly double its number of bank workers to 4000. Remarkably, once they are working, the bank workers' salaries are generated from the Bank's own earnings.
2.8 Appropriate media
Bank workers and social development officers have very few communications media at their disposal for centre meetings or workshop sessions. There are no slide or film projectors, no video equipment and rarely a poster. This does not derive from any aversion to the use of technology. Computers and pocket calculators are considered indispensable for the Bank's operation. It is simply the result of a judgement about cost-benefit and appropriateness.
Meetings are taking place in remote community halls without electricity. The heat makes it necessary to close window shutters. The halls are rectangular and it is the custom to sit on mats along the walls so that all participants are facing each other. Under such circumstances, few can make meaning of wall posters. But human ingenuity can solve such a problem. The Bank has introduced an innovation in visual aids. Small picture cards 10 x 15 cm. are handed out to the women so each participant can tangibly hold the topic of discussion in front of her. After use, the cards are collected ready for use in another meeting. It works beautifully and it could not be simpler and cheaper! Quite recently, the Bank has decided that the time has come for trying video in its training programme and, characteristically, staff members themselves will learn by trial and error whether it is worth it.
back contents next
<section>3</section>
back contents
REFERENCES
ALINSKY, Saul. 1969. Reveille for Radicals. New York: Vintage Books, Random House.
BANGLADESH BUREAU OF STATISTICS. 1985. Statistical Pocket Book of Bangladesh 1984-85. Dhaka: Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics.
BANGLADESH RURAL ADVANCEMENT COMMITTEE (BRAC). 1984. Peasant Perceptions--Famino, Credit Needs, Sanitation. Rural Studies Series Vol. 1. Dhaka: BRAC
BAPPA, Salihu. 1981. "Popular Theatre for Adult Education: Community Action and Social Change". Convergence, 14(2):24-35. Toronto: International Council for Adult Education.
BELTRAN, Luis Ramiro. 1975. Social Structure and Rural Development. Communication in Latin Americas The Radiophonic Schools of Colombia. Honolulu: The East West Center.
BOAL, Augusto. 1979. Theatre of the Oppressed. New York: Urizen Books.
BROKENSHA, David W.; D.M. Warren and O. Werner. 1980. Indigenous Knowledge Systems and Development. Washington: University Press of America.
CERHA, Jarco. 1967. Selective Mass Communication. Stockholm: Norstedf and Soner.
COULSON, Andrew. 1977. "Agricultural Policies in Mainland Tanzania". Review of African Political Economy, 10: p.80. London: Onyx Press.
FRASER, Colin. 1981. "Video for Farmer Training: Training for Agriculture and Rural Development". FAO Economic and Social Development Series, 24:121-128. Rome: FAO.
FREIRE, Paulo. 1970. The Pedagogy of the Oppressed. New York: Penguin Press.
FUGLESANG, Andreas. 1973. Applied Communication in Developing Countries. Uppsala: The Dag Hammarskjold Foundation.
FUGLESANG, Andreas. 1982. About Understanding: Ideas and Observations on Cross-cultural Communication. Uppsala: -The Dag Hammarskjold Foundation.
FUGLESANG, Andreas. 1984. "The Myth of People's Ignorance". Development Dialogue 1/2:42-62. Uppsala: The Dag Hammarskjold Foundation.
FUGLESANG, Andreas and Dale Chandler. 1985. Search for Process. Reports from a project on Methods and Media in Community Participation. Vol. I - a report; Vol. II - a collection of case studies; Vol. III - a selected bibliography. Uppsala: The Dag Hammarskjold Foundation.
FUGLESANG, Andreas and Dale Chandler. 1 986. Participation as Process: What We Can Learn from Grameen Bank, Bangladesh. Oslo: NORAD, The Norwegian Ministry of Development Cooperation.
GRAMEEN BANK. 1986. Grameen Bank: A Bank for the Poor. Dhaka: Grameen Bank.
KIDD, Ross. 1982. "Popular Theatre and Popular Struggle in Kenya: The Story of the Kamiriithu Community Educational and Cultural Centre". Theatrework, 2(6):47-61. Minnesota.
KIDD, Ross and Nat Coletta. 1980. Tradition for Development: Indigenous Structures and Folk Media in Non-formal Education. Bonn: German Foundation for International Development.
KLAPPER, Joseph T. 1960. The Effects of Mass-Communicatlon. New York: The Free Press of Glencoe.
LAZARSFELDT, P.F. and E. Katz. 1955. Personal Influence. New York: The Free Press of Glencoe.
LEANER, Daniel. 1958. The Passing of Traditional Society. New York: The Free Press of Glencoe.
LEANER, Daniel, ed. 1967. Communication and Change in the Developing Countries. Honolulu: The East West Center.
PYE, Lucien W., ed. 1963. Communications and Political Development. New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
RAHMAN, Atiur. 1986. Consciousness Raising Efforts of Grameen Bank. Working Paper No. 3, Grameen Bank Evaluation Project. Dhaka: Bangladesh Institute of Development Studies.
RAHMAN, Rushiman Islam. 1986. Impact of Grameen Bank on the Situation of the Poor Rural Women. Working Paper No. 1, Grameen Bank Evaluation Project. Dhaka: Bangladesh Institute of Development Studies.
ROGERS , Everett M. 1 967. Diffusion of Innovations. R New York: The Free Press of Glencoe.
SCHRAMM, Wilbur. 1 964. Mass Media and National Development. California: Standford University Press.
YUNUS, Muhammad. 1982. Grameen Bank Project in Bangladesh: A Poverty Focussed Rural Development Programme. Dhaka: Grameen Bank.
WESTERGAARD, Kirsten. 1983. "Rural Pauperization: Its Impact on the Economic Role and Status of Rural Women in Bangladesh". In HUQ, J. et al., eds. Women in Bangladesh: Some Socio-economic Issues. Seminar Papers Volume I. Dhaka: Women for Women.
back contents
