<title>Pioneering a new approach to communication in rural areas: the Peruvian experience with video for training at grassroots level. Pioneering a new approach to communication in rural areas: a Peruvian </title>
<section>1</section>
contents next
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This Case Study forms part of a series which the Development Support Communication Branch, of FAO's Information Division, is preparing. It will be used as background material for an Expert Consultation on development Communication which FAO plans to hold in 1987, as well as for general information and briefing on communication activities in the field which seem to be of special interest and potential value to rural development and communication specialists.
The FAO and the author wish to express their gratitude to the Peruvian authorities, and in particular to the staff of CESPAC, for the invaluable assistance and support they provided during the drafting stages of this paper. Any errors or misrepresentations that may remain are the fault of the author, who is Colin Fraser of Agrisystems, Vie B. Croce 143, Rome, Italy.
Rome, January 1987.
INTRODUCTION
The attitudes, knowledge, and skills of rural people are major factors in development, especially in the poorer areas of the Third World. Through no fault of their own, rural people often lack the basic education and the understanding of concepts, the confidence and self-esteem, that would allow them to set about modifying their reality; and it is hardly surprising, therefore, that they often seem to fall back on fatalism as a refuge from their own incapacity.
It follows that grassroot-level training is a sine qua non of rural development. The problem is in finding ways of carrying out such training effectively and economically on the massive scale required. In theory, it is the task of the extension services in most countries, but it i' a sad fact that, for the most part, extension services have not been able to measure up to the needs. Too often, extension cervices are understaffed, undertrained, and unsupported by the facilities they need, such as transport.
It was in the quest for solutions to the problems of grassroot information and training that Peru, in the mid-1970s, embarked on a course that led to the most extensive experience yet in the use of video in rural areas of a Third World country. More than 1,000 video programmes of about 20-minutes' duration each have been made, and they have been used with more than 150,000 farmers. More than 150 Peruvians have been trained in the production and use of video programmes for rural development, and a further 200 have been trained in the use only of the programmes.
These achievements were not realized easily: they are the fruit of arduous work, of vision, and of tenacity -- some would say stubborness -- in the face of aversion, opposition, and setbacks over the years. The very survival of the initiative was at stake on many occasions, and never has the Project had the support it really needed in terms of resources, not to mention the moral support that was often lacking too.
However, the greatest testimony to the pioneering work done in Peru is that a number of other countries have embarked on similar projects to use video in rural areas for information and training. Many of these countries have received technical assistance from Peruvians in launching such activities; for the Peruvian Project has established procedures and methods that ensure the constructive use of video for rural development, and help to avoid the mistakes so often made with the medium - mistakes which lead to valuable equipment gathering dust in cupboards, or broken down for want of a small repair.
The Peruvian Project in question is known as CESPAC (Centro de Servicios de Pedagogia Audiovisual para la Capacitacion). This, like other names in Spanish invented by the Project, cannot be precisely translated into English, a problem which will be discussed later. However, in broad terms, it means, "Centre for Audio-Visual Services for Training".
Whatever the problems of translating its name properly, CESPAC has made a- vital contribution to communication for rural development. Nowadays, the use of video for information and training in rural areas is a widely accepted proposition, and more and more governments and development agencies are becoming involved in using it. Ten years ago, this was certainly not so; the work of CESPAC has been instrumental in changing the situation.
This Case Study sets out to document the origins of CESPAC, its methodology, and its operations, reporting as objectively as possible on its strengths and weaknesses.
AUTHOR'S NOTE
I would like to comment on the way the information in this Case Study will be presented. The activities that ultimately developed into CESPAC began some 12 years ago. Obviously, such a long-lived project must go through many different phases in its development. For example, its institutional framework may change, as may the approach and methodology, the equipment used, and so on. In fact, changes. in all these areas have taken place since Peru first began to use video in rural areas.
I could either present the large amount of information in chronological order, a" a history of this period of time in which the video-based rural training activities were developed, or I could present the material by subject-matter, e.g. the training of national staff, the equipment used, the institutional framework, etc.
The Case Study might make easier reading if it were written as a history, a blow-by-blow account of what happened from year 1 up to the present, but I consider that if this Study is to have usefulness as a work of reference, it is preferable to present the CESPAC experience by subject-matter divisions. This will make it possible for anyone interested in a specific aspect of the project, e.g. the equipment used, to' find the information required in one section rather than to have to delve through the whole document in search of all the references to equipment.
Material for this Case Study has been drawn from a rich documentation. Firstly, when there was still widespread criticism of the Project's methodology, FAO's Development Support Communication Branch, which was backstopping the Project from Rome, organized a Technical Analysis that was carried out by independent consultants in 1978. They reported on the training of Peruvian staff in the use of the video-based methodology, on the appropriateness or otherwise of the communication technology being used, and on the usefulness of the methodology among the rural communities who were supposed to benefit from it. Their findings were very positive overall, and this helped to silence the opposition and let the Project continue to develop its methodology and operations.
In 1980, a Feasibility Study of the Project was prepared to assist the Government to decide whether to make it into a Special Investment Project. This Feasibility Study is in 6 volumes and totals over 580 pages. Then, in 1984, an analysis of the Project's activities, and future projections for it (totalling some 200 pages) was prepared as a basis for possible international loan financing. Furthermore, there have also been two Project Mid-Term Reviews, and I was fortunate to participate in both. Then there are all the Project Director's Progress Reports, and the regular Government/UNDP/FAO Tripartite Review Reports. And finally, there were two evaluations sponsored by Swiss bilateral aid (COTESU) in 1985 and 1986.
In fact, the main problem facing me in writing this Case Study was what to leave out. In the interest of readability and usefulness, I have attempted a ruthless synthesis of the information, and I have not provided reference sources since they are almost exclusively the documentation mentioned above.
A point should be made about the name of the Project: it began operations within the Communication Department of an agrarian reform institution, and it we. later named CEPAC, before becoming CESPAC, as it is today. The background to these change" will be explained in the section of this study dealing with the institutional framework. However, for the sake of simplicity, the activities will be described simply as the Project, or CESPAC, regardless of the time in CESPAC'. history that is being covered.
PERU AND ITS AGRICULTURE
In order to understand the context of CESPAC's origins and work, we have to examine briefly the physical and human geography of Peru, and the social, economic, and political realities of the country.
Peru, which has existed as an independent state since 1824, covers a land area of 1,285,215 sq. kms. (This makes it more than twice the size of France -- 551,000 sq. kms). It has a population of about l9 million. It is estimated that about 45% of these people are pure Indian, and that over 85% of the population has some Indian blood.
Some 5.5 million people live in Lima, and it is estimated that, overall, more than 60% of the population now lives in urban agglomerations. This strong tendency towards urbanization is likely to continue.
The country i. divided into three distinct geographical zones: the Costa, the Sierra, and the Selva. The Costa is made up of the coastal plain. It is a desert area with lest rain than most of the Sahara, and 80 it can only produce crops under irrigation. The water for this comes from the rivers that flow down from the Andes to the east and cross the Costa on their way to the Pacific Ocean.
Despite its aridity, the Costa (with the capital, Lima) is the main population, economic, and agricultural area of the country. There were, until relatively recently, come very large latifundia belonging to wealthy families who were often conspicuous by their absence; they spent much of their time and money in capital. of the world that offered a better climate and more amusement than Lima.
The Sierra consists of the Andean chain that runs like a backbone down the country. The jumble of ridges end valleys that make up the foothills, at an altitude of up to about 3,500 metres, provides climatic conditions that are reasonably favorable to agriculture; and the soils, many of which are of volcanic origin, are fertile. The Andean Indians who live here cultivate maize, potatoes, fruits and vegetable., but of course there are erosion problems on the elopes.
During the days of the Incan civilisation, there were extensive systems of terraces, but these have fallen into disrepair. Ecologically, it is a fragile environment, and it provides only a meagre living for its inhabitants.
The Altiplano -- the High Plateau -- of the Andes, at an altitude of about 4,000 metres and more, has been called the "roof of the world". Here, under a sky made crystal by the rarefied atmosphere, where the blinding sun caste black shadows and sears with its heat, while the air is still bitingly cold, lies an immense landscape of melancholy beauty. The Indians, hunched in their ponchos to protect them from the piercing winds that flatten the grass as they sweep across the treeless expanse, tend their flocks of llamas and alpacas, and wrest some lean crops from the unhelpful land.
The Indians. here are miserably poor and malnourished. Their squat form in part result" from this malnutrition, and their barrel chests have developed to Meet the need for extra lung capacity in the thin air. These people stoically withstand the cold and misery that are the companions of their existence, and at the same time, they maintain an innate dignity which is untouched by their poverty.
The Selva is the Amazon basin to the east of the Andes. It is divided into two parts, the High Selva and the Low Selva. The High Selva is the part lying at an altitude of between about 350 and 1,000 metres. It is an area of high rainfall and abundant vegetation. The main crop. are rice, cocoa, coffee, maize and coca.
The Low Selva is made up of Amazon rain forest. More than 20 languages are spoken by the indigenous people, who live mainly by hunting, fishing, and some slash-and-burn agriculture. There is also some rubber production, and since the mid-70s, oil has been extracted. Forest exploitation is, of course, an important activity. (The vast forests of the Selva mainly account for the fact that well over half of Peru's land area is forested).
As a whole, the Selva is the great Peruvian frontier. Its isolation behind the barrier of the Andes, which cuts it off from the main urban centres, has kept it very sparsely populated. But it has abundant resources, and this has led to settlement programmes in recent years. However, as in so many tropical areas, the soils are lateritic and very fragile; they therefore need especially careful management if they are not to lose their limited fertility and erode.
The agricultural sector in Peru has been declining in the last decades. In 1961, it accounted for 25.6% of GNP and employed 52.8% of the labour force; by 1972, it wan producing only 15.2% of GNP and employing only 40.6% of the labour force, and the tendency continues. This, set against a population growth rate of about 2.5%, has led to a grave situation. For example, cultivated land per inhabitant was about 0.21 ha. ten years ago whereas today it is only about 0.16 ha. Peru, in fact, has one of the very lowest ratios of cultivated land to inhabitant in the whole of Latin America. Only about 2.9% of the country's total land area is under the plough.
Furthermore, nutritional levels. have declined seriously: in the city of Lima in 1972, the lowest income groups had a per capita daily calory intake of 1,934 (against an estimated requirement of 2,492 calories per day); by 1979, the daily calory intake among this same group had dropped to a mere 1,486. Protein intake per day for the same years dropped from 52.7 grammgrammeses per capita to 41.3 grammes (against an estimated requirement of 56.2 grammes).
Of course, nutritional levels do not depend only on the simple availability of food: money to buy it is just as important. But the figures do show a decrease in per capita agricultural production of about l.l% annually in recent years.
As mentioned earlier, until quite recent times, the main agricultural lands of the Costa were often in the hands of wealthy absentee landlords. Then, during the first presidency of Belaunde-Terry, from 1963 to 1968, a first agrarian reform law was passed. This set out to make more effective use of land and allowed the expropriation of unused or misused farms. By 1966, over 200,000 ha. had been distributed to farm labourers.
This agrarian reform initiative was given a strong boost after the Belaunde government was overthrown in 1968 by the military: Gen. Velasco Alvarado presided over a junta that began a vigorous programme of "combining public and private ownership of the economy", and it also introduced radical agrarian reform measures.
The large land holdings, especially in the Cotta, were taken over and turned into production cooperatives, with the original workers becoming the cooperative member. These members were asked to elect their managers, and quite frequently, they elected the person who had been the estate manager for the wealthy landlord. This is not as paradoxical as it may seem at first sight: the undertrained, often illiterate, workers realized that among their ranks there was no one with the managerial capacity to run the cooperative, so they chose the ex-manager, however much they might detest him.
In the Sierra, the basis for the reform we. the Sociedad Agraria di Interes Social, or SAIS, (roughly translated as Agrarian Company for Social Benefit). These were an amalgamation of what had been large estates with the traditional Indian communities (comunidades). They grouped small producers into forms of association that would be mutually beneficial. The managers of the SAIS were appointed by the State.
CESPAC had its distant origins in this energetic agrarian reform programme, as we shall see in the next section.
THE ORIGINS OF CESPAC
When the populist government of General Velasco took power and launched its sweeping agrarian reform in 1969, it was realized that the breaking up of large holdings, and the creation of cooperatives, would require follow-up and support. Otherwise, agricultural production- would drop, a. had happened following unsupported agrarian reform programmes in other countries.
One step in the support process was to create a Centro Nacional de Capacitacion y Investicacion pare la Reforma Agraria (CENCIRA), which can be translated as National Training and Research Centre for Agrarian Reform. The Government was interested in obtaining technical assistance for agrarian reform, and an FAO agrarian reform specialist, who was working in Chile, helped in the fomulation of both CENCIRA itself and of a UNDP/FAO project to support it.
This project, PER/71/544, began operation. in 1971. It was a project of broad institutional support to CENCIRA, and it included advisers in such areas as research, rural socioeconomics, and marketing.
But it also included a component for development communication, for it was clear that there we. an enormous orientation and training task to be accomplished if the beneficiaries of the agrarian reform programme were to take beat advantage of the opportunities offered. For in human terms, the agrarian reform programme brought with it enormous changes: farm workers of generally rather low educational level, accustomed only to obeying orders, were being expected to play a part in the running and working of the cooperatives of which they were now members. Their perception of their own role in the economic life of the country would need to change, and they would have to acquire new levels of knowledge and skills. The Communication Department of CENCIRA, and the component of the UNDP/FAO project designed to strengthen it, were created to play a part in the orientation, mobilization, and training of rural people.
Initially, there were two FAO communication specialists attached to CENCIRA. One was to advise in the area of communication planning, while the other was primarily a film specialist, but with broad experience in other audio-visual media too.
At about the same time that PER/71/544 was setting under way, a similiar project in Chile wee providing assistance to ICIRA, the Chilean equivalent of CENCIRA.
ICIRA, under the Allende government in Chile, was also seized of the importance of communication within agrarian reform programmes and was preparing to try video recording a. a medium likely to prove useful in the communication process. The idea was that video could be used to transfer ideas and information in a multiplicity of directions. For example, if the Government was considering a development scheme in an area, portable video could record the ideas and opinion. of the local population regarding such an initiative; or Government ideas and proposals could be conveyed to the area first. At whichever end the communication flow began, a feedback could be assured by video, and thus a dialogue could be engaged. {Such feedback processes are of course the essential difference between information and communication). It was also reasoned that video could be used to transfer information and successful experience horizontally between communities, as well as for orientation and
training.
Nor should it be forgotten that this was shortly after the famous Fogo Island experience in Canada. In that experience, the Challenge for Change unit of the Canadian National Film Board, and the Extension Department of Memorial University, St John's, Newfoundland, used firstly film and then video to help stimulate a remarkable community revival.
A series of films and video tapes were made with the local population to show problems and prospects as seen through the eyes of the people themselves.
The films were shown to meetings all over the Island as a starting point for discussions. They proved to be a great stimulus, and they helped people to a clearer realization of the issues facing them, and of their options and alternatives. As a result, and with the assistance of community development workers, they decided on, and carried through, an action plan which revived the community.
Such open-ended, or non-manipulative, use of media for participatory research and planning is the heady dream which all dedicated development communicators hold in the back of their minds as the ultimate goal. However, it does require a political environment which will guarantee a sympathetic hearing from the authorities once the messages begin to arrive from the community level.
While ICIRA was researching, formulating its ideas and plans and awaiting its video equipment, the FAO international Project Manager of CENCIRA visited Chile and learned of the video initiative. He was impressed with the thinking behind it and asked whether some CENCIRA-staff could participate in the first training course that ICIRA was going to run to train Chilean staff in the use of video. Thus, 1O Peruvians attended that first course in Chile.
The first head of CENCIRA, Col. Dante Castro, was mainly interested in using video for what is called institutional communication, that is to say for information, orientation, and training within or between institutions. Thus a first order for video equipment was placed in late 1974. But it was Col. Dante Castro's successor, Col. Max Velarde, who began the recruitment of personnel and organized the availability of a building and an operational budget to launch Peru on its path towards pioneering the use of video for rural development.
contents next
<section>2</section>
back contents next
THE CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
The conceptual considerations that follow were not all thought out in the early days of the activities that led to CESPAC's present methodology. Some of them were developed over time, and on the basis of experience. In fact, one of the principles of the project has always been that of continuous experimentation. The information below tries to provide an overall view of the guiding precepts and conditions that governed the development of the methodology, and of its main conceptual features.
Firstly, it is important to note that the Spanish word "capacitation", which is invariably used in the context of the methodology that was ultimately developed, has a broader meaning than the word "training" in English. While training has connotation. that limit it to the strict improvement of technical skills, "capacitation" holds notions of generally enhancing a person's capacity to improve his or her condition of life. In direct translation from a phrase used by the Project staff, "Capacitacion is helping people to take action to change their reality".
Naturally, enhancing technical skills is part of "capacitation", but implicit too is attitudinal change, or increased self-awareness, leading to action which may have nothing to do with technical matters.
So, in this sense, we are back to the Fogo Process described in the previous section, or what the famous Brazilian educationalist, Paolo Freire, called "conscientization", yet another word for which there is no proper English equivalent. In the essence, it means helping people to an increased state of awareness of their situation, and of self-confidence, so that they are stimulated to examine their problems objectively and adopt options for resolving them. It can be thought of as a first step down the path to self-help and towards people assuming responsibility for their own destiny.
It was also realized over time, and as CESPAC became more and more involved with the emarginated peoples of the Sierra, in their primarily subsistence farming, that the methodology should take fully into account traditional peasant knowledge and practice. This traditional, empirical and historical knowledge, which had at least provided survival over the centuries, could not, and should not, be underestimated and cast aside in a drive for modernization. Rather, this peasant knowledge needed to have rational, scientific and modern knowledge judiciously grafted onto it. The grassroot training system needed to facilitate this. It also needed to address the peasant in his own language and with images reflecting his own reality.
Further factors that conditioned the approach concerned the circumstances in Peru at the time. As mentioned in the previous section, the Peruvian agrarian reform process called for massive orientation and training of rural people to prepare them for their new roles and to modernize the rural sector generally.
CENCIRA had a total staff in its early years of only about 180 people, and only 60 of these were technical people who had the knowledge and capacity to be trainers. Most of the training they did was for Ministry of Agriculture staff, and in any case, such a limited number of people could do very little at the grass-root level.
The task facing the Communication Department of CENCIRA and its international advisers was to develop a methodology that could inform, motivate, and train rural people on a massive scale. More precisely, the objectives of the methodolgy would be to transfer to the rural producer and his family information aimed at helping them to make better use of natural resources and farm inputs; to improve the quality of rural life, including those qualities connected with health, education, and rural employment. At the same time, the communication system should benefit field-level technicians, particularly those working in extension, by providing them with a source of standardized technical information emanating from the research and academic sectors, by helping them expand the quality and quantity of their outreach, and by providing them with information that would in effect constitute a continuous in-service updating of their knowledge.
The extension services in Peru, as in so many countries, were short-staffed, under-trained, and under-equipped. Furthermore, their approach tended to be that of one-way transmitters of information in an autocratic "top-down" manner. It was not possible to rely on them alone to carry out the massive training task required.
The training approach had to take into account the high levels of illiteracy in rural Peru, estimated at 42% for men and 67% for women. This militated in favour of an audio-visual system.
Whatever communication media were to be used, they had to measure up to the specific requirements of Peru. In other words, they needed to be at an appropriate level of technology for the country to assimilate; they had to be economically viable in conditions as poor as those in Peru; they had to be utilisable even in remote area. and withstand the rigours of transport over poor roads, and so on.
The contents of programmes needed to be based on the peasants' needs; in other words, if whatever was made available to them in the way of information and training was to make any impact, it should have "utility value" that the audience could easily recognize.
Related to this was the need to provide information that was obviously relevant to the locality in which it was being used, or, in the jargon of communication specialists, which was "locally specific". For it is known that audio-visual materials made in locations which show different conditions or types of people from those in the area where the materials are being used have less impact, even if the content has utility value, than those made in the sane or in a similar environment. This is especially so among groups of low educational level whose limited knowledge and experience make it more difficult for them to perceive the relevance to their own situation of information originating elsewhere.
However, this need for "local specificity" was in direct contradiction with the need to provide training on a massive scale. In fact, the tug-of-war between reaching large numbers of rural people and providing materials specific to very local needs is inescapable.
All these needs and considerations were finally englobed in a methodology called "pedagogia audiovisual", the term used in the title CESPAC. It seems that in Spanish, "pedagogy" has a much broader meaning than it does in English. In fact, the difference between the two words is not unlike the difference that exists between "capacitation" and "training". "Pedagogy" in Spanish covers a general teaching/learning process, whereas in English it in usually taken to mean the art, science, or profession of teaching in a formal education context. For this reason, the direct translation "audio-visual pedagogy", apart from sounding absurd, does not convey the thinking that exists behind the Spanish version. So it cannot be used in English to describe the CESPAC methodology, even if we are prepared to stomach its pomposity.
Even more difficult is the proper English term for the people who work with this methodology. In Spanish, they are called "Pedagogos audiovisuales", that is to say "audio-visual pedagogues". But in English, the word "pedagogue" has the strong derogatory connotation of someone who teaches pedantically, so we are faced with yet another terminology problem. There seems little alternative but to call thee video programme producers, but this is not fully satisfactory because they are in fact farmer trainers at the same time. The author can only plea for the reader's patience and understanding, and at the same time state his refusal to use "pedagogis audiovisual" or "pedagogos audiovisualen" in anything other than the original Spanish, and between inverted commas. (However, the terms do translate into French satisfactorily).
"Pedagogía Audiovisual" is based on the saying "What I hear, I forget. What I see, I remember. What I do, I know." Farmer training "packages" have been developed on the basis of that saying, as we shall see in greater detail in a later section. Suffice it to say here that it it made up of video programmes, written materials, interpersonal discussions, and practical work.
An underlying principle of the methodology is to "recuperate, produce, conserve, and reproduce peasant knowledge", but adding modern scientific knowledge and practice to it when appropriate. Video is an ideal medium for creating open communication circuits for this purpose, circuits in which information can enter at any point and travel in any direction. For example, recordings made with peasants in the field showing an aspect of traditional peasant knowledge and practice can be shown to technicians who can comment, or they can be shown to other peasants. Or the process can begin with a technical proposal for peasants to comment on, and so on.
Schematically, the arrangement can be presented as below:
In effect, a communication bridge is established between all those playing an active role in grassroot-level training, and it is important to note that there is no hierarchical order. Indeed, the best available information in the teaching package can reach the grassroot level directly, whereas in most normal extension systems, information is filtered though several layers of the service before it reaches the grassroot level, with all the inherent risks of distortion.
Of course, the question of costs is of vital importance. As will be detailed later, the methodology specifically stresses artisanal production of training materials, with sub-professional equipment, to keep costs in line with the possibilities of a developing country.
Finally, having outlined the conceptual framework of the methodology, it should be mentioned that CESPAC staff talk about their "Theoretical Model" and their "Practical Model". The "Theoretical Model" is what they aspire to achieve, the ideal implementation of the methodology. However, real constraints and day-to-day problems often mire them in a "Practical Model", that is to say, what can be achieved in practice. CESPAC staff, carried away by enthusiasm, sometimes talk of their "Theoretical Model" as though it were a completed reality, leading to some confusion or incredulity among listeners familiar with the Project's activities! Of course, perfect implementation of the methodology is the objective towards which they strive; the goal is not unrealistic at all, but conditions in Peru are far from easy, and the methodology is still young.
THE COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY
The Equipment Used
When the Communication Department of CENCIRA and the FAO project staff agreed to purchase video equipment, it had certainly not been decided that the communication activities would centre on the use of this medium. In fact, a multi-media approach was in force and slide sets were still being produced in the period after the first video equipment arrived. Some 90 slide sets in total were produced by the Project.
With regard to other media, it was decided that, even though CENCIRA had film equipment, 16mm or 8mm film would be inappropriate in view of the need to process film outside Peru, and due to the very high cost of film production in General.
Printed materials were also an important part of the communication activities, and an FAO adviser worked with CENCIRA for an extended period to help with this aspect.
It is clear that, even in those early days, there was a strong feeling among Project staff that the Chilean video experience, which was curtailed by political events, should be reactivated in Peru and enlarged upon. The previous experience of the FAO adviser who had been in Chile, and his still earlier experience in educational broadcast and closed-circuit TV in Chile and in Argentina, certainly had a strong influence in favour of video.
Discussions among Project staff led them to the conclusion that in the "hors, medium, and long term, electronic recording and playback of images and sound, i.e. video, would offer greater advances and possibilities than the more traditional methods using light-sensitive chemicals, i.e. photography and its derivatives.
Time has proven this thinking to have been absolutely correct; for the developments in the video field in the last 15 years have been startling. We only have to remember that in 1972, when ICIRA began working with video in Chile, equipment for use outside the studio could only record in black and white; it used 1-inch wide tape on open reels; a typical camera weighed 5 kgs, and the separate recorder over 20 kgs; both required power from mains or from a generator; a reel of tape provided about 30 minutes of recording time; and the combined cost of camera and recorder was about $8,000. The manufacturers declared it "portable", but those who had to use it in the field jokingly called it "transportable".
Compare this with the Video 8 system launched in 1985, only 13 yearn later: it has camera and recorder mounted in a single unit; it records in colour, and with a quality that would have defied belief only a few years ago; it runs off a rechargeable battery and uses a tape 8mm wide in a cassette which provides 2 hours of recording time. The weight of the whole unit, complete with battery and cassette, is just 2.18 kg, and it costs about $1,200. Furthermore, similar progress in miniaturization and lowering of cost has been taking place in almost every video format.
Nevertheless, it was not given to everyone to share the Project staff's vision of the future, and there was virulent criticism from many quarters at the mere notion that something as sophisticated as video could be successfully and routinely used in rugged rural conditions.
Faced with such attacks, and with the accusation that they were holding a partisan position in favour of video, Project staff had difficulty providing chapter and verse for their belief in the future of video. They therefore tended to fall back on justifications that hardly stood up to the harsh light of careful examination. For example, they said that peasants preferred the movement video provided over elides, and this is probably true, but there was never any formal research finding to this effect. It was also stated that slide sets were more expensive than video, and it is true that film rawstock and slide copying are expensive compared to the cost of video-tape. But the equipment cost for slides are much lower. And it seems that no proper analysis was ever carried out to examine the possible establishment of a filmstrip laboratory to make multiple copies of slides sets in strip form through an internegative process. In Europe, this cuts the cost of copies to about half
that of making individual elide sets when 50 copies of each are required, and to much less if even more are required.
Notwithstanding these points, it is clear that the Project staff took a correct decision in opting for video, given the objectives and the type of communication work to be done. But it did not seem so to many, and during the endless wrangles that took place in those early days, the contrived justifications did not help to convince people.
Despite their conviction that video would be the beat solution, the first video equipment was purchased in an experimental frame of mind, knowing that it would need to be tested for its suitability, and not knowing which particular models might be the most appropriate.
However, in the period between ICIRA's purchase for Chile of 1-inch so-called portable equipment and the first order for Peru, Sony Corporation had launched its Portapak system. This was indeed portable, and it worked off rechargeable batteries. It used half-inch tape on open reels, and it recorded in black and white. A microphone built into the camera recorded sound. This equipment was of sub-professional quality.
When the equipment first arrived, a specialist came form Sony for one month to help in its installation. This was the only outside assistance in electronic engineering that the Project has ever received.
An early technical problem encountered was in connection with the built-in microphone with its automatic audio levelling system. When recording scenes with a high ambient noise level, or scenes of an activity which was in itself noisy - for example farm machinery repair -- the sound of a person speaking near the microphone was correctly recorded and the ambient- noise pushed into the backgound. But in pauses between words or sentences, the automatic levelling system raised the volume of the ambient sound to that of the last word spoken, making a very uneven and disturbed recording.
From the start, the Project was lucky enough to have two Peruvian and one foreign, but locally resident, electronic engineers working with it. They were able to modify the equipment by eliminating the automatic audio-leveller and incorporating a manual one with a visual indicator in its place. They found the appropriate parts in Lima.
The project did good work with its black and white open-reel equipment, but then the cassette systems and colour video became widely available in 1978. Initially this colour equipment was far more expensive than the black and white, and there was some debate as to whether the project should be allowed to purchase it. (Today, of course, black and white equipment is only made in the form of surveillance cameras, and the price of colour equipment i. lower than black and white once was).
The arrival on the market of the Umatic 3/4-inch colour cassette system with its much improved editing system, as well as its far superior visual quality, opened a new era for the project. Since that time, all programme production has been carried out in the Umatic format. The grade of the equipment is Low Band, that in to say sub-professional, in keeping with the project's emphasis on economy. All colour equipment uses the NTSC standard of North America. It is cheaper to buy than PAL/SECAM, and the standard generally used in Peru is NTSC. There can be no doubt, however, that PAL/SECAM would provide better colour quality, an important consideration when dealing with agricultural topics.
While the technology for field recording, and for editing, presented few difficulties, the question of suitable playback unit. for use in rural areas was more problematic. While the field recording units were battery-operated, as just mentioned, the same was not initially true for the playback units consisting of recorder and monitor. These needed a source of electricity, and the only solution initially, when in the field, was to use generators. However, as has been the experience elsewhere with generators, they gave more trouble than the electronic video equipment. Furthermore, they were expensive to purchase. A solution to this problem was a priority.
It was decided that an inverted would best meet the need; an inverted could take 12-volt Direct Current from a car battery and convert it into the 110-130-volt Alternating Curent required by the equipment.
The Project's electronic engineers began to design and build their own inverted, using component. available on the local market in Lima. The resulting device, which cost only $200 at the time, was a lot cheaper than anything that could be purchased.
The advent of home video recorders using 1/2-inch tape in cassettes, with the Betamax or VHS systems, made field playback easier. There are models that will work directly off 12-volt DC power source, and the recorders are much smaller and lighter than earlier models. However, even with a model that will work off a 12-volt source, the monitor still requires 110 or 220 volts AC if the screen is to be big enough to cater for a large group of viewers. Inverters and 12-volt car or truck batteries have become the standard solution to this problem, both in Peru and elsewhere, so much so that Sony now supplies them. Of course, they can be made even more cheaply on an industrial scale, but CESPAC was the first project to explore this solution.
However, in remote areas without electricity -- and there are many of these in Peru -- there remains the problem of recharging the battery. An average fully charged battery will give about 4 hours of playback time, but there is an increasing tendency for video playback teams to stay in communities for 10 to 14 days at a time in order to cut down on transportation costs. If a vehicle has to come in every few days to bring a freshly charged battery, there is no transportation saving.
In 1986, therefore, a peddle-operated generator for battery recharging was developed. The project staff believe that the willingness of the farmers to recharge a battery by peddling for a period of up to 4 hours will provide an indication of their interest in seeing the video programmes made for them, a sort of ongoing evaluation through feedback!
The technique now used by CESPAC is to record all the material for video programmes on Umatic 3/4-inch equipment, and to do the editing in the same format to take advantage of the rapid and convenient Umatic editing systems. The finished programmes are then copied and reduced onto the 1/2-inch Betamax for use with farming communities.
As this is being written, the Project is experimenting with the new Video 8 format to see whether it could be used in playback units to reduce weight and energy needs. Video-8 provides an image which is almost as good as that of 3/4--inch Umatic.
Durability and Maintenance
As mentioned above, when the Project began to use video in rural areas, there were numerous critics. Most CENCIRA training staff were accustomed to nothing more advanced than blackboard and chalk as training aids. To leap into the video era seemed a folly to some of these people. Of course, many doubted that any serious information and training work could be done with video; in their minds they were probably relegating the medium to the world of entertainment and superficial information associated with TV.
Others stated that the equipment could not survive the rigours of rural use for more than a few weeks, or at best a few months. A particularly serious criticism, however, was that the Project was creating long-term technological dependency on the Japanese electronics industry, and that this was not in the interest of Peru.
The findings of the Technical Analysis, mentioned in the Author's Note and carried out in 1978, confounded all the worst doubters and critics, if they cared to be objectively interested. The consultant found that the equipment was being repaired almost entirely with electronic parts found in Lima. The repairs required were very few, taking into account the intensive use being made of the equipment: for months and years on end, shifts were worked with the limited equipment available, resulting in its working almost around the clock. Despite this, and the rugged conditions in the field, the consultant estimated that the useful life of the equipment would be at leant 5 years; and he hazarded a guess that it might even last 10 years, so good was the condition in which he found it.
His prognostication in thin regard has proven fairly accurate. In fact, there is equipment still at work that is considerably more than 5 years old.
On the other hand, it has emerged clearly that, especially with the playback units, the breakdown rate rapidly increases after 34 years. It is possible to argue that it would be cheaper, at that point, to replace it rather than to go on repairing it. The palyback units are relatively inexpensive, in any case.
The editing equipment is worked for longer hours than any other, and for this reason a High Band editing suite was purchased in 1984. This professional grade equipment is far more robust than the sub-professional equipment which makes up the rest of the editing suites.
Overall the video equipment has proved itself far more reliable than even the optimists expected. The commonest faults occur in the plugs and cables that connect camera to recorder, recorder to monitor, and so on. The constant plugging and unplugging ultimately damages them. For this reason, the Project has developed a special wooden carrying box for the playback units, which now number 115 in Peru. The case allows the recorder, inverted, monitor, and speakers to be carried as a single unit in the case which is divided into compartments for each item. The cables connecting them can remain coupled, thereby avoiding the wear and tear caused by constant plugging and unplugging, and at the same time providing excellent protection from shocks and dust. The only drawback in that the complete unit in its box weighs about 63 kgs, a considerable load even for two people using the large steel lifting handles.
From the very start, the Project has placed great emphasis on proper care and maintenance of the equipment. These aspects are instilled into the Peruvian staff during the training course which prepares them to be trainers of farmers and users of video. There can be no doubt that the successful and relatively trouble-free work with video in the field in Peru stems from this thorough foundation given to all the staff.
In addition, however, there is a very good maintenance unit in the Project. The availability in Peru of people with the basic qualifications to work with electronic apparatus was an advantage that would not be found in every Third World country. Certainly, a Project such as CESPAC must foresee the need for specialised training of maintenance staff in working with the specific type and brand of equipment the project uses. However, it would be too much to expect such a project to train electronic technicians ab initio.
Quantities of Equipment
The quantities of equipment in the Project over the years have been as follow.
Field Recording Units 3 (B & W) 5 (3 B & W, 2 Col.) 9 (Colour)*
Editing Suites 1 2 5*
Field Playback Units 8 45 (B & W & Col.) 115
* One of these is BVU i.e. broadcast quality
back contents next
<section>3</section>
back contents next
THE TRAINING OF PERUVIAN STAFF, THEIR SELECTION AND NUMBERS
Staff Training and Motivation
In formulating its policy for training of national staff, the Project began with the notion that all-round farmer trainers should be generated. Each trainer should be able to determine training needs, formulate a course proposal, develop this into a series of audio-visual programmes, and actually use them in a farmer training situation.
It was also agreed that the production of video-programmes should not follow the normal procedures of film-making, in which every member of the production crew has his or her specialisation as a scriptwriter, cameraman, soundman, editor, or whatever. Instead, the Project staff would be trained so that each of. them could carry out any or all of the functions, from prior research, to scripting, field recording, editing, and use of the programmes with farmers.
This approach has been dubbed that of "non-specialization", and it has been applied in all the projects using video for rural development with which FAO has been associated. It is probably true that non-specialization does not give the visual and audio quality that would be achieved using production teams of specialists, but more important than such quality is the efficiency and speed of production gained by halting people who can turn their hand to any part of the production process.
The Project staff consider that this approach, coupled with the use of sub-professional equipment, leads to an "artisanal" level of production that is in tune with the economic necessities of the country and the needs of the rural population.
Another principle agreed from the start was that the training courses should be based on the approach of "learning while doing". Thus, the trainees would begin working with video from the first day of the course, and in general, the mornings would be devoted to theoretical matters and the afternoons to practical work.
The first course began in late 1975, with 27 trainees, and lasted 7 months. It did not turn out well because, despite the declared emphasis on "learning while doing", it contained far too much theory. In effect, it was over-ambitious in trying to provide a theoretical and conceptual framework for the production and use of audio-visual training means in rural areas of Peru, as well as providing the basic technical knowledge required. It covered such subjects as semiotics, rural sociology, and linguistics, in addition to the more directly relevant fields of training methodology, pedagogical theory, communication, and technical fields such as lighting, basic electrics and electronics, etc.
The course turned into something of a fiasco; its theoretical and idealogical parts led to rambling and sterile discussions which were an intellectual orgy for some university graduates, and at the same time, deeply frustrating for the more practically minded; for all the trainees, it was daunting in the sheer quantity of the material covered, in its duration, and in the intensity of the work schedule.
The normal working hours forseen for the course were from 08.30 hours to 19.00 hours, with appropriate breaks during the day, but there was a deliberate strategy to make people work longer hours. An evening practical session was scheduled each day to cover some specific technical field, and of course, the enthusiastic trainees stayed on for it, often working until midnight or beyond.
Quite apart from learning a great deal in those long days, there were secondary benefits for the Project. The first was that the trainees developed a strong work ethic and a disregard for normal working hours, a prerequisite once in the field because farmers might want courses at any time from dawn to late night. Secondly, these long hours had the effect of introducing a natural selection process: trainees who were not sufficiently motivated or interested would drop out in the first week or so because they were unwilling to accept the work rhythm of the Project.
It is worth commenting on that work rhythm. One of the most remarkable things about the Project has always been the dedication and hard work of its staff. This may result, in part, from the influence of the FAO International Project Director: an independent observer once wrote that he had "an uncanny gift for motivating people". This is certainly true, but it should also be mentioned that the Peruvian who was the National Project Director for the first 10 years of the Project's life was also a truly remarkable person and a natural leader.
But perhaps the fact that the staff were pioneering a new field, and that there was a lot of opposition to what they were trying to do, also helped to create a rare degree of staff unity and enthusiasm, as well as total dedication to the work. They spend long periods living in primitive rural areas, usually apart from their families; they often put in days of 12-14 hours, and show a unique commitment to their work with peasant communities, despite their very low pay.
The courses that followed that first, and rather unsatisfactory one, have been much more practical in their orientation, and the theoretical subject-matter covered has been more directly related to the farmer training methodology developed by the Project. A training manual was also produced by the Project as an aid to standardizing the course material for the future.
Over the years, the courses have been shortened to the point where it is now considered that 3 months of basic training are sufficient. However, these three months are followed by a period of up to nine months during which the new staff work under the close supervision of more experienced people. During this period, they are producing video programmes for farmer training, but it requires a total of about one year of training and working under supervision before the average new recruit has acquired all the skills required. Of course, we are not referring here only to the skills needed to produce video programmes that are satisfactory from the visual and audio viewpoint: they must be satisfactory too as training programmes for farmers, and this implies a proper structuring and presentation of the information in the programme. Hence the long period of apprenticeship before producers are considered fully fledged.
During certain periods of the Project's life, there has also been the need to train people who will be the users of the video playback units and tapes with the farming community. Such training goes well beyond the mere handling of the equipment: it also covers an insight into the whole methodology developed by the Project in the context of agricultural and rural development in Peru, and provides guidance on how to make best use of it, how to conduct the discussion period and practical work that form part of the methodology, and so on. Theme courses vary in duration from about 2 to 6 weeks according to the needs and background of the trainees. Over 200 people have been trained in this aspect of the work.
Staff Selection
The Project staff were drawn from two basic sources. Some of them already worked for the public sector and were transferred to the Project, whereas others were recruited especially. In both cases, none of the people had any experience of farmer training or the use of video, though a few had agricultural backgrounds. The Project had no say in the selection of those assigned to it, but for the new recruits, university graduates were in the majority. Most of them had degrees in some aspect of the social sciences, but this was not a formal requirement. Above all, those responsible for the selection were looking for young people with evident interest in the type of work, and with the sort of social opinions that would make them happy to work with the underprivileged. But there were no hard and fast rules and one of the best audio-visual trainers was an ex-driver from the Project.
It is a fact that the Project has never been able to develop a satisfactory selection process for its staff, especially bearing in mind the need for people with an understanding of peasant values, perceptions, language, and culture. A logical solution, which has been suggested on more than one occasion during the Project's life, would be to train farmers and send them back to work among their peers. But this has been possible in very few cases; in fact only 6 farmers have become qualified producers and users of video programmes; and among the 200 people trained in the use only of the methodology, 14 were farmers. One reason for the inability to recruit farmers is that there are many unemployed graduates who have priority.
Staff Resources
Since the Project began, it has trained about 150 people as video producers and users -- "Pedagogos Audiovisuales". Graduates of earlier courses have been the trainers for all course" subsequent to the first. This strong tendency towards "nationalising" the Project as soon as possible has always been a strong point in the Project's favour. It has had a number of beneficial effects, especially in terms of morale.
But just as important is that it has been a factor in helping to retain trained staff in the Project, for FAO follows a deliberate policy of using them as consultants in other countries. The extra revenue from being a consultant for a few weeks has been a considerable element in balancing personal budgets and fleshing out the pitifully low salaries paid in the Peruvian public sector. (More detail on salary levels will be found in the section of this document on the Institutional and Financial Factors). Furthermore, there can be no doubt that these Peruvian consultants, most of them young, have been very well received in other countries: as people from another developing country, they have enjoyed high credibility as promoters of, and trainers in, a video-based methodology that they themselves have fully mastered.
Despite the inducements and the generally high morale in the Project, however, there has been a fairly high turnover of staff and today only 6 of the original 27 trained in that first course remain.
The staffing levels since 1976 have been as follows:
Programme Producers/Users (Pedagogs audiovisuelles) Auxiliary staff Local consultants Int. advisers
It is interesting to note the slow increase over the years in the Auxiliary Staff, that is to say administrators, secretaries, drivers, guards, and cleaners. Unfortunately, these add to the overall cost of the Project and therefore reflect on the ultimate coats in the field, but it is probably impossible to expect that, in a Third World country today, there will not be pressure to provide employment, whether the jobs filled are strictly necessary or not.
back contents next
<section>4</section>
back contents next
THE PRODUCTION OF VIDEO AND OTHER MATERIALS AND THEIR USE WITH FARMERS
The Video Programmes
As mentioned in the Introduction to this Case Study, the Project has produced almost a thousand video programmes of some 20 minutes duration each, and has used them with about 150,000 farmers. This is a considerable achievement, and this section will cover the modus operandi of the Project in this area.
Firstly, it should be noted that the Project activities aim to meet the needs of farmers by researching their information and training needs with them before deciding what materials to produce. The Project also tries to be sensitive to their cultural values and perceptions when planning and producing the materials. However, there are varying opinions as to how much success has been achieved in this aspect of the work. Most of the Project staff claim that it is a routine matter to involve the farming communities in all stages of planning the production of materials. Perhaps, as mentioned earlier, it is a matter of confusion between the "Theoretical Model" i.e. what is being aimed at, and the "Practical Model" i.e. what is actually being achieved under the prevailing constraints.
Be this as it may, many outside observers have commented that there should be much greater farmer involvement in the production process. An objective analysis would almost certainly show that there has not been enough farmer involvement hitherto. This is not because the Project is unaware of the need for it, but rather because the Project has been under such premature to produce materials -- just to ensure its survival -- that it has not been possible to pay the due attention to this issue. (The section of this document devoted to infrastructural and financial matters provides more detailed information on the difficulties that the Project has undergone).
Few of the video producers have specialised training in the subject matter of the programmes they produce. The Project therefore has to obtain the contents of its programmes from other sources. In the main it does so from research institutions, from universities, and from the staff of development projects it is assisting.
The Project produces courses on given subjects, such as irrigation, fertilisers, alpaca production, home vegetable plots, etc. These courses are broken down into a series of lessons. Naturally, some courses are longer than others: that on dairy cattle husbandry contains 17 lessons, but on average there are 8-10 per course. While an average duration for each lesson is about 20 minutes, some are as short as 6-7 minutes and some exceed 25 minutes. The length depends on how the subject Batter can be naturally broken down into chapters, but care is also taken not to exceed the probable attention span of the farmer. There appears to be a tendency to shorten the programmes in recent years, mainly for this reason.
The majority of the commentaries for the programmes are in Spanish, but as necessary they are also made in Quachua and Aymara (the languages of the Sierra) and in Aguaruna (the language most spoken in the Selva).
The programme producers usually work in teams of two, and in close cooperation with appropriate subject-matter specialists to ensure technical accuracy of the content. The producers write a basic script, which is checked with the specialists before field recording is begun. Once the raw material is on tape, the team returns to the Project Headquarters in Lima for the editing phase and to discuss the semi-final version with the subject-matter specialists. With this semi-final version agreed, the team takes the course to the field and uses it with farmers for a trial period that may last over a month. During this period, they discuss the material in detail with the farmers and they note comments and criticisms that are made. If warranted, they modify the material in the light of the findings of this trial period, and only then is the course considered final and copies of it made for general use. Clearly, only the flexibility and easy editing of video makes such an approach
possible.
As mentioned in the part of this Study dealing with the Conceptual Framework, it was realised from the early days of the Project that materials would have to be locally specific, (i.e. reflect the same conditions as those in the area in which they were to be used). For this reason, the early strategy was to establish production units in different parts of the country. It was believed that five would be necessary to be representative of the varying physical and human geographies of Peru. Thus, Regional Centres were planned in Puno, Iquitos, Lambayeque, Piura, and Huancayo, and were actually established in all of these except the last.
The approach failed for a number of reasons, the most important being that these Regional Centres never reached that critical mass of trained people, equipment and production necessary to provide continuity, credibility, and impact. Another reason was that it proved difficult to establish proper equipment maintenance units in the Centres, and no equipment requiring repair had to be sent by air to and from the maintenance unit in Lima. This was costly and time consuming.
No deliberate decision was ever taken to give up Regional Centres, and certainly, it was never thought that there could be any substitute for locally specific materials. However, in the extent, it usually proved easier and more economical to send production teams to-the field for the time required to do the recording for a course. Nevertheless, in recent years there has been a tendency for the Project to concentrate its efforts in some particular geographical area of Peru, particularly in the Sierra, and when this occurs, it is usual to open an office in that area.
It is difficult to be precise about the length of time required to produce a video-taped course, since it varies considerably according to the subject matter. However, an average time for a course of about 10 lessons, from initial research through scripting, recording, and editing, is in the region of 7 months.
The courses made by the Project cover a very broad range of subjects concerned with rural development. They are grouped under the following categories: Agricultural Production Techniques, which accounts for about 30% of all courses; Livestock Production Techniques, about 20%; Natural Resources, about 15X; Health and Habitat, about 15%; Mechanization, about l0%; Forestry, Management, and Aquaculture, the remaining l0%.
As could be expected with courses made over a period of many years, by people at varying levels of training and experience, the quality of the programme" tends to be uneven. However, it should be understood that, in this context, the word "quality" is being used to describe the audio and visual components, and the way the subject matter is structured, as seen through the eyes of an educated person from an industrialized country. This is important because the judgement does not take into account the quality of "utility value" to the audience for which the materials are intended, nor the perceptions of those audiences.
Over the years, there has been much discussion about the word "quality" in relation to video programmes made by the Project. It is certainly true that when the materials are shown within the headquarters of development agencies, there is almost invariably some criticism. It seems that most people automatically judge the programmes by the standards of the TV services they follow daily, and they tend to forget for whom, and for what purpose, the programmes were made. For example, comments regarding the slow pace of the programmes are quite frequent, but in fact, farming communities with a high level of illiteracy would not be able to follow properly if the pace was that of modern TV programmes.
In this respect, it is interesting to note that in the most recent evaluation sponsored by Swiss bilateral aid in 1986, 31% of a sample of 315 peasants found the courses too fast and asked for a repeat, despite all the precautions taken to adopt a very slow pace of presentation.
When the quality of the programmes is criticised, Project staff have tended to down-play the importance of quality in the conventional industrialised country sense; and in discussions, they will often deny that it has any importance at all as long as the visuals and the sound track are intelligible.
It is also true, of course, that conventional quality is achieved not only by a high degree of specialisation and professionalism, but also through the use of sophisticated and professional-level equipment. And for the obvious reasons of economy and cost-effectiveness, such equipment would be out of place in a Project like CESPAC.
However, there is a Puritanical streak in the thinking of many of the Project staff, and this can be illustrated by an anecdote regarding sound tracks. In almost all the programme" made by the Peruvian Project, the commentators have a delivery which is lifeless and without inflexion. In fact, the commentators are Project staff without voice training and without any specific natural talent for commentary reading. But the Project insists on using them because it forms part of the artisanal mystique, avoiding the introduction of standards and procedures from the world of audio-visua1 professionals concerned with journalism or entertainment.
Yet when another project in Latin America, which had received considerable technical assistance from Peruvian staff, began to use a small-time but professional actor to read its commentaries, the Peruvians were reproachful. They pointed out the extra cost of using a professional, and the risk that a professional reader will impose the rhythm of a written text on the presentation, rather than having the images dictate the commentary.
However, the programmes made by the other project seem more lively and attractive, certainly to outsiders, and having a well-voiced, expressive commentary is part of that attraction.
Of course, the final answer to these debates lies in what the peasants most appreciate. Unfortunately, however, research into the way farmers perceive the materials, what catches and holds their interest best, and how they interpret and decodify what they are seeing in terms of their own reality and experience, has been the weakest point of the Project's activities. There are good reasons for this lack of research and on-going formative evaluation, and they will be covered in the section of this Study dealing with the institutional and financial framework of the Project. Nevertheless, it is a great pity that more work has not been done to determine what "quality" is in the eyes of the farmers. To do so would be a first step on the path to trying to improve that quality as a means of ensuring the maximum effectiveness of the materials.
The Printed Materials
It was mentioned in an earlier part of this document that the video is only part of the methodology developed by the Project; other elements are printed materials, discussions, and practical work.
The printed materials are of two basic kinds. There is a Guide for the Trainer and a Guide for Course Participants. The former aims at providing more in-depth information on the subject-matter of the course in question for the field technician who is present during the course. He is responsible for discussing the material in the video programme with course participants, for answering questions as necessary, and for supervising the practical work. It is essential that this technician be properly prepared for his role, and since, as in most countries, there is little refresher training for field technicians, the Guide for the Trainer tries to make up for this deficiency. It also provides him with hints as to how to generate good group dynamics during the training sessions.
The Guide for Course Participants is produced in the simplest language possible and with many illustrations to make for easy comprehension. It is handed out to course participants to take home as a source of future reference should they wish to refresh their memory on certain aspects of what they learned during the course.
It has been pointed out that there is a certain contradiction in using such printed materials in a methodology which has been specifically developed to help overcome problems of low literacy. However, the Project feels that there is usually someone in a family, especially among the younger members, who can read and will help the parents to decipher the Guide. It is also believed that the mere taking home of a printed manual, even if the person cannot read it properly, provides a sense of achievement and satisfaction.
The production of so many printed support materials is a very expensive part of the Project's activities. It would seem essential to determine to what extent the materials for course participants meet a felt need -- and are in fact used -- and from that, to carry out a cost-benefit analysis.
The video programmes and the printed materials that support them are known as the "Paquete pedagogico" -- the Training Package.
The Methodology at Work in the Field
In the early years of the Project, most of the courses were being provided in the cooperatatives that had been created by the Agrarian Reform Law. Even if the members of these cooperatives made up only about 25% of the rural population, the Government felt that they should be given priority. In addition, the cooperatives all had a committee to decide on education and training needs, and this committee was therefore an easy entry point for the Project. However, with the slow de-emphasizing of the cooperatives over the years, there has been increasing attention given to the needs of the poorest people, especially those in the Sierra, and the Project has become more and more active in that area.
Today, more often than not, the Project works in an area as the result of an agreement or contract with a local authority or with a specific development institution or programme. In such cases, the Project supplies video-based training services under one of three possible arrangements.
The first possibility is that the Project assumes the whole responsibility for planning the training and for carrying it out with its own staff. (This is called Canacitación Directa). The second is that the Project assumes the responsibility for planning the training, for providing the materials, and for training the staff to use them. Once trained, however, this staff is taken over by the contracting institution. (This is known as capacitación Conducida). The last possibility is that the contracting organisation obtains technical assistance from the Project, then purchases its own playback equipment and the programmes, and has the Project train its staff to use them. (This is called Capacitación Implantada).
In the first case, which usually applies in particularly emarginated and poor areas, the Project bears the cost. But in the second and last cases, the contracting organisation makes a substantial contribution, or even pays its way entirely.
The actual training sessions with farmers are usually organised on the basis of one lesson per day. So a course made up of, say, 10 lessons would be spread over 10 days. The time chosen for the day's lesson is decided in conjunction with the farmers when possible, and attempts are made to schedule times that will interfere as little as possible with the farmers' normal activities. For this reason many lessons are given in the early morning, or in the evening.
A point of particular importance is that the training is taken to -- or at least very close to -- the farmers' place of work. This overcomes the problems inherent in systems such as that of farmer training centres. In many countries where they have been established, it has proven difficult for farmers to leave their holdings for the week, or even two-week, duration of training courses in the centres. And of course. even if they are able to leave home, they lose important productive time, unless all courses are scheduled in the dead season. But then, the training centre would lie idle for large parts of each year.
Using the Peruvian methodology, a lesson begins with an introductory discussion on the subject. This is followed by the playback of the video tape for the day, and there are then more discussions on the content of the programme. The task of the subject-matter specialist, who is invariably present, is to help the farmers think about what they have seen in the context of their own circumstances and needs, and to answer questions. Following this very important discussion period, a session of practical work is undertaken, if circumstances permit. A whole lesson made up of the video programme, the discussion, and the practical work will normally last about 2 hours.
It has been said that there is a contradiction in the use of video followed by a session of practical work, for the following reason. One of the advantages of any audio-visual presentation is that it can bridge time and space; for example, audiovisual media can allow farmers to see every step of the production of a certain crop, which in reality spans a whole cropping season, in B very short space of time; and audio-visual media can also show how other people in other places grow their crops. This bridging of time and space is a unique advantage of an audio-visual presentation. It allows training to take place out of season, where farmers have less to do, and it helps to overcome one of the major problems associated with traditional training and extension methods: the necessity of having the trainer/extensionist visit the farm at the proper intervals to ensure that all the most important operations are explained and actually demonstrated. Desirable as this is, it is seldom
possible unless there is highly-organized and well equippped extension service, as may be the case under the Training and Visit system.
So, to use the video programmes when practical work on a given crop in possible may appear as an inefficient use of the medium. An extensionist once pointed this out when a Video programme on the proper selection of seed potatoes was immediately followed by a physical demonstration of what had been seen on the screen, and by a session during which farmers actually selected seed. He argued that the video had added nothing to the session. His case was strengthened by the fact that the video programme was low in visual quality, and therefore the physical demonstration was much clearer.
However, that extensionsist's view overlooked another very important function of that video programme, or of any such programme: it standardises and updates the information that the technician passes on to farmers. Everyone has played the game of starting a message going from person to person in a group of people and seeing with amusement how the information is distorted by the time it has reached the end of the chain. One can well imagine how extension workers, isolated as they so often are, with little if any updating of their knowledge and skills, are bound to pass on information that is incomplete and/or inaccurate; and what is more, unless they have proper training as extensionists, or a natural gift for communicating, the manner in which they pass on the information is unlikely to be well-structured. In fact, many of the technicians who work with the Project's methodology praise it precisely because it sets norms for content and structure and thereby facilitates their
work.
Farmers themselves now express their almost unanimous satisfaction with the video-based methodology. In the 1986 Swiss Aid-sponsored evaluation, 92% of the sample of 315 farmers commented to the effect that video was most helpful in making a subject understandable because it was like "actually being in the field".
Of this same sample, 80% said they would like more video-based training; this was exactly the same percentage as that revealed by the analysis of a sample of 153 farmers carried out in 1978, when the methodology was still in its infancy. Another interesting finding of that early analysis was that 67% of the farmers in the Costa, and 78% of those in the Sierra had asked questions and made comments while attending courses, thus denoting a good degree of participation in the learning process.
There were some other very important findings during that 1978 analysis which, even if they have been superseded by subsequent events, are still important for future planning and for avoiding mistakes. At the time of-the analysis, most of the courses were still being given in the context of the cooperatives formed under the Agrarian Reform programme. It was found that, in many cases, the cooperative managers agreed on a certain course being given, without any discussion with the cooperative members, and then ordered them to participate. More important still was the fact that many course participants did not feel that they could put into practice what they had learned. This, in effect, was because farmer training was being considered an aim in itself, and not enough attention was being given to follow-up in terms of input. supplies, and so on. For example, the course on dairy cattle husbandry might be given-in a cooperative when there was no real dairy development scheme at
work in the area. Some of the information assimilated by farmers regarding, for example, correct milking techniques, would be applicable, but those requiring inputs and services from outside, such as artificial insemination or concentrated feedstuffs, might not be. In sum, this finding reinforced the principle that training should not be isolated from other inputs and services, or it can lead to disaffection and frustration among trainees.
Fortunately, the tendency of recent years by which the Project is working more and more within the context of specific local development actions has overcome this problem, and there can be little doubt that today the training being provided has much more relevance to the circumstances and possibilities of the trainees. There is also a willingness on the part of most of the institutions to respond favourably to requests for simple inputs from farmers who have participated in courses. For example, quite recently a course on home vegetable gardens in the Sierra prompted the farmers to tell the local authorities that the quality of vegetable seed available in Puno was just not good enough: the local development corporation immediately undertook to obtain better seed and make it available.
The Reach of the Project
From its inception, a hypothesis of the Project was that it would carry out training in rural areas on a massive scale. For the period 1981-1984, the objective was to reach no less than 159,000 farmers, but in fact, only 59,119 were reached. Even if this is still a noteworthy number, it is also a noteworthy shortfall. It raises the issue of the difficulties in actually organising the training in rural areas.
It has been calculated that when the Project itself carries out the whole training operation with its own staff, ("Capacitación Directa") a single playback unit can be expected to provide 9,450 participant/lessons in the course of a year. However, experience has shown that when the responsibility for using the methodology is handed over to others, the number of people reached drops in proportion to the degree of remaining involvement of the Project. Under "Capacitación Conducida" it can be expected to reach 80% of the 9,450 participant/lessons, i.e. 7,560 per annum, whereas under "Capacitación Implantada" it is likely to be running at only 65% of maximum capacity, i.e. 6,140 participant/lessons per year. This drop in efficiency is a natural reflection of the lower degree of commitment to the methodology among people not so directly involved with the Project.
It should also be stated that when the Project began operating, its calculations on how many people it might be able to reach were based on the assumption that it would continue to work extensively with the cooperatives of the Costa. The relatively good roads in that area, and the fact that the people were already grouped in their cooperatives, made it easier to reach large numbers. But when the emphasis turned to the Sierra, new problems emerged. Firstly, the scattered nature of the population makes it difficult to reach large numbers, and secondly the roads are very poor. These factors make it almost impossible for a playback unit to give the average of 2.5 lessons per day which has been proven possible in the Costa, and which was the basis for the calculation of Project objectives.
At one stage, it appeared that the shortfall in farmers reached might seriously warp the cons/benefit ratio of the methodology, but as will be seen from the section of this Study devoted to costs, they are still very reasonable. Nevertheless, the Project is concerned about the difficulty of reaching people on a sufficiently massive scale, particularly in the Sierra, and for this reason it in seriously thinking of an experiment with a small, portable TV transmitter. Such a transmitter could send a signal to say 10 or 12 playback units simultaneously in an area. It seems that such transmitters are relatively cheap, but before one can be tried, there are organisational and legislative issues to be settled.
Why has the Use of Video in Peru been so limited to Training?
It will be remembered that early in this Case Study, mentions were made of the use of video as an open-ended communication channel for improving participatory development planning, for creating a two-way dialogue with the authorities, or for enabling the exchange of information and experience between communities. However, these functions have not been realised in the Peruvian context, where the use of video is confined mainly to a training role. Some explanation of this limitation is called for.
When the Project first began, it was certainly envisaged that video would be used in its wider role in social communication and mobilisation, but events have made such a role difficult. In 1976, the Project made a video programme near Piura, in northern Peru. It was a description of historic, social' and economic conditions in a 30,000 sq. Em area in which the Government was interested in starting an agricultural development programme. The programme included many interviews with people, from farmers to local authorities. It also examined the economics of sorghum production in the area, and it emerged that there was a loss of $10 per hectare for any farm growing sorghum under the prevailing price conditions. The final interview was with a cooperative member who commented that the same people who fixed the price of farm inputs such as fertiliser also fixed the price of sorghum.
This tape was shown to the then Minister of Agriculture and the local authorities. They judged it extremely interesting, but instructed that it was to be shown to no one else. And at that moment, the idea of using the methodology for real development communication was stunted before it was properly born.
Nevertheless, in 1978 the Project did again become involved in a communication process that went well beyond its normal field of training and transfer of technology to farmers. Swiss Aid was helping a settlement project in the Selva, at Genaro Herera, about 3 hours by boat from Iquitos. The objective of the project was to establish a production cooperative for about 180 families, and an important element was the introduction of Brown Swiss cows. The project was not going well, and about 60 families abandoned the settlement. Swiss bilateral aid asked CESPAC to make a series of video programmes to analyse, with the local people, the ecological, sociological, technological, and economical suitability of the project design. The 6 programmes produced revealed a number of failings in that design, especially on the technological level. The Swiss changed a number of elements in the project as a result, including changing over from Brown Swiss to Zebu cattle.
And again in 1984, the Project carried out some very interesting work that was not connected to pure training. At San Pedro de Cotta, about 80 km from Lima, there is an area of about 6,300 ha of ancient Incan terraces that have fallen into disrepair. Yet, about 1,300 ha could be quite easily brought back into use.
A small project, with minimal financing from UNESCO, was set up to pay farmers for work they did in reclaiming the terraces However, from among about 350 heads of families in the area, only 22 actually began to work on the terraces.
CESPAC made a video documentary with the 22 farmers after the, had sown their first crop of potatoes, and this programme was taken into the village one evening. The documentary had to be shown 4 times, and the audience kept increasing in number until 150 people were present. As a result of that showing, 67 people went to work on the terraces, and in 7 months, a further 3 ha had been brought back into use.
But despite these experiences with the dynamic role that video can play in social mobilisation, the Project feels that, in general, the political climate has not been favourable to its use for that purpose. But the Project Mid-Term Review that took place In May 1985 firmly stated that the methodology developed by the Project should be used experimentally for purposes other than pure training. For example, it could be extremely valuable in the situation analysis phase of the many community development schemes that have been launched in the Sierra in recent years.
It could also be used to stimulate development initiatives by showing successful development experiences in some communities to others who have not yet embarked on such action, and so on. It is very much to be hoped that the Project will find the space and freedom in which to be more innovative and flexible than it has been hitherto. For it seems to many people that limiting the use of video to its role in training is to use only a part of its great potential for development.
back contents next
<section>5</section>
back contents
INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK, EXTERNAL FINANCING, AND COSTS
The Project has had a chequered institutional framework over the years. As has already been mentioned, it started out as part of a broad UNDP/FAO assistance project to CENCIRA, the national agrarian reform training and research centre. That project, PER/71/544, terminated in 1975, and the International Project Manager formulated a second phase to continue along much the same lines as the first. However, a new Director of CENCIRA, Col. Max Velarde, decided that he only wanted assistance in the communication area, stating that "Peru has plenty of technical knowledge; we just have to transfer it to peasants".
The Government therefore requested assistance for a project to help to develop a system for farmer training on a mass scale. Its title, directly translated from Spanish, was "Mass Training for Rural Development". CENCIRA remained as the counterpart agency, but CENCIRA's Communication Department was renamed Centro de Produccion Audiovisual pare la Capacitacion, or CEPAC for short.
UNDP approved the project as PER/76/003; its contribution was to amount to $900,000 for 4 years and was designed to cover the coat of three international advisers for varying periods of time, training courses, equipment, etc. The Government contribution was to be the equivalent of $2,000,000. However, the Project was approved during one of UNDP's financial crises, and there was to be a delay of several months in actually providing funds. Things looked bleak, but after some frantic efforts, the Government of the Netherlands agreed to step into the breach with a bridging allocation of $94,000.
Later, the Netherlands again helped, through a Project with Cencira, to create a production unit at Cusco. And the Friedrich Ebert Foundation of Germany also became involved in that it financed and ran a production unit at Piura, in the northern part of the Costa, from 1978 to 1983. Both this and the Netherlands-financed unit relied on CEPAC in Lima for training of staff and for general support.
A very grave problem throughout those years was the deteriorating economic situation in Peru, and the effect this had on the Government's ability to pay its part of Project costs. At the start of the PER/76/003 project, the CENCIRA staff working with it numbered 30, and in addition to covering their salaries, CENCIRA was also able to meet most running costs. By 1979, the staff covered by CENCIRA was only 15, and all running costs were being met from the international component or from income being generated by some training activities. All in all, it is probable that the Government only contributed about 10% of the $2 million it had committed itself to provide in terms of salaries and services. As could be expected, this seriously hampered operations and made it difficult for the Project to meet all its objectives.
In the face of this serious situation, in 1978, FAO's Technical Cooperation Programme helped out too. It made available the sum of $150,000 to help finance CEPAC's operations, and to purchase some equipment. It was with these funds that the first colour video was bought, after some argument in fact, but the Project staff reasoned that colour equipment would soon be as cheap as black and white -- they were right -- and that it should be used experimentally.
During the Mid-term Review of the Project in 1979, the question of Government financing received much attention, for it was evident that the Project would never be able to continue unless there were some mayor changes, and above all, unless there was real national support for it. Another factor was that CENCIRA was in decline as an institution, and it was in fact abolished in 1980.
For these reasons, a new institutional home had to be found for the Project, and it also seemed that it might be possible to ensure proper financial support if the Project were to become Special Investment Project in the Agrarian Sector.
It was to examine this possibility that the detailed Feasibility Study of 1980 was prepared, and the upshot was that CEPAC became CESPAC -- Centro de Servicios de Pedagogza Audiovisual pare la Capacitacion. And with the demise of CENCIRA, CESPAC was attached directly to the office of the Minister of Agriculture as a Special Project.
When the first phase of PER/76/003 terminated, also in 1980, the Government requested another project which was basically to consolidate, refine, and improve the methodology already developed, and to help to apply it on a massive scale. UNDP agreed to finance it to the extent of $946,000 spread over a further 4 years. The Government contribution was to be the equivalent of $1.7 million.
In the event, UNDP was unable to provide any financing until 1982, and FAO's Technical Cooperation Programme again came to the rescue. The CESPAC methodology had been arousing ever more interest in other countries of Latin America, and a number of people from other countries had been trained in CESPAC courses. Furthermore, CESPAC staff had provided advisory services outside Peru. A TOP project was therefore fomulated to allow the international adviser in CESPAC to draw up a Latin American regional project for video-based farmer training, but at the same time it bridged the period until UNDP financing could come on stream.
So, at the beginning of 1982, a new phase of PER/76/003 began, with a termination date of end-1986. In addition, during 1984, the Swiss bilateral aid programme in Peru also became involved and made contributions to the Project worth $485,000 for work in the Puno and Cusco areas.
At many times during the years covered above, it seemed as though international support for the Project could not be continued, and that the adviser who had really been the driving force behind getting the Project started in the first place -- and who won FAO's prize, known as the Sen Award, for the best field expert in 1983 -- would have to leave. And at no time did the Project ever have the resources it really needed to operate properly in the field. It has always been a hand-to-mouth existence, and survival itself was often the main concern: on several occasions, only desperate efforts in Perk and in FAO Headquarters came up with a last-minute rescue.
In reality, that survival might not have been possible at all but for one vital factor, a factor which also serves as an illustration of the value placed on the services provided by the Project: the Project began to generate considerable income. The first step in this direction was when cooperatives began voluntarily to pay something towards the costs of the courses they were receiving. Then, little by little, national and international organisations began to seek the services of CESPAC. For example, the Andean Pact organisation commissioned a course on Coffee Rust. And gradually, development institutions and projects in Peru signed contracts for CESPAC services.
Over the years, this turnover generated by the Project has reached the remarkable total of $1.13 million. And the Project, quite apart from the work it has done in Peru, has provided advisory and training services to the following countries: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Colombia, El Salvador, Paraguay, Uruguay, India, China, South Korea, Cape Verde and Mali.
Initially, when CENCIRA was still the Project's institutional base, the income being generated was often appropriated for other CENCIRA activities, but since the Project became CESPAC, such income has been ploughed back and is used to meet operational costs, salaries of staff who are not on the ffinistry's regular payroll, and the like.
While on the subject of staff salaries, it in interesting to note how those of Project staff relate to those of other sectors, and how they seem to have declined over the years. While the Project was still with CENCIRA, CEPAC staff were being paid 20-30% less than other CENCIRA staff, and some 30% less than they might have expected at an equivalent level of competence in the private-sector broadcasting system. In US Dollar equivalent, a video producer earned $200 per month in late 1976, $500 in 1983, $300 in 1984, $220 in January 1985, and only $80 in January 1986. In the same period, the monthly salaries of the directors of departments in the Project have dropped from a peak of the equivalent of $650 in 1975 to $100 In January 1986. Of course, these figures reflect the parlous state of the Peruvian economy and currency, but there has also been a real loss in local purchasing power.
The total resources of the Project, from all sources since 1975. have amounted to the equivalent of about $4.63 million. Of this total, some $670,000 have been spent on audio-visual equipment -- and over half of that amount was provided by Peru. A further $290,000 or so have been spent on other equipment such as vehicles. The remaining $3.67 million have been spent on salaries and operating costs.
Thus, the audio-visual equipment component represents just under 15% of the total cost, and this confounds the idea held by so many that the capital investment in video equipment will override all other considerations when embarking on such a methodology. Even including the vehicles and other items, which are standard issue in most development projects anyway, the equipment component only comes to 20.7%.
In fact, all the other projects now using the methodology are confirming the CESPAC experience: equipment costs run to 15-20% of total costs, assuming that Low Band (sub-professional) video is used.
Detailed analyses have been made of the cost of producing a course and delivering it to farmers. In 1984, the cost of producing a farmer training package worked out at $1,502 for the printed materials and $1,780 for the video programme for each lesson. And the direct costs of making and presenting a whole course -- which, as will be remembered, is normally made up of about 10 lessons -- worked out at S13 per person who received the course.
Even taking the total resources used by the project and dividing them by the number of farmers who have received courses, the cost only comes to $30 per farmer/course. And this does not take into account the value of the equipment the Project still has, the trained staff, the value of the training packages, and so on.
It is interesting to note the relative costs of the printed materials and of the video: the so-called high-technoology medium of video costs little more than the very traditional. And one can hardly expect to make much impact with printed materials in most rural areas of the Third World.
It is also interesting to compare the cost of making and presenting a video-based course with the cost of farmer training centres. In 1980, a farmer training centre in Honduran calculated that the cost of lodging and training a farmer in the centre was $6 per day. Nor did this figure include any allowance for the productive work time lost on his holding.
In summary, therefore, it can be said that the costs of the CESPAC methodology are far from being dissonant with the needs in Third World countries.
A final, but very important point, needs to be made in respect of the Project's institutional framework within Peru. It concerns its relationship with the traditional extension services.
When the Project first began, the idea was that the methodology would be used by the CENCIRA farmer training units known as CENCICAPs -- centres for participatory peasant training. However, this did not function very well, mainly because the staff of the CENCICAPs were not over-enthusiastic about the methodology, preferring in many cases to use blackboard and chalk.
Later, when CENCIRA had been abolished, it was planned that the methodology would be used by the extension services belonging to INIPA -- the national institute for agricultural and livestock research and production. And when the Government purchased almost 100 playback units, it was planned that these would be distributed to the extension offices scattered around the country for their use, and many units were so distributed. But yet again, the cooperation did not work out well. The equipment was underutilised, and it broke down much more often than when in the hands of CESPAC staff, most probably because there was a general lack of enthusiasm for the methodology. In the end, CESPAC took the equipment back.
It is not easy to pin-point the reasons for this inability to integrate the use of the methodology in the extension services. And it should be clear that the problem is not limited to Peru. In the past, there seems to have been a reluctance on the part of many agricultural technicians to accept development communication. Perhaps they considered that the social scientists or generalists normally involved in development communication have no substantive role to play in agricultural matters; or perhaps the news, home entertainment, and publicity functions of the media warp their attitudes towards all media and they do not grasp their potential as a serious tool for development; or perhaps the relatively new approach of development communication has been seen as a threat to more traditional systems of extension.
Whatever the cause, and it could be an amalgam of the possibilities outlined above, plus others not mentioned, there are today weak links between INIPA staff and the staff of development institutions (and CESPAC staff too) who are using the video-based training system in the field.
OBSERVATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
The Project has been a pioneer. It has established a series of parameters and a methodology for grassroot-level training based on video, one which overcomes the problems that have been frequently encountered in making rational use of this medium. CESPAC's work has been the basis for similar successful projects elsewhere.
It has also established standards of hard work and dedication to the cause of rural development among many Peruvians, an important asset in any administration. Witness the remark of the Nobel Peace Prize winner, Norman Borlaug, when he was asked what he felt his biggest contribution had been during his years of work at CIMMYT, the maize and wheat breeding centre in Mexico. He replied to the effect that he had created a team of young Mexican agricultural scientists who took pleasure in work in the field, in donning workers' clothes, and in going out into the trial plots under the hot sun. CESPAC has young people who will work all hours of the day or night, in primitive rural conditions, away from their families, and all this for a salary which is usually lower than those at similar levels in other sectors.
CESPAC has actually reached very large numbers of rural people, and people in the bidonvilles, with useful information and training. This is in contrast with nearly all other institution-building projects in which the international community assists because, in effect, they provide training and orientation to the staff in the top part of the agricultural-sector pyramid. CESPAC, with its methodology, reaches the base of that pyramid.
It is also noteworthy that the Project has succeeded, despite all the difficulties, in accumulating the critical mass of equipment, trained people, and work output required to overcome the forces of inertia and resistance that tend to bog down any new approach. CESPAC, as an institution, has been created, and it is likely to endure unless it suffers complete neglect and no replacement of staff and equipment.
The Government's role has been of fundamental importance throughout, even if it is true that it was unable to finance its part of the activities as planned; but this was mainly the result of the Peruvian economic situation. Several Ministers of Agriculture supported the Project to the best of their ability, and they had the wisdom to leave the national Project Director, originally the Director of the Communication Department of CENCIRA, in the job for 10 years. The fact that his exceptional talents were available to the Project for so many years was vital to the development of the Project. In most developing countries, able staff are moved like firemen from one desperate-need situation to another. At the time of writing, he has been replaced by another of the original 6 Peruvians who have worked with the Project since the beginning. He is also highly competent, very experienced, and fully dedicated to the peasant cause.
If one cares to be critical, it has to be concluded that CESPAC is still not making the fullest possible use of video as a catalyst in rural development. It has confined itself to the use of the medium for training and the transfer of technology; and it has not really used it for participatory planning and social mobilisation, for example by transferring successful development experiences in one community to other communities facing similar problems.
The reasons offered by CESPAC staff for this limitation have validity. They include the notion that a first step towards better lining standards in rural areas is an increase in production and productivity, that the political climate has never been appropriate for other uses of video, and that the Project was so busy fighting for its survial that it had no time to do anything but produce, and use, course after course, following the format and methodology it had developed over the years.
These same reasons are also given for the lack of the applied research that is necessary in order to maximise the effectiveness of the training packages. And yet, such research is of crucial importance.
Just to quote one example, it is not known whether a really good farmer showing how to do a certain farming operation is more or less convincing to other farmers than a white-coated technician, with his outsider's authority, demonstrating the same thing.
It would not be too difficult to experiment with different ways of presenting the same information and then to test the various approaches with typical audience groups. It could be that there would be no real preference for one approach over another, but the CESPAC must find out more about such issues, about peasant perceptions and preferences in terms of the way information is structured and presented, and about the way language needs to be used to ensure optimum assimilation by the farming community. Only in this way will the methodology developed by CESPAC really reach its ultimate stage of development and effectiveness.
Despite these observations, the achievements of CESPAC are remarkable. It has broken new ground in working with video in rural areas, and it has also created a viable methodology for its use as an instrument of grassroot-level training.
An enthusiastic, and totally committed, group of people have more than proven their point, often against fierce opposition from conservative thinkers, and always in the face of great material shortages, if not actually fearing for the very survival of their endeavour.
Rural development planners would do well to consider carefully whether the ever-improving communication technology available today, especially in the area of video, could not be applied to their needs, building on the CESPAC experience.
back contents
