<section>m</section>
APPENDIX VII: SOLAR FEED DRIER
Sun-drying is one way of drying moist feed to form a dry product which can be stored. Two of the problems in sun-drying are that the feed attracts flies during drying and that, in seasons when there is intermittent rain, it is difficult to complete the drying satisfactorily even though the sun is very powerful during the rest of the day.
A solar drier developed for drying fish for human consumption (Thomson, 1979) can be adapted for use for drying fish feeds. The principle is shown in Figure 1. Basically, any greenhouse type unit where convection occurs is suitable. Air should be channelled over shallow layers of feed placed on a dark surface. The scale of the drier can be adapted to the daily feed output. A clear cover which slopes to the sides as well as to one end would be better than the design illustrated in Figure 1, which is prone to leakage during rain. It is hoped that the illustration will however provoke ideas for adapting the principle involved for drying moist fish feeds for storage.
Figure 1: Solar Feed Drier
<section>n</section>
APPENDIX VIII: NAMES & ADDRESSES OF MANUFACTURERS AND SUPPLIERS OF COMPOUND FEEDS FOR FISH AND SHRIMP
The following list does not pretend to be complete but it is hoped that it may assist with the location of suppliers of commercial feeds.
The inclusion of a specific company on the following list does not imply a recommendation. Similarly, the absence of other companies from the list should not be construed to mean that they are unsatisfactory.
AUSTRALIA
Janos Nutrition, N.S.W., P.O. Box 194, Forbes, New South Wales 2871
Milne Feeds, 103-5 Welshpool Road, Welshpool, W.A. 6106
FRANCE
AQUALIM, B.P. No. 1, Z.I. de Nersac, 16440 Roullet-St-Estephe
COFNA-SARB (Division Export), 28 rue Legendre, 75017 Paris
Grand Semoulerie de l'Ouest, B.P. No. 2, 16160 Gond-Pontauvre
HONGKONG
Tai Sang Feeds Co. Ltd. 71-73 Fau Tsai Street, Un Long, New Territories
INDONESIA
P.T. Charoen Pokphand Indonesia Animal Feed Mill Co. Ltd., P.O. Box 83, Jakarta
P.T. Comfeed Indonesia Ltd., P.O. Box 197, Surabaya
ITALY
Hendrix S.p.A., 37060 Mozzecane, Verona
JAPAN
FAI (Fisheries & Aquaculture International Co. Ltd.), No. 7 Kohji-Machi Bldg., Room 555, 4-5 Kohji-Machi, Chiyoda-Ku, Tokyo 102
Higashimaru Foods Inc., 2-1-11 Taniyamako, Kagoshimo City, 891-01
Technoventure Co. Ltd., Diamond Plaza Bldg., 25 Ichibancho, Chiyoda-Ku, Tokyo 102
MALAYSIA
Aquafeed Sdn Bhd, 39 Jalan Tembuga Kuning Satu, Tmn. Sri Skudai, Johor Bahru
Gold Coin (Malaysia) Bhd., P.O. Box 56, Mak Mandin, Butterworth, P.W., Penang
NETHERLANDS
Provimi B.V., P.O. Box 5063, 3008 AB Rotterdam
Trouw & Co. B.V. International, Boxmeer
NORWAY
T. Skretting A/S, Boks 319, 4001 Stavanger
PHILIPPINES
San Miguel Corporation, 6766 Ayala Avenue, Makati, Metro Manila
Universal Robina Corporation, P.O. Box 3542, Metro Manila
SINGAPORE
Chia Tai Feedmill Pte. Ltd., 38 Penjuru Lane, Singapore 2260
Gold Coin Ltd., P.O. Box 1849, Singapore 9036
Marine Feed (S) Pte. Ltd., 12 Jalan Kilang Barat, Singapore 0315
SRI LANKA
Ceylon Grain Elevators Ltd., 15 Rock House Lane, Colombo 15
SWEDEN
Ewos A.B., P.O. Box 618, S-151 27 Sodertalje
TAIWAN
Hanaqua Feed Corporation, Lin-Hai Industrial Zone, No. 40 Chung-Lin Road, Hsiao Kang District, Kaohsiung
Kuang Ta Feeds Co. Ltd., 9th Floor, Cathay Nan King Business Bldg., 91 Nanking E. Road, Sec. 3, Taipei 104
President Enterprises Corporation, 2-20 Yan Harng, Yeong Kang, Tainan
Tai Roun Products Co. Ltd., 6th Floor No. 1, Nanking E. Road, Sec. 2, Taipai
Wanyng Group, No. 168 Chung San Road, Sec. 2, Pan Chiao City, Taipei Hsien
THAILAND
Betagro Company Ltd., 107 Yukol 2 (Suan Mali), Bangkok 1
CP (Charoen Phokphand Feedmill Co. Ltd.), 36 Soi Yenchit, Chand Road, Bangkok
Sahapatanakaset Co. Ltd., 4th Floor, Sivanart Building, 43/18 Soi 84, Lardprao Road, Bangkapi, Bangkok 10
UK
BP Nutrition (UK) Ltd., Wincham, Northwich, Cheshire CW9 6DF
Fulmar, Dunkirk Mill, Aylsham, Norfolk NR11 6SX
USA
Bioproducts Inc., Box 429, Warrenton, Oregon 97146
Central Soya Company, 1300 Fort Wayne National Bank Building, Fort Wayne, Indiana 46802
The Jim Dandy Company (Western Grain Company), P.O. Box 10667, Birmingham, Alabama 35202
Murray Elevators (Silver Cup Feeds), P.O. Box 7428, Murray, Utah 84107
Ralston Purina Company, Checkerboard Square, St. Louis, Missouri 63188
Rangen Inc., P.O. Box 706, Buhl, Idaho 83316
WEST GERMANY
Milkivit-Werke A. Trouw Gmbh, 8859 Burgheim
<section>o</section>
APPENDIX IX: GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Most terms used (such as digestible energy, food conversion ratio, decorticated, etc.) have been defined in the text. These may be located by using the index to the manual. Tables of conversions have been provided in Appendix X.
A number of other words have however been used without textual definition. These are covered in this appendix.
ANADROMOUS
Fish which return (from the sea) to rivers to spawn.
BIOMASS
The total weight of living matter present, expressed in terms of a given area or volume of the habitat. In aquaculture this word normally refers only to the species being cultured.
BINARY-TYPE DIETS
An alternative to farmers carrying out all of the processes involved in feed manufacture on the farm. In this type of feed the farmer buys, for example, a mixture of dry ingredients (including vitamins, minerals, etc.) and mixes them with another ingredient (usually trash fish). The farmer does not have the problems of purchasing, processing, mixing and storing a multiplicity of ingredients. The farmer relies on a professional feed manufacturer to mix the dry ingredients but can still make fresh (normally moist) feed on a daily basis. This type of feed is frequently used in eel feeding and (in Japan, for example) the feeding of marine fish in cages. Although called binary feeds (meaning two parts), in fact the farmer often adds one or two other ingredients, such as fish oil.
BLACKSTRAP
A type of molasses.
COMPOUND FEED
A feed composed of several ingredients.
DETRITUS
In aquaculture this term is used to represent the loose material which accumulates, through natural processes, at the bottom of ponds or other enclosures.
HYPERVITAMINOSIS
Condition caused by intake of toxic (i.e., excess) amounts of a vitamin.
INORGANIC
Concerning chemical componds which do not contain carbon as the principal element (excepting carbonates, cyanides and cyanates). Matter other than plant or animal.
METABOLISM
The physical and chemical processes by which feedstuffs are synthesized into complex elements (anabolism), complex substances are transformed into simple ones (catabolism), and energy is made available for use by an organism.
MINERAL
Naturally occurring substance with a characteristic chemical composition expressed by a chemical formula; may occur as individual crystals or may be disseminated in some other mineral or rock. Trace elements are, in feedstuff usage, sometimes included in the term 'minerals' but many, such as chlorine and iodine, are gases in their elemental form. However, their source in feedstuffs is often a mineral substance, such as salt (NaCI), or potassium iodate (KIO[3]). Supplementary minerals are often provided in compound feed manufacture as MINERAL MIXES (see PREMIX).
NUTRIENT
Substance which is or provides nourishment (food). In discussing feeds this word is often used to refer to dietary components, such as lipids, fatty acids, or minerals.
ORGANIC
Concerning chemical compounds based on carbon chains or rings and also containing hydrogen, with or without oxygen, nitrogen and other elements.
POLLARDS
Fine bran containing some flour.
PREMIX
This word means a 'preliminary mix' and is applied to mixtures of vitamins and minerals (alone or together) and other ingredients (such as medications, preservatives and antioxidants) which are included in diets in very small quantities. Pre-mixing these ingredients in a carrier (such as wheat bran) before adding them to the final mixture facilitates their better distribution. If an ingredient which is included in a formula at (say) 1 g per ton is put directly into the final mixture it will not be properly distributed.
PROXIMATE
The 'proximate' analyses consist of moisture, lipid, protein, fibre, ash, and (by difference) carbohydrate (NFE).
PURIFIED DIET
A feed made out of refined ingredients with defined analyses. For example, protein might be supplied by casein rather than fish meal. These feeds are used for nutritional research, not for commercial purposes.
TANK
An aquaculture production unit normally made out of concrete, metal, wood, plastic, etc. In this manual this word does not refer to small ponds or reservoirs which are normally referred to as tanks in the Indian sub-continent, for example.
TANKAGE
A protein concentrate made from meat scraps by the 'wet rendering' process, as opposed to meat meal, which is the result of 'dry rendering'.
TELSON
Central (pointed) portion of the tail of shrimp and prawns.
TRACE ELEMENTS
See MINERAL.
VITAMIN MIX
See PREMIX.
<section>p</section>
APPENDIX X: CONVERSION TABLES AND COMMON FORMULAE A. CONVERSIONS
Length
1 micron = 0.001 mm
1 mm = 0.0394 in = 0.001 m
1 cm = 0.394 in = 10 mm = 0.01 m
1 m = 3.28 ft = 1.094 yd
1 in = 25.83 mm = 2.54 cm
1 ft = 0.305 m = 12 in
1 yd = 0.915 m = 3 ft
Weight
1 g = 0.0353 oz
1 kg = 1 000 g = 2.205 lb
50 kg = 110.25 lb
1 000 kg = 1 mt
1 mt = 0.9842 UK 1/t = 1.102 US t
1 oz = 28.349 g
1 lb = 16 oz = 453.59 g
1 UK 1/cwt = 112 lb = 50.80 kg
1 US cwt = 100 lb = 45.36 kg
1 UK 1/t = 20 UK 1/cwt = 2 240 lb = 1.016 mt = 1.12 US t
Volume
1 litre = 1 000 ml = 0.220 UK 1/gallon = 0.264 US gallon
1m^3 = 35.315 ft^3 = 1.308 yd^3
1m^3 = 1 000 litres = 219.97 UK 1/gallons = 264.16 US gallons
1 ft^3 = 0.02832m^3 = 6.229 UK 1/gallons = 28.316 litres
1 UK 1/gallon = 4.546 litres = 1.2009 US gallon
1 US gallon = 3.785 litres = 0.833 UK 1/ gallon
1 MGD (million UK 1/ gallons/day) = 694.44 GPM (UK 1/ gallons/minute)
1 MGD = 3.157 m^3/minute = 3 157 litres/minute
1/'British' or 'Imperial' units
Area
1 m^2 = 10.764 ft^2 = 1.196 yd^2
1 ha = 10 000 m^2 = 2.471 acres
1 km^2 = 100 ha = 0.386 mi^2
1 ft^2 = 0.0929 m^2
1 yd^2 = 0.836 m^2
1 acre = 0.405 ha
1 mi^2 = 640 acres = 2.59 km^2
Temperature
Pressure
1 psi (lb/in^2) = 70.307 g/cm^2
1 atmosphere = 14.69 lb/in^2 (psi) = 29.92 in Hg
1 atmosphere = 33.9 ft HO
Calorific Value
1 cal (calorie) = 4.184 joules = 0.003968 BTU 1/
1 kcal (kilocalorie) = 1 000 cal = 4 184 joules
1 Mcal (megacalorie) = 1 000 000 cal = 1 000 kcal
1 joule = 0.239 cal
1 BTU 1/= 252 cal = 778.16 ft lb = 1 055.124 joules
1/British Thermal Unit
Power
1 HP = 746 watts = 0.746 kw = 550 ft lb per second
1 kw = 1 000 watts
Other
1 m^3 of water weighs 1 mt
B. COMMON FORMULAE
Areas 1/
Tiangle
Rectangle
A = ab
Parallelogram
A = ah
Trapezoid
Circle
Circumference
C=2p r
Sphere
A=4p R^2=p d^2
Sector
Volumes 1/
Sphere
Regular Prism
V= area of base × h
Regular Circular Cylinder
V=p r^2h
Regular Circular or Con
Frustrum of Any Pyramid
<section>q</section>
APPENDIX XI: BULK DENSITY, PELLETABILITY AND PARTICLE SIZE
A. Examples of Bulk Density
Ingredient
Typical Bulk Density
(mt/m^3)
Ipil-ipil leaf meal
Lima beans
Gram seeds
Lentil seeds
Dried Peas
Cowpeas
Lucerne (Alfalfa)
Dried Citrus pulp
Hay
Millets
Whole Wheat
Ground Wheat
Wheat bran
Ground Barley
Rice grains
Rice bran
Ground Maize
Maize gluten feed
Maize gluten meal
Maize germ meal
Coconut meal
Exp. Soybean meal
44% Ext. Soybean meal
50% Ext. Soybean meal
Groundnut oilcake
Groundnut meal
Sesame oil cake
Cottonseed oil meal
Sunflower oil cake
Exp. Mustard oil meal
Meat meal
Meat + Bone meal
Blood meal
Bone meal
Fish meal
Shrimp meal
Poultry by-product meal
Dried whey
Molasses
Dried Brewer's grains
Limestone
Calcium carbonate
Fine Salt
Water
Sources: Göhl (1981), Pfost and Pickering (1976), ADCP (1980)
B. Pelletability
Ingredient
Pelletability 1/
Dried Lucerne
P
Blood meal
P
Brewers grain
P
Coconut meal
P
Exp. Cottonseed meal
M
Fish meal
M-P
Exp. Groundnut meal
G
Ipil-Ipil leaf meal
P
Lipids
P
Maize (Corn) meal
G
Exp. Mustard seed oil meal
M
Rice bran
P
Shrimp meal
P
Exp. Soybean meal
G
Wheat meal
G
Wheat bran
P
Dried Whey
P
1/P = poor M = medium G = good
Particle sizes of feeds are often given in screen (sieve) sizes. These can be confusing, as sieve size numbers vary from country to country. Table 1 will help to prevent misunderstandings. It is essential to know which type the sieve series being quoted belongs to (UK, USA, 'Tyler', Canada, France or Germany). Then the nominal sieve opening size can be looked up.
Source: ADCP (1980)
Table 1: Sieve Sizes
Table 1: Sieve Sizes (contd.1)
Table 1: Sieve Sizes (contd.2)
<section>r</section>
APPENDIX XII: FEED BINDERS
The importance of producing aquaculture feeds which are water stable, particularly for crustacean use, has been mentioned in the text of the manual.
Many different substances have been used for increasing the water stability of aquaculture diets. Some are already used by the feedstuffs industry for increasing the durability (resistance to physical breakdown during handling and storage) of terrestrial and avian feedstuffs. Some are specialist chemicals, others are natural products which are raw or refined. Some binders have additional nutritive value.
A list of some of the substances used to increase water stability of feeds is given in Table 1. Final selection should depend on cost and availability and experimentation with the raw materials being employed in each dietary formulation.
Table 1: Substances Used for Inducing Water Stability in Aquaculture Feeds
Casein
Gelatin
Collagen
Chitosan
Guar Gum
Locust Bean Gum
GFS (xanthan gum, locust bean gum, guar gum mixture)
Agar
Carrageenin
Seaweed binder 1/
Corn Starch
Tapioca Starch
Potato Starch
Wheat Gluten
High Gluten Wheat Flour
Carboxymethylcellulose (CMC)
Sodium Alginate + Sodium Hexametaphosphate
Lignosulphonates
Hemicelluloses
Bentonites
Polymethlolcarbamide (Basfin)
Carbopol
Hydrolysed Polyvinyl Alcohol
XB-23 (an anionic heteropolysaccharide)
1/Meyers (1987b)
Substances which tend to be antagonistic to good pellet stability in dry pellets are listed in Table 2.
Table 2: Ingredients Antagonistic To Dry Pellet Water Stability
Lucerne Meal
Cereal hulls, particularly rice and oats
Bone
Salt*
Molasses*
High lipid levels (> 10%)
Brewers grain (high levels)
Whey (high levels)
* These substances have been used to increase stability in moist feeds.
For other information on pelletability, see Appendix XI, section B.
The method of feed manufacture also affects the feed water stability. In general, techniques which involve, or generate heat, such as pelleting, and steaming/cooking, gelatinize or partially gelatinize natural starches in the feed ingredients which help to bind the feed together. The expansion (cooker/extruder) technique is the most effective technique but is very costly. The water stability of pelleted feeds can be improved by the use of very finely ground raw materials and of thicker, small hole diameter, die plates. These techniques considerably increase the cost of processing. All methods of increasing feed water stability increase feed cost so it is sensible to examine the necessity for producing an extremely well-bound diet if it is to be eaten within a few minutes of feeding, or if frequent feeding may be a cheaper alternative.
Further reading for Appendix XII:
Hastings (1970), New (1976), Heinen (1981), Salevan (1981), Meyers (1987b)
<section>s</section>
APPENDIX XIII: FEEDING TABLES
In this appendix some examples of feeding tables for various species are provided:
1. Feeding Table for Rainbow Trout Fed Dry Diets
Fish Size
Crumble and
Amount of Feed
(% Body Weight/Biomass)
Per Day
(g)
Pellet Size
At: 7°C
9°C
11° C
13°C
15°C
No. 1
No. 1
No. 2
No. 2
No. 3
Nos. 3-4
No. 4
2.4 mm
2.4 mm
3.4 mm
3.4 mm
4.8 mm
4.8 mm
6.4 mm
Source: NRC, 1981 (simplified and adapted)
2. Feeding Table For Pacific (Coho) Salmon Fed Oregon Moist Pellet 1/
Fish Size
Amount of Feed
(% Body Weight/Biomass) Per Day
(g)
At: 40°F
45°F
50° F
55°F
(4.4°C)
(7.2°C)
(10.0°C)
(12.8°C)
(15.5°C)
Below 0.76
Above 41.3
Source: Piper et al., 1982 (simplified and adapted)
1/Amounts are greater than for a corresponding dry diet because the dry matter content of the feed is less.
3. Examples of Feeding Rates for Trout Fed Commercial Feed
Animal Size (g)
Feeding Rate (% Biomass/Day)
At: 5°C
13°C
19°C
180 plus
Source: Sales literature, Nippon Haigo Shiryo K.K., (Japan).
4. Feeding Rate for Tilapia with Commercial Pellets
Fish Size (g)
Feeding rate (% Biomass/Day)
Source: Sales literature, President Enterprises Corporation, (Taiwan).
5. Feeding Rate for Tilapia Fed 25% Protein Feed in Monoculture at 24°C
Fish Size (g)
Amount
of Feed
(g/fish/day)
(% of biomass)
Source: Marek, 1975 (adapted).
6. Feeding Rate for Tilapia (T. nilotica) in Tanks and Cages at 27-31°C Fed a 46% Protein Commercial Fish Feed
Fish Size (g)
% of Biomass to be Fed Per Day
Up to 5
30 reducing to 20
14 reducing to 12
7 reducing to 6.5
6 reducing to 4.5
4 reducing to 2
1.8 reducing to 1.5
Source: Pullin and Lowe-McConnell, 1982
7. Feeding rate for Tilapia With Commercial Pellets
Fish Size
Feeding rate (% Biomass/Day)
<25 g
>25 g
Source: Sales literature, Tai Roun Products Co., (Taiwan).
8. Typical Spring-Summer-Autumn Feeding Schedule For Channel Catfish in Ponds Based on Stocking Rates of 5 000- 7 500/ha and a 36% Crude Protein Diet 1/
Date
Water Temperature
Fish Size
% Body Weight To Feed 2/
(°F)
(°C)
(g)
Apr 15
Apr 30
May 15
May 30
Jun 15
Jun 30
Jul 15
Jul 30
Aug 15
Aug 30
Sep 15
Sep 30
Oct 15
Source: Piper et al., 1982
1/This table illustrates the combined effects of animal size and temperature on feeding rate. As temperature increases feeding rate also increases but, as the animals grow larger, metabolic rate decreases and lower feeding rates are recommended.
2/Fed six times per week.
9. Commercial Feeding Programme for Channel Catfish Fed Dry Feeds 1/
Fish Size
Feed Type
Feeding Amount
(% Biomass Per Day)
Feeding
Frequency
Swim -Up
Trout Chow size 00
Ad lib on water surface
3-10/Day
Up to 2.5 cm
Trout Chow No. 1
Ad lib on water surface
4/Day
Up To 3.8 cm
Trout Chow Nos. 2 or 3
4/Day
3.8-7.6 cm
Trout Chow Nos. 3 or 4
3/Day
7.6-12.7 cm
Trout Chow No. 4 or Catfish Starter
3/Day
12.7-17.8 cm
Catfish grower
32-45°F: 0.5%
45-55°F: 1.0%
2/Week
4/Week
17.8 cm-market
Catfish chow (in ponds)
55-65°F 2.0%
6/Week
or
65-75°F 3.0%
6/Week
Catfish cage chow (in cages)
75-85°F 4-6%
7/Week
85-95°F 3-4%
5-6/Week
Broodstock
Catfish breeder chow
32-45°F 0.5%
4/Week
45-55°F 1.0%
5/Week
55-65°F 2.0%
6/Week
65-75°F 3.0%
6/Week
Source: Ralston Purina, 1974
1/Like Table 8, this feeding chart illustrates the combined effect of increasing animal size and seasonal water temperatures on recommended feeding rates.
10. Feeding Rates for Channel Catfish Fed Floating Feed
Fish Size
% Biomass to be Fed
Daily At Various Temperatures (°C)
(mm)
(g)
30 plus
Source: Foltz, 1982 (simplified).
11. Feeding Rate of Channel Catfish with Commercial Feed
Animal Size
Feeding Rate (% Biomass/Day)
60°F
70°F
75-85°F
>90°F
(Inches)
(g)
15.5°C
21°C
24-29°C
>32°C
Source: Sales literature, Western Grain Company, Alabama, USA
12. Experimental Feeding Guide For Carp
(% Body Weight/Biomass Per Day)
Pellet Size:
1.5mm
1.5mm
2.7mm
4mm
5mm
5mm
Temperature
(°C)
Animal wt:
Source: A. Coche (pers. comm.)
13. Feeding Rate For Marine Shrimp (Penaeus monodon)
Animal Age/Size
Feed Type
Feed Rate (% Biomass/Day)
Up to P30
PL No. 1
P30 - 0.6 g
PL No. 2
0.6 g - 5 g
Starter No. 1
5 - 10 g
Starter No. 2
10 - 20 g
Grower
20 g - market size
Finisher
Source: Sales literature, Hanaqua Feed Corporation, Taiwan, 1984
<section>t</section>
APPENDIX XIV: FEEDING DEVICES
1. MOBILE DEVICES FOR DRY FEEDS
2. STATIONARY DEVICES FOR DRY FEEDS
3. FEEDING DEVICES FOR WET OR MOIST FEEDS
4. OTHER DEVICES
The feeding of fish and shrimp is done by hand in most farms and there are advantages in doing so. The main one is that it enables the operator to inspect his stock regularly and to judge whether they are eating properly. It also enables him to check the other parameters of the pond/tank/cage at the same time.
There are, however, a number of mechanical aids to hand feeding and many types of automatic feeders on the market. Automatic feeders are particularly appropriate to intensive systems and the feeding of nursery fry tanks which require frequent, small doses of feed.
This appendix lists and illustrates some of the major types of feeding device. Automatic feeders are available for dry diets. Moist diets are difficult to dispense automatically because of their texture. The exact operational details of each feeder are not illustrated, only the principle involved. Details of devices for fry feeding are given in another FAO publication (Berka, 1973). Commercially available feeders are marketed by aquaculture equipment supply companies in each country. The names of some can be found in the annual Buyers Guide of the American journal, 'Aquaculture Magazine'; advertisements for them are often to be found in 'Fish Farming International'.
Some feeders, particularly demand feeders, are relatively easy to construct using simple materials like oil drums or plastic containers.
1. MOBILE DEVICES FOR DRY FEEDS
Feed does not necessarily have to be carried round a pond. It can be pushed round in a wheelbarrow or, if the ponds are large or many, and the bunds are wide and strong enough to take a vehicle, the feed can be towed in a truck or a tractor driven trailer. The feed can then be shovelled or thrown into the pond by the operators.
Feed can be more efficiently distributed in this manner with mechanical help. Nearly all equipment of this type depends upon a blowing device powered by the truck or tractor engine. Feed is released into the turbo blower by the operator who controls the time (and therefore the amount of feed) and the direction in which it is ejected. This then is still a form, albeit mechanically aided, of manual feeding. Hoppers in this type of equipment can contain up to 3-4 tons of feed at a time and blowers will distribute feed over an area of up to 6 x 3 m on each occasion or up to a distance of 20 m from the pond bank.
Blower feeders are obviously designed for very large farm units and are not appropriate for small-scale aquaculture: they are mentioned here for completeness.
Similarly, while feed is often transported by boat and fed by hand or by shovel, devices have been used in large farms to aid this operation. These include mobile boat mounted blowers, as above, and longitudinal slots in the bottom of boats through which different amounts of feed can be released by operating a lever.
2. STATIONARY DEVICES FOR DRY FEEDS
2.1 Electrically Powered Feeders
2.2 Demand Feeders
2.3 Water Controlled Feeder
These devices can be grouped into a number of categories. Some require mains or battery electrical power. Some rely on water power, others on the weight of the feed and the action of the feeding fish.
2.1 Electrically Powered Feeders
These fall into two broad categories - those which operate mechanically and those which employ compressed air.
In both cases the control devices are electrical. The time and duration (thus the amount of feed) can be pre-set by the operator using an electrical timer. This may be mains or battery driven and it may operate a single feeder or a whole bank of feeders. Some sophisticated feeders are controlled not only by timers but also by sensors which detect when certain environmental factors are correct, such as temperature or light intensity.
2.1.1 Compressed Air Feeders
Basically, though there are many variants and patented examples of compressed air feeders, most are based on the same principle. A compressor supplies air to one or a number of feeders. The supply of air to each feeder is normally shut off. Each feeder has a supply of feed in a hopper mounted above a feed distribution pipe, in turn placed over the tank or pond. Feed is allowed to fall by gravity from the hopper into the distribution pipe. It ceases to flow when the orifice of the hopper becomes blocked by the fallen feed. A blast of air is introduced into the distribution pipe by the release of a valve controlled by a timer and the feed is ejected with considerable force. The amount of feed ejected on each occasion depends on the diameter of the distribution pipe and the hopper outlet and, principally, by the length of time that the blast of air is allowed to pass through the distribution pipe.
2.1.2 Mechanical Feeders
The operation of these types of feeders, which are also controlled by timers, depends on electro-magnets or electric motors. The principles of operation are best described by the following series of diagrams:
Type 1
Movement of the slug 'A' is controlled by an electro-magnet. The space 'B' governs the amount of feed released at each movement of 'A'.
Type 2
Here the feed trough consists of two parts, one inside the other. The movement of the inner one is controlled by an electro-magnet. When the holes in the two parts of the feeder coincide, the feed falls through.
Type 3
In this version the feed falls from the hopper on to a disc which is rotated by an electrical motor at intervals to eject a portion of feed. The motor also releases the feed from the hopper on to the disc by operating a valve. The feed can either be released directionally, using the guide shield 'B' or, if the latter is removed, throughout a 360 angle.
Type 4
In type 4, an endless screw mechanism transfers the feed from the hopper to the outlet. The amount of feed released depends on the number of revolutions of the motor drive screw, which is controlled by a timer as is the periodicity of feeding.
Type 5
Type 5 is similar to type 4 except that a blower is added, which distributes the feed over a greater distance.
Type 6
In type 6, the feed is delivered on a conveyor belt driven, at selected intervals, by a motor controlled by a time switch.
Type 7
In type 7, a series of spikes on a revolving spindle overturn a row of feed containers in turn. The frequency depends on the speed of revolution of the spindle.
There are many commercial varieties of the feeders whose principles were described above.
2.2 Demand Feeders
There are also many different varieties of demand feeders but their general principle is the same. Some species of fish learn very rapidly to use demand feeders but they are usually unsuitable for small fish which are unable to operate them. The following diagram illustrates the principle. The advantages and disadvantages of demand feeding are discussed in some of the papers listed in 'further reading' at the end of this appendix.
In the demand type of feeder illustrated above, the fish touch the rod connected to a plug or plate in the bottom of the feed hopper. This plug normally closes the hopper so that feed does not fall out. When moved by the movement of the bait rod, a small quantity of feed is released. The quantity of feed released on each occasion can be controlled by the shape and design of the plug. The plug is usually ball shaped or an inverted cone. These feeders can easily be 'home-made' (see Hepher and Prugenin, 1981 and Meriwether, 1986).
Another type of feeder has advantages over the normal demand feeder; it relies on the WEIGHT of food consumed. Instead of the bait rod in the example shown above, there is a rod with a feed tray on the end. As the weight of feed on the tray decreases, more feed is released from the hopper.
2.3 Water Controlled Feeder
The operation of these feeders is similar to those diagrammed in section 2.1.2 of this appendix, except that the motive power is water instead of electricity. Either a water wheel is used or water is allowed to run into a container which empties on a syphon system, like a lavatory cistern, every time it becomes full. As the container empties (or the wheel moves) it triggers a valve on a feed hopper which releases a controlled amount of feed.
3. FEEDING DEVICES FOR WET OR MOIST FEEDS
The non-manual distribution of high moisture feeds is much more difficult than that of dry feeds because of the formers' stickyness. However, the principles involved in some dry feeders can be adapted for use with moist feeds. The examples given in section 2.1.2 (Types 4 and 6) can be modified for this purpose but normally hoppers will need to be re-designed to prevent the feed sticking together.
In Japan, where small 'trash' fish is often used for feeding large aquaculture cages, feeding is done in the following way. A feeding boat moors alongside the cage. Alongside the feeding boat itself is a barge full of 'trash' fish. A suction hose is put into the barge and, using a pump on the feeding boat, the feed is sucked up into it. From there the feed is transferred to the centre of the cage using water pumped through a pipe mounted on a boom (see following page).
This type of feed and other moist feeds can also be transferred to large cages and ponds more effectively than it can be fed by hand, by using a mechanical 'thrower'. This is simply a centrifugal fan into which the feed is dropped.
Another type of feeder used for dispensing moist minced feed is based on forcing the feed through a horizontally mounted die plate through the use of a heavy weight.
The weight type of minced feed dispenser runs continously; the system does not lend itself to operation at fixed intervals.
Flowing water is used to transfer freshly made moist pellets in another feeding technique. In this case the feed is made, in the pre-determined quantity for each cage, in a mixer/extruder mounted on board a boat. The mixer/extruder is driven mechanically or hydraulically from the boat engine. The extruded feed falls into a trough where a supply of water, provided from a small on-board pump, washes it through a pipe into one or more cages:
4. OTHER DEVICES
Floating feeds are sometimes put within a floating collar so that they do not float away all over the pond or tank. In this way the feeding activity of the fish can be concentrated in one place. Less feed is wasted and it is easier for the operator to observe the feeding behaviour of the fish.
Further reading for Appendix XIV:
Berka (1973), Coil Morales (1983), Lee (1981), Sedgwick (1982), Stevenson (1982), Hepher and Pruginin (1981), Meriwether (1986).
<section>u</section>
APPENDIX XV: TOXIC AND ANTI-METABOLITE SUBSTANCES OCCURRING IN FEEDS
The following table, which provides a summary of the toxic and anti-metabolite elements occurring in common feedstuffs which are known to affect aquaculture species, is extracted from New, (1986a):
Toxin or Antimetabolite
Type
Factor or Effect
Examples of sources
Fungal toxins
Aflatoxins
Produced by the mould Aspergillus spp., which grows, particularly in high temperature/high humidity conditions, on ingredients and compund feeds, particularly groundnut meals and cereals
T-2 toxins
As above, orginating from the mould, Fusarium spp.
Vomitoxin
Caused by Fusarium spp.
General deterioration of feed quality
Caused by Penicillium spp. moulds
Bacterial infection
Salmonella contamination
Contaminated ingredients, especially animal proteins, together with insects and rodent droppings
Mycobacteriosis
Unpasteurized trash fish and viscera
Bacterial toxins
Botulism
Trash fish stored anaerobically
Chemical contaminants
Pesticides and Herbicides, such as organo chlorine and poly chlorinated biphenyls (PCB's).
Plant ingredients, contaminated by spraying, and accumulation in fish and fish products used as ingredients
Heavy metals,e.g., Mercury
Concentrated by animals and plants used as ingredient sources
Various
Contamination of feeds by traces of chemicals used during feed processing e.g., lubricants, fumigants, water softening chemicals, etc.
Volatile N-nitrosamines (VNA)
Fish meal, especially that dried by hot air exhausted from an oil burner (direct heating/drying method)
Natural feed components
Cyclopropenoid acids Synergistic effect on aflatoxins and act as growth inhibitors.
Kapok and cottonseed oils
Cyanogenetic glycosides
Linamarin
In expeller linseed meals, lima beans, cassava
Dhurrin
From damaged or old sorghum and maize
Vitamin antagonists
Linatine (Anti-vitamin B[6])
Expeller linseed meals
Lipoxidase (Anti-vitamin A)
Soybean meal
Antivitamin D
Soybean meal
Antivitamin B[1]. (Thiaminase)
An enzyme present in raw fish, particularly freshwater fish, herrings, mussels, clams, and shrimp
Antivitamin E
From kidney and haricot beans. (Note: vitamin E deficiency also caused by lipid rancidity)
Antibiotins (e.g., Avidin)
In raw egg white; normally egg (used in larval diets) is cooked. Biotin can also be inactivated by rancid fats
Alkaloids
Green parts of potato plants
Mimosine
Growth inhibitor from ipil-ipil (tangen-tangen)
Toxic amino acids
Chick peas
Natural feed components (continued)
Gossypol (reduces amino acid availability)
Pigment from cottonseed products
Glucosides
Rapeseed and mustard seed meals
Oxalic acid
Sugar beet
Phytates (from complexes with proteins, phosphorus, calcium, zinc, copper, magnesium, etc., thus reducing availability of these components)
Soybean, sesame, groundnut and cottonseed meals; cereal hulls, germ and endosperm
Protease inhibitors (affects activity of the trypsins and exacerbates sulphur-amino acid deficiencies)
Unheated or underheated soybean meal and protein concentrates
Haemagglutinins
Unheated soybean meal; various species of beans
Sapogenin glycosides
Soybean meal, alfalfa, sugar beet (not normally toxic but water extracts of some extracted saponins are used to kill fish during harvesting in some locations)
Peroxides
Oxidised oils
Poorly stored and inadequately protected (by antioxidants) ingredients, particularly those with high poly-unsaturated fatty acid levels such as fish oils and meals.
<section>v</section>
APPENDIX XVI: METHODS OF FEED ANALYSIS
INTRODUCTION
The following methods of feed analysis are provided by courtesy of the Tropical Products Research Institute, London, England and were prepared by Cockerell, Halliday and Morgan (1975). In addition to the techniques reproduced here the original text contains methods for the determination of thioglucoside, urease, total sugars in molasses, potassium content of molasses, and free gossypol in cottonseed meal.
A footnote has been added to the method for crude fat analysis, based on the experience of the author of this manual. The method for calculating NFE has been altered, so that it conforms with other parts of this manual.
The methods of analysis are otherwise as published by the original authors, who are thanked for their permission to reproduce them here.
SAMPLE PREPARATION
All samples of raw materials and finished products should be stored for analysis in sealed containers. Prior to analysis, samples should be ground to pass through a 1 mm screen; where grinding is difficult a mortar and pestle can be used. In the case of moist samples or where grinding is unduly prolonged moisture determinations should be carried oat on the material before and after grinding, as described below.
MOISTURE DETERMINATION
Weigh out 4 to 5 g of the sample in a covered, flat, aluminium dish and dry to constant weight at 100° C. preferably in an oven fitted with controlled ventilation.
CRUDE PROTEIN
Total nitrogen is determined by the Kjeldahl method and the result multiplied by 6.25 to give crude protein.
Reagents:
1. Sulphuric acid (98%), nitrogen free.
2. Potassium sulphate, reagent grade.
3. Mercuric oxide, reagent grade.
4. Paraffin wax.
5. Sodium hydroxide, 40% solution.
6. Sodium sulphide, 4% solution.
7. Pumice chips.
8. Boric acid/indicator solution. Add 5 ml of indicator solution (0.1% methyl red and 0.2% bromocresol green in alcohol) to 1 litre saturated boric acid solution.
9. Hydrochloric acid standard solution (0.1N).
Apparatus:
1. Macro Kjeldahl digestion and distillation units.
2. Kjeldahl flasks (500 ml capacity or larger).
3. Conical flasks, 250 ml.
Method:
Weigh accurately approximately 1 g of sample into a digestion flask and add 10 g potassium sulphate, 0.7 g mercuric oxide (pre-measured catalyst tablets containing these two reagents are available), and 20 ml sulphuric acid. Heat the flask gently at an inclined angle until frothing subsides and then boil until the solution clears.
Continue boiling for a further half hour. If the frothing is excessive, a small amount of paraffin wax can be added.
On cooling add about 90 ml distilled water, recool, add 25 ml sulphide solution and mix. Add a small piece of pumic to prevent 'bumping' and 80 ml of sodium hydroxide solution while tilting the flask so that two layers are formed. Connect rapidly to the condenser unit, heat and collect distilled ammonia in 50 ml boric acid/indicator solution. Collect 50 ml of distillate. On completion of distillation remove the receiver (wash condenser tip) and titrate against standard acid solution.
Calculation:
Nitrogen content of sample (%)
Crude protein content (%) = nitrogen content × 6.25
CRUDE FAT
Reagents and equipment:
1. Petroleum ether (b.p. 40-60°C).
2. Extraction thimbles.
3. Soxhlet extraction apparatus.
Method:
Weigh into an extraction thimble 2-3 g of the dried sample (residue from dry matter determination can be used). Place the thimble inside the soxhlet apparatus. Place a dry, tared solvent flask in position beneath, add the required quantity of solvent and connect to condenser. Adjust heating rate to give a condensation rate of 2 to 3 drops/second and extract for 16 hours. (The extraction time may be reduced to a minimum of six hours by increasing the condensation rate). 1/ On completion remove the thimble and reclaim ether using the apparatus. Complete the removal of ether on a boiling water bath and dry flask at 105° C for 30 minutes. Cool in a desiccator and weigh.
1/Author's Note: If the straight type of extraction tube is used to hold the thimble instead of a soxhlet apparatus, extraction times can be reduced to one hour and still provide results accurate enough for routine work. In this way nine samples can be analysed in duplicate per day, using only 3 heaters. This is important as lipid analysis is often a limiting factor in obtaining the rapid results necessary for timely quality control; lack of equipment prevents analysis of more than a few samples if 16, or even 6, hours extraction time is insisted on.
Calculation:
ASH
Weigh a 2 g sample into a dry, tared porcelain dish and then place in a muffle furnace at 600° C for 6 hours. Cool in a desiccator and weigh.
Calculation:
ACID SOLUBLE AND INSOLUBLE ASH
Reagents and Apparatus:
1. Hydrochloric acid (1 to 2.5 v/v)
2. Filter paper, ashless
3. Dishes, porcelain
Method:
Use the residue obtained from ash determination. Boil with 25 ml hydrochloric acid, taking care to avoid spattering, filter through ashless paper and wash with hot water until acid free. Place filter paper and residue into a dry, tared porcelain dish and place in a muffle furnace at 600 C for 2 hours or until carbon free.
Calculation:
CRUDE FIBRE
Crude fibre is determined as that fraction remaining after digestion with standard solutions of sulphuric acid and sodium hydroxide under carefully controlled conditions.
Reagents:
1. Sulphuric acid solution (0.255N).
2. Sodium hydroxide solution (0.313N).
3. Antifoam reagent (Octyl alcohol).
4. Ethyl alcohol.
5. Hydrochloric acid, 1% v/v.
Apparatus:
1. Beakers, 600 ml tall-sided.
2. Round-bottom flask condenser unit.
3. Buchner flasks, 1 litre.
4. Buchner funnels, Hartley 3 section pattern.
5. Crucibles, silica with porous base.
6. Rubber cones to fit above.
Method:
Weigh about 2 g of the dried, fat-free sample into a 600 ml beaker (for convenience the residue from ether extraction can be used). Add 200 ml of hot sulphuric acid, place the beaker under the condenser and bring to boiling within 1 minute. Boil gently for exactly 30 minutes, using distilled water to maintain volume and to wash down particles adhering to the sides. Use antifoam if necessary. Filter through Whatman No. 541 paper in a Buchner funnel using suction and wash well with boiling water. Transfer residue back to beaker and add 200 ml hot sodium hydroxide solution. Replace under the condenser and again bring to boil within 1 minute. After boiling for exactly 30 minutes filter through porous crucible and wash with boiling water, 1% hydrochloric acid and then again with boiling water. Wash twice with alcohol, dry overnight at 100 °C, cool and weigh. Ash at 500 °C for 3 hours, cool and weigh. Calculate the weight of fibre by difference.
Calculation:
Crude fibre (% of fat-free DM)
NITROGEN-FREE EXTRACT (NFE)
Calculate as 100 - % crude protein - 7, crude fat - % crude fibre - % ash - % moisture.
FREE FATTY ACID CONTENT OF FATS & OILS
Reagents and apparatus:
1. Ethyl alcohol.
2. Phenolphthalein (1% soln. in alcohol).
3. Sodium hydroxide (0.25N).
4. Stoppered flasks, 250 ml.
Method:
Weigh 7.05 g oil or fat into a stoppered flask, add 50 ml alcohol previously neutralized by adding sufficient 0.25N sodium hydroxide to give faint pinkish colour with phenolphthalein (2 ml). Titrate with sodium hydroxide with vigorous shaking until a permanent faint pink colour appears and persists.
Calculation:
Free fatty acids % (as oleic acid) = volume of 0.25N NaOH used in titration
CALCIUM
Reagents:
1. Hydrochloric acid (1 to 3 v/v).
2. Nitric acid (70%).
3. Ammonium hydroxide (1 to 1 v/v).
4. Methyl red indicator (Dissolve 1 g in 200 ml alcohol),
5. Ammonium oxalate (4.2% soln.).
6. Sulphuric acid (98%).
7. Standard potassium permanganate soln. (0.05N).
Apparatus:
1. Porcelain dishes.
2. Volumetric flasks, 250 ml.
3. Beakers, 250 ml.
4. Quantitative filter paper & funnels.
5. Burette.
Method:
Weigh 2.5 g finely ground material into a porcelain dish and ash as above (alternatively use residue from ash determination). Add 40 ml hydrochloric acid and a few drops of nitric acid to the residue, boll, cool and transfer to a 250 ml volumetric flask. Dilute to volume and mix.
Pipette a suitable aliquot of the solution (100 ml for cereal feeds; 25 ml for mineral feeds) into a beaker, dilute to 100 ml and add 2 drops of methyl red. Add ammonium hydroxide dropwise until a brownish orange colour is obtained, then add two drops of hydrochloric acid to give a pink colour. Dilute with 50 ml water, boil and add while stirring 10 ml of hot 4.2% ammonium oxalate solution. Adjust pH with acid to bring back pink colour if necessary. Allow precipitate to settle out, and filter, washing precipitate with ammonium hydroxide solution (1 to 50 v/v). Place the filter paper with precipitate back in beaker and add a mixture of 125 ml water and 5 ml sulphuric acid. Heat to 70° C and titrate against the standard permanganate solution.
Calculation:
SODIUM CHLORIDE
Reagents
1. Standard 0.1N silver nitrate solution.
2. Standard 0.1N ammonium thiocyanate solution.
3. Ferric indicator - saturated aqueous solution of ferric alum.
4. Potassium permanganate solution - 6% w/v.
5. Urea solution - 5% w/v.
6. Acetone (A.R. grade).
Method:
Weigh 2 g sample into a 250 ml conical flask. Moisten sample with 20 ml water and then add, by pipette, 15 ml 0.1N silver nitrate solution - mix well. Add 20 ml concentrated nitric acid and 10 ml potassium permanganate solution and mix. Heat mixture continuously until liquid clears and nitrous fumes are evolved - cool. Add 10 ml urea solution and allow to stand for 10 minutes. Add 10 ml acetone and 5 ml ferric indicator and back titrate the excess silver nitrate with the 0.1N thiocyanate solution to the red brown end point.
Calculation:
Calculate result as sodium chloride.
PHOSPHOROUS
Reagents:
1. Molybdovanadate reagent. Dissolve 40 g ammonium molybdate 4H 0 in 400 ml hot water and cool. Dissolve 2 g ammonium metavanadate in 250 ml hot water, cool and add 450 ml 70% perchloric acid. Gradually add the molybdate to the vanadate solution with stirring and dilute to 2 litres.
2. Phosphorous standards. Prepare stock solution by dissolving 8.788 g potassium dihydrogen orthophosphate in water and making up to 1 litre. Prepare the working solution by diluting the stock 1 in 20 (working concentration = 0.1 mg P/ml).
Apparatus:
1. Spectrophotometer to read at 400 mm.
2. Graduated flasks, 100 ml.
Method:
Pipette an aliquot of the sample solution prepared as for the calcium determination into a 100 ml flask and add 20 ml of the molybdovanadate reagent. Make up to volume, mix and stand for 10 minutes. Transfer aliquots of the working standard containing 0.5, 0.8, 1.0 and 1.5 mg phosphorus to 100 ml flasks and treat as above. Read sample at 400 mm setting the 0.5 mg standard at 100% transmission. Determine mg phosphorus in each sample aliquot from a standard curve.
CAROTENE
Reagents:
1. Acetone.
2. Hexane (b.p. 60-70°C).
3. Diatomaceous earth.
4. Activated magnesia.
Apparatus:
1. Reflux apparatus.
2. Chromatographic tubes (30 cm × 12 mm i.d.).
3. Spectrophotometer.
Weigh out 2 g of sample (more or less depending on carotene content) and reflux with 15 ml of a 3:7 acetone:hexane mixture for one hour. Cool and filter into a 50 ml volumetric flask, washing with hexane and making up to volume.
Prepare a column using a 1:1 mixture of activated magnesia and diatomaceous earth. Pack under vacuum to a total depth of about 7 cm and then add 0.5 cm anhydrous sodium sulphate to the top of the column. All materials used in making the column must be thoroughly dry.
With the column under vacuum and a 50 ml volumetric flask to collect the eluate apply 25 ml of the sample extract to the column. As the last of the extract enters the adsorbent add acetone:hexane eluent (1:9) and continue until the carotene band is washed through. Add acetone:hexane eluent (1:9) to the flask to make up to volume and then read in the spectrophotometer at 436mm . Prepare a standard curve using beta carotene concentrations of 0.1 to 5m g/ml of acetone hexane mixture.
AFLATOXIN ANALYSIS
A method of aflatoxin analysis is outlined below which is suitable for materials such as groundnut meal, coconut meal and palm kernel meal. For full details of the method and for alternative procedures reference should be made to B.D. Jones (1972), Methods of aflatoxin analysis: Report No G 70, Tropical Products Institute, London, England.
Reagents:
1. Chloroform (Reagent grade).
2. Diethyl ether (Reagent grade).
3. Chloroform/methanol mixture (95/5 v/v).
4. 'Celite' diatomaceous earth.
5. Kieselgel 'G' (Merck).
6. Qualitative standard. Helps to distinguish aflatoxin spots from other fluorescent spots which may be present. A groundnut meal containing aflatoxins B, obtainable from the Tropical Products Institute, London, can be used for this purpose.
Apparatus:
1. Thin layer chromatography plates, 20 × 20 cm.
2. U.V. lamp, peak emission at 365 mu.
3. Bottles, wide-mouthed, 250 ml.
4. Micropipettes.
5. Shaking device.
Method:
Weigh 10 ml of material into a wide mouthed bottle and thoroughly mix in 10 ml of water. (If high fat material is used, a prior Soxhlet extraction with petroleum ether will be necessary). Add 100 ml of chloroform, stopper with a chloroform resistant bung and shake for 30 minutes. Filter the extract through 'Celite', take 20 ml of filtrate and make up to 25 ml (Soln. A.). Take another 20 ml of filtrate and concentrate to 5 ml (Soln. B.).
Prepare thin layer plates by shaking Kieselgel 'G' (100 g) with water (220 ml) for 20 minutes and applying the mixture to the plates with a suitable apparatus to a depth of 508 u. Leave for 1 hour, then dry at 100°C. Spot 10 and 20 ul of solution B and 5 and 10 ul of solution A onto a plate, together with a qualitative standard spot, in a line 2 cm from the bottom of the plate and at least 2 cm in from each side. Carry out the spot application in subdued light.
Develop the plate in diethyl ether to a height of 12 cm. Allow to dry in subdued light then redevelop the plate in chloroform:methanol (95/5, v/v) to a height of 10 cm from the baseline. Examine the plate in a dark room, 30 cm from the UV source. The presence of a blue fluorescent spot at Rf 0.5 to 0.55 indicates aflatoxin B (check that the standard spot also lies in this range). The presence of a second spot at Rf. 0.45 to 5 indicates aflatoxin G. The toxicity level of a sample can then be classified in terms of aflatoxins B and G according to the following table:
Vol. Applied (ul)
Cone. of aflatoxins (m g/kg)
Toxicity level if fluorescence observed
No fluorescence
Fluorescence
5m l (Soln. A)
very high
10m l (Soln. A)
high
10m l (Soln. B)
medium
20m l (Soln. B)
low
Note: References for each method quoted in this appendix are given in the original paper (Cockerell, et al., 1975).
<section>w</section>
APPENDIX XVII: SCIENTIFIC NAMES OF AQUACULTURED SPECIES REFERRED TO IN THIS MANUAL
Ayu
Plecoglossus altivelis
Carp, Common
Cyprinus carpio
Carps, 'Chinese':
Bighead
Aristichythys nobilis
Black
Mylopharyngodon piceus
Grass
Ctenopharyngodon idella
Mud
Cirrhina molitorella
Silver
Hypophthalmichthys molitrix
Carps, 'Indian':
Catla
Catla catla
Mrigal
Cirrhinus mrigala
Rohu
Labeo rohita
Catfish:
African
Clarias macrocephalus
Brackishwater
Clarias gariepinus
Chrysichthys nigrodigitatus
Channel
Ictalurus punctatus
Common
(Danubian Wels; Sheatfish)
Siluris glanis
Walking
Clarias batrachus
Colossoma
Colossoma spp.
Eel
Anguilla spp.
Grouper
Epinephalus spp.
Milkfish
Chanos chanos
Pacu
Prochilodus spp.
Prawns, Freshwater:
Giant River Prawn
Macrobrachium rosenbergii
Rabbit Fish
Siganus spp.
Salmon, Atlantic
Salmo salar
Salmon, Chum Pacific:
Chinook
Oncorhynchus tshawytscha
Chum
Oncorhynchus keta
Coho
Oncorhynchus kisutch
Seabass, European
Dicentrarchus labrax
Seabass
(Giant Sea Perch)
Lates calcarifer
Sea Bream, Giltlead
Sparus auratus
Sea Bream, Red
Chrysophrys (Sparus) major
Shrimp, Marine:
Banana Prawn
Penaeus merguiensis
Giant Tiger Prawn
Penaeus monodon
Kuruma Shrimp
Penaeus japonicus
Northern White Shrimp
Penaeus setiferus
Snakehead
Ophicephalus spp.
Snapper
Lutjanus spp.
Tambaqui
Colossoma spp.
Tilapia 1/:
Blue
Tilapia discolor Tilapia aurea
Java
Tilapia mossambica
Trout, Rainbow 2/
Nile
Tilapia nilotica
Salmo gairdneri
Yellowtail
Seriola quinqueradiata
1/All tilapia have been referred to as Tilapia spp. The disputed scientific terms Sarotherodon spp. and Oreochromis spp. have not been used.
2/The trout species normally aquacultured, for which feeds are formulated.
<section>x</section>
APPENDIX XVIII: KEY TO SCIENTIFIC NAMES OF INGREDIENTS REFERRED TO IN THIS MANUAL
African Oil-Palm
Elaeis guineensis
Alfalfa
Medicago sativa
Algaroba
Prosopis chilensis
Anchovy
Engraulis spp.
Banana
Musa paradisiaca
Barley
Hordeum vulgare
Brewers Yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Caoutchouc
Hevea brasiliensis
Carrot
Daucus carota
Cassava
Manihot esculenta
Chickpea
Cicer arietianum
Clupeid
[a group of fish - see herring, anchovy]
Coconut
Cocos nucifera
Coffee
Coffea arabica
Copra
Cocos nucifera
Corn
Zea mays
Cotton
Gossyium spp.
Cow Pea
Vigna unguiculata
Dahl
Cajanus cajan
Dasheen (Yaro)
Colocasia esculenta
Flax
Linum usitatissimum
Gingelly
Sesamum indicum
Groundnut
Arachis hypogaea
Guar
Cyamopsis tetragonoloba
Herring
Clupea harengus
Horse Gram
Vigna unguiculata
Ipil-ipil
Leucaena leucocephala
Jerusalem Artichoke
Heliantus tuberosus
Kangkong (Swamp Cabbage)
Ipomea aquatica
Kapok
Ceiba pentandra
Lab lab 1/(Egyptian Bean)
Dolochos lablab
Lentil
Lens culinaris
Linseed
Linum usitatissimum
Lucerne
Medicago sativa
Lupin
Lupinus spp.
Maize
Zea mays
Manioc
Manihot esculenta
Menhaden
Brevoortia tyrannus
Millets
[various species]
Milo
Sorghum bicolor
Mung Bean (Black Gram)
Vigna mungo
Mung Bean (Green Gram)
Vigna radiata
Mustard
Brassica spp.
Oats
Avena sativa
Orange
Citrus sinensis
Papaya
Carica papaya
Para Rubber
Hevea brasiliensis
Peanut
Arachis hypogaea
Poppy
Papaver somniferum
Potato
Solanum tuberosum
Rape
Brassica spp.
Red Bean
Vigna umbellata
Red Dahl
Lens culinaris
Red Gram
Cajanus cajan
Rice
Oryza sativa
Safflower
Carthamus tinctorius
Saithe (Coley)
Pollachius virens
Sago Palm
Metroxylon sagu
Saman (Cow Tamarind)
Samanea saman
Senegal Gum
Acacia Senegal
Sesame
Sesamum indicum
Sesbania
Sesbania grandiflora
Silkworm
Bombyx mori
Sisal Hemp
Agave sisalana
Sorghum
Sorghum bicolor
Soybean
Glycine max
Split Pea
Lens culinaris
Squid
e.g., Loligo spp.
Sugar Beet
Beta vulgaris
Sunflower
Helianthus annuus
Sweet Potato
Ipomoea batatus
Tamarind
Tamarindus indica
Tapioca
Manihot esculenta
Tuna
e.g., Thunnus thynnus
Velvet mesquite
Prosopis velutina
Water hyacinth
Eichhornia crassipes
Wheat
Triticum aestivum
Yam
Dioscorea alata
1/Also used to describe a form of algae (see section 2.3)
<title>ADCP/REP/87/26 - Feed and Feeding of Fish and Shrimp. Feed & Feeding of fish & Shrimp</title>
<section>1</section>
ABSTRACT
This manual has been prepared as an easy-to-read guide to the choice, manufacture, storage and use of feed in small-scale aquaculture. It was written for fish and crustacean farmers, extension officers and university aquaculture students.
Feeding increases the productivity of aquaculture farms but it constitutes the highest single cost item of running expenditure. Care in its use is therefore imperative. The manual attempts to answer the basic questions likely to be asked by those intending to apply feed as part of a programme to intensify production.
The main sections of the manual deal with the need to feed, feed composition, choice of feeds, feed manufacture, nutritional requirements, storage, feeding practice, record keeping and likely problems. Eighteen appendices cover a wide range of related topics including examples of feed formulae, feed machinery, feeding devices, simple tables of feed composition, binders, feeding tables and analytical methods.
<section>2</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
This manual is intended to be an easy-to-read guide to the selection, manufacture, storage, and use of feed in small-scale aquaculture. it concentrates on feed for fingerling fish and postlarval shrimp/prawns up to market-size animals; it does not cover hatchery or live feeds, or fertilization techniques, which are the subject of other FAO manuals. The target audience of the manual is fish and shrimp farmers, extension officers and university aquaculture students.
The topic covered in this manual is very broad. In a publication of this length it is only possible to introduce and summarize information on each subject. For this reason extensive lists of other publications have been provided at the end of each section or sub-section, where relevant, under the heading 'further reading', for those whose interest in that subject has been stimulated.
The manual has been organized into an introduction and eleven major sections, each of which answers a basic question, such as 'why should I feed'?, 'what is feed composed of'?, ' can I make my own compounded feeds'? etc..
A number of specialized topics are covered in eighteen appendices. The topics covered include over 40 examples of fish and crustacean feed formulations, premix composition, ingredient definitions, feeding tables and feeders and a glossary of terms used. 1/
1/The scientific names of aquacultural species cited are given in Appendix XVII; those of ingredients are provided in Appendix XVIII
The author hopes that his readers will find the manual useful and instructive. Constructive criticisim of its content, as of its omissions, would be welcomed so that it may be improved in future editions.
<section>3</section>
2. WHY SHOULD I FEED?
2.1 Energy
2.2 Feeding Habits of Fish
2.3 Types of Natural Food
2.4 Fertilization
2.5 Effect of Feeding
'What is this manual all about? Fish already grow in my ponds. I have managed to increase production by fertilization. Why should I spend more money on feed? Will I be able to produce more or make more profit'?
These are the sort of questions this section will try to answer. Having done so, the rest of the manual deals with the type of feed that can be used, how to make mixed (compound) feeds, and how to store and use feed on your farm.
In this section, information on energy and the feeding habits of fish is summarized. The types of food available to them are then introduced. The ways in which the food available to the fish can be increased are discussed. Finally there are some notes on the economic effects of feeding.
The object of aquaculture should be to produce the maximum weight of marketable fish or shrimp from a given volume of water in the shortest time at the least cost.
2.1 Energy
Fish and shrimp require food to supply the energy that they need for movement and all the other activities in which they engage, and the 'building blocks' for growth. In this they do not differ from other farm animals, or humans. However, aquatic animals are 'cold-blooded'. Their body temperature is the same as the water in which they are living. They do not therefore have to consume energy to maintain a steady body temperature and they tend to be more efficient users of food than other farm animals. Their metabolic rate however depends very largely on the temperature of the water in which they are living. The optimum temperature (that at which they will grow best) is different for each species. Within the range of temperatures of which they are tolerant (those at which they will survive, eat and grow) metabolic rate, and the need for food, increases as the optimum temperature is reached. Thus, in areas where there is a wide range of water temperature seasonally, fish will
eat much more food in the summer than in the winter.
Energy can be defined as the capacity to do work. Energy is required to do mechanical work (for example, muscle activity for movement), chemical work (the chemical processes which take place in the body), electrical work (nerve activity) and osmotic work (maintaining the body fluids in an equilibrium with each other and with the medium, whether fresh, brackish or seawater in which the animal lives). Free energy is that which is left available for biological activity and growth after the energy requirements for maintaining body temperature (not necessary for fish) is satisfied. Excess energy is dissipated as heat.
From the point of view of the fish or shrimp farmer, the most economically important thing is the quantity and cost of the energy which is available for the growth of the animal being cultured. Food supplies this energy. The food requirements of different species vary in quantity and quality according to the nature of the animal, its feeding habits, its size, its environment, its reproductive state, etc.
The gross energy (or gross calorific value) of a food, sometimes designated as GE, is the total energy contained in it. Not all of it is available to the animal. Different components of the diet have different energy availabilities. This topic will be dealt with further in section 3 of this manual. The digestible energy (DE) of a food is the GE of the food less the energy of the faeces excreted. The energy available for the 'building blocks' of growth is what remains after the energy for metabolism 1/, reproduction, etc., has been supplied.
1/Metabolism is the sum of all the chemical and energy transactions of the body. It is the process by which nutritive material is built into living matter. Metabolism includes the storage of energy (anabolism) as fat, protein and carbohydrate, and its conversion (catabolism) into free energy for work and growth.
The metabolic rate of small fish and shrimp is greater than that of large animals. Small animals grow faster than large ones in terms of percentage increase in weight per day. Thus the feed requirements of small fish and shrimp are different to those of larger animals; small animals require a higher feeding rate (Appendix XIII). At a certain body size, growth rate starts to decline rapidly. The optimum marketable size of an aquaculture species normally occurs at this point, unless market factors dictate otherwise.
The topic of energy requirements is more fully dealt with in the papers listed under 'further reading' at the end of section 2.
2.2 Feeding Habits of Fish
Fish can be grouped into four main categories, according to the type of food which they prefer under natural conditions. These are herbivores, detritus feeders, carnivores, and omnivores.
Herbivores feed directly on the green plants which are the primary source of all food energy. Plants use the energy from sunlight to convert water, carbon dioxide from the air, and nutrients dissolved in the water into organic matter. This process is called photosynthesis. Herbivorous fish and shrimp may feed on microscopic plants - the smaller algae, or 'phytoplankton', or on larger (macroscopic) plants in the pond. Animals which consume plants are the most efficient users of the energy which ultimately arises from the sun. The more intermediate organisms there are between the energy 'fixation' of plants into food and the final consuming animal, the more opportunities for energy loss there are.
Detritus feeders are also very efficient because they feed mainly on dead organic matter (and any associated live organisms) at the bottom of the pond. Much of their food consists of the fungae and bacteria concerned in the breakdown of dead plant and animal matter. The pond detritus may originate from within the pond or from outside (dead leaves from overhanging trees, etc.).
Carnivorous fish and shrimp feed on other, usually smaller, animals. Those which eat the microscopic animals present in the water (the zooplankton) are usually classed as plankton eaters and included in the detritus eaters or omnivores. The larger animals consumed by carnivores include insects and their larvae, frogs, snails, molluscs, and other fish and crustaceans. Fish which feed on other fish are sometimes referred to as piscivores. Within a pond there is a whole series of animals eating other animals, which eat other animals, etc., all down what is known as the food chain until those that eat plants directly are reached. The higher in this food chain that the preferred food for a particular species of fish or shrimp appears, the less efficient that species is as a converter of natural energy into flesh. Piscivores, such as trout, feeding on natural food, are one of the least efficient fish in this sense 1/. The food chain of a carnivorous fish has at least four links
i.e.,
1/Carnivores, because of their feeding habit, require a higher protein level in their diet. This is reflected in the higher costs of artificial feeds, protein being the most expensive major feed component. Carnivores require more energy to eliminate the high levels of nitrogenous wastes which build up when animal protein, rather than plant protein, is digested.
ALGAE
ALGAE EATING CRUSTACEANS (ZOOPLANKTON)
ZOOPLANKTON EATERS
CARNIVOROUS FISH
Omnivores feed fairly unchoosingly on both plant, detritus and animal sources of food, depending on what is available. They are less efficient converters of plant energy than herbivores or detritus eaters, but more efficient than carnivores. Examples of these four categories of aquatic animals are shown in Table 1.
Probably the most efficient use of the natural food available in a pond is obtained by polyculture (the culture of more than one species of fish or shrimp simultaneously). If the species cultured are carefully selected, each will have the food it thrives on available to it without it having to compete with the other species present for its nutriment. The best known example of this in aquaculture is that of mixed (Indian or Chinese) carp culture, where up to four or five species of carp, each with a different feeding habit, are reared together.
Table 1 Examples of the Feeding Habits of Aquatic Animals
Herbivores
Detritus Feeders
Omnivores
Carnivores
Grass Carp
Mud Carp
Common carp
Trout and salmon
Molluscs
(clams, oysters, mussels, etc. 1/
F/w prawns
Mullet
Kuruma shrimp
Snakehead
Silver carp 2/
Channel catfish
Groupers
Black carp
Milkfish
Sea bass
Many tilapias
1/Plankton or zooplankton eaters
2/Phytoplankton eaters
The feeding habits of fish are reflected in their digestive anatomy. Typically, carnivores have a short gut with an extendable stomach for large prey. Omnivores which tend towards animal food still have a large stomach but also a longer intestine. Omnivores, such as common carp, which tend towards a plant diet have pharyngeal teeth, no stomach and a long intestine. The gut of herbivores, particularly those which consume phytoplankton, is the longest and most complex type. Anatomical details are given in Smith (1980).
The terms primary, secondary, and tertiary productivity are often applied to pond culture. The primary producers, which convert nutrients, carbon dioxide, and water into organic matter (food) using sunlight energy, are algae. Larger plants are also primary producers but, unless eaten by fish, they do not contribute to the productivity of the pond; indeed, by creating shade and competing for nutrients, they may reduce it. Consuming organisms comprise the secondary or tertiary productivity of the pond. Secondary, or intermediate producers are animals which consume plant food and 'elevate' it to a secondary level. Only part of the food is used for growth, as much as 90% being lost in metabolism. The tertiary producers are those organisms which feed on other animals, resulting in a further, similar, loss of energy. The fish or shrimp which are cultured for food are the 'terminal' producers of the pond (although under less controlled conditions there may be other fish or aquatic
animals which prey on them).
It is obvious therefore that the light and nutrients available in a pond are the limiting factor in the quantity of plant material (and thus that of all the other links in the chain - sometimes referred to as trophic levels) that can be produced. The introduction of fish or shrimp into a pond can speed up the production process by thinning out the population of food organisms, allowing more to grow in the space made available. Fish return some nutrients to the pond in the form of faecal matter. However, the maximum basic (primary) productivity of the pond still depends ultimately on the available nutrients. The maximum level of fish production from a pond on a given level of primary productivity will be achieved by an optimum population density. Too low a stocking density will result in a few, fast-growing fish but will leave excess, unconsumed, food. Too high a stocking density will result in little or no growth of individuals because insufficient food is available. Some
species of fish will not breed in normal pond conditions - thus the number of fish harvested will never exceed the number stocked. Others breed prolifically before they are harvested - thus, unless management techniques are employed to prevent this, the number of fish present may escalate rapidly. This may result in there being too high a biomass for optimum growth rate to be achieved.
The food habits of fish and shrimp vary, not only between species, but also according to age. Though they may have characteristically different habits between species when they have grown to the postlarval or fingerling stage (i.e., they are then herbivores, carnivores, omnivores, or detritus eaters) the food types consumed by small fry and larvae of most species tend to be similar. The structure of the mouth and digestive tract and the gills of 'adult' animals becomes adapted to the type of food normally eaten. Fry of fish and shrimp larvae mostly consume algae and small planktonic animals such as copepods, cladocera, aquatic larvae, rotifers, etc. (see section 2.3). Food habits may also vary according to environmental changes. The classifications given to fish are indicative, not definitive.
2.3 Types of Natural Food
Before continuing to talk about ways in which the food available in a pond or other enclosure can be increased, either by directly influencing the level of primary productivity or by other means, this sub-section briefly describes the different forms of 'natural' foods which are available to fish and shrimp. Only those low in the food chain (or at a low trophic level), not the larger animals which some fish eat, are mentioned here.
UNICELLULAR ALGAE
These are microscopic single-celled plants which are the major primary producers, photosynthesing food from pond nutrients utilizing light energy. They reproduce very quickly, given a good supply of nutrients.
FILAMENTOUS ALGAE
These plants also photosynthesise in the same way as unicellular algae. They consist of colonies of small algal cells attached together. Often regarded as relatively inedible and therefore wasteful in ponds for some aquaculture species, the growth of some types (the green filamentous algae) is actively encouraged (see LUMUT below) for shrimp and milkfish culture in some countries. Filamentous algal colonies can be very large and may form dense masses of material causing physical problems in pond management.
LAB-LAB
A community consisting mainly of benthic (bottom dwelling) blue-green algae and diatoms, together with other plants and animals.
LUMUT
A community consisting mainly of filamentous green algae, together with other algae and animals.
BACTERIA AND FUNGI
Microbial organisms which grow very rapidly and live on detritus at the bottom of the pond - dead phytoplankton cells, leaves, and dead animal tissue.
ZOOPLANKTON
Whereas the microscopic plants are referred to as phytoplankton, zooplankton is a term which refers to microscopic animals. Zooplankton and phytoplankton are together referred to by the general name plankton. The zooplankton include rotifers 1/, of which Brachionus plicatilis is the best known example, which eat algal cells; cladocerans, which include the water fleas, of which Daphnia spp. and Moina spp. are the best known examples; copepods like Calanus spp. and Cyclops spp. and anostracans 2/, of which Artemia spp. are well known in aquaculture.
1/Also known as 'rotatoria' or wheel animalcules
2/Also known as 'fairy shrimp'
MUD EATERS
Animals like insect larvae such as chironomids and various worms, which ingest mud and detritus and derive nutriment from the bacteria and fungi living on it, are in this category.
OTHER INSECT LARVAE
Living in the body of the water, these prey on other food animals, as well as the fry of shrimp and cultured fish, but themselves form a food for larger animals.
2.4 Fertilization
2.4.1 Background
2.4.2 Benefit of Fertilization
2.4.1 Background
The maximum biomass (total weight of animals) which can be produced in a production unit (pond, tank, pen or cage) depends on the quantity of suitable food available. Simply stocking more fish into a pond will not result in a greater production of marketable fish. It may result in more fish but they will not grow so fast and their average weight at any given time will be lower than it would be if the stocking rate were lower. The yield of a production unit can be very significantly increased if more food is made available, providing other parameters, such as water quality, are maintained in an optimum condition. One way of increasing the food availability in production units is by fertilization.
Specific techniques of fertilization are not covered in this manual, which deals in this sub-section only with the principles involved.
The fertilization of ponds, like that of agricultural soil, is simply a means of increasing the nutrients available to the plants growing in it. In the case of ponds, increasing the primary productivity of the pond in this way will also increase the availability of other organisms which are food for shrimp or fish, which graze on the algae in the pond.
Fertilizers may consist of natural organic fertilizers, such as animal manures, or of inorganic chemicals, such as urea. The major nutrients supplied by fertilizers are nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium (and, in manures, organic carbon).
Examples of typical fertilizers include:
INDIVIDUAL CHEMICALS
N
Available P
Soluble K
Other
(as P[2]O[5])
(as K[2]O)
Urea
Single superphosphate
Ca
Triple superphosphate (TSP)
Ca
Orthophosphoric acid
Ammonium sulphate
24% S
Ammonium chloride
66% Cl
Ammonium nitrate
Potash
Cl
15-15-15 ('mixed') fertilizer
MIXTURES OF CHEMICALS
These have a numerical system given to them which refers first to the percentage of nitrogen (N), then to the percentage of available phosphorous (as P[2]O[5]) and finally to the percentage of potassium (as potash, K[2]O).
Sometimes these are referred to as NPK Fertilizers.
12-24-12 therefore contains 12% N, 24% available P[2]O[5] and 12% K[2]O
16-20-0 is 16% N and 20% available P[2]O[5]
45-0-0 is 45% N only
ORGANIC FERTILIZERS
Examples are:
1. Chicken manure
2. Cattle manure
3. Pig manure
4. Compost
Organic manures can be applied directly, in the same way as inorganic (chemical) fertilizers, or they can form part of an integrated animal-fish farming unit. In the latter, terrestrial or avian species are grown together with one or more aquatic species. For example, duck-fish culture, poultry-fish systems or pig-fish systems are practised in many countries. Normally, only the terrestrial or avian species is fed; the fish feed on the aquatic organisms in the pond, whose growth has been encouraged by the manure, or directly on the droppings themselves (copography).
Fertilization thus, by various means, is a way of increasing the available natural food in a pond. Different fertilizing programmes encourage different types of food production. For example, phytoplankton production is favoured by a high ratio of nitrogen to phosphorus in the fertilizer. Organic manure, which is high in phosphorus, favours the growth of 'lab-lab'. If not carefully applied, organic fertilizers may deplete the oxygen supply in the water. Generally, organic fertilizers encourage the production of phytoplankton. Often, a combination of both is used. The fertilization programme can be tailored to fit the feeding habits of the fish being cultured.
Fertilization is often part of a programme to increase the natural productivity of the pond which includes the addition of lime to reduce the acidity of the water, liberate bound nutrients already in the soil and provide a reserve supply of carbon dioxide for photosynthesis.
2.4.2 Benefit of Fertilization
It is difficult to generalize on the effects of fertilization on the productivity of aquaculture ponds because that productivity depends on so many factors, including the species being cultured, the quality of the soil and the water, temperature, etc. The major point is that the increase over the natural productivity of the pond is very great. The natural productivity could be as low as 100-200 kg/ha/year (even this is 2-4 times that which might be obtained in open waters). In such a pond, fertilization could be expected to increase productivity by a factor of 4 or 5. The following example, extracted from a paper by Kavalec (1976), illustrates the potential effect of fertilization very well, even though the ponds compared were of different construction. In one location, where ponds were built in poor soil and there was a rapid flow-through of water (which resulted in loss of fertilizer) fertilization of 460 kg/ha of sodium nitrate, 360 kg/ha of triple super phosphate (TSP)
and 15 kg/ha of potassium chloride gave a production of tilapia equivalent to 820 kg/ha/year, compared with 185 kg/ha/year without fertilization. In another location, using the same water supply, where the soil quality was better and water management was possible, fertilization rates 50% of those quoted above increased the production of tilapia from about 800 kg/ha/year to 1 332 kg/ha/year, 1 938 kg/ha/year and 2 516 kg/ha/year for stocking rates of 5 000, 10 000 and 16 000/ha, respectively. The natural productivity in this example at this site was already very high.
The benefit of a fertilization programme can be measured in a number of different ways. One is the INCIDENCE OF COST, a formula proposed by Vincke (1969):
A second method of comparison is the PROFIT INDEX (Miller, 1976):
PROFIT INDEX VALUE OF FISH CROP PROFIT INDEX COST OF FERTILIZER
These formulae can also be applied to the effect of feeding (section 2.5.)
However, there is another factor besides the cost of the treatment, whether it is fertilizer or feed, and the weight or value of the fish or shrimp produced. This is the time taken for the animals to reach marketable size. If the treatment shortens the length of the growing period (increases the growth rate) in a location where the pond can be re-stocked earlier, a further benefit is achieved.
Actual data on the cost benefit of fertilization is rare (Leopold, 1981).
2.5 Effect of Feeding
2.5.1 Background
2.5.2 Benefit
2.5.1 Background
Feeding consists of supplying the animals being cultured with additional or 'artificial' food. This is food which is not 'natural', i.e., grown in the pond. The 'artificial' food may consist of single (individual) raw materials such as rice bran or groundnut cake, simple mixtures of ingredients, or complex formulated 'compound' feeds compacted by hand or by machine.
Feed may be presented to the animals by hand or from automatic feeders (Appendix XIV).
Feeds for aquaculture may be regarded as 'supplementary' or 'complete'. Supplementary feeds are those which supplement the natural food available in the pond. In other words the animals being cultured are receiving part of their nutrient requirement from natural sources and part from the 'artificial' feed being added to the pond. Feeding supplementary feed increases the production available from the pond. A 'complete' feed, as its name implies, must supply all the nutrient requirements of the animal. Complete feeds are essential in intensive systems of culture where (as in tanks) no natural food is available at all or where the proportion of natural food available is small in relation to the total required. For example, if a pond is expected to produce 4 000 kg/ha/year of shrimp and the natural food available, stimulated by fertilization, can only support a shrimp output of 1 000 kg/ha/year, a 'complete' artificial feed will be necessary for the pond. If the productivity
goal is lower a 'supplementary' feed, which adds to the nutrients available but does not completely satisfy all the nutrient requirements of the animals, would be sufficient. Supplementary feeds are cheaper than complete feeds. Supplementary feeds are low-cost agricultural and animal by-products which can be directly consumed by fish but which, in excess, may also act as organic fertilizers. These materials (such as mill sweepings or brewery waste) may be fed alone or in combination as a mash or pellet.
The rest of this manual (section 3 onwards) describes how ingredients are selected for feeding, what the nutritional requirements of different species of farmed fish and shrimp are, and how to prepare, store and present feeds.
2.5.2 Benefit
As has been exemplified earlier in this section of the manual, fertilization is a means of increasing output from a pond or other aquaculture production unit over that achievable through the consumption of the natural foods present (the natural productivity of the pond). However, the increase made possible by fertilization is limited. Organic fertilizers particularly tend to cause water quality problems.
'Artificial' feed (i.e., feed placed in the pond by humans), which will in future simply be referred to as 'feed', is generally a more direct and efficient way of increasing the food available to the fish than fertilization. Except for those fish that consume faecal material from organic manure directly (which makes that technique a form of feeding), fertilization acts by increasing the primary productivity of the pond. As has been shown earlier, there may be many links in the food chain (trophic levels) between the primary producers and the organisms actually ingested by the targeted aquacultural fish or shrimp. At each trophic level, perhaps 90% of the energy originally supplied is lost. Nevertheless, fertilizers are normally more readily available and cheaper than feeds on a unit weight basis, and should be used to increase production as far as possible. Beyond that, direct feeding is more appropriate. In some situations, for example in tanks or ponds with a rapid
exchange of water, fertilization can be wasteful because much of the material washes out of the pond before it is used. Feed is consumed immediately by most fish and relatively quickly by shrimp and prawns and in the latter case, if the water stability is adequate, little feed is wasted.
Increasing the stocking density and thus the fish biomass in a pond places additional strains on water quality. Good water quality has to be maintained by greater water exchange and artificial aeration. These devices remove soluble excretory products, which are toxic, and maintain dissolved oxygen at the levels necessary for growth and survival. These conditions are not ideal for fertilizer application.
Both fertilizer and feed have a role to play in the intensification of aquaculture. Both increase the productivity of the system - fertilization up to a certain maximum point, beyond which feeding must be employed to achieve higher results. Fertilization is more appropriate for the rearing of herbivorous fish which are lower down the food chain, such as the tilapia in the example in section 2.4. (unless grown in high density) rather than carnivorous species, such as marine fish, salmonids and most shrimp.
Production levels achievable in shrimp ponds are approximately 100-300 kg/ha/year without fertilization and 600-1 000 kg/ha/year with. However, with feeding, maximum productivity levels have probably not yet been achieved. Intensive methods of culture in Taiwan are consistently giving production levels of up to 20 000 kg/ha/year on some farms. In Japan, levels up to 50% higher than this have been reached. These cases are extreme examples of the potential results of feeding. Enormous increases in unit productivity are possible but total costs (not just those of the feeding operation itself but other costs, such as pumping and aeration equipment, fingerling costs, etc.,) also obviously rise. Increasing productivity results in increased income and, despite increased total expenditure, should mean increased returns too, as will be seen later.
The efficiency of a feed is normally measured by the amount necessary to produce a unit weight of fish. This is called the feed conversion ration (FCR). The feed conversion ratio is the unit weight of feed given, divided by the live weight (or wet weight) of animal produced.
For example, if 1 250 kg of fish were produced (harvested) from a pond to which 2 000 kg of pelleted feed had been presented during the growing cycle, the FCR would be
Often the FCR is written 1.6:1 (i.e., 1.6 units of feed are necessary to produce 1 unit of fish). The higher the value of the FCR, the less efficient the feed is. For example, a feed which has an FCR of 2.2:1 is worse (less efficient) than one which has an FCR of 1.6:1. Moisture levels in the animal or in the feed are not normally taken into account when the FCR of a feed is calculated. This means that wet or moist feeds automatically have much higher FCR's than dry feeds because so much of the feed consists of water. This does not mean that they are less efficient, simply that you should compare like with like. Moist feeds are normally proportionately cheaper than the equivalent dry feeds, if made on the farm. Strictly it is only possible to compare the FCR of a moist diet with that of another diet of similar moisture content unless a further calculation is done. To compare moist feeds with dry diets the FCR's must be reduced to a common level, either to a dry matter basis
or to an assumed 10% moisture basis 1/. For example, let us assume that the FCR of a dry feed is 2.3:1 and that of a moist feed is 3.8:1. We know that the moisture content of the moist feed is 35%. It is reasonable to assume (since we do not know it and most 'dry' feeds are in this range) that the dry feed has a moisture content of 10%. Therefore the FCR of the moist feed can be brought to a comparable level as follows:
1/Wet weight is still used for the weight of animal produced.
Then the two feeds can be compared together - the dry feed, with an FCR of 2.3 is more efficient than the moist feed in this case, which has an FCR of 2.74. Strictly the true moisture of each feed should be measured and the FCR's compared on a dry matter basis.
The FCR, as calculated above, is only the true FCR of the feed in a situation where the 'artificial' feed is the only or 'complete' feed that the animals are receiving. Even in very intensive systems of aquaculture there is some natural feed available, because of the natural productivity of the water, which may have been stimulated, either by true fertilization or because of waste feed. I therefore prefer to use the expression 'apparent feed conversion ratio' (AFCR) because the true FCR of a feed can only be measured where there is no other feed available to the animal. From the farmer's point of view it is the AFCR which is important rather than the FCR since the AFCR is the figure that he can use to measure the cost effectiveness of the use of that feed in his particular farm environment.
The AFCR is a way of comparing two feeds used in similar circumstances. However, several other factors or also important. The first is the relative cost of the two feeds. Thus, if diet 'A' gives an AFCR of 2:1 it may appear better than diet 'B', with an AFCR of 2.5:1. However, if diet 'B' costs 75% of diet 'A' it is obvious that, economically, diet 'B' is better assuming that all other factors are the same. Putting numbers on this example, let us assume that diet 'A' costs US$ 1.20/kg and diet 'B' US$ 0.90/kg. Then, to produce 1 kg of fish with diet 'A' will cost 2 × US$ 1.2 = US$ 2.4 whereas the production of 1 kg of fish with diet 'B' would cost 2.5 × US$ 0.9 = US$ 2.25. Thus diet 'B', though it has a poorer AFCR, is more economical to use. What we have arrived at here, comparing the product of unit feed cost and AFCR, is the same as the INCIDENCE OF COST used by Vincke (1969) and mentioned earlier in section 2.4.2:
Though AFCR and feed (or fertilizer) cost are the two most important factors, others also have a bearing to play on economic viability. Diets 'A' and 'B' in the above example are only comparable in that way if the resultant fish have equal values, for example. If diet 'B' produced fish that are less marketable because of poor appearance or flavour, then the comparative efficiencies of the two diets would have to be re-examined. Here the PROFIT INDEX, mentioned by Miller (1976), is a more useful means of comparison:
Here, the cost of the whole feed/fertilizer treatment is being compared with the value rather than the amount of fish produced.
Similarly the efficiency of several diets can only be directly compared if the time taken for the crop to reach the desired market size is the same (i.e., the growth rate is the same). If diet 'X' results in the animals taking 4 months to reach market size while diet 'Y' gets the animals to that size in 3 months, diet 'X' is less efficient than diet 'Y' even if they have same cost and the same AFCR and the animals fetch the same market price.
Assessing the relative efficiency of two diets therefore requires information of several different types:
AFCR
Feed cost
Growth rate
Product market value 1/
Cost of feeding 2/
1/The 'dress-out' weight of fish or the head:tail ratio of shrimp is not mentioned here becuase these are factors which govern the market value (at farm gate) of the whole animals.
2/One feed may cost more than another to feed because of some inherent quality, such as different storage or transport costs, different labour costs for feeding, etc.
Feed costs increase according to the increase in intensification of the aquaculture system (Leopold, 1981). The importance of natural feed decreases as intensification of production increases. Although the total feed costs increase, within certain broad limits, return on capital does not decrease but may in fact increase because an increase in intensification results in a relative decrease in the level of fixed operating costs per unit of production. Leopold (1981) quotes a case. (Table 2) where decreasing fixed costs cancelled out the increased cost of feeding to such an extent that the unit cost of fish production also decreased.
Table 2 Example of the Effect of Feeding on the Production of Carp In Poland in 1962-1966
Amount of Feeds used (kg/ha)
Average Fish Yield (kg/ha)
Costs of Production of 1 kg of Fish (in zloty)
Feed Costs
Fixed Costs
Total
up to 400
Source: Leopold, 1981
In the above example, other variable costs (including fingerling cost, labour, etc.,) were excluded as they only constituted 15% of the total production costs. It is clear from the example that the AFCR (apparent feed conversion efficiency) of the feeds used were better at low levels of application, probably because the contribution of natural food was still significant at this level. This example well illustrates the effect of intensification through feeding increasing levels of feed per unit area. These include a much more efficient use of the facilities available and a very significant reduction in the total cost of producing each unit weight of fish.
The economics of compound feed use are discussed further in section 5.4.6.
Feeding has a most significant potential role to play in increasing the revenue and profitability of your aquaculture unit. This manual seeks to introduce you to ways of starting to use feed on your farm.
Further reading (section 2):
Frey (1960); New and Singholka (1982); Woynarovich (1975); Leopold (1981); Hopkins and Cruz (1982); Cook (1978); Stickney (1979); Miller (1976); Vincke (1976); Kavalec (1976); George (1976); NRC (1973); Jauncey and Ross (1982); Wright and Kenmuir (1981); Boyd (1982).
<section>4</section>
3. WHAT IS FOOD COMPOSED OF?
3.1 Nutrient and Other Components of Feedstuffs
3.2 How to Understand A Feed Composition Table
In the first part of this section of the manual a brief summary of the major components of feeds will be given while in the second part the use of feed compositional tables will be explained. It is stressed that this section can do no more than introduce this vast subject. Readers are recommended to consult other books and publications (see 'further reading' at the end of this section).
3.1 Nutrient and Other Components of Feedstuffs
3.1.1 Moisture
3.1.2 Lipids and Fatty Acids
3.1.3 Proteins and Amino Acids
3.1.4 Carbohydrate
3.1.5 Energy
3.1.6 Minerals
3.1.7 Vitamins
3.1.8 Other components of Feeds
3.1.9 Summary of Analytical Information Needed About Feeds
The major components of feedstuffs are moisture, lipids, protein, fibre, carbohydrate, minerals and vitamins.
3.1.1 Moisture
Moisture (water) is an important diluent of the nutrients in feedstuffs. It is necessary to know the moisture content of raw materials and compound feeds as a check on their feeding requirements, for use in calculating analytical data on a dry matter basis and also because moisture has an important function in determining the form of the diet (see section 4.3). It also has an effect on its stability and its shelf life.
3.1.2 Lipids and Fatty Acids
In feedstuff chemistry the words fat, lipid and oil are sometimes used synonymously. Tables of feed composition often refer to the crude fat level, by which is meant the material which can be removed from the feed by ether extraction. The term 'oil content' is also often used in this context. The term crude lipid content can also be used. The word lipid is a general term which covers sterols, waxes, fats, phospholipids and sphingomyelins. Many of the vitamins are fat soluble and will be extracted by ether - thus the term crude lipid content. The words oil, fat, and wax, reflect the increasing melting points of these lipid components.
Fats are the fatty acid esters of glycerol and are the primary means by which animals store energy. (Please note that it is not possible to define all of the terms used in food biochemistry here; you may need to consult 'further reading' for this purpose). Fish are able to metabolize lipids readily particularly when deprived of food, as during the migration of salmon, for example. Phospholipids are components of cellular membranes. Sphingomyelins are found in brain and nerve tissue compounds. Sterols are important components of, or precursors of, sex and other hormones in fish and shrimp. Waxes form important energy storage compounds in plants and in some animal components.
Dietary lipid has two main functions - as a source of energy and as a source of its component fatty acids, some of which are essential (i.e., cannot be synthesised by the animal itself) dietary components for the growth and survival of the recipient animal. The part which lipid has to play as an energy source for fish and Crustacea is dealt with in section 3.2.5. Lipids are also important factors in the palatability of feeds.
The fatty acids which are components of lipids are categorised in the following way. They are given a common name but are also, besides their straightforward chemical formula, given a specific numerical designation, such as 14:0; 20:1; 18:3n-3; 18:2n-6; 20:4n-6; 22:5n-6; or 22:6n-3, for example. This nomenclature refers to the length of the carbon chain in the molecule, the number of carbon-carbon double bonds present and the position of the first double bond. This can be illustrated by the chemical formulae of some of the fatty acids mentioned above. This nomenclature may sound complex to those with little knowledge of biochemistry but it is necessary just to know what the terminology means so that it is possible to understand references to different types of fatty acids when fish and shrimp nutrition is being discussed. The methyl group is shown in the following formulae as CH[3].
In the designation 20:n-6, for example, '20' means that there are 20 carbon atoms in the chain. '4' means that there are four carbon-carbon double bonds (the double bond is shown as a = sign and the carbon atom is shown as C). n-6 means that the first double bond, numbering from the methyl (CH[3]) end, occurs after the sixth carbon atom in the chain. Myristic acid (14:0) has fourteen carbon atoms but no C=C double bonds. Arachidic acid (20:0) also has no double bonds. Linolenic acid (18:3n-3) has eighteen carbon atoms and three double bonds, the first of which appears on the third carbon atom. Linoleic acid (18:2n-6) has two double bonds and the first occurs on the sixth carbon atom. And so on.
Those fatty acids which have their first double bond on the third carbon atom are known as the 'n-3' series 1/ or the 'linolenic' series after the name of the fatty acid in the series with 18 carbon atoms in its chain. Similarly, those which have their first double bond on the sixth carbon atom are known as the 'n-6' series 2/or the 'linoleic series. It is essential to notice the difference (which is only the addition of the letter N) between the two words LINOLENIC and LINOLEIC. This similarity causes a great deal of confusion and printing errors (not, I hope, in this manual!).
1/Or w -3' series
2/Or w -6' series
Saturated fatty acids are those without any double bonds. Monosaturated fatty acids are those with only one double bond, while those with more than one double bond are known as poly-unsaturated fatty acids. Those with fewer double bonds are referred to as 'more saturated' than those with a greater number. The n-3 series and n-6 series fatty acids, and the n-7 and n-9 fatty acids are all members of the group known as polyunsaturated fatty acids, because they have more than one double bond. Sometimes these are referred to as PUFA's for short. Members of this group which have many (4 or more) double bonds are sometimes referred to as higher unsaturated fatty acids (HUFA'S).
It is hoped that the above explanation will help extension workers and students to understand these terms, which are frequently referred to in papers and books about fish and shrimp nutrition because of their importance.
The essential fatty acid (EFA) requirements of different species vary but are not yet fully understood. Readers are referred to 'further reading' at the end of this section for a fuller understanding of this topic. For the purpose of this manual I propose only to make the following generalizations:
a) Aquatic animals have a higher requirement for the n-3 series of fatty acids than terrestrial animals, for which the n-6 series is more important;
b) EFA deficiencies are more noticeable in seawater than in freshwater conditions (for trout). Thus salinity affects EFA requirements;
c) Marine fish appear to have a greater requirement for HUFA's than freshwater or anadromous species. It is not yet known whether they can utilize the n-6 series as well as they can the n-3 series;
d) Coldwater species appear to have a greater requirement for the n-3 series fatty acids than warmwater species;
e) Shrimp and prawns have a requirement for the n-3 series and the n-3:n-6 ratio is important;
f) The levels of either type of PUFA's can be detrimentally high in a feed. Knowledge of the specific requirements of a species is therefore constantly being sought to optimize formulation practice;
g) Although many vegetable lipids (but not those of palm, olive or coconut) are high in PUFA's, the best sources (and the most expensive) sources of the n-3 HUFA's are marine lipids. Vegetable oils tend to have high levels of the n-6 series (linoleic series). Lard and beef tallow have low total levels of PUFA's (see lipids in Appendix V).
Dietary phospholipids have been shown to enhance the growth rate of crustaceans but supplemental lipids such as lecithin are probably only necessary in purified diets (feeds made from purified ingredients, rather than the type of ingredient normally used in commercial animal feeds).
The necessity of high dietary levels of PUFA's in aquatic animal diets makes the possibility of fats becoming rancid very real. These may be toxic or growth depressive. This topic is mentioned again elsewhere in the manual (Appendix XV).
3.1.3 Proteins and Amino Acids
Proteins are large complex organic compounds which perform an essential role in the structure and functioning of plants and animals. Animals cannot synthesise them from simple inorganic materials, unlike plants, and have to rely on ingesting them through their diet (either from plants or from other animals which already contain them) or on their synthesis by gut bacteria. Dietary protein is therefore essential for all animals. The 'optimum' dietary level of protein is that which produces maximum growth. However protein acts as an energy source as well as a tissue builder and excessive levels of dietary protein may form an expensive way to supply energy (section 3.1.5). The optimum dietary protein level may not be the most economic to use.
Proteins are composed mostly of amino acids linked with peptide bonds and cross linked between chains with sulphydral and hydrogen bonds. There are twenty major amino acids. The amino acid composition of proteins from different sources varies widely. Some proteins have none of certain amino acids. Some amino acids can be synthesised by animals; those that cannot be synthesised are called essential (essential in the diet) amino acids or EAA's. For fish and crustaceans the EAA's are arginine, histidine, isoleucine, leucine, lysine, methionine, phenylalanine, threonine, tryptophan and valine. Amino acids contain different amounts of nitrogen; thus the figure given for protein level in feed compositional tables is never strictly accurate. Other compounds contribute nitrogen and are detected in the analytical test to determine 'protein' level. The 'crude protein' level is calculated by multiplying the nitrogen level determined in the analysis by 6.25.
The quantitative EAA requirements of different species varies (Table 3). The EAA content of different feed ingredients varies even more widely (see Appendix IV). This is one of the principal reasons why a compound diet, made from several ingredients, is potentially more efficient than a single ingredient, which may be too high or too low in one or more essential amino acids. The amino acid profile of a feed must be balanced for the dietary protein to be used effectively. This can be illustrated in the following way. Suppose the exit gate of a pond is composed of ten vertical planks of wood (Figure 1), each of which represents one of the essential amino acids, numbered one to ten.
Table 3 Quantitative Dietary Amino Acid Requirements for Various Fish Expressed as a Percentage of Dietary Protein, together with the Amino Acid Profile of Two Feed Ingredients and of Sea Bass
Source: New, 1986a
Notes:
1/ Cited in Jauncey, 1982.
2/ Cited in Millikin, 1982.
3/ Methionine and cystine.
4/ Cystine absent.
5/ Tyrosine absent.
6/ Tyrosine present.
7/ Cystine present.
8/ Phenylalanine and tyrosine.
9/ NRC, 1981.
10/ International Feed No. 5-02-000.
11/ International Feed No. 5-00-381.
12/ Methionine + 50% cystine.
13/ Phenylalanine + 50% tyrosine.
14/ Alliot et al., 1974. (Dicentrarchus labrax).
15/ Not determined.
16/ Luquet & Sabaut, 1974.
Figure 1: Limiting Amino Acids (A)
It will be seen from the diagram that the level of water in the pond will depend on the height of the shortest plank (plank 4). The shortest plank represents the 'first limiting amino acid'. If this plank is lengthened (or this amino acid is increased in level by altering the proportion or the type of ingredients used, or by adding it in synthetic form) then plank 3 would control the water level (or be the next limiting amino acid). Ideally all the planks should be just as high as the level of water desired in the pond (the quantity of each amino acid in the diet at exactly the correct level for the species being cultured) to avoid wastage of materials. Figure 2 illustrates what happens if one plank is unnecessarily long (or if one amino acid is present in excess in the diet) - it serves no useful purpose and is an unnecessary expense.
Figure 2: Limiting Amino Acids (B)
An unbalanced diet, particularly where one or more EAA's are deficient, is one of the principal reasons why the dietary protein level may have to be unnecessarily high to promote optimum growth. In such a case the rest of the protein is wasted in order to supply the required level of the deficient EAA(s).
Even when an EAA is shown by chemical analysis to be present in sufficient quantities it may not be biologically available to the animal. For example, the free a -amino group of lysine may become bound to other molecules during processing of the feedstuff, rendering it unavailable to the target animal. Thus the method of processing and the quality of high protein (expensive) ingredients is an important factor in formulation of compound feeds.
Methionine and phenylalanine are amino acids which can be 'spared' or partially replaced by cystine and tyrosine (two non-essential amino acids) in the diet. Up to approximately 50% of either the methionine or the phenylalanine requirement can be spared or replaced by cystine or tyrosine respectively. Methionine and lysine are usually the first two limiting amino acids in feeds. In tables of the levels of EAA's in ingredients a combined figure is often given for methionine and cystine. While fish, and particularly shrimp, do not thrive well on mixtures of pure synthetic amino acids instead of protein, individual amino acids (notably 1-lysine and dl-methionine) can effectively be used to supplement diets otherwise deficient in these amino acids. Whether synthetic amino acids are used or not, as usual, depends on the economics of the situation.
An illustration of the deficiencies of some EAA's in common ingredients is presented in Table 4. Here the amino acid profile of examples of some high-protein sources are compared with that of chicken egg protein (considered an excellent source of protein for animals). It will be seen that most plant proteins are deficient in the sulphur-amino acids (methionine and cystine) but that the 'score' of sesame and palm kernel cake is higher than fish meal in this respect. Mung and red beans (legumes) are high in lysine. Meat meal, because of its poor levels of iso-leucine and methionine and cystine, is a poor quality protein compared with fish meal. Only milk does not have seriously limiting levels of methionine and cystine, compared with fish meal. Fish meal is acknowledged to be the best (but usually the most expensive) protein source for fish feeds. Feeds should, ideally, be matched (balanced) with the specific EAA requirements of the species being cultured but this information
is, as yet, incomplete for most aquatic species.
'Non-essential' amino acids have an important role to play in diet palatability.
3.1.4 Carbohydrate
The carbohydrates, which include starches, sugars, cellulose and gums containing only the elements carbon, hydrogen and oxygen, are usually the cheapest source of energy in foods and feeds. Fish and shrimp, however, vary in their ability to digest carbohydrate effectively. Many fish appear to be able to utilize simple carbohydrates, such as sugars, more effectively than complex starches; the reverse appears to be true for shrimp and prawns but this observation may be confused by the beneficial effect that carbohydrates tend to have on the structural integrity of the feed, caused by the binding quality of starches. Carnivorous fish such as salmon and trout and, particularly, marine fish are not efficient converters of carbohydrate. Channel catfish, like shrimp, appear to be able to utilize complex carbohydrates more readily than simple sugars. Channel catfish and carp can utilize quite high levels of dietary carbohydrate; the natural diet of grass carp is very high in this
component. The topic of the energy value of dietary carbohydrate is dealt with separately in section 3.1.5.
Table 4 Limiting Amino Acids and Chemical Score of Essential Amino Acid Content of Selected Feed Proteins 1/
1/Scores based on comparison with whole egg protein of the following amino acid composition (percentage of protein): arginine, 6.7; cystine, 2.2; histidine, 2.7; isoleucine, 7.0; leucine, 8.5; lysine, 6.8; methionine, 3.3; phenylalanine, 5.4; threonine, 5.5; tryptophan, 1.9; and valine, 8.2.
Feedstuff
Arg
His
Iso
Leu
Lys
Met + Cys
Phe
Thr
Try
Val
Fish meal (Peru)
Meat meal
Milk, skimmed
Milk, whole
Groundnut oil cake
Coconut oil cake
Soybean meal
Palm kernel cake
Cottonseed cake
Sunflower oil cake
Sesame oil cake
Mung bean
Red bean
Chlorella vulgaris
Spirulina maxima
Scenedesmus obliquus
Torula yeast
Brewer's spent grains
Source: ADCP, 1985
* Seriously limiting amino acids
Some carbohydrates are normally regarded as indigestible. These are reported separately in the tables of feed composition as 'fibre' or 'crude fibre'. Fibre includes substances such as celluloses (from plants), lignin, chitin, etc. Many fish do not have the enzyme cellulase which is necessary for the digestion of cellulose, and fibre is usually regarded as unavailable as an energy source. At small levels, however, it may aid pelletability. Cellulase however is produced by the gut bacteria of many fish, as is chitinase in crustacea, and herbivorous fish are able to digest fibre.
3.1.5 Energy
Fish use much less energy for protein synthesis than do warm-blooded farm animals because they do not need to maintain a constant body temperature, need less energy to maintain position and move, and because the excretion of ammonia uses less energy in protein breakdown and excretion.
However, excess or insufficient dietary energy levels result in reduced growth rates. Energy needs for maintainance and movement will be fulfilled before energy is used for growth. Thus if the energy/protein ratio is too low, protein will be used to satisfy energy requirements first; what is left will be available for growth. Fish and shrimp eat primarily to satisfy energy requirements, so a diet with excess energy content will inhibit food intake and also reduce the protein available for growth. Excess dietary fat also leads to high body fat in cultured fish, low dress-out yield and poor shelf life in market size animals.
Lipids are the best source of energy for fish, followed by proteins and the carbohydrates. Digestible energy 1/ levels for raw materials and compound feeds derived from experimentation are not readily available for fish or shrimp. Metabolisable energy 2/ is difficult to determine with fish but has been derived for trout. However, ADCP (1983) suggested a method of calculating approximate digestible energy values based on the following factors (Table 5).
1/ Digestible energy = food intake gross energy minus faecal gross energy.
2/ Metabolisable energy = food intake gross energy minus faecal energy minus energy in gaseous products of digestion minus gill energy minus urinary energy.
Table 5 Calculation of Digestible Energy Values for Fish 1/
1/In order to maintain uniformity with another FAO fisheries publication (ADCP, 1983), this method of calculating DE has been used. Many different techniques are used by different authors which means that the DE values given in section 6 of this manual cannot easily be compared because they have been derived from different sources. See New (1985) for a full discussion of this problem. DE is calculated on DM (dry matter) basis.
Nutrient
Gross Energy (GE) 2/
kcal/g
Estimated Digestible Energy
(DE (kcal/g)
Carbohydrate (non-legumes)
Carbohydrates (legumes)
Proteins (animal)
Proteins (plant)
Fats
Source: ADCP, 1983
2/GE = the amount of heat that is released when a substance is completely oxidised in a bomb calorimeter containing 25-30 atmospheres of oxygen.
The factors shown in table 5 have been used to calculate the estimated values for DE in the feed compositional tables in Appendix IV. No calorific value has been ascribed to fibre in this method of calculation.1/
1/In order to maintain uniformity with another FAO fisheries publication (ADCP, 1983), this method of calculating DE has been used. Many different techniques are used by different authors which means that the DE values given in section 6 of this manual cannot easily be compared because they have been derived from different sources. See New (1985) for a full discussion of this problem. DE is calculated on DM (dry matter) basis.
Lipid and, to a lesser extent, carbohydrate can be used in diets to 'spare' protein for growth. Higher levels of lipid and carbohydrate enable a reduction in the protein level necessary for optimum growth. As protein is usually the most expensive major component of the diet, this has important economic benefits. Providing that the level of high PUFA (HUFA) containing lipid (see section 3.1.2) has already been provided, usually from a marine oil, the extra lipid required as an energy source alone can be supplied by a cheaper vegetable or animal oil. Substituting fish oil for protein does not normally result in a cheaper diet. There are also reasons (to lessen the risk of rancidity) for keeping the level of poly-unsaturated fatty acids as low as possible while satisfying EFA requirement.
The following is an example of the method of calculation of DE. A cereal has the following analysis, on an as-fed basis: moisture 12.4%; lipid 1.5%; protein 12.2%; fibre 2.7%; ash 1.7%; NFE 69.5%. (NFE is the nitrogen free extract and is equivalent to the carbohydrate fraction of the diet). Only the lipid, protein and NFE values are relevant in this method of calculating estimated DE (digestible energy) values, but they must first be converted to a dry matter basis. The calculations are as follows:
a) convert to a DM basis:
b) calculate DE contributed by each component:
1/Had the material been of animal origin, instead of a cereal, the factor 4.25 would have been used for calculating protein DE
2/Had the material been a leguminous plant instead of a cereal the factor 2.0 would have been used in calculating carbohydrate DE
c) sum to find total DE
3/DE is normally reported in kcal/kg
3.1.6 Minerals ^4/
4/The total mineral content of feedstuffs is also referred to as the 'ash content' because of the method of analysis (see page 251)
Mineral elements are important in many aspects of fish and shrimp metabolism. They provide strength and rigidity to bones in fish and the exoskeleton of crustacea. In body fluids they are involved mainly with the maintenance of osmotic equilibrium with the aquatic environment and in the nervous and endocrine systems. They are components of enzymes, blood pigments and other organic compounds. They are essentially involved in the metabolic processes concerned with energy transport.
Most of the seven major 'minerals' - calcium (Ca), phosphorus (P), potassium (K), sodium (Na), chlorine (Cl), magnesium (Mg) and sulphur (S) -and fifteen trace elements - iron (Fe), zinc (Zn), copper (Cu), manganese (Mn), nickel (Ni), cobalt (Co), molybdenum (Mo), selenium (Se). chromium (Cr), iodine (I), fluorine (F), tin (Sn), silicon (Si), vanadium (Va), and arsenic (As) reported essential for terrestrial animal life are also believed to be required by fish. However, only seven, (Ca, P, Mg, Fe, Zn, I, and Se) have been shown to be required or utilized by salmonids. It can be assumed that the following elements at least are also essential for body functions: Na, Mo, Cl, Mn, Co, and probably Cr and F.
Fish and crustacea can absorb minerals by other routes than from the digestion of food - through the ingestion of seawater and through exchange from their aquatic environment across body tissues such as skin and the gill membranes. Minerals are therefore probably not so important a component of the diet of fish and shrimp as they are in that of other animals.
Calcium is absorbed by fish from seawater but freshwater is low in calcium. However, since most feedingstuffs, particularly animal proteins, have high levels of calcium, calcium deficiency in fish through dietary insufficiency is most unlikely. On the other hand both seawater and freshwater contain very little phosphorus so this element is important from a dietary point of view. The level of phosphorus in feeds and feed components is therefore very important information. Some types of phosphorus are unavailable to fish and an assessment of the availability of phosphorus in the diet is essential. Generally animal sources of phosphorus are best absorbed by fish but some species, such as carp, do not absorb the element well from this source. Inorganic sources of phosphorus vary in their availability but some in common use in feedstuffs are mostly high in availability. The phosphorus from plant sources is generally poorly available. It should be noted that most feed
compositional tables (including those in Appendix IV) show levels of total phosphorus. Those that show a level for available phosphorus are designed for the manufacturers of poultry feeds and should not be applied to fish. The availability of the phosphorus in animal protein is taken as 100% for poultry for example. There appear to be differences in the availability of phosphorus in the diet to various species of fish so it is difficult to generalize. However, guidelines are suggested in Table 6:
Table 6 Provisional Availability Factors for Phosphorus
Type of Ingredient
% Availability Factor
(to Apply to the Total Phosporus Level in the Feed)
Stomachless Fish
Other Fish and Shrimp
(eg., Cyprinids - Carp, etc.)
Plants and plant products
Animal products
Microbial products
Inorganic phosphorus:
Monobasic sodium, potassium
or calcium phosphates
Dibasic calcium phosphate
Tribasic calcium phosphate
There is some evidence that, although the actual level of calcium may not be important, the Ca/P ratio may be of importance in the nutrition of some fish and crustacea.
A summary of the available information on the mineral requirements of fish is given in Table 7.
Table 7 Summary of Information on Mineral Requirements of Fish
Mineral
Dietary Requirement
Ca
P (available)
Mg
Na
K
S
Cl
Fe
50-100 mg/kg
Cu
1-4 mg/kg
Mn
20-50 mg/kg
Co
5-10 mg/kg
Zn
30-100 mg/kg
I
100-300 mg/kg
Mo
trace
Cr
trace
F
trace
Source: ADCP, 1983
Apart from adjusting the phosphorus content of diets there would seem at first little reason to worry about mineral deficiencies in feeds for fish compounded from a mixture of raw materials because of the considerable quantities present in the ingredients. Normally only purified diets deficient in a specific mineral cause deficiency symptoms in fish or shrimp. However, excess quantities of some minerals present in ingredients of animal origin (Ca, P, Na and K) have been shown to impair the absorption of zinc, even when the dietary level of the latter is high. Cobalt is often added to practical feeds for salmonids because of its importance in the synthesis of vitamin B by gut bacteria. Cobalt has also been reported to have growth promoting activity. Most feed manufacturers add mineral supplements to their fish feeds as an insurance policy while awaiting further information on the necessity of doing so. Salt (NaCl) is often added to feeds for special purposes (e.g., to improve
survival when animals are being transferred from freshwater to more saline water - tilapia grown in brackishwater or salmonids being transferred to sea cages or tanks, for example). Deficiencies are more likely to occur in highly intensive culture in tanks or cages than in ponds, where minerals are available from natural foods.
For more details about the mineral requirements of fish and shrimp and their metabolism, please consult 'further reading' at the end of this sub-section.
3.1.7 Vitamins
The last major feed component to be described is the vitamin content of feeds.
Vitamins are complex organic compounds required in trace amounts for normal growth, reproduction, health and general metabolism. Many vitamin deficiency symptoms have been described for fish and a few (notably vitamin C deficiency) for shrimp. As in the case of mineral deficiencies, they are most prevalent in high density cage and tank intensive culture systems. Deficiency symptoms are not described here (see 'further reading'). Vitamin deficiencies are much less likely to occur in extensive systems of culture, in ponds where natural food is also available. There is however a tendency for vitamin mixes to be added to diets for these types of culture, as an insurance against possible problems. It should be noted however (see later) that excesses of some vitamins can also cause problems.
This section of the manual is intended only to categorise the vitamins in various ways so that readers can better understand the terminology used in other papers and books. This information is presented in tabular form (Table 8). Major sources of each vitamin are also listed.
The functions and deficiency symptoms of each vitamin are described in ADCP (1980).
The most common vitamin deficiency in fish nutrition is that of vitamin B (thiamin). Moist or wet feeds containing raw aquatic animal products, especially if not fed immediately after manufacture, contain enzymes called thiaminases which may partially or completely inactivate the thiamin present in the feed. Thiaminase levels in freshwater fish flesh are higher than in that of marine fish (i.e., the source of the fish flesh is important). Thiaminases have also been reported in other ingredients, such as rice polishings and beans. Supplemental thiamin may therefore be required in diets containing fish flesh unless they have been pasteurised.
Table 8 Characteristics of the Major Vitamins Important to Fish and Shrimp
Vitamin Synonyms
Group 1/
Solubility 2/
Examples of Major Natural Sources
Thiamine; Aneurine; B[1]
B
W
legumes, brans, yeast
Riboflavin B[2]
B
W
yeast, liver, milk, soybeans
Pyridoxine B[6]
B
W
yeast, cereals, liver
Pantothenic acid
B
W
brans, yeast, animal offal; fish flesh
Niacin; nicotinic acid; niacinamide
B
W
yeast, legumes, forage
Biotin
B
W
liver; yeast; milk products
Folic acid; folacin
B
W
yeast; fish tissue and viscera; leaf meal fish meal and viscera,
Cyanocobalamin; APF 3/; B[12]
B
W
slaughterhouse wastes
Choline
W
wheat germ; legumes.
Inositol
W
legumes; yeast; wheat germ
Ascorbic acid* C
W
citrus fruits; fresh fish tissue; insects
Retinol A 4/
F
fish oils 5/
Cholecalciferol D 4/
F
fish oils
Tocopherols* E 2/
F
vegetable oils
Menadione K 4/
F
leaf meals
1/B = members of the B group of vitamins
2/W = water soluble vitamins. F == fat soluble vitamins
3/Animal protein factor
4/Hypervitaminosis (problems associated with excess dietary inclusion) can occur with these vitamins
5/Some carotenoids (e.g. b -carotene; astaxanthin) are precursors of vitamin A utilisable by some species
* These vitamins are particularly susceptible to losses in potency caused by heat, rancidity or feed processing. The water soluble vitamins also tend to leach into the aquatic environment.
The levels of vitamins in feeds are mostly reported in terms of milligrams of vitamin per kilogram of feed (mg/kg). Levels of vitamins A, D and E are, however, reported in terms of international units of activity (I.U.). These units are defined in table 9 as follows:
Table 9 International Units of Activity of Vitamins
Vitamin
One I.U. (International Unit) equals:
A
The activity of 0.344 microns of all-trans-vitamin A[1] acetate
or 0.3 microns of retinal (vitamin A)
or 0.6 microns of b -carotene
D
The activity of 0.025 microns of vitamin D[3] (cholecalciferol)
E
The activity of 1 mg of synthetic vitamin E acetate (dl-a -tocopherol acetate)
Source: Kutsky, 1981
Vitamin E has anti-oxidative properties and may be required at higher levels in fish and shrimp diets which are high in PUFA's as these are susceptible to rancidity (see Appendix XV).
3.1.8 Other components of Feeds
Feeds contain many other types of substances, too numerous to deal with in detail in this manual. Readers are recommended to consult the references given in 'further reading' at the end of this sub-section. In compound feeds these may include synthetic substances added for special purposes by the manufacturers, such as hormones, antibiotics, pellet binders, and pigments.
Natural feed ingredients contain other substances, some of which are detrimental to their quality. The latter include mycotoxins, enzyme inhibitors, vitamin destroying enzymes, haemagglutenins, products of oxidative rancidity, other natural toxins, chemicals, and contaminants, such as pesticides and herbicides. Some of these substances are listed in Appendix XV.
3.1.9 Summary of Analytical Information Needed About Feeds
In summary, the following are the major, but not the sole analytical characteristics 1/ of compound feeds and natural feed ingredients which are of importance to those designing feeding programmes for fish and shrimp:
Moisture Content
Crude Lipid Content
Crude Protein Content
Crude Fibre Content
Carbohydrate (NFE) Content (by difference)
Ash Content (necessary, if the NFE level is to be calculated by difference) Ca/P Ratio
Available Phosphorus Content Lysine Content
Methionine and Cystine Content Level of Poly-unsaturated Fatty Acids (n-3 and n-6 series)
Further reading (section 3.1):
NRC (1983); ADCP (1980); Halver (1972); Jauncey and Ross (1982);
New (1985); New (1976); Tacon (1985); Kutsky (1981); Davies (1985);
Tacon and Cowey (1985)
1/ Measurements of quality, such as free fatty acids, peroxide value, available lysine, and aflatoxin content have been omitted from the list but are mentioned in other places in this manual.
3.2 How to Understand A Feed Composition Table
3.2.1 Moisture Content
3.2.2 Comments on the Use of Specific Compositional Tables
When compound feeds are formulated (see section 5.2.) for any animal it is necessary to know the composition (analytical characteristics) of each of the raw materials which are to be considered for use. There is no true substitute for recent analytical data on the actual material to be used, for the analysis of ingredients varies widely according to the method and place of growth or manufacture. However such data is not often available and to obtain it quickly and accurately enough to use for formulation can place an intolerable burden on local analytical facilities. The nutritionist in the field therefore almost always has to resort to published data on feed composition in tables prepared for formulation purposes.
Usually the data in feed compositional tables (see 'further reading') has been obtained in locations different to the one for which diets are to be formulated. Being able to look up the analysis of a similar ingredient to the one being considered for inclusion in a diet depends on having an accurate name for the product and an understanding of the method by which it was produced (if it is a by-product), grown (if a plant), or the species (plants and animals) from which it came. Thus feed terminology is important and efforts (Harris et al., 1980) are being made to establish internationally recognized feedstuff names and descriptions and to relate these to the common names used in each country. This system is, however, very complex to use and the reader is recommended to use the more simple descriptions used in an excellent publication by Göhl (1980). An example of a feed compositional table is given in Appendix IV. Other examples are referenced in 'further reading' at the end
of this sub-section.
Feed composition tables are often lengthy and apparently complicated. The following notes are intended to make them easier to understand and use. Some of the information listed in them is specific to the nutrition of terrestrial and avian animals for which the data have primarily been gathered. Comments on these factors are not included here. As yet, no feed composition tables have been constructed solely with the formulators of fish and shrimp feeds as an audience, except those published by NRC, (see 'further reading'). Some feed composition tables contain excellent, detailed explanations of the terminology used in them (e.g., NRC, 1971) but others do not explain the way in which the information should be used.
3.2.1 Moisture Content
One basic confusion relates to whether the analyses given in feed composition tables is based on the dry matter (DM) content of the feed or on an 'as-fed' (or as received) basis. Some tables clearly state which method is being used - others do not. Most dried ingredients contain 7-12% of moisture. The use of data which is based on DM content in a ration being formulated on an as-fed basis will therefore lead to errors of the same order. Tables which present information on a DM basis do so because moisture content can be so variable, particularly for cereals; this therefore gives an easier means of comparison. However, if analyses based on a DM basis are to be used for formulation on an as-fed basis, they have to be converted to that basis by using the known moisture content of the local material. For example, if the protein content of an ingredient in a compositional table is given as 45% on a DM basis and the actual material being considered for use locally is known to have
a moisture content of 9%, the as-fed protein content can be calculated as follows:
As-fed protein content = DM% protein × (100 -moisture content)
Similarly, as-fed analyses can be converted to a DM basis by the following means if the moisture content is known. Suppose an ingredient is known to have a moisture content of 12% and an as-fed protein content of 23%. The protein level of this feed on a DM basis can be worked out as follows:
An alternative to calculating the formulation of a compound feed from analytical information of the as-fed type is to calculate it all on a DM basis. The final analysis can then be converted to an as-fed basis using the expected moisture content in the same way as in the first example above. In all cases data should always state whether they are being reported on an as-fed or a DM basis. Some feed manufacturers state the analysis of their product on a DM basis, giving a maximum moisture content as well.
In some tables and reports of analytical data about feeds the dry matter content is given, followed by a set of other data. This normally means that the other data presented is on an as-fed basis. The same is true when a figure for moisture content is followed by other data. Thus, if the feed data is presented in the following way, it will all be on an as-fed basis:
Yellow Corn
Example 1
Example 2
Moisture
Dry matter
Lipid 1/
Lipid 1/
Protein 2/
Protein 2/
Fibre 3/
Fibre 3/
Ash 4/
Ash 4/
NFE 5/
NFE 5/
Synonyms:
1/ crude lipid; crude fat; ether extract.
2/ crude protein; N × 6.25; nitrogen content (kjeldahl) × 6.25.
3/ crude fibre.
4/total ash; mineral content.
5/nitrogen-free extract; carbohydrate.
In the examples given above it is easy to check that the data are given on an as-fed or as-received basis because adding together all the components listed, including moisture, totals 100%. In example No. 2 the moisture content must first be obtained by subtracting the figure given for DM from 100%.
In other tables, a figure is given for dry matter which is followed by figures for lipid, protein, fibre, ash and NFE. If the latter five components add up to 100% each is therefore quoted on a DM basis.
In the examples given above all six of the major components (sometimes called the proximate analyses) are listed - moisture, lipid, protein, fibre ash, and NFE. In such a case it is easy to check on which basis the data is presented. Often however, when feed analytical data is given, only some of the components are listed, which makes it more difficult to decide which basis has been employed. These six components are the only ones that should be taken into account when checking this matter. All other data should be excluded because they form a part of the six major ones. For example, a calcium level of 0.4% may be quoted - this is not additional to the six major components quoted - it is already included in the figure reported for ash content. Similarly a level reported for an amino acid -say 0.26% lysine - is already included in the figure quoted for protein content. Thus adding all the figures in the table together would not give a total of 100%. If the analyses quoted
include all six major components, these should add to 100%. If they do not, some must have been given on a DM basis or an error in compilation has been made.
This topic has been dealt with at length because it is the source of greatest confusion in consulting feed analytical tables. Some specific comments on individual feed tables follow.
3.2.2 Comments on the Use of Specific Compositional Tables
a) Hubbell (1984)
This table is designed for use by US feed manufacturers and is confined to the major ingredients readily available on the market in the USA.
The analyses given for amino acids are clearly marked as being on an as-fed basis. One is left to assume that the data presented for minerals is on the same basis.
Similarly the main table in this list does not state if the analyses are on an as-fed basis or not. As data for NFE is not presented it is impossible to check if the major six components add to 100% or not. However the fact that the DM content figure is listed provides the clue that the other data given are on an as-fed basis and this is confirmed by detailed examination of specific data for certain ingredients. The reason why data for NFE (an indefinite term for matter other than lipid, protein, fibre, and ash) is excluded from the table is that the figures given for the other components carry a 'margin of safety' i.e., they are under-estimates of those components (oil and protein) which are usually the subject of minimum specifications in compound feed and over-estimates of those (such as fibre) which are usually specified as a maximum level by feed compounders on their products.
All data presented in this table are given as a percentage except vitamins and energy levels. The energy levels quoted are not applicable to aquatic species and should be ignored. Data for vitamins are presented in milligrams per pound (mg/lb). For international use these figures would be more useful if given as ing/kg. To convert, use the following factor:
Vitamin content in mg/kg = content in mg/lb × 2.2046
b) ADCP (1983)
This publication presents a very clear set of data on a range of common feed ingredients gathered from various sources, mostly extracted from Göhl (1981). Analyses are reported on a DM basis but, where available, a dry matter (DM) figure is also given so that the reader can calculate the other data into an as-fed basis if desired. The compositional tables from this report have been reproduced in Appendix IV, with some additions from the author of the current manual.
Approximate digestible energy levels for fish are presented in ADCP (1983), which have been calculated from the following energy values:
kcal/g
Carbohydrates from non-leguminous plants
Carbohydrates from leguminous plants
Protein from animals
Protein from plants
Fats
No energy value was assigned to fibre for aquatic animals in this publication.
c) NAS (1971)
This is a very comprehensive set of tables of the composition of feed ingredients available in North America. The information is clearly presented but the number of ingredients and varieties of each quoted make the document somewhat daunting for the novice. There is, however, a very good guide to the interpretation of the tables at the front of the book. In these tables, analytical data for each material is presented in both an as-fed and DM (dry-matter) basis, where the moisture content was known, which makes it very easy to comprehend. The tables contain a lot of information on vitamin and mineral levels which is missing from other tables. There is also much information on energy levels and digestibility which, however, is not applicable to aquatic species.
Though well presented, the sheer weight of information (and of the book!) makes the volume difficult to digest. Also the information is very specific to feeds available in the North American continent. These tables are recommended for the advanced nutritionist rather than for the novice.
d) NAS (1969)
These tables are similar to those presented in NRC (1971) but are much less comprehensive. Not so many ingredients are listed. These tables form a good introduction to the analytical characteristics of feed ingredients available in North America.
e) Devendra (1981)
The compositional tables which form part of this report on feed resources are a good guide to some of the less conventional feed ingredients to be found in South and South-East Asia. Data for the six major components (moisture, lipid, protein, fibre, ash, and NFE) is provided together with, in most cases, data on calcium and total phosphorus.
f) FAO and USDA (1982) and Leung et al., (1968)
These publications are intended for nutritionists dealing with humans and are not recommended as part of the reference material for the novice feed formulator. They do, however, contain a significant amount of information on components like vitamins and, in the case of FAO and USDA (1982), amino acids and fatty acids which can be useful guides to the possible composition of related by-products of human food, for which equivalent data is as yet unpublished.
g) Göhl (1981)
In my opinion this is easily the most useful publication describing feeds and their composition and I believe that it should become the feed nutritionists 'bible'. Feeds are well classified, using a simple system, and are thus easy to look up. Scientific, English, and many local names are given for each feedstuff and there are good indexes. Data on the proximate components and, in most cases, calcium and phosphorus are presented on a dry matter basis, in the section specific to each ingredient. The data are from many different locations (and processes), giving a good indication of variability. At the end of the book a separate table gives quite comprehensive information on the amino acid contents of feeds, reported as a percentage of crude protein. The document is an invaluable guide for the novice and a useful reference for the professional in this field.
h) Other Tables
Less comprehensive, but locally useful, compositional tables are also available. These include the following:
Manik et al., (1976) lists analytical data for twenty-six possible ingredients for shrimp and prawn feeds which are available in Indonesia. Although not stated, analyses are presented on an as-fed basis. In most cases data for all of the six proximate analyses are given.
Malik and Chughtai (1979) have compiled a most useful set of feed tables for Pakistan. Data for some mineral (Ca, P, Na, and K, and in some cases, Fe, Mn, Cu, and Zn) as well as the results of proximate analyses are presented. Common local and botanical names are listed, proximate analyses are presented on an as-fed basis and a separate column additionally notes the dry matter content of the samples analysed.
Sadiq and Seng (1982). This publication presents less comprehensive information on Pakistani feed ingredients than Malik and Chughtai (1979) but does give a useful glimpse of the great variability that exists in raw materials. Maximum and minimum figures, as well as averages, of many components are presented. This amply illustrates the dangers inherent in applying data from feed tables which are based on averages for formulation work. Unfortunately, as pointed out earlier, the nutritionist in the field usually has no other option but to apply data from compositional tables.
Further reading for section 3.2:
NAS (1969); NAS, (1971); Devendra (1981); Sadiq and Seng (1982);
Hubbell (1984); Harris et al., (1980); ADCP (1983); Göhl (1981).
<section>5</section>
4. WHAT FEEDS CAN I USE ON MY FARM?
4.1 Ingredient Types
4.2 Advantages of Compound Feeds
4.3 Physical Form of Diets
4.4 Choosing the Type of Compound Feed
So far this manual has dealt with the reasons why feeding fish and shrimp is advantageous. The major components of feedstuffs (lipid, protein, etc.,) have been described and an explanation of feed compositional tables has been provided. Now we come to the questions..... Which feed can I use? Do I have to use a mixture of feeds or will a single feedstuff do? What effect does the physical form of the diet have? As in the case of all of the topics in this manual, these questions are very broad. The manual aims to introduce the topics and to answer the questions in a preliminary way, leaving the reader to explore the subject further on his own. References on this subject are given at the end of the section in 'further reading'.
4.1 Ingredient Types
4.1.1 Grasses
4.1.2 Legumes
4.1.3 Miscellaneous Fodder Plants
4.1.4 Fruits and Vegetables
4.1.5 Root Crops
4.1.6 Cereals
4.1.7 Oil-Bearing Seeds and Oil Cakes
4.1.8 Feeds of Animal Origin
4.1.9 Miscellaneous Feedstuffs
4.1.10 Additives
There are ten major groups of materials which can be used in fish and shrimp/prawn feeds (Table 10). The categories given in Table 10 are those designed by Göhl (1981), plus an additional one, additives.
Table 10 Ingredient Categories
Grasses
Legumes
Miscellaneous fodder plants
Fruits and vegetables
Root crops
Cereals
Oil-bearing seeds and oil cakes
Feeds of animal origin
Miscellaneous feedstuffs
Additives
A summary of the major characteristics of each group is given below. Descriptions of some of the most common ingredients in each category are given in Appendix V; details of their analytical characteristics are given in Appendix IV. Excellent descriptions of over 500 animal and plant substances and their by-products are given in Göhl (1981); other papers on this topic are listed in 'further reading' at the end of section 4.
4.1.1 Grasses
Grasses are normally utilized either fresh (as pasture) or in the form of hay or silage for cattle. Dried grass is also used in feeds for other livestock and is a potential minor ingredient in fish and shrimp feeds, as a source of carotenoids. Being characteristically very high in fibre content, grasses are of limited value in fish feeds except for herbivorous fish.
4.1.2 Legumes
The leaves and stems of legumes are, like the grasses, widely used as fodder for terrestrial animals. A few (e.g., ipil-ipil and alfalfa) have successfully been used in feeds for aquaculture. Legume fodder is rich in protein and minerals. The seeds of legumes have a great potential value as aquaculture feed ingredients though many contain anti-nutritive factors when raw; processing (heat treatment) usually renders them safe for use. Leguminous seeds are often rich in lysine though poor in methionine. Whole beans and peas are used extensively as human food. They are therefore usually expensive ingredients and their use in aquaculture feeds may only be justified in diets for high-value export-oriented species. Some examples of leguminous plants, which all have the ability to convert gaseous nitrogen into protein, are acacia, clover, lucerne, groundnut (peanut), gram, lentil, locust beans, chickpea, guar, ipil-ipil, lima beans, field peas, mung bean, cowpeas, and soybean.
Some leguminous plants produce high-oil seeds which are processed for the extraction of vegetable oil. The by-products of oil extraction processes are included in section 4.1.7.
4.1.3 Miscellaneous Fodder Plants
The leaves and other aerial parts of many plants, other than those specifically grown for fodder, are used for this purpose. While these may have local significance as aquaculture feed ingredients, nutrient digestibility (though crude protein levels on a DM basis are often quite high) is low. The plants in this category which have proved to be useful in aquaculture feeds are listed in Appendix V.
4.1.4 Fruits and Vegetables
Waste fruits and vegetables and the by-products from their processing or harvesting have not been used much in compound feeds for aquaculture. However, they are sometimes used, fresh, for feeding or manuring ponds. As both types of products are usually seasonal, large quantities of wastes and by-products are available intermittently but they are not normally preserved for later use by ensiling or drying. The leaves of these plants are usually more nutritious than the stems. Examples of the many by-products in this category which are often wasted are those from grapes, tomatoes, the palms, bananas and plantains, mangos, melons, citrus fruits, pineapple, and breadfruit.
4.1.5 Root Crops
Root crops are excellent sources of energy for many classes of livestock, being rich in carbohydrates. Their value as ingredients for aquaculture feeds is limited however, partly because of their high value for human food and partly because most aquatic species cannot digest carbohydrates well. Root crops, with some exceptions, are very deficient in protein, calcium and phosphorus, and vitamins. Waste from root crops can be utilized in small quantities in compound feeds. Many contain toxins which need destruction by heating before use. Some root crops have special value in aquaculture because of their ability to increase the water stability of diets (see Appendix XII), e.g., potato, cassava (manioc; tapioca), and sugar beet molasses. Other plants in this category include yams, carrots, Jerusalem artichokes and dasheen (yaro).
4.1.6 Cereals
Cereals and cereal by-products, despite their high carbohydrate content, form an important component in aquaculture diets. Their starch content helps to increase the water stability of the feed, particularly where heat is included in their method of processing. Cereals also contribute significantly to the protein and lipid content of the diet. Though deficient in some amino acids (e.g., lysine) they can be used to balance high-protein animal and vegetable ingredients. Cereals are often one of the cheapest raw materials that can be included in compound feeds for aquaculture. The brans are excellent sources of the B group vitamins. The names of cereal grains are well known. Examples, particularly of their by-products are however given in Appendix V.
4.1.7 Oil-Bearing Seeds and Oil Cakes
Many plants are grown specifically for the oil which their seeds or fruits produce, which is utilized for human food and other purposes. Vast quantities of by-products from the vegetable oil industry are produced and these are the staple ingredients of animal feedstuffs, being high in protein and low in carbohydrate. All are potential ingredients of aquaculture feeds.
Examples of the plants from which products in this category come are the leguminous plants soybean and groundnut, together with mustard, rape, sunflower, safflower, coconut, kapok, cotton, oil palm, linseed, poppy, sesame (gingelly) and para rubber (caoutchouc).
In considering the use of ingredients from this group it is essential to understand the terminology used in describing oil-seed by-products because ingredients with apparently similar names have completely different analytical characteristics. The external coating of some seeds is sometimes but not always completely removed before oil extraction, e.g., in the case of sunflower seed, groundnut, and cotton seed. The material which remains after oil extraction is referred to in several ways:
Decorticated (sometimes referred to as 'Dec')
Coating removed before oil extraction
De-hulled
Coating removed before oil extraction
Without hulls
Coating removed before oil extraction
(Undecorticated (shortened to 'Undec')
Coating not removed
With hulls
Coating not removed
Some intermediary products between 'Dec' and 'Undec' exist. A few tables of feed composition (e.g., NAS, 1971) refer to these as 'with some hulls'. Decorticated products are higher in protein and lower in fibre than undecorticated products.
The other major set of terms applied to this class of feeds refer to the method of oil extraction used, which also has important analytical consequences. These terms are defined as follows:
Expeller: (shortened to 'Exp'):
oil removed by mechanical process, either by hydraulic presses or by screw augers. The latter type can be distinguished by looking at the pieces of unground cake, which are not flat. The hydraulic process does not remove as much oil but damages the cake less than the screw process which generates a lot of heat.
Extracted: (shortened to 'Ext')
oil removed by a highly efficient chemical process using solvents. Sometimes the words 'solvent extracted' are applied to this residual product.
The characteristics of these products are that expeller residuals are much higher in oil content and lower in protein content than extracted products.
Two other terms are applied to oil-seed residues. These are 'cakes' and 'meal'. Normally, if a product is referred to as a 'cake' it means it is an expeller residue. Similarly a 'meal' normally refers to an extracted product. However there can be some confusion here because the word 'meal' can also be used to refer to a ground or milled product. So, the words 'groundnut meal' might refer either to groundnut cake which had been ground into a meal or it might refer to extracted groundnut. When in doubt, the chemical analysis is the only criterion to use in determining which product is being offered for sale if it is in ground (meal) form. Some illustrations of the important analytical differences designated by the above terms are given below in Table 11.
Table 11 Examples of the Effect of Processing on Analytical Characteristics of Oil-Seed Proteins
Country and Material
H[2]O
LIP
PROT
FIB
NFE
ASH
Pakistan
Dec. Cottonseed
Undec. Cottonseed
USA
Exp. Groundnut
Ext. Groundnut
Note: The squares denote the analytical component most affected by the processing differences between the alternatives in each pair of ingredients.
Oil seed hulls are also available by-products of the vegetable oil industry but, being extremely high in indigestible fibre content, are of little value for aquaculture feeds.
Descriptions of the common oil-seed residues are to be found in Appendix V.
4.1.8 Feeds of Animal Origin
These ingredients are either from terrestrial, avian or marine animals. They constitute the most important (and often the most expensive) ingredients of aquaculture feeds. Animal protein is necessary to balance the amino acid and vitamin deficiencies in cereals and other plant products. Animal proteins appear to contain unidentified growth factors for some animals. Marine proteins have always been important components of aquaculture diets although shortages of fish meal are stimulating research on methods of replacing them, either partially or completely, with other ingredients. Ingredients of marine origin are important sources of poly-unsaturated lipids (PUFA's), particularly of the important n-3 series (see section 3.1.2). Some examples of ingredients in this category are blood, feather meal, poultry by-products meal, fish meal, meat meal, raw fish, fish oils, fish silage, shrimp meal and milk by-products. Some of the more common of these ingredients are described in
Appendix V.
4.1.9 Miscellaneous Feedstuffs
Many other ingredients have potential in aquaculture feeds; their value has not yet been fully evaluated, however. Some of these ingredients are sometimes referred to as 'unconventional' or 'non conventional' feedstuffs, though many, such as cane sugar molasses, are conventional ingredients in feedstuffs for other animals. This group of feedstuffs includes leaf protein concentrate, minerals, seaweed, by-products of sugar cane, by-products of fermentation processes, lipids, microbial proteins, algae, manures, and celluloses. Some examples are described in Appendix V.
4.1.10 Additives
An increasing diversity of other substances are being used in animal feedstuffs. These include synthetic amino acids, vitamins, binders, antioxidants, preservatives, prophylactic medicines, hormones, and growth promotors. Most of these have very specific uses, for which manufacturers' literature should be consulted. It is beyond the scope of this manual to deal with this topic in detail but some comments or definitions are given below:
Amino Acids
The major synthetic amino acids available for supplementation are 1-lysine and dl-methionine (see section 3.1.3.). See also 'chemo-attractants' below.
Vitamins
Individual vitamins, or premixes of them prepared for specific purposes, are commercially available. The storage and mixing of vitamins, and other trace substances, require special care and facilities and it is not recommended that farmers prepare their own or attempt to add individual synthetic vitamins to their feeds. Where this is done, however, it is essential to dilute the substance before adding it to the final product (see section 5.4.5.).
Binders
Substances used to improve the durability (preserve the physical form of the diet during storage e.g., prevent pellets breaking down into 'fines') or the water stability of the feed are dealt with in Appendix XII.
Antioxidants
Usually included in vitamin premixes or added to lipids (especially fish oils) during manufacture, antioxidants are substances capable of preventing or delaying the onset of rancidity. Feed rancidity results in the unpalatibility of feeds and the generation of toxic chemicals. Antioxidants can be naturally occurring substances, such as vitamin E, or synthetic chemicals. The commonly available commercial antioxidants, under a variety of trade names, are BHT (butylated hydroxytoluene), BHA (butylated hydroxyanisole) and ethoxyquin.
Preservatives
Several substances may be added to feeds to control the rate of deterioration, particularly that due to fungal attack. Most are sodium or potassium salts of propionic, benzoic, or sorbic acid.
Chemo-attractants
Synthetic chemicals or natural ingredients containing chemicals, such as free amino acids which cause feeding behaviour in fish or shrimp. Meyers (1987a) has reviewed this topic, which is also covered by Mackie and Mitchell (1985)
4.2 Advantages of Compound Feeds
Feed ingredients can be fed singly or in simple or complex mixtures. The latter are usually known as compound or compounded feeds. They are sometimes fed simply as a meal or mash (mixed ground ingredients), or in some form of dry pellet, or as a formed moist product (see section 4.3).
Though feeding of single ingredients to fish and shrimp is often practised it can be a very inefficient use of feed because a single ingredient is most unlikely to supply all the nutrients required by the animal in the balance in which it needs them. Unless the system of culture is so intense that the contribution of natural food is minimal, single ingredients often act more as. a manure which increases natural productivity, than a specific feed for the animal being cultured.
A single feed ingredient may, for example, be too high in indigestible fibre which may be largely wasted, or in carbohydrate of limited digestibility. Conversely, the ingredient may be too high in expensive protein which may be consumed to satisfy the energy requirement of the animal rather than for growth (see section 3.1.5.).
The unsatisfactory nature of feeding single feedstuffs to fish is partly responsible for the generally poor apparent feed conversion ratios (AFCR's) achieved by doing so (note that compound feeds for fish usually give AFCR's of 2.0-2.5, or less). Table 12 illustrates this point:
Table 12 Apparent Feed Conversion Ratios (AFCR) 1/achieved by Feeding Single Ingredients to Fish
Ingredient
AFCR 1/
Fresh sea fish
Freshwater fish
Fresh meat
Prawns and shrimp
White cheese
Soybeans
Maize (corn) meal
Potatoes
Cottonseed cake
Ground rice
Oil palm cakes
Cassava leaves
Guinea grass
Banana leaves
Dried silkworm larvae
Source: Hickling, 1962
1/ For explanation of AFCR, see section 2.5.2 of this manual. Some of the ingredients are moist, which also reduces their AFCR on an as-fed basis.
The effect of feeding a single ingredient versus simple mixtures of ingredients can be illustrated as follows, using only the lipid, protein and fibre levels as examples. Suppose we consider four ingredients only - wheat, rice bran, expeller groundnut cake and fish meal. It is very unlikely that fish meal would ever be used as a single feedstuff because of its cost - it is used in this example for illustrative purposes only. For the purpose the analysis of the four materials is assumed as follows:
Ingredient
Lipid (%)
Protein (%)
Fibre (%)
Rice bran
Fish meal
Exp. Groundnut
Wheat
If the dietary requirements of the fish being cultured are assumed as 6% lipid, 23% protein and less than 8% fibre the effect of feeding any of the four ingredients can be demonstrated as follows:
Effect of Feeding Single Ingredients
(% of Dietary requirement fulfilled)
Ingredient
Lipid
Protein
Fibre
Rice bran
Fish meal
Exp. Groundnut
Wheat
(Dietary requirement =
It can be seen at once that, in the above example, none of the ingredients complies with the dietary requirements of the animal. Wheat supplies neither enough lipid nor protein, although it does not exceed the maximum fibre level which was set. Expeller groundnut supplies too much of all three components when fed alone. The fish meal complies with the maximum fibre level imposed but is in gross and wasteful excess in protein level. The rice bran is deficient in lipid and protein and very much in excess of the desired fibre content.
Even a simple 60:40 mixture of two of the ingredients in the above example results in a product which is much closer to the requirements of the animal defined for this example:
Inclusion Level of Ingredient
Contribution to Mixture
Lipid (%)
Protein (%)
Fibre (%)
60% Rice Bran
40% Exp. Groundnut
Total
(Dietary requirement =
The 60:40 mixture of rice bran and expeller groundnut cake now complies with the dietary protein requirements of the animal and is only a little in excess in lipid. It still contains too much fibre but it is a great improvement on either ingredient used singly.
One of the ways in which these four ingredients could have been used to achieve greater compliance with the dietary requirements which were set for the animal would have been to have used 20% rice bran, 35% exp. groundnut, 5% fish meal and 40% wheat. The result would have been as follows:
Inclusion Level of Ingredient
Contribution to
Mixture
Lipid (%)
Protein (%)
Fibre (%)
40% wheat
20% rice bran
35% exp. groundnut
5% fish meal
Total
(Dietary requirement =
The mixture of four ingredients is still rather high in fibre but complies well to the requirement for lipid and protein.
Thus the purpose of a mixed or compound diet is demonstrated - it is to provide a feed which is balanced in its various components. In practice these include a wider variety of components than the three illustrated in the above example. The topic of formulation will be dealt with more thoroughly in section 5.2 of this manual.
The emphasis in the rest of this manual will therefore be on the formulation, production and use of compound feeds for aquaculture.
4.3 Physical Form of Diets
Mixed or compound feeds may be presented to fish or shrimp in a number of different forms.
The feed may be dry (about 10% moisture), moist (about 30-45% moisture) or wet (>50% moisture) or an intermediate between these. Normally, only mixtures of wet materials (e.g., trash fish) would come into the wet category. Most compounded aquaculture feeds fall into the dry category or the moist group.
Dry feeds are easier to manufacture on a large scale and easier to store, transport and feed. There is evidence however that moist feed may be more palatable and attractive to the animals and can give better results than a dry feed. Moist feeds are easily made on a small scale at the farm site. There is the additional advantage that moist ingredients (e.g., trash fish) can be utilized without employing energy wasting, and sometimes quality damaging techniques of fish meal production. Dry feeds lend themselves to large-scale manufacture best, though there are some commerically available moist feeds for fish (and many more for pet animals). The topic of feed manufacture is discussed in section 5 of this manual.
Dry and moist feeds are usually formed into a definite physical shape - pellets, crumbles, granules, balls, cakes, etc. Dry pellets are normally tubular in shape with a fixed length and diameter. Their diameter depends on the size of the orifice through which they are extruded. Usually, dry pellets are cut by the pelleting machine into pre-selected lengths. Dry pellets can be broken into smaller irregular shaped particles - crumbles -or reduced still further in size and graded into various sized granules for younger animals. The hardness of pellets may be varied by manufacturing technique, choice of ingredients, and the use of binders.
Moist feeds are normally extruded through some form of mincer to form pellets of regular diameter, depending again on the diameter of the size of orifice through which they are extruded. Moist pellets are often not cut so they break naturally from a spaghetti or noodle-like product into a range of pellet lengths. Maintenance of their shape in air and in water depends on the choice of ingredients, method of manufacture and on the use of binders. Some moist feeds consist of hand-made compacted cakes or balls of feed.
The particle size of raw materials is also important for it governs the durability and acceptability of the compound feed it is included in. Generally, finer particles make better pellets but poor grinding techniques can damage the nutritional quality of the feed.
Compound feeds can also be made in a 're-hydratable' form. These are dry pellets which rapidly absorb water when placed in water (i.e., when fed) and become soft, like a moist feed.
Feeds produced by the moist feed technique can, if desired, be sun-dried into dry feeds and stored and fed in the same manner as the latter.
Feeds can be produced that sink to the bottom of the pond, tank or cage (most compound feeds are of this type) or they can be manufactured in a way that produces a floating pellet. The latter have the advantage, for those fish that will accept them, that it is easier to observe when feeding occurs and when all the feed is consumed. Shrimp do not accept floating feeds well, except when they are very young post-larvae at which time they are still mainly pelagic in habit.
Commercial aquaculture feeds are produced in a range of sizes designed for different sizes (ages) of animals. Examples of the sizes used are given in tables 13-17 and in Appendix XIII.
Information on particle size determination is given in Appendix XI.
4.4 Choosing the Type of Compound Feed
Different species of shrimp and fish have different nutritional requirements, both in terms of the type of raw materials used (quality) and the proportion (quantity) of each component ingredient. The requirements vary because of the characteristics of the species being cultured which are affected by its normal diet in its natural environment. Specifications for the major species covered by this manual are given in section 6. Methods for making different types of feed are given in the next section, section 5. Final selection of the type of feed to use will depend on the size and behaviour of the animal to be fed, the type of production unit it is to be reared in, the availability of labour and feed manufacturing equipment, and economics.
Further reading (for section 4)
Göhl (1981); Kennedy (1978); Malik and Chughtai (1979); Sadiq and Seng (1982); Devendra (1981); Jauncey and Ross (1982); ADCP (1983); ADCP (1980); Manik et al., (1977); Minsaas (1978); Lovell (1982); Boonyaratpalin (1982); Deveraj and Keshavappa (1980); Edwards (1982); Viola et al., (1981); Viola and Arieli (1983); Jackson et al., (1984); Disney and James (1980); Tacon (1981); Tacon (1985); Brandt (1979); Rumsey et al., (1981); ADCP (1979); Woynarovich and Kühnhold (1979); Müller (1980); NRC (1983); Piper et al., (1982); Phillips (1970); Tacon and Jackson (1985).
Table 13 Feed Sizes for Trout
Animal Size
Feed Size
Fry from swim-up to 3 inch
Crumbles (size unspecified)
3-4 inches
Pellets 3/32 × 3/32 inches long
4-7 inches
Pellets 1/8 × 1/8 inches long
> 7 inches
Pellets 1/4 × 1/4 inches long
Source: Phillips, 1970
Table 14 Standard Granule and Pellet Sizes for Salmon and Trout
Size
Specification 1/
Notes
Granules
Starter
420-595 microns
Made from 1/8 inch pellets
No. 1
595-841 microns
Made from 1/8 inch pellets
No. 2
841 microns-1.19 mm
Made from 1/8 inch pellets
No. 3
1.19-1.68 mm
Made from 3/16 inch pellets
No. 4
1.68-2.38 mm
Made from 3/16 inch pellets
No. 5
2.38-3.36 mm
Made from 3/16 inch pellets
Pellets
3/32 × 3/32 inch
2.35 × 2.35 mm
1/8 × 1/8 inch
3.1 × 3.1 mm
3/16 × 3/16 inch
4.7 × 4.7 mm
1/4 × 1/4 inch
6.25 × 6.25 mm
Source: NRC, 1981
1/Micron size is determined by particle analysis (see Appendix XI)
Table 15 Feed Sizes for Rainbow Trout (in Japan)
Fish Size
Food Type
Feed Size
(g)
(mm)
Fry
Crumble (C)
0.3-0.5 (300-500 microns)
C
Fingerling
C
C
Adult
Pellet (P)
P
P
P
P
Spawner
P
Source: Kafuku and Ikenoue, 1983
Table 16 Recommended Particle Sizes for Channel Catfish Fry
Weight of Fish
Feed Size
(g)
(mm)
Source: NRC, 1983
Table 17 Recommended Sizes for Abernathy Dry Pellets for Pacific Salmon
Fish Size
Feed Size
(g)
Starter granule
1/32 inch granule (G)
3/64 inch G
1/16 inch G
3/32 inch G
3/32 inch pellet (P)
1/8 inch P
3/16 inch P
Source: Piper et al., 1982
<section>6</section>
5. CAN I MAKE MY OWN COMPOUND FEEDS? HOW?
5.1 How do I Choose my Ingredients?
5.2 How do I Decide How Much of Each Ingredient to Use (Formulation)?
5.3 What Machinery Do I Need? And Where Do I Get It?
5.4 How Do I Make Compound Feeds?
5.5 Economics of Feed Production
5.6 What Special Problems Am I Likely To Have In Making Compound Feeds?
In an earlier part (section 2) of this manual the reasons for feeding were explained. A description of the different feed components was given in section 3, together with some notes on feed compositional tables. In section 4 the advantages of using compounded feeds rather than individual ingredients was discussed.
Let us assume therefore that you are now convinced that feeding your aquaculture stock with compound feeds is a good idea. You have perhaps already looked for local suppliers of compound feed designed for the species you are growing. Maybe you have already tested them on your farm. Perhaps there were none readily available locally however. If there were, you might have thought that they were extremely expensive. So you have begun to think "can I make my own compound feeds?", "if so, how do I begin?", "what equipment will I need?" This section of the manual provides preliminary answers to each of these questions.
First of all - yes, you can make your own feeds. If your aquaculture production does not exceed 300 tons per year it may not be difficult to do so. If your farm is very large it may be more difficult because the scale of the feed-making operation becomes a large extra management problem. In the latter case there would be, unless you put the feed mill under separate management, a danger of its operation becoming too important a component of the farm manager's responsibilities. Also, professional advice would be essential in designing the feed manufacturing plant, selecting and installing equipment, and training staff to operate it. This section of the manual does not attempt to deal with the establishment of a large feed mill, which is a very specialized topic. However, it does show how simply feed-making operations can be established on a small farm scale. Small scale feed manufacture is not difficult but it does require a lot of care if the feed is going to be successful
for your farm. If you decide not to make your own, some suggestions on ways to locate suppliers of ready-made feeds are given in section 10 of the manual.
In the previous paragraph I said that I regarded the feed requirements of a farm with an aquaculture production of not more than 300 tons per year as a relatively small scale operation, for which it is possible to set up a feed production plant on the farm site. On a moist feed basis, the feed requirement for a farm of this size would not exceed an average of about 3 tons per day, though it could seasonally rise much above this level. Remember that the higher AFCR's of moist feeds, due to their higher moisture content, mean that you would require larger amounts of them than you would of an equivalent dry feed. Also, since the storage of moist feeds would require refrigeration, you would have to make your feeds on a daily basis. However, the making of moist feeds is a much easier and cheaper form of farm manufacture than setting up a dry feed plant. Also, moist feeds can be quite easily converted into dry feed if preferred.
An idea of the scale of equipment cost involved in making your own feed is given in section 5.3.
The labour involved in feed manufacture is mostly needed for moving ingredients and finished compound feed from one part of the plant to another. In small plants, moving feed by hand between different pieces of equipment will also be necessary. It is only efficient to have full-time labour employed for the feed plant if the mill is going to be in operation all day, every day. It is difficult to ensure regular operation of a dry pellet mill which is manufacturing for only one production unit (your farm) since the smallest equipment available may produce more than the average daily requirement of feed. There is therefore a tendency to make feed intermittently and draw feed from stock on a daily basis. The result is that the plant and its labour force may be standing idle much of the time. Moist feed requires daily manufacture but the operation need not take all day. Some farms find that they are able to use the same labour force to feed the fish as to make the feed itself.
Most of the work in the feed mill can therefore be done by drawing labourers from the general pool of labour available on the farm. It is essential to have a full-time foreman and a deputy, who is responsible solely for feed manufacture, raw material intake, quality control, storage, etc.
There is a wide choice of machinery available for feed manufacture; section 5.3 explains the different types and their functions and gives some examples of them, while Appendix III lists the names and addresses of some feed equipment suppliers.
Sections 5.1 and 5.2 deal with the selection of raw materials and the formulation (i.e., how to choose how much of each ingredient) of compound feeds. Section 5.4 deals with the methods of making feed. This manual thus explains the general way in which these operations may be tackled so as to give an understanding of these topics. It is suggested, however, that you seek on-site advice when you start up operations on your own farm, particularly for formulation work. Once you have started making your own feed you will become more and more confident and you will be able to alter your own feed formulae and adjust your manufacturing techniques to reflect changes in feed requirements and ingredient availability. Advice in the initial stages may be obtained through your local fisheries department or from international advisers supplied as part of aquaculture development programmes funded through the development banks (World Bank, Asian Development Bank, etc.,) or UNDP, or by
bilateral funding agencies.
5.1 How do I Choose my Ingredients?
Three major factors govern the choice of ingredients, once you have decided to make your own aquaculture feeds. These are:
- Suitability for species being cultured (type and quality)
- Quantity available locally and regularity of supply
- Cost
SUITABILITY
Major sources of high-protein animal and vegetable ingredients, together with cereals or cereal by-products and, probably, vitamin/mineral premixes will be required. In fact a very wide range of ingredients can be utilized - this topic has been covered in section 4. Each species has its own dietary requirements (section 6). Some thrive better on certain types of ingredients than on others and different proportions of them are needed. The dietary requirements of different species are discussed in section 6, while Appendix II gives some typical examples of the various ingredients and their proportions (formulae) used in actual diets. Choosing the ingredients to be used in feed manufacture on your farm is firstly a matter of matching the types available locally (or that can be imported) with the needs of the formulae of feed suitable for the species of fish or shrimp which you are farming. The first thing to do therefore is to prepare a list of the raw materials available to
you.
Having prepared that list, you must make an assessment of the quality of the ingredients available. This means you must carefully define each raw material (see sections 3 and 4) and allot to it a real or theoretical analytical composition. This information is essential before formulation work (section 5.2) can be done. Real analyses of local ingredients may be available from the suppliers or from surveys conducted by local government departments of fisheries or other livestock production departments or by local universities. In the absence of local information, ingredient compositional tables have to be used (Appendix IV). This is less satisfactory than the use of accurate local information but is often necessary.
Finally, you must try to find reputable suppliers who are known to supply good quality ingredients, free from adulteration and toxicity. Quality, as is stressed in many parts of this manual, is an essential part of your feeding programme which, if neglected, can have disastrous results. Talk to other livestock farmers and to the livestock departments in local universities and government institutions - they will be able to point you towards the reliable suppliers of ingredients.
QUANTITY AND REGULARITY OF SUPPLY
Choose ingredients which are regularly available in sufficient quantities. Some ingredients are only available seasonally. The more regular the supply of each ingredient is, the better. Otherwise you will have to purchase much larger quantities than you would like to, and face the problems of longer-term storage, or you will have to make frequent changes in your feed formulation because of the lack of a specific ingredient which is not available in sufficient quantities to supply your needs. Sometimes a very suitable ingredient may be available locally. However, if you want to include an ingredient in a formulation at a 57, inclusion level, for example, and you are going to make 500 tons of feed per year, but there is only about 100 kg of the material available per week, it is unsatisfactory. It is not going to be suitable for use, even though it is basically a good ingredient. In this situation it would be better Co include it in only one of the types of feed you are making
(say for a starter feed) rather than try to include it in them all and run out of it every few days and have to change the formulae.
So, the message is: choose ingredients which are available in sufficient quantities on a regular basis.
COST
Cost is the last but not the least of the three major factors to consider. The cost of each ingredient can vary quite markedly from one location to another, depending on supply and demand. What may be a very acceptable ingredient in one place may have to be rejected, or used in smaller quantities, in another because it is too expensive. Cost obviously interacts with availability and suitability. All these factors have to be reviewed simultaneously in the selection of ingredients for your compound feeds.
You should therefore complete your summary of the raw materials available in a tabular form which shows analytical characteristics (composition - from actual local data or from tables) and cost per unit at the farm site. This table will be used when you formulate your feed (i.e., decide how much of each ingredient to use) and assess its potential cost.
5.2 How do I Decide How Much of Each Ingredient to Use (Formulation)?
A great deal of information has, by now, been gathered by you. You know (section 5.1) the analytical characteristics and cost of the available ingredients; the requirements (section 6) on the animal you are farming are known; and typical examples of formulae are available (Appendix II). How is all this information to be put to use in deciding how a feed formulation should be constructed? Each ingredient used should be included because it contributes a particular component necessary in the diet. For example, it may be a good source of marine protein, it may supply a need for a certain type of fatty acid, etc. Also the object is to satisfy the dietary requirements of the animal at the cheapest cost. This is known as 'least cost formulation'.
Least cost formulation is best done using a specifically designed computer programme. The computer stores all the data gathered about the available raw materials (analyses and cost), together with the specifications of the feeds to be formulated. It will then do the necessary calculations and will turn out a least-cost formulation. Although computer hardware and software for this purpose is available it may not be economically sensible to purchase it unless very large numbers of such calculations are regularly necessary, e.g., in a large feed mill or a group of smaller ones. On an individual farm it may only be necessary to do the basic formulations once - after that it may only be a matter of examining the effect of relatively minor changes. These changes may be either in specification, based on new information as to the animal's requirements, or in the ingredients, based on new availability or cost data. Linear programming for least-cost formulation is therefore not dealt
with in this manual since it is not thought appropriate for small scale aquaculture. Those who are interested in this subject are recommended to consult Chow et al., (1980).
Feed formulation by 'hand' calculation is a tedious and repetitive (but not difficult) process of trial and error. A simple calculator is necessary for this work. Some examples of the way in which it can be done are worked through in this section of the manual.
For formulation, the following information is necessary:
1. A list of available raw materials, together with compositional data and cost information;
2. The specifications of the diet to be made, in terms of levels of protein, lipid, EAA, EFA, etc.;
3. Knowledge of the special suitability of certain individual raw materials for the animal to be fed.
The first step in formulation is therefore to assemble the above information in an organized and accessible way.
The second stage is to draw up a worksheet for feed formulation, which includes provision for the major nutrients and for cost data. An example of a data sheet is given in Table 18.
In Table 18, column 1 is for the full description of the ingredients, column 2 is for the proposed inclusion rate, and column 3 is for the cost of that proposed inclusion rate (e.g., a 21% inclusion rate of an ingredient costing US$ 0.50/kg would contribute 0.50 × 21/100 = US$ 0.105 to the cost of each kg of diet). Columns 4 are for the contributions certain inclusion rates will make to the analytical characteristics of the diet (e.g., a 15% inclusion of an ingredient with a protein level of 44% would contribute 44 × 15/100 = 6.6% of protein to the final diet). Similarly column 5 is to record the available energy contributed to the feed by the inclusion level of each ingredient contemplated (see later in this sub-section for calculation of this factor). The results can then be totalled to see how they comply with the specifications for the ration. Re-adjustments can then be made, using another worksheet or modifications to the same one.
The worksheet given in Table 18 only refers to the major nutrients because it is necessary to balance these with the principal specifications of the diet first, before other factors such as EAA content, etc., can be examined. When the basic diet has been provisionally established its other analytical features can be examined and adjustments made to reach the final, balanced, formulation.
Now let us assume that we have ingredient data ready and that we have inserted on the worksheet (Table 18) what the specifications of the diet to be formulated are. How do we start the formulation? It is here that the experience of the formulator comes in. He will have certain pre-determined ideas in his mind about minimum inclusion rates of certain ingredients, based on his and others' experience. This experience is a constantly changing and developing matter; it is also very specific to the individual doing the formulation. It is therefore impossible to lay down in this manual specific rates of minimum inclusion, especially as there are so many species and different raw materials available. However, it is hoped that the examples of feed formulae given in Appendix II and the discussion of dietary requirements in section 6 will help you to start to form your own judgements of these matters. Personal judgement is an essential part of formulation and it is a factor which the
computer cannot replace.
For the purpose of the following examples to be worked through in demonstrating how formulation is done, I have selected a very simple diet -initially to consist of only three ingredients - and a theoretical diet specification. For simplification I am also going to use only two analytical characteristics - the protein and the lipid level. I am also going to assume that, of these three ingredients, one which is of known nutritional value exists locally and is of acceptable cost. The formulator in the example has therefore already decided, on the basis of past experience, on a minimum inclusion rate for it. Thus the amount of this ingredient is already fixed. Let us assume that he has four other ingredients to select from.
To give clarity to the example to be worked through, names of the ingredients 1/ and other information available have been set out below:
1/ It must be stressed that all figures used are fictitious and for example only.
DIET SPECIFICATIONS
Species:
Mermaid
Diet Type:
Growers
Lipid Level:
7% (on as-fed basis)
Protein Level:
26% (on as-fed basis)
INGREDIENTS LOCALLY AVAILABLE
Ingredient Name
Analytical Composition on an as-fed basis (%)
Cost (US$/ton)
Lipid
Protein
Fish Meal
Exp. Groundnut Cake
Ext. Soybean Meal
Ext. Rice Bran
Maize Meal
For the example, I am assuming that the formulator (nutritionist) has made up his mind, from past experience, that mermaids must have a minimum of 10% fish meal in their diet. The inclusion level of this ingredient in the diet is therefore fixed - the fish meal will thus contribute 0.6% lipid, 5.5% protein and US$ 60/kg to the final ration respectively. This can therefore be entered on the diet formulation worksheet (Table 18). Having defined (for this example) that there shall be only two other ingredients, the nutritionist decides to select one high protein ingredient (groundnut or soybean) and one low protein ingredient (rice bran or maize meal). This is because it is already obvious to him that the dietary protein requirements for mermaids cannot be matched if all three ingredients are high in protein or if the remaining two, after fish meal (at a fixed level of 10%), are low in protein. This can be demonstrated as follows. The dietary protein requirement is 26%. The
fish meal, at 10% of the diet, will provide 5.5% protein to it. If the remaining 90% of the diet consists of either maize meal (9.8) protein) or rice bran (13.3% protein), or any combination of the two, the final protein content of the diet cannot be high enough:
Fish Meal
Inclusion Level 10%
Protein Contribution 5.50
Maize Meal
Totals
or Fish Meal
Rice Bran
Totals
Inclusion Level
Protein Contribution
or Fish Meal
Maize Meal
Rice Bran
Totals
Table 18 Worksheet for Diet Formulation
Ingredient
Inclusion Rate (%)
Cost of Inclusion
Nutrient Contribution on as-fed basis (%)
H[2]O
LIP
PROT
FIB
NFE
ASH
CA
AVAIL P
DE (kcal/kg)
Totals
Specification
In all three cases the protein level is too low. Obviously any other combination of maize meal and rice bran would also fail to supply enough protein. Similarly, if the remaining two ingredients, after fish meal, were the two high protein ingredients, groundnut and soybean, the final protein level would be too high for the specifications:
Fish Meal
Inclusion Level
Protein Contribution
Exp. Groundnut Cake
Totals
or Fish Meal
Ext. Soybean Meal
Totals
or Fish Meal
Exp. Groundnut Cake
Ext. Soybean Meal
Totals
Clearly the two other ingredients, after fish meal, have to consist of one high protein and one low protein ingredient. The next question to decide is therefore 'what mixture of the two types will provide the correct protein level? There are four possible combinations - groundnut/rice bran; groundnut/maize meal; soybean/rice bran; and soybean/maize meal. This problem is solved as follows:
We know that the 10% inclusion of fish meal will contribute 5.5% protein to the final ration. Thus we know that the other 90% of the diet must contribute the rest (26.0% - 5.5% = 20.5%). This portion of the formulation can be treated as a seperate diet, consisting of the two remaining ingredients. In other words, we can say that the non-fish meal portion of the diet must contain 20.5 × 100/90 = 22.78% protein.
Thus we know that the other two components must provide this final level of 22.78% (say 22.8%) protein to balance the fish meal contribution. The amount of each of the four possible pairs of ingredients which will supply this level of protein can be calculated as follows. A cross is constructed thus:
Subtracting No. 3 from No. 1 gives the value of No. 5
Subtracting No. 3 from No. 2 gives the value of No. 4
regardless of the positive or negative signs
Thus, for the example being worked through, the four possible mixtures can be determined as follows:
Then the actual combinations of ingredients can be calculated as follows:
a)
b)
c)
d)
Thus, for the four alternatives, the levels of each ingredient in the final diet (remember the above mixture constitutes only 90% of the final mix) would be:
1. 44.8 × 0.9 = 40.3% groundnut and 55.2 × 0.9 = 49.7% rice
2. 52.6 × 0.9 = 47.3% groundnut and 47.4 × 0.9 = 42.7% maize
3. 28.4 × 0.9 = 25.6 soybean and 71.6 × 0.9 = 64.4% rice
4. 35.1 × 0.9 = 31.6 soybean and 64.9 × 0.9 = 58.4% maize
(Totals = 90%)
We can now check out the effect of combining each of the four alternatives with fish meal on the final dietary protein level and, while we are doing so, examine also the level of lipid in the final diet achieved by each combination. The diet cost can also be calculated from the ingredient costs.
Remember that the original specifications of the diet to be formulated were:
Lipid 7.0%
Protein 26.0%
The results of the four possible formulations are:
Ingredient 1/
Inclusion Rate
Inclusion
Contribution to
Cost (US$/ton)
Lipid (%)
Protein (%)
a) FM
RB
EGC
b) FM
MM
EGC
c) FM
RB
ESM
d) FM
MM
ESM
1/ FM = Fish Meal; RM = Rice Bran; MM = Maize Meal;
EGC = Expeller Groundnut Cake; ESM = Extracted Soybean Meal.
In all four cases, since this is the component we have been balancing, the protein level is correct, at 26%. This checks our previous calculations. Which of these possible formulae agrees with the dietary specifications we seek to meet? Clearly it is (a), which has a lipid level of 7.3%, that meets the specifications best. By coincidence it also turns out to be the cheapest of the four alternatives, so it would be the formulae to select. The compound feed would therefore be made from 10% fish meal, 49.7% rice bran, and 40.3% expeller groundnut cake.
Had the required dietary lipid level in the above example been 5% instead of 7% none of the four alternative formulae would have met this specification adequately, and the formulator would have had to decide how to modify them. In practice there would be several ways of doing this. One would be to add a pure lipid (such as maize/corn oil) to the diet, if one were available, and to modify the levels of the other ingredients to re-balance the protein level. However, this would increase dietary cost; diet (d), which, (because of its lipid level) would be the diet on which this modification would be carried out, is already the most expensive of the alternatives. The most sensible way to overcome this problem would be to remove the restriction (originally only placed on the formulation for the sake of simplicity in this example) that there should not be more than three ingredients in the final diet. If five ingredients are available, why not use four or five of them, instead of
three? To do so would provide a more balanced diet in other ways also, probably. A simple way (it is not the only way, nor is it the cheapest solution) of doing this would be to look at ways of combining diets (a) and (d). Compared to the new required lipid level of 5% (a) is too high, at 7.31% and (d) is too low, at 3.64%. I have selected (d) rather than (c), which is also too low in lipid, because formulation (d) contains the least of the most expensive secondary ingredient, soybean meal.
A new formulation, using all five ingredients could be derived in the following way to meet the new 5% lipid, 26% protein specifications. In diets (a) and (d) the 10% fish meal component is common and can be excluded from the calculations. Thus, in diet (a), the other two ingredients (rice bran and groundnut) contribute 1.19 + 5.52 = 6.71% lipid to the feed. In diet (d) the two other raw materials (maize and soybean) contribute 2.63 + 0.41 = 3.04% lipid. The combined contribution required is 5% (the specified dietary lipid level), less the 0.6% (contributed by the fish meal) =4.4%. We can then solve the problem of how to combine all four ingredients to produce the required lipid level by constructing a cross similar to that used in balancing the protein level originally:
Level of Lipid in Two-Component Mixes Proportion to Include
Thus the proportion of the ingredients in diet (a) to use in the final formula would be
and the proportion of the ingredients in diet (d) to be used would be
Applying this to the final formulation, the results would be as follows:
Ingredient
Inclusion Level
Fish Meal
Ext. Rice Bran
49.7% (from (a)) × 37.1% =18.44 %
Exp. Groundnut Cake
40.3% (from (a)) × 37.1% =14.95 %
Maize Meal
58.4% (from (d)) × 62.9% =36.73 %
Ext. Soybean meal
31.6% (from (d)) × 62.9% =19.88 %
Let us then check if the new formula complies with the new diet specifications (5% Lipid; 26% Protein):
Ingredient
Inclusion Rate
Inclusion Cost
Contribution to
(US$/ton)
Lipid (%)
Protein (%)
Fish meal
Ext. Rice Bran
Exp. Groundnut Cake
Maize Meal
Ext. Soybean meal
Totals
As can be seen, the new formula complies with the 5% lipid, 26% protein specifications and now consists of a five component diet costing US$ 303.67/ton - 10% fish meal; 18.4% rice bran; 15% groundnut cake; 36.7% maize; and 19.9% soybean.
The above simple examples show how to balance a diet for two components, lipid and protein, from five available ingredients. In practice the problems seem much more complex, since the diets need to be balanced for a number of other component specifications as well (see section 6), such as energy, minerals, essential amino acids (EAA's), etc. Also, many more ingredients are normally used, including a vitamin mix. The principles used are exactly the same as in the above examples, however.
When selecting ingredients in a preliminary way from a wide range of available raw materials it is often useful to make a crude comparison of them for a selected parameter on a 'best-value' basis. The following examples are based on the same ingredient characteristics used in the earlier formulation examples, for which fuller analyses are now given:
Ingredient
H[2]O %
LIP %
PROT %
FIB %
ASH %
NFE %
Cost (US$/ton)
Fish meal
Exp. Groundnut Cake
Ext. Soybean Meal
Ext. Rice Bran
Maize Meal
Two questions may be posed, for example
a) which of the high protein ingredients is the 'best value' protein and
b) which of the two cereal products is the 'best buy' for available energy? The answers to these questions are worked through below:
(a)
1 unit (%) of protein from fish meal costs
1 unit (%) of protein from groundnut costs
1 unit (%) of protein from soybean costs
1 unit (%) of protein from rice bran costs
1 unit (%) of protein from maize meal costs
Thus it can be seen that the best buy for protein is expeller groundnut cake at these prices and analyses. This assumes that the protein quality (EAA content) of all three is the same. It is not. Fish meal has a much better EAA profile than the others. This is where the nutritionist uses his judgement to over-ride simple calculations. A computer programme would take account of the level of major EAA's in the ingredients as well as other factors in assessing 'least cost' or best buy. It is interesting to note the high cost of protein from maize meal, which would not be used primarily for its protein contribution.
(b)
Using the factors for digestible energy (DE) in kcal/g which are given in section 3.1.5 of this manual (i.e., 3.0 for non-legume and 2.0 for legume carbohydrate (NFE); 8.0 for lipids; 3.8 for plant protein and 4.25 for animal protein), the DE of these ingredients can be calculated as follows:
Ingredient
Calculation 1/
kcal/kg
Fish Meal
Exp. Groundnut
Ext. Soybean
Ext. Rice Bran
Maize
1/Calculation: First bracket = protein; second = lipid; third = NFE. The first figure in each bracket is the % of the component, e.g., 55 = 55% protein. This is the same as saying 55 g of protein in 100 g of sample. The final × 10 factor converts the result to kcal/kg instead of kcal/100 g
The cost of energy (cost/kcal) would therefore be as follows:
(US$/kcal)
Fish Meal
Exp. Groundnut
Ext. Soybean
Ext. Rice Bran
Maize
At these prices therefore, rice bran is (just) a cheaper source of energy than maize and both are very much cheaper than the high protein ingredients as energy sources.
These then are the basic principles of formulation calculations 'by hand'. Greater detail, and information on computer techniques, is given in the papers listed in 'further reading'.
Further reading (for section 5.2.):
Hardy (1980); Deyoe (1976); Chow et al., (1980); Butcher (1976); Mason (1976); Halver (1978).
5.3 What Machinery Do I Need? And Where Do I Get It?
5.3.1 Feed Types
5.3.2 Types of Machinery or Equipment
5.3.3 Equipment Sizing
So far in this section, I have dealt with the choice of raw materials and how to decide how much of each to use in designing a feed (formulation). Now we start to discuss the small scale manufacture (for farms producing less than 300 tons of aquaculture product per year) of aquaculture feeds.
Before dealing with feed production in section 5.4, some information on the topic of machinery is necessary. This sub-section (5.3) defines some of the machinery used in feed manufacture and gives some rough guidelines for sizing of equipment. Examples of feed machinery suppliers are given in Appendix III.
5.3.1 Feed Types
Firstly I want to explain the types of aquaculture feed, before continuing to deal with the kinds of machinery used in their manufacture. Figure 3 shows the major types of feeds used in aquaculture.
Aquaculture feeds fall basically into two types - dry and non-dry. Dry feeds are normally made from dry ingredients but they can also be made by drying a feed made from moist ingredients or from mixtures of dry and moist ingredients. Dry feeds are not completely free from moisture; they reach an equilibrium moisture content (usually about 7-13%) depending on the environment. Non-dry feeds are divided into two major categories - wet and moist. There is no agreed or exact demarkation line between them: I define wet feeds as those which are made entirely or almost entirely from high moisture ingredients, such as 'trash' fish, waste slaughterhouse products, undried forage, etc. As such they would have moisture contents of about 45-70%. Moist feeds are made from mixtures of wet, or moist, and dry raw materials, or from dry ingredients to which moisture has been added. Usually moist feeds range from 18-45% moisture. There is no really clear division between 'moist' and 'wet'
feeds. A third class of products - flaked feed - is designed for aquarium fish, fish fry and early post-larval shrimp and is therefore not covered in this manual.
Dry feeds may be simple mixtures of dry ingredients, in which case they are called 'mashes' or meals'. If they are formed into a compacted shape, which may be hard or relatively soft they are called pellets (sometimes large pellets are referred to as cubes in livestock feeds but this term is rarely applied in aquaculture because pellet size is mostly quite small). Pellets can be made in a range of sizes (see section 4.3.). Depending on the processing technique used, pellets may float or sink when placed in water. The non-floating type are often broken up and then sieved into a range of smaller sizes, called crumbles or granules, for small fish or shrimp.
Figure 3 Types of Compounded Aquaculture Feeds
* USED MAINLY FOR LARVAE OR VERY YOUNG FRY AND FOR AQUARIUM FISH THIS TOPIC IS NOT DEALT WITH IN THIS MANUAL
Non-dry feeds, whether 'moist' or 'wet' are either extruded or non-extruded. An extruded feed is one which is made into a product like spaghetti or noodles by forcing it through narrow holes in a special piece of equipment. Non-extruded moist or wet feeds may simply be non-formed single ingredients (such as 'trash' fish) or mixtures of them, or they may be formed by machinery (but usually by hand) into cakes, balls and pastes. Natural binding materials in the feed, or added binders, enable them to be formed in this way. Extruded moist feeds are sometimes re-formed into balls by hand before feeding.
Extruded moist pellets can be dried, by machinery or by sun-drying, into dry sinking pellets - thus the link between the two products in Figure 3. Pellets can also be moistened (re-hydrated) before use to form semi-moist pellets.
During the production of either dry or non-dry feeds heat may or may not be used. Sometimes moist (e.g., 'trash' fish and fish viscera) ingredients may be pasteurized before use. Non-extruded moist feeds may be cooked or steamed during manufacture to increase their water stability. Dry pellets may be made by a 'cold' process or steam may be used in their manufacture. All pelleting generates some heat mechanically. All floating pellets receive a considerable amount of heat during processing.
5.3.2 Types of Machinery or Equipment
Table 19 shows the main types of machinery necessary for the production of each type of aquaculture feed dealt with in this manual. A brief description of each piece of equipment follows. The names and addresses of some feed equipment suppliers are given in Appendix III.
Scales
Accurate scales for weighing ingredients and completed feeds are essential parts of all feed mills. For the size of operations being considered here, simple platform scales (Figure 4) are adequate. The type that have a direct reading dial are the easiest to use and are least likely to cause mistakes to be made. Those which require manual balancing by moving counter weights along a bar are less reliable, but cheaper. Accurate manufacture according to formulation depends on good scales; this item is often neglected, with insufficient money being spent on it. Scales with a taring device are the best (the ability to adjust to zero after a container has been placed on them so that the weight of the actual ingredient being weighed can be read directly from the dial).
Table 19 Types of Equipment Necessary for the Production of Different Kinds of Aquaculture Feeds
Dry
Non-Dry
Mash Meal
Floating Pellets
Sinking Pellets
Granules
Extruded
Pastes, Cakes and Balls
Non-Formed
Grinder/Mill (Dry Products) 1/
Grinder (Wet Products)
Dry Mixer
Wet Mixer
Elevators 2/
Conveyors 2/
Pelleter and Dies
Mincer/Extruder and Dies
Cooker/Extruders
(Expanders) and Dies
Surge Bins
Cooler/Dryer
Fat Sprayer
Cooker
Steam Boiler
Freezer
Crumbier
Sifter
Bag Sewer
Scales
Notes:
1/ Not needed if all dry products purchased in ground form.
2/ Manual labour can substitute, especially in smaller plants.
3/ Feed balls sometimes formed from extruded products.
4/ Only if product not used moist.
5/ Not in 'cold' process.
6/ Only if product not to be used immediately.
Figure 4: Platform Scales
Grinders/Mills (Dry Ingredients)
The mill or dry grinder is a means of reducing the size of dry ingredients so that they are suitable for mixing into a feed and for any subsequent processes that occur during manufacture. There are many types of mill available. The two most common ones are attrition, or plate mills, and hammermills.
The attrition or plate mill depends on shearing the feed between two roughened plates, one or both of which are 'rotating'. This type of mill is good for coarse grinding but is not very efficient at producing the fine particles from typical aquaculture feed ingredients which are necessary for high water stability feeds.
Hammermills are the type of impact mill (other types, such as centrifugal impact mills are frequently used for grinding flour) which is most generally suitable for reducing the particle size of a wide range of dry animal feed ingredients. The basic principle of the hammermill is that its grinding chamber consists of a series of stationary or, more often, swinging, hammers pinned to plates attached to a central rotor. The hammers strike and break up the incoming material, which is forced through a perforated steel screen. Sometimes a fan or blower is used to assist the removal of the ground product. The principle of the hammermill is illustrated in Figure 5.
Figure 5: Cross-section view of Hammermi11, showing Rotary Feeder, Air Separator for Heavy Foreign Material, Permanent Magnet, Hammer Rotor and Grinding Screen.
The perforated steel screens of hammermills are available with different hole sizes, ranging from about 0.8 mm upwards, depending on the fineness of the final product desired. The output of the mill depends on the horsepower of the motor, the type of feed being ground, and the size of the screen mesh. For example, a 50 HP hammermill will fine grind about two tons/hour of maize or about 4 tons/hour to a coarser particle size. In most small scale feed mills a 5-10 HP hammermill will adequately cope with the requirement for ground products. Many dry ingredients will be bought in a pre-ground form, though some will require further size reduction.
Grinders/Mincers (Wet Products)
In the manufacture of moist or wet aquaculture feeds it is also necessary to reduce the particle size of wet ingredients. The principle of the wet feed grinder is the same as that of the domestic mincer, with which everyone is familiar. The ingredient falls into a continuous spiral or screw, which is motor driven. The screw forces the feed against a knife which is rotating against a fixed die plate, through which the feed is forced. Die plates are available with a range of hole sizes depending on the coarseness of the final product desired. Often, feeds are minced twice with successively smaller die plates to produce a better result. The product is extruded in spaghetti- or noodle-like form. The principle of a mincer is illustrated in Figure 6.
Figure 6: Principle of Wet Feed Mincer/Grinder
This type of grinder is available in capacities ranging from the small domestic mincer up to commercial sizes capable of grinding many tons of product per hour. Many of the larger mincers are able to tackle bones as well as flesh and also frozen blocks (provided these are pre-cut), frozen whole fish etc., (see Figures 15-18).
Dry Mixers
Efficient mixing is the key to good feed production. The feed will not be the balanced formulation it is designed to be unless it is properly mixed. Dry mixers are a mechanical means of achieving this and are of two main types - vertical and horizontal. The vertical mixer (Figure 7) consists of one or more vertical screws which elevate the ingredients to the top of the mixer where they fall by gravity to the bottom, to be mixed and re-elevated.
Figure 7: Vertical Mixer
Horizontal mixers (Figure 8) consist of a series of paddles or metal ribbon blades mounted on a horizontal rotor within a semi-circular trough. The blades move the material from one end of the mixer to the other, tumbling it as it goes. These mixers usually discharge the mixed product from the bottom, using the same mixer blade action.
Figure 8: Horizontal Mixer
Vertical mixers are the most common type found in small livestock feed mills. However, the vertical type is less well suited to aquaculture feeds than the horizontal type, which are much more efficient in blending in small quantities of liquids (such as added lipids) or in mixing ingredients with different particle sizes.
Another type of mixer, which is similar to the horizontal type in action, has a bowl-shaped or flat-bottomed container in which a series of paddles are mounted on a spindle driven by a motor mounted either above or below the mixer (Figures 9 and 10). This type of mixer has the same advantages over the vertical type of mixer as the horizontal mixers mentioned earlier. In addition it is cheap and is therefore frequently used in aquaculture farms, particularly in South East and South Asia. It can also be used for mixing moist feeds.
Wet Mixers
Vertical mixers are unsuitable for mixing wet ingredients. Horizontal mixers are more suitable but, because of their complex construction, are often difficult to clean properly. There is also a tendency for sticky materials to adhere to the blades and to accumulate at one end of the mixer. Simple bowl or circular mixers, illustrated in Figures 9 and 10, are the roost suitable types for mixing wet ingredients or mixtures of wet and dry materials. They can also be used for mixing dry ingredients. This type of mixer is available in sizes suitable for mixing a few kilograms or of dealing with several tons of ingredients. The larger types discharge the mixed product from the bottom.
Figure 9: Bowl Type Mixer
Figure 10: Circular Type Mixer
Elevators and Conveyors
There are many different types of equipment for conveying feeds from one part of a mill to another or from one piece of equipment to another. Some are designed to operate horizontally, some on a slope (Figure 11), others elevate the material vertically to a different level of the building. The requirement for elevators and conveyors will depend on how automated the mill is to be and how its plant is laid out. The utmost use of such equipment is made in the modern animal feed mill (often using pneumatic systems) to minimize labour needs and to maximise the use of land by building multi-storey, rather than horizontally arranged plants. In small-scale aquaculture feed mills, most of this type of work (feed transfer) will be done manually so the topic of mechanical equipment for this purpose is not dwelt upon further here (see 'further reading' at the end of this section).
Figure 11: Example of an Elevator
Pelleters
The process of pelleting consists of forcing a soft feed through holes in a metal die plate to form compacted pellets which are then cut to a pre-determined size. The machinery which has been developed for this purpose is now very diverse in design and there is much controversy between different equipment manufacturers as to which type is the most effective. Most pelleters now have a conditioning unit mounted above them where liquids such as water and molasses can be added to improve pelletability. The water is sometimes added in the form of steam which softens the feed and partially gelatinises the starch content of the ingredients, resulting in firmer (and more water stable) pellets. From the conditioner, the feed falls (Figure 12) into the centre of the pelleter itself. In the pelleter two or more rollers and feed ploughs push the material through the holes of the die plate (Figure 13). A photograph of a die plate is shown in Figure 14. Usually the die plate itself
rotates and, on its outer side, stationary knives cut the pellets to a pre-set length. From there, they are transferred to a cooler/drier to remove the heat which is generated during the pelleting process or is often added during steam conditioning. The moisture content of the pellets also needs to be reduced for proper storage.
Pelleting and the efficient operation of pellet mills are specialized subjects on which many books have been written. This manual cannot do more than illustrate the principle behind the pelleting operation and the reader is strongly advised to consult publications cited in 'further reading' at the end of this section, particularly MacBain (two publications, neither dated) and Pfost and Pickering (1976). All makers of pelleting equipment provide instruction in their use and some organize training courses in this and related topics.
Die hole sizes usually range from 2 mm up to 9.5 mm. The thickness of the die plate helps to determine the compactness and stability of the pellet. Pellet dies can be up to about 90 mm thick.
Figure 12a: Component Parts of a Conventional Pellet Mill
Figure 12b: Component Parts of a Conventional Pellet Mill
Figure 13: Typical Die and Roller Assembly used for Producing Hard Pellets
Figure 14: Die Plate from a Commercial Sized Pelleting Machine
Mincers
The same equipment as is used to mince or grind wet ingredients for 'wet' or 'moist' feeds can be used to extrude the mixed feed in 'noodle' or 'spaghetti' form. Examples of suitable mincers are shown in Figures 15-18. This is what makes the production of moist feeds, or dried feeds made from moist feeds extruded in this way, highly suitable for small-scale aquaculture feed production. These mincers are relatively cheap. One mincer can do both jobs (preparing raw materials and extruding the final product). Preferably, more than one should be purchased because this makes mill organization much easier and more efficient and provides a back-up in case of equipment failure. Mincers are extremely simple to operate, unlike pelleters. An example of the moist feed product from a mincer is shown in Figure 19.
Figure 15: Example of Mincer for Extruding Moist Feeds
Figures 16: Example of Mincers for Extruding Moist Feeds
Figures 17: Example of Mincers for Extruding Moist Feeds
Figures 18: Example of Mincers for Extruding Moist Feeds
Figure 19: Extruded Moist Feed Produced by Mincing Equipment
Mincer die plates come in a range of hole sizes and can often be produced locally. It is not normally possible to cut the extruded material to a fixed length (although some more expensive mincers do this too) but the extruded product breaks into short pieces on handling and is easy to feed. It can be fed moist, or dried mechanically or by sun-drying. A combined mixer/mincer for moist diets which can be mounted on land or on a boat is shown in Figure 20.
Figure 20: Combined Mixer-Mincer for Moist Aquaculture Feed Production
Cooker/Extruders (Expanders)
The extrusion cooking process, because it causes a high level of gelatinisation of starches, results in feeds with good water stability. It can produce 'expanded' floating feeds as well as sinking pellets. The process also improves the digestibility of the product. However, extrusion cookers are usually very large and expensive to purchase and operate. As such they are inappropriate for consideration for small-scale aquaculture feed production; they are therefore not dealt with further in this manual (see Pfost and Pickering, 1976).
Surge Bins
This term simply refers to temporary storage bins where feed can be held stationary while awaiting movement to the next stage of the manufacturing process. For example, where a batch mixer takes 15-20 minutes to mix a feed, the presence of a surge bin before it enables the next set of ingredients to be weighed and transferred into it during the mixing process of the previous batch. Surge bins are a means of speeding up production rather than gearing the whole output of the mill to the slowest part of the process.
Coolers/Driers
Pellets from dry pelleters may exit at up to 88°C and 17-18% moisture. The temperature must be quickly reduced to ambient or less and the moisture level to 10-12% or less for proper storage and handling. Pellets must therefore be cooled and dried. Moist pellets, if they are going to be converted to dry pellets, also need drying although their temperature is not normally much elevated during manufacture.
Coolers/driers are of two basic types, horizontal and vertical. In the vertical type, pellets usually fall by gravity into a chamber through which air is sucked by a fan (Figure 21).
In the horizontal type of cooler/drier (Figure 22) the pellets are conveyed on a perforated steel mesh or moving belt through which a cooling air stream is passed. The horizontal method is best for 'sticky' dry pellets or for moist feeds (if it is necessary to dry the latter). Heat can also be applied to the air supplied to horizontal driers for reducing the high moisture contents of moist feeds to those of dry pellets for storage. This type of drier is standard in the production of noodles and spaghetti and other pasta. Horizontal driers may be very large and are often arranged on several spatial levels.
Figure 21: Vertical Cooler/Drier
Figure 22: Horizontal Cooler/Drier
Fat Sprayer
Fat is sometimes added to feed after pelleting or extrusion because high lipid feeds do not pellet so well as low lipid products. Fat is therefore sprayed onto the feed in mixers placed in the production flow after the pelleting equipment.
Cookers
Cookers are used for steaming/cooking feeds to assist water stability through starch gelatinisation. Obviously the design of cookers has almost infinite variation. Hastings (1975) mentions two types capable of steaming up to 10 kg batches of moist feed cakes, made by hand. One is a cylindrical kettle with a false perforated bottom on which the cakes can be placed and steam allowed to enter. The other type has an hour-glass shape and the cakes are placed above a bamboo screen placed over the narrowest section.
Steam Boiler
Where steam is used in the pelleting process, a steam boiler is needed. A pellet mill with a capacity of 1.0-1.5 tons per hour of pellets would require a steam generation plant capable of producing about 60-90 kg/hour of steam at 100-150 psi.
Freezer
A freezer will only be required if it is intended to freeze moist feed or moist feed ingredients for subsequent cold storage. Space can often be rented at a local cold store or fish processing unit; it is doubtful if the purchase of a cold store could be economic for a small-scale aquaculture feed plant.
Crumbler
A crumbler is a roller mill with rolls specially designed for breaking up pellets into smaller particles (Figure 23). Usually the crumbler consists of two corrugated rolls situated below the cooler/drier exit. The pellets can then be diverted into the crumbler, if crumbles or granules are desired, or they can by-pass it.
Figure 23: Crumbler
Sifter
The sifter is a separator, usually oscillating, with a number of screens. It is used to separate off crumbles or granules which are too large and, both in pellet and crumble manufacture, to screen off the dusty portion (fines) of the feed for return to the pelleter for further processing. The sifter (Figure 24) is a means of ensuring a good quality product with the right particle size and a low level of fines, which are wasteful to feed.
Figure 24: Sifter
Bag Sewer
Machines are available for sewing the tops of the bags in which dry feed may be placed for storage. This machine is not normally necessary unless the feed is going to be sold to other farms.
5.3.3 Equipment Sizing
Having decided to set up a plant to produce a certain type of aquaculture feed you then have to decide what size of equipment to purchase. This must be done by working out the maximum amount of feed you need to manufacture in one hour. The following example is provided.
We will assume that you have decided to make a moist feed on a daily basis. Also that you are unable to even out your farm production/harvesting schedule completely because of seasonal differences in growth rate and the fact that you do not have many ponds. Let's say that you have therefore worked out, from typical AFCR's and from feeding rate tables, that you will require between a minimum of 2 tons and a maximum of 8 tons of moist feed per day 1/.
1/ If you are going to produce a dry pellet, your needs could be averaged out (to say 6 tons/day). You could then decide only to work a 7-hour day, 5-day week, 50-week year, building up a stockpile to serve the period when feed demand is greatest. You would then need to size your plant on the basis of
A pelleter capable of producing 1.5 tons/hour would be adequate. Bear in mind that large pellets can be produced more quickly than small pellets so the final sizing of the plant depends on the rate of production of the equipment when it is set to make the sizes of feed you intend to use on your farm.
You have a number of options here. One would be to size your plant so that it is capable of producing 4 tons/day in an 8 hour work shift and, when the demand is greatest, work on a double shift basis. Whether it is best to do that or to size the plant to a capacity of 8 tons/day in an 8-hour shift depends on the local economics of labour and equipment costs. Installing a plant which is capable of producing twice as much feed in a given time does not necessarily double its capital cost.
We will assume, for this example, that you have decided to produce 8 tons/day in an 8-hour shift (average 1 ton/hour). The major piece of equipment you need to purchase, which governs the rate at which your whole mill operates, is the mincer/extruder. You will need one capable of extruding at least 1 ton/hour of the size of feed which you intend to use. I mentioned earlier that the same type of equipment is also suitable for mincing/grinding your moist raw materials. If (say) 30% of the feed, on average, is composed of moist ingredients you will need an additional mincing capacity of 0.3 tons/hour. Rather than buy one mincer capable of (say) 1.5 tons/hour to cover all your mincing and extrusion needs it would be better to buy two separate mincers, one to be used normally for raw material preparation and one normally for mixed feed extrusion. This gives you greater flexibility and means that the two different operations can proceed simultaneously, rather than sequentially. It
also gives you a 'spare' mincer if one should break down, which would enable you to cover that emergency through longer working hours until a repair could be effected.
If you are producing one ton per hour maximum of extruded feed you will also need to produce one ton per hour of mixed feed to put into the mincer. However this does not necessarily mean that you need a mixer capable of holding a whole ton in each batch. (Mixing is a batch operation, as compared to extrusion, which is a continuous operation). Again, the final sizing depends on the economics of labour versus equipment costs. It may be better, since at least two batches of feed could be mixed during one hour, to buy a wet mixer capable of mixing 0.5 ton batches. Before the wet mixture is prepared, the dry ingredients may be mixed separately in some processes. As the same kind of mixer will do in both cases, it may be better to buy two small mixers, rather than one large one, from the repair point of view (as in the case of mincers). If the moist ingredients represent 30% of the final product it follows that the dry ingredients will constitute only 70% of the mixing volume if
relatively cheap so you might decide to buy a grinder capable of grinding 5 tons/hour and only use it two days per month. Against this you must balance the frequency of raw material delivery and the fact that ground materials do not have such good keeping qualities as unground feeds.
As you will see from the above example there are no strict rules for the sizing of the equipment for your feed plant; many options are open. However, I hope the example and discussion has given you some ideas on how to approach the topic. Start by calculating your maximum daily feed production requirement and work back from the size of the main piece of equipment (pelleter or mincer for formed diets, or mixer in the case of meals or mashes), balancing the important factors shown below:
- ease of operation
- relative cost of options
- back-up capability in case of equipment failure
- storage requirements and availability
- maximum use of equipment
Finally, a word or two about cost. Any costs of equipment quoted in this manual would rapidly become out of date, so no specific details are given. Equipment suppliers (Appendix III) would be able to supply this data at the time the feed plant is being designed. However, the following examples are provided to give some idea of the scale of cost involved in feed manufacture:
a) the equipment necessary (based on manual labour) for a simple mixing and extrusion plant for producing approximately 5 tons per day of moist feed (excluding the grinding of dry materials) was estimated to cost about US$ 20 000 - 25 000 (1984 prices). This figure did not include buildings, power supplies etc.
b) a complete 5 tons/day moist feed plant, operating on a 6-8 hour/day basis, inclusive of all grinders, mixers, extruder, conveyors, steelwork, electrical controls etc., but excluding erection costs, building, and commissioning, was quoted at about US$ 160 000 (1984 prices). This plant was based on minimization of labour.
c) a complete 5 tons/day dry pelleting plant as in (b) was estimated at about US$ 140 000 (1984 prices)
d) a simple lay-out consisting of a vertical mixer, a hammer mill, a 1 ton/hour pelleting system, including pelleter, conditioner, cooler, surge bins and crumbler, one bucket elevator, and three screw conveyors, but excluding steam boiler, was estimated at US$ 71 000 (1982 prices) for India (Chow, 1982).
One more point - don't forget to buy adequate spares for all your machinery. No machine works for ever. Make sure you have spares on site of all components which are most likely to wear or break.
Further reading for section 5.3:
MacBain (two publications; neither dated); Pfost and Pickering (1976), ADCP (1983); Csavas et al., (1979); Hastings (1975); Orme (1971); Stivers (1971); Coil Morales (1983a; 1983b); Robinson (1971); Robinette (1977); Hastings (1979); Williams (1986); Simmons (1963).
5.4 How Do I Make Compound Feeds?
5.4.1 Simple Mixtures
5.4.2 Forming into a Shape
5.4.3 Cooking
5.4.4 Drying
5.4.5 Compound Feed Production
As has been shown in earlier parts of this manual, there are very many different types of compound feed. The manufacture of some of them is a very sophisticated process, especially steam pelleting (and, even more so, cooker/extrusion expansion techniques). This manual is designed to be simple to read and deals only with the production of feed for small-scale aquaculture. Methods for the production of dry floating or sinking pellets by steam pelleting or cooker-extrusion are not therefore dealt with here. Each topic would require its own manual 1/; it is suggested that the advanced student of feed manufacture should consult Pfost and Pickering (1976) and Simmons (1963), on these topics. The production of dry pellets by another, simpler, process is discussed in this section, however.
1/Small, complete, pelleting plants (e.g., 1 ton/hour) for other livestock are produced by a number of manufacturers (Appendix III), each of which produce detailed manuals of operation of which the two by MacBain (undated) are examples. Several suppliers also produce small, laboratory-scale, pelleters some of which can be used with steam injection. Their output is very small and, as they are not designed for continuous operation (but for research), they are not appropriate for the daily production of feed for a commercial farm.
In this part of the manual a number of relatively simple methods of making compound feeds for aquaculture are dealt with. These are discussed in increasing order of complexity, ranging from a mixture of two ingredients up to the preparation of moist or dry pellets from many ingredients selected according to a formula (see section 5.2) specifically designed for the species being farmed.
This sub-section is therefore divided into five parts, each summarizing methods of feed manufacture, in increasing order of complexity:
- Simple mixtures
- Forming into a shape
- Cooking
- Drying
- Compound Feed Production
5.4.1 Simple Mixtures
As the title implies, this is simply the act of mixing two or more ingredients together. The raw materials used may be all dry, all moist, or a mixture of both. The purpose of mixing them, rather than feeding them to the animals separately, is to provide a more balanced feed (i.e., not all high protein ingredients or all high carbohydrates etc.,).
A simple mixture like this, particularly one consisting of dry materials only, does not remain a single feed once it is put into the water in which the animals live. It will tend to break down very quickly into its component parts. However, it is a simple way of providing a better feed than a single ingredient. Simple mixtures, such as groundnut cake and rice bran, are often made for this purpose where no feed making equipment is available on the farm at all.
The ingredients should be as finely ground when purchased as possible, to ensure that the stock can ingest them. The mixing process can be done by hand, by shovel on the floor, by pounding in a bowl (Figure 25), or by using a simple mechanical mixer. A concrete mixer will do.
The main thing to be careful about in this type of simple mixing is that the proportions of the ingredients are correct and that no contamination occurs. The ingredients should be weighed out, not measured by volume, because the bulk densities of different ingredients vary widely (Appendix XI). An alternative method is to weigh one batch of each ingredient and then to mark its volume in a container specifically reserved for that ingredient, using volume measurement in each successive batch. Even this is a little inaccurate however, because the bulk density of the same ingredient can vary, especially according to its particle size. Care must be taken to see chat only the intended ingredients are included in the mixture. Make sure that the ingredients are well identified and that chemicals which may (but should not be) be stored nearby are not included by mistake. Do not mix feed on a floor area which is contaminated with herbicides or pesticides, for example.
5.4.2 Forming into a Shape
It is more efficient to present a feed mixture to the animals in a form (shape) which will retain its structural integrity until the animals have eaten it rather than break down immediately into its component parts, as will happen with the simple dry mixtures dealt with in section 5.4.1.
Forming the mixed feed into a shape can be done simple by hand - this will be described here. More complicated and efficient ways are described in section 5.4.5.
Forming the mixture into a compact shape requires the addition of a moist ingredient or a liquid - water or an edible oil, for example, - and preferably the inclusion of an ingredient with binding properties. Natural ingredients with known binding properties include cooked (or pre-gelatinized) potato or tapioca starch, sago, sticky rice, etc., (see Appendix XII),
Basically the technique consists simply of choosing ingredients with known nutritional value which will stick together when mixed on their own, or when water or vegetable oil is added to wet them sufficiently. Fat can be better applied if a spraying device is used but remember to use one which is not contaminated with chemicals. The actual moisture content necessary to produce the 'stickyness' needed for constructing this type of mixed feed varies for each mixture. Don't add too much water at first, you can always add more later. Keep moulding the well-mixed mixture in your hand to test its stickyness. It must not be of a runny consistency (too wet) and it must not crumble out of your hand (too dry). The ideal mixture is that which, when you squeeze a ball of it in your hand, extrudes a 'sausage' of dough-like material from between your thumb and your first finger which will stick together and not fall off or be runny. Mixtures of this type can be formed into various shapes.
Up to this stage the mixing can be done as in section 5.4.1 - by hand, or by using a simple mixer like a clean concrete mixer.
Figure 25: Mixing Feeds by Hand
The choice of the shape and size of the final product can be modified according to the way in which your stock reacts to the feed. The shape and size should be that which promotes the maximum feeding activity with the least competition between individual animals. Flat cakes, large lumps of paste and spherical balls of material are suitable. Flat cakes have been used successfully for milkfish and shrimp, for example. Feed for eels is often presented in paste form on a feeding tray, from which the eels actively feed. Feed mixtures formed into moist balls have been successfully used with many species, including tilapia and shrimp. 1 have seen marine shrimp feed well on very large (1 kg or more) balls of moist feed.
Here again, as with 'unformed' mixtures, the 'manufacturing' process is very simple. Reasonable care to see that the correct ingredients in the correct proportions are used and that the moisture content is correct will ensure that a good product is made. In a feed designed for milkfish (Table 20), Hastings (1975) defined the added water as 12%, for simplicity. In fact the amount necessary to get a good paste or cake will depend on the actual moisture content of the other ingredients. I prefer therefore to see the formula written as in Table 21. In Table 21, the quantities of all the ingredients have been re-defined as percentages of the total, excluding the water content. The instruction "add water to (the desired) consistency" is then given. The final total moisture content of this feed would have been about 48%.
Table 20 Formula for a Milkfish Production Feed Cake (Hastings, 1976)
Trash fish
Rice bran
Coconut cake
Soybean cake waste
Dry cassava
Water
Table 21 Formula, as in Table 20, written in preferred manner
Trash fish
Rice bran
Coconut cake
Soybean cake waste
Dry cassava
Water
add to consistency
The smaller the particle size of the ingredients, the better the water stability of the final product will be. The ingredients can be pre-ground (before delivery) or ground and sifted on site. In no case should the feed particles be larger than 2 mm (preferably less than 1 mm).
Wet ingredients must be fresh and the final feed, if fed moist, must be used on the same day as it is made or it must be refrigerated or frozen.
5.4.3 Cooking
Cooking the moist products described in section 5.4.2 much improves their water stability because it gelatinises some of the natural starches present in the ingredients.
Cooking can be, and often is, done by adding sufficient water to make the mixture into a slurry (like a thick soup or porridge) and heating it in a pot over a fire. The moisture content is then reduced until the mixture is thicker and more viscous (sticky). It can then be formed into balls or cakes and fed. This method of cooking is very simple but tends to overcook the feed. It has the advantage of reducing the bacterial content of the feed but it may also severely damage its quality by destroying vitamins and reducing the availability of amino acids.
A better method is to place the pre-formed cakes or balls into a steamer/cooker (section 5.3.2) and steam them for about 30 minutes. This technique can also be used for pre-gelatinizing the high carbohydrate ingredients of a feed, such as tapioca or potato starch, before they are added to the mixture.
5.4.4 Drying
The cakes or other forms of feeds described earlier, whether cooked or not, can be dried so that they can be stored for subsequent use, rather than be fed on the day on which they are made.
Drying can be done in an oven but usually it is difficult to keep the drying temperature low enough to prevent the feed's quality being damaged. Forced air drying is better (a combination of heat of a lower temperature and air circulation). In practice, sun-drying is often satisfactory in tropical climates. Here the feed can be spread in thin layers on a clean flat surface and dried in the sun. It must be protected from birds and other animals and covered during rain. It is best to spread the feed on trays or netting, which can be quickly moved if necessary (rain!). The time necessary for drying depends on the climatic conditions and the original moisture content of the feed. It should be as short as possible to achieve the required moisture content (about 10%). If the drying time is too long the feed will ferment (i.e., microbial and enzymatic action will develop) which will spoil it.
Appendix VII describes a method of sun-drying which helps to protect the feed from rain showers and from other animals.
Feed which is dried this way can either be fed as a hard cake or it can be ground up by hand or in a grinder and then sieved into different sizes for different sized fish or shrimp.
So far, all the processes described have gradually increased the water stability of the feed:
Water Stability
Good
Dried Cooked Feeds
Dried Uncooked Feeds
Made from moist feeds
Moist Cooked Feeds
Moist Uncooked Feeds
Poor
Dry Mixtures
5.4.5 Compound Feed Production
Now we turn to more complex methods of feed production, which are designed to produce better quality, well balanced feeds, which cannot be achieved by the simple techniques described earlier.
Figure 26 summarizes the major stages of compound feed manufacture. 1/
1/Binary-type diets are not shown in Figure 26. This type of compound feed, which represents a compromise between 'home-made' and manufactured products, is explained further in the glossary (Appendix IX).
As mentioned before, only those operations which are appropriate to the production of feed for small-scale aquaculture (those marked by hatching in Figure 26) are dealt with in this manual. References for those who wish to study steam pelleting techniques or others such as cooker/extrusion expansion, have been provided earlier.
This sub-section contains some comments on those stages of compound feed which are marked by hatching in Figure 26.
Intake
The most important matter at this stage is to check the quantity and quality of the raw materials being delivered or collected. Make sure that each ingredient is actually the one which you ordered and which is contained in the formula of the aquaculture feed to be made on your farm. The appearance and names of some of the feed ingredients are very similar but, as has been demonstrated in sections 3 and 4 and in Appendices IV and V, their analysis may be very different. Use of the wrong ingredient will greatly affect the quality of your compound feed and your costs of fish or shrimp production.
Make a visual inspection for quality, using appearance (signs of damp on dry materials, fungal growth), smell, texture, etc., as a means of assessing quality. Do not accept unsatisfactory batches of ingredients even if they are offered at a discounted price. You may, at the worst, kill some of your stock or, at the least, depress growth rate by the use of damaged ingredients.
Marking
You will notice that the word 'mark' is included at several points in Figure 26. This has been done to stress the importance of labelling ingredients and mixtures of them at each stage. Ingredients are commonly not labelled when they arrive, except vitamin premixes. You personally may be able to remember them all, and where they have been put, or be able to identify them later - but can your staff?? Proper, clear, indelible labelling should be used for all stacks of materials and on all containers, so that mistakes are less likely to occur. Mistakes caused by using the wrong ingredient are very common, especially in small-scale production where all material movement is by (often unskilled) manual labour. These mistakes can waste expensive ingredients and will destroy the whole point of your making compound feeds, which is to produce a feed designed and balanced specifically to promote optimum growth and survival on your farm. Mark the raw materials; mark each batch of mixed
ingredients during production with its name and batch number, so that the operators know whether it is the batch they have added a specific ingredient to or not, for example. Don't neglect this simple but essential instruction: MARK IT and insist that your staff follow that rule too.
Grinding
The equipment used for the grinding or mincing of dry and moist ingredients has been dealt with in section 5.3.
As far as operation is concerned, the following points are important:
a) Do not overload the equipment by trying to force too much material through too quickly. You will cause blockages and equipment failure. Some grinders have an ammeter which will indicate when an overload occurs. Overloading can always be heard (i.e., the motor speed changes between normal loading and overloading).
b) Follow the equipment manufacturer's instructions for use.
c) Grinders and mincers are very dangerous pieces of equipment. Pay special attention to safety (section 5.5).
d) Choose grinder sieves and mincer die plates carefully to produce the smallest particle size possible, consistent with speed and economy.
e) Clean the equipment immediately after use.
f) Only grind what dry ingredients you need within the near future; ground raw materials store less well than unground ones.
Figure 26: Major Stages in Compound Feed Manufacture and Use
g) When you mince wet ingredients, collect the liquid as well as the solid material that emerges from the mincer. Don't waste it; it contains valuable nutrients and attractants which are essential parts of the final feed.
h) Don't allow foreign bodies to enter the grinding or mincing machinery. Large commercial scale grinders have devices such as screens and magnets to prevent the entry of articles other than the feed itself. Hand operated equipment does not. Knives, nails, string, stones, etc., harm your equipment and may cause other problems (section 5.5).
Weighing
Accurate weighing is an essential part of good feed production. This is why it was stressed in section 5.3. of this manual, when the dangers of economizing on weighing equipment were pointed out. Now that you have good scales you must make sure that they are used and looked after properly.
The manufacture of feeds on a small scale involves a large number of hand weighing operations. The accuracy of these is important. It is very easy to get distracted during weighing operations and to make a mistake. The operator who is doing the weighing must be provided with a check list specifying how much of each ingredient should be weighed and in which order they should be added. He must check off each ingredient immediately after it is weighed so that double addition of some ingredients and omissions of others do not occur. Materials should not all be weighed into the same container which rests permanently on the scale until the batch is finished. If this is done and a mistake is made (e.g., too much of one ingredient) it is very hard to rectify without removing some of another ingredient also. Weigh each ingredient separately, check it off the list and then add it to the other ingredients which are already waiting in another container (perhaps in the mixer itself, or
the container which is going to be used to transport the ingredients to the mixer).
Keep the scales clean and don't forget to re-tare (adjust the zero point) after the weighing container has been placed on the scales and before each ingredient is weighed. Make sure the scales are level and that they are properly and regularly zeroed.
Scales are important and expensive pieces of equipment. Don't abuse them; follow the makers instructions and have them regularly maintained by a professional in that field.
Mixing
Efficient mixing is the next key to good feed production. The mixing time for a batch of dry or moist ingredients varies according to the design of the equipment - the advice of the manufacturer is usually available on this topic. Generally, dry materials mix adequately more quickly than moist ingredients or mixtures of the two. A general rule would be to allow a mixing time of at least 15 minutes after the last ingredient has been added to the mixer.
The order in which ingredients are added greatly affects mixing efficiency. It is not good just to put all the ingredients into the mixer and then switch it on. Materials such as vitamin mixes, which are added at low inclusion rates, should not be put into an empty mixer. Put one of the major ingredients (say the cereal component) in first, switch on the mixer and then add the minor ingredient so that it is already mixed into the major component before other ingredients are added. If you put the minor component into the mixer first, some will fall into crevices and will not be included in the final mixture. The loss of a small amount of a major ingredient in this way is much less important than the loss of a minor (but usually more costly) ingredient.
Minor inclusions of liquids such as lipids should be added after the dry components have been mixed. Ideally, such liquids should be sprayed on to the dry mixture to ensure they are evenly distributed. Where this is not possible, pouring them into a dry mix leads to balling or clumping, which may take a long time for the mixer to break down. The process can be speeded up considerably if the mixer is stopped and these balls of liquid and solid are broken up and distributed by hand. The mixer can then be restarted.
In moist feed mixing the moist ingredients should be added last, after all the dry and minor liquid ingredients are mixed. The mixer will then form the feed into a sticky dough-like consistency if the moisture level is correct.
After all the ingredients of a moist feed have been added and mixed it is (if the formulation is accurate) normally necessary to add some water to adjust the consistency to that which will extrude satisfactorily. The proper consistency is checked in the same way as was explained in section 5.4.2. Be careful not to add too much water at first; if the quantity added proves to be too little you can easily add more. If the same formula is always being made and the same batches of ingredients are being used, it becomes possible to quantify the amount of water to be added, speeding up the operation. However, it is not possible to do this when the ingredient source and the type of feed being made is frequently altered. As to Judging whether enough water has been added to provide the correct consistency for extrusion through the mincer, there is no good substitute for the test suggested in section 5.4.2. This consists of squeezing the material in your hand (much as you might
hand-test damp soil to assess its clay content when selecting sites for ponds) to see whether a 'sausage' of dough can be extruded between the thumb and the first finger which is neither too runny nor too crumbly.
Extrusion (Mincing)
The same general rules apply to the extrusion of a mixed feed from a mincer as apply to the mincing of raw materials. Choose the die hole size for the feed which you are making. The rate of production will decrease as the die hole selected gets smaller. Don't overload the mincer (try to force too much feed through it at once). The material that is being fed into the top of the mincer is very sticky and sometimes it does not drop into the mincer screw very easily. Some mincers have an additional feeding screw which helps to overcome this problem. Most simply supply a special tamping rod (usually made of plastic) for pushing the material into the screw. This device, and the mincer, should be designed so that the tamping rod cannot actually come into contact with the screw itself. My experience is that, if such a device is provided, it quickly becomes used for other purposes and gets damaged or lost. The next stage is that the operators of the equipment look for other things
with which to poke the feed into the mincer screw. Knives, screwdrivers, metal rods and hands seem to be the most common solutions. This practice is extremely dangerous for the operator and the equipment. It can lead to severe injury and/or the shearing of the screw and the failure of the equipment. If you must use something to help feed the mincer, make sure that it is a soft piece of wood and attach it to the frame with a piece of string.
The extruded product will emerge from the mincer in the form of long strands of spaghetti- or noodle-like consistency. These strands will break up into shorter pieces as they fall into the container placed below the mincer outlet. They will break up further during transport so there is no need to do this by hand.
After extrusion the feed should be placed into marked containers, before being weighed and distributed during animal feeding operations. Moist feed can be frozen for later use but, except for very small quantities which can be frozen in very shallow layers in a cold store., freezing moist feed requires proper freezing equipment. As this is unlikely to be available on a small farm this topic is not dealt with here. Moist feeds can however be dried (see below) and stored, instead of being used on the day of manufacture.
Drying
This topic has been dealt with in section 5.3.2. Moist feeds that have been dried can be stored (section 7) and are usually much more water stable than the original moist feed.
5.5 Economics of Feed Production
The general benefits of using feeds have been discussed in section 2.5.2 of this manual, including methods by which these can be quantified.
The economic viability of making compound feeds on the farm as opposed to purchasing them from a feed mill, being place and time specific, needs local study. It is therefore impossible to generalise on the economics of 'home-made' feed production. However, a specific model is provided below which utilizes cost data available in 1984. The substantial capital outlay involved in this model, which concerns an aquaculture unit of considerable size, should not deter the owner of a small farm from considering the manufacture of his own feeds.
The savings on unit feed costs achieved by small-scale on-farm feed production would also be considerable, without large capital expenditure. Additionally, the existing labour on a small farm may be able to absorb the extra work load of making feeds, keeping operational costs low. Farm-made compound feeds provide a potentially cheaper alternative to the purchase of commercially manufactured products, where these are locally available. Where commercial feeds for fish and shrimp are not available, an ability to produce compound feeds on the farm provides the farmer with an opportunity to increase productivity which might not otherwise exist.
At the other extreme, the owner of a very large aquaculture unit might prefer, as noted in the introduction to section 5, to buy in his compound feeds (even at higher unit costs) in order to be able to concentrate his managerial skills on farm, rather than feed mill, operation.
With these reservations, namely that:
(a) the relatively high capital costs of farm feed manufacture for a medium-sized farm should not deter the operator of a smaller farm from making his own feeds, and
(b) the owner of the very large farm may prefer not to have the additional responsibility of feed manufacture, the following model is provided.
Costs and estimates used were those relevant in a developing country in 1984. The estimates given were for a moist shrimp feed for intensive aquaculture, achieving an AFCR of 4:1. The projected maximum hourly output of the plant was 5 t, while total annual production was 750 t using a labour intensive production system.
Estimated capital expenditure was US$ 50 000 for production and storage buildings and for services, and US$ 25 000 for equipment. Depreciating buildings over 15 years and equipment over 5 years, and assuming an annual interest of 20% to service the loan for capital expenditure, resulted in a production cost for these items of US$ 31/t of feed manufactured. Estimated expenditure on utilities and maintenance represented US$ 20/t of feed, while labour costs were US$ 12/t. Allowing for contingencies, total manufacturing costs were US$ 70/t of feed. Raw material (feed ingredient) costs for this moist, high protein, shrimp feed were typically US$ 250/t. Total feed cost was therefore US$ 320/t.
At an AFCR of 4:1, feeding costs were therefore US$ 1 280/t of heads-on shrimp produced. At that time a commercial dry pelleted grow-out feed was available at US$ 950/t. Using this feed and assuming a favourable AFCR of 1.8:1, feeding costs were US$ 1 710/t of shrimp. In this model therefore, savings of over US$ 400/t of shrimp in feeding costs were possible. In this farm, with a defined shrimp output of about 188 t/y, total potential savings were in the order of US$ 75 000 annually.
It is emphasized that the figures given above are for model purposes only. However, since the estimates used are based on an amalgam of experience in several developing countries, they do provide some idea of the potential value of 'home-made' feeds. As a rule-of-thumb I normally add 30% to local raw material costs in estimating the unit cost of farm-made compound moist feeds to cover production costs.
A hypothetical study of the economics of feeding a pelleted feed versus another strategy for increased production, the use of manure as a fertilizer, has been made by Tacon (1986a). This is repeated below, as an illustration of a method of assessing the economic viability of using compound feeds on your farm.
Assumptions and Calculations
Major Feed Input
Pelleted Feed
Manure
Total fish yield (kg/ha/day)
Total manure or feed used (kg DM/ha/day)
Feed or fertilizer conversion efficiency
Unit cost of feed or fertilizer (US$/kg)
Input cost/kg of fish produced (US$/kg)
Gross profit (or loss)/ha/day
(where "y" is fish price/kg)
10 y - 20
5 y - 2.5
Testing various fish prices on the above example, it can be seen that, at a fish price of US$ 1.0/kg, there would be a daily loss of US$ 10 if pelleted feed were used and a profit of US$ 2.5 if manure were applied. If, however, the price of fish were US$ 4.0/kg then the use of pelleted feed would generate a greater profit (US$ 20) than manure (US$ 17.5). Equal profits (US$ 15) would be achieved from the use of pelleted feed or manure when the price of fish was US$ 3.5/kg. Thus, in this hypothetical example, it would be more profitable to use pelleted feeds whenever the fish price was more than US$ 3.5/kg. This sort of calculation, using locally applicable data, needs to be done when feeding is considered.
5.6 What Special Problems Am I Likely To Have In Making Compound Feeds?
Most of the problems which are likely to occur in small scale feed manufacture can be avoided by good management.
The first important matter, ingredient quality, has already been stressed on several occasions in this manual. The completed compound diet can only be as good as the quality of its ingredients will allow. The important characteristics of feeds have been discussed in section 3 and Appendix IV, while sources and descriptions of ingredients are dealt with in section 4 and Appendix V.
Plant hygiene is also important. It is essential not only to take precautions to exclude pests and other forms of spoilage from raw material and dry compounded feed stores (section 7) but also to keep the machinery used for making feeds clean. Feed making equipment should be installed in a building which is easy to keep clean. Moist feed machinery must be cleaned immediately after use with freshwater, preferably warm. A high pressure hose is useful for cleaning mixers and mincers but care must be taken to protect the motor and switches from damage. All traces of feed must be removed from moist feed mixer blades and from the knives, screws and die plates of mincers. This will prevent old, rancid, mouldy feed from a previous batch being included in later ones and it will reduce the breeding places for fly and other insect larvae. Moist feed equipment should be housed in an area with floor drains of adequate size so that the latter do not easily become blocked by particles of
feed. Areas where dry feed is made should also be kept as free from dust as possible and the floor swept at least on a daily basis.
The care that is necessary to prevent feed contamination has also been mentioned earlier. Proper separation of all feed storage and manufacturing areas from those where chemicals are kept is important.
Feed manufacturing, like any other activity involving machinery, can be dangerous to those employed in it, especially if it is their first experience of this type of work. Particular mechanical danger exists related to grinders, mincers and mixers. There is also the danger of electrocution, especially where moist feeds are being made, and of fire. Electrical supplies should be mounted high on the walls or hung from the ceiling, to take them above the normal level of water distribution during machinery washing etc. Switches should always be within arm's reach of the equipment they serve so that they can be switched off quickly in an emergency. No machine should be controlled by a switch several metres away on a wall. Another worker may switch the equipment on by mistake when it is being cleaned or maintained, for example. Equipment undergoing major repair should be disconnected from its power supply. Never supply more than one piece of equipment from one switch gear.
Operators who switch on equipment must make sure that all other workers in the vicinity are clear of the equipment and are aware that it is about to be switched on before it is started up. Hands must not be put near the moving parts of equipment; long hair and flowing clothes are dangerous attributes for the machinery operator. Guards which are normally supplied to make driving gear safer are often removed for servicing operations; they must always be replaced before the equipment is put back into use.
Dry feed, especially when finely ground, is very flammable, sometimes explosively so. Dry grinding should therefore take place in well ventilated areas where naked flames are prohibited.
Obviously safety is a separate, specialized subject, of which only sufficient has been said here to alert you to the most obvious dangers. THINK ABOUT SAFETY, not just speed.
The next point in this sub-section concerns quality control. Quality control is desirable to ensure that the feeds being made meet the specifications being laid down for them. Usually there is no time for quality control analysis of the final feed (especially if it is a moist feed) before it is used. Process control, which is the careful control of all stages of manufacture by the person responsible, is therefore critically important. Regular samples of the final product should be taken and subjected to analysis as well if possible so that, at least in retrospect, efficiency and accuracy of mixing and formulation can be checked. Government and university laboratories will usually assist in this matter and, in many locations, private analytical laboratory facilities are also available. Care should be taken to ensure that any samples that are taken for any purpose are representative of the whole. It is misleading to sample one bag only from one hundred bags to be checked.
Small samples should be taken from 10-20% of the containers and mixed to form a bulked sample. A full discussion of the topic of quality control is to be found in Cockerell et al., (1975) from which methods of analysis have been selected and reproduced in Appendix XVI. Alternative methods of analysis are given by Lovell (1975), CMFRI, (1982) and Ravindrananth (1981).
The final warning: you must look ahead and calculate your feed needs several months ahead. Keep proper records of your stocks of each raw material and do not let the quantity of any material fall below a pre-set minimum stock level. This level must be determined on the basis of how long it takes to get a new delivery once the material has been ordered. Stock control is essential if you are not going to run out of ingredients. If you do run out you will be unable to produce consistent feeds.
<section>7</section>
6. YOU SAY DIFFERENT ANIMALS NEED DIFFERENT FEEDS AND THAT THE FEEDS HAVE TO VARY ACCORDING TO AVAILABILITY. I UNDERSTAND THAT, AND THE PRINCIPLES OF FORMULATION, BUT CAN YOU GIVE ME SOME EXAMPLES OF COMPOUND FEED COMPOSITION FOR MY ANIMALS, SO I KNOW WHERE TO START?
6.1 Salmon and Trout
6.2 Catfish
6.3 Carps
6.4 Tilapias
6.5 Shrimp and Prawns
6.6 Other Species
In section 4 it was explained that different species have different nutritional requirements. Some methods of making feeds have been described in section 5. There is a considerable amount of published information on the specific requirements of each species; it is more detailed for those species on which most nutritional research has been conducted. Until recently only a few species were grown in intensive culture - these were the ones on which research centred.
In a manual such as this it is only possible to briefly note some characteristics of feeds developed for the major cultivated species: tilapia, carps, catfish, trout, salmon, marine shrimp, freshwater prawns, groupers and sea breams, and rabbitfish, for example. No information has been included on the requirements of eels. For those who wish to study the topic of specific nutritional requirements, 'further reading' is suggested at the end of this section.
A brief summary of the known requirements of each of these species follows, while specific examples of formulations are provided in Appendix II. It is stressed that the examples given in Appendix II are intended to provide an indication of how actual diets are constructed. To some extent, because of the differing local availabilities of ingredients, the formulations given are specific to the location and the time at which they were first developed. Where possible therefore, both the location and the date of each formulation have been quoted. It should be noted that, although some specifications are given in this section for each species, the analytical characteristics of the formulations given in Appendix II do not necessarily comply with them. This is because those who develop practical or commercial feed formulae sometimes amend the specifications according to their own personal experience or because of considerations relating to local conditions and economics.
In the individual sub-sections of this part of the manual which follow, only the major nutrients are covered. Readers are advised to consult the papers listed in 'further reading' at the end of the section, which give full details about the state of nutritional knowledge on each species at the time they were written. New information is constantly emerging, based on research and the result of practical application. Any recommendations given here, and in 'further reading' are therefore subject to amendment in the future.
A level or a range of levels for each major dietary component is quoted in the following sections. As stated before, these levels are not fixed and may often be varied because of the personal beliefs of the individuals responsible for a particular formulation, or because of the cost of particular ingredients in a specific location. For example, as has been explained earlier in this manual, protein can be 'spared', sometimes by lipid and sometimes by carbohydrate so that lower dietary levels will promote adequate growth. Local conditions and preferences often dictate whether protein levels are in fact reduced for this purpose, by increasing levels of lipid, for example. Thus different farm-made or commercially available feeds for the same species may vary quite widely in analytical composition yet each satisfy the nutritional needs of the animal. The aim of successful formulation is to satisfy these needs in the most cost effective manner. Though nutritionally beneficial and
cheaper in terms of ingredient cost than protein, high levels of lipid, for example, may make feed manufacture itself more difficult and costly. Final formulation is therefore a balance between known dietary requirements, ingredient availability and cost, manufacturing capability and expense, and the personal beliefs of the nutritionist responsible for the formulation.
Most is known about the nutritional requirements of trout and salmon and channel catfish because these species have been commercially grown intensively longer than others. A substantial amount of information is available about common carp and tilapia. Much less is known about the dietary requirements of shrimp and prawns or marine fish; still less is known about those for other species such as rabbitfish and Indian carps, though a number of test compounded feeds have been formulated.
'Optimum' levels of some dietary components are given in the sub-sections of the manual which follow but these must be used with caution. Optima vary according to so many other factors, including the environmental conditions, the species, the age of the animal, the types of raw material used, etc. It is impossible to give all the variants in a document of this size, so the reader is asked to consider the figures given as indicative rather than definitive. More details can be obtained by consulting the papers and books listed in 'further reading'.
6.1 Salmon and Trout
The major dietary requirements of salmon and trout, which are similar, can be summarized as follows:
Lipid 1/
starter feeds (fry)
grower feeds (fingerling)
production feeds (older fish)
Protein
starter feeds
grower feeds
production feeds
Amino Acids
lysine (fingerling feeds) 2/
methionine (fingerling feeds) 2/
4% (in absence of cystine)
Available Phosphorus
DE
2 800-3 300 kcal/kg
Other Components
see 'further reading'
Essential Components:
fish meal 3/; at least 1% inclusion of n-3 series fatty acids; natural or artificial carotenoids
Negative Factors:
non-protein nitrogen (e.g. urea); high carbohydrate levels (> 20%); high fibre levels (> 6%); rancid lipids.
1/Commercial trout and salmon diets tend to have higher (up to 20%) lipid levels than those quoted here
2/As a % of protein.
3/Work on partial or complete replacement of this expensive ingredient is proceeding. Synthetic amino acids may be used to balance vegetable proteins.
Further reading for section 6.1:
Gaudet (1967); Phillips (1970); Nosho (1981); NRC (1973); NRC (1981); Kennedy (1978); EIFAC (1971); Edwards (1978); Halver (1972); Sedgwick (1982); Piper et al., (1982).
6.2 Catfish
6.2.1. Channel Catfish
6.2.2 Other Catfish Species
6.2.1. Channel Catfish
The nutrient requirements of channel catfish, like those of salmon and trout, have been the subject of much study in the U.S.A. because of the commercial importance of this species. They are summarized as follows:
Lipid
10% (experimental)
8% (commercial)
fry to fingerlings
fingerlings to sub-adults
Protein
adults and broodfish
Carbohydrate
higher levels tolerated than by salmon and trout
Amino Acids
lysine
5.1%) % of dietary
methionine (cystine absent)
2.3%) protein
Available Phosphorus
Salt
DE
2 700-3 100 kcal/kg
Other Components
see 'further reading'
Essential Components
not less than 7.5% fish meal (in intensive feeds; soybean is adequate substitute in feeds for extensive culture); not less than 14% animal protein.
Negative Factors:
rancid lipids; high fibre levels (>8-10%); more than 15% cottonseed meal.
6.2.2 Other Catfish Species
The specific nutritional requirements for other catfish species are little known. Diets for Siluris glanis developed in Hungary have been based on the requirements for channel catfish and an example is given in Appendix II.
Individual ingredients, such as boiled tilapia flesh, Moina spp., and fresh chub mackerel viscera, appear Co be good feeds for the fry of Clarias batrachus. Commercially produced pellets have given good results in Thailand in the pond culture of Clarias spp., compared to the traditional 9:1 trash fish:rice bran mixture. Compounded experimental diets for the fry of Clarias macrocephalus in Thailand were composed of fish meal, rice bran, fish oil, peanut meal and alpha starch, having approximately 10% lipid and 35.7% protein (on DM basis).
Further reading for section 6.2:
NRC (1983); Pillay (1967); ADCP (1983); ADCP (1980); Lee (1981); Tacon and Beveridge (1981); Taechajanta and Sitasit (1981); Srisuwantach et al., (1981); Dhamrongrat and Kasesunchi (1981); Halver (1982); Winfree (1979); Hastings (1973); Piper et al., (1982); Millikin (1982).
6.3 Carps
6.3.1 Common Carp
6.3.2 Indian and Chinese Carps
6.3.1 Common Carp
Of the carp species, most nutritional studies have been conducted on the omnivorous common carp. The known dietary requirements are summarized as follows:
Lipid
up to 18% (higher levels spare protein)
Protein
Amino Acids
lysine
5.7%)% of dietary
methionine (cystine absent)
3.1%) protein
Available Phosphorus
DE
2 700-3 100 kcal/kg
Other Components
see 'further reading'
Essential Components:
at least 1% of each of n-3 and n-6 series fatty acids; high lipid diets for oogenisis in broodfish.
Negative Factors:
non-protein nitrogen: there is some evidence that carp may be able to utilize this (this is disputed, however); rancid fat; high lipid or carbohydrate after ovulation of broodfish.
6.3.2 Indian and Chinese Carps
General specifications for warmwater omnivorous species were given by ADCP (1983) as follows:
fry & fingerlings
juveniles & growers
broodfish
Lipid (min %)
Protein (min %)
Calcium (min/max %)
Available Phosphorus (min/max %)
Lysine (min., as % of protein)
Methionine/Cystine (min as % of protein)
DE (kcal/kg)
Using these specifications, diets were formulated for various Indian carps (examples of these are given in Appendix II) and other species.
Further reading for section 6.3:
ADCP (1983); Viola and Arieli (1982); Szumiec (1977); Jauncey (1982); Millikin (1982); Pillay (1967); NRC (1983); Sen and Chatterjee (1979); Tacon (1986b).
6.4 Tilapias
Most tilapia of the genus Sarotherodon are omnivores, using plankton and detritus as feed, while those of the genus Tilapia utilize coarser food including large algae. The natural food preference of tilapia have been summarized by Jauncey and Ross (1982). A wide range of individual ingredients and simple mixtures of them have been used in the intensive culture of tilapias (Pullin and Lowe-McConnell, 1982), of which rice bran is a primary example. The following specification for compounded tilapia feeds are derived from Jauncey and Ross (1982):
Lipid
(fry to 0.5g)
(0.5-35 g animals)
(35 g - market size)
Protein
(fry to 0.5 g size)
(0.5-35 g animals)
(35 g - market size)
Digestible Carbohydrate
Fibre
(fry to 10g)
(10 g - market size)
Lysine
Methionine + 50% cystine
as % of dietary protein
DE
2 500-3 400 kcal/kg
Other Components
see 'further reading'
Essential Components:
not less than 1% each of n-3 and n-6 series fatty acids
Negative Factors:
rancid fats
Further reading for section 6.4:
Pullin and Lowe-McConnell (1982); Jauncey and Ross (1982); Viola and Arieli (1982); Hastings (1973).
6.5 Shrimp and Prawns
Although the study of shrimp and prawn nutrition is much more recent than that of salmon and trout dietary requirements, knowledge of this topic is increasing rapidly due to the scale and value of shrimp farming world-wide. Dietary requirements appear to vary quite widely, particularly with respect to protein level, from species to species. In general, marine shrimp require high levels of animal protein (particularly marine), whereas freshwater prawns are more omnivorous. Provisional figures for some species are summarized below:
Penaeus
japonicus
Penaeus monodon
Penaeus setiferus
Macrobrachium rosenbergii
Lipid %
Protein %
Lysine 1/%
Methionine 1/%
Other components:
see 'further reading'
Essential Components:
1-2% n-3 series fatty acids, particularly HUFA members of the series; high n-3/n-6 fatty acid ratio; marine protein for marine shrimp particularly.
Negative Factors:
excessive cholesterol level; excessive vitamin C; Ca/P ratio >2.0
1/Based on the amino acid profile of mussel flesh (as % of protein).
2/Cystine present.
Further reading for section 6.5:
New (1976); New (1980); ADCP (1983); Meyers (1980); Abu Hassan (1984); Kanazawa (1984); Manik (1976); Manik et al., (1980); Yang (1979); Hastings (1975); Hew and Cuzon (1982); McVey (1983).
6.6 Other Species
6.6.1 European Sea Bass, Sea Breams, Grouper and Yellowtail
6.6.2 Other Species
6.6.1 European Sea Bass, Sea Breams, Grouper and Yellowtail
The nutritional requirements of the marine members of the super-family Percoidae are less well known than those of other cultured species. Existing knowledge has however, recently been reviewed (New, 1986a). The following is a summary of the requirements of that group of fish:
Component
Species 1/
Type of feed 2/
Lipid (% on DM) 3/
Grouper
E
Red sea bream
C
Yellowtail
E
Yellowtail
C
Gilthead sea bream
E
Gilthead sea bream
C
European sea bass
E
Protein (% on DM) 4/
European sea bass
C
Grouper
E
Red sea bream
C
Yellowtail
E
Yellowtail
C
Gilthead sea bream
E
Gilthead sea bream
C
Lysine (% of protein)
European sea bass
E
European sea bass
C
Gilthead sea bream
Methionine (% of protein)
Gilthead sea bream
4.0 (Met + Cyst)
Available
not less than 0.7% as fed
Phosphorous DE
2 700-3 700 kcal/kg
Other Components:
see 'further reading'
Essential Components:
marine proteins; at least 1-2% of n-3 series fatty acids (of C20 and above); carotenoids for red sea bream.
Negative Factors:
as for salmon and trout.
1/For scientific names, see Appendix XVII
2/E = Experimental diet; C = Commercial feed
3/Lipid levels of commercial diets for red sea bream and yellowtail are probably less than optimal 4/The higher levels of the range in each case are for fry feeds
6.6.2 Other Species
Ayu:
Lipid (% on DM)
Protein (% on DM)
Commercial feeds
Sea Bass (Lates calcarifer) and Snapper:
Lipid (% on DM)
Protein (% on DM)
Experimental feeds
(Kanazawa, 1982)
Rabbit Fish:
Lipid (% on DM)
Protein (% on DM)
Experimental feed
(Kanazawa, 1982)
Pacu and Tambaqui:
Protein %
30-33 (fingerlings) 25 (adults)
Experimental feed
(ADCP, 1983)
General specifications for warmwater carnivorous species were given by ADCP (1983) as follows:
fry + fingerlings
juveniles + growers
broodfish
Protein (min %)
Calcium (min/max %)
Available Phosphorus
(min/max %)
Lysine (min % of protein)
Methionine + Cystine
(min 7, of protein)
Further reading for section 6.6:
New (1986a); Kafuku and Ikenoue (1983); Millikin (1982); Meyers (1977); ADCP (1983); Kanazawa (1984).
<section>8</section>
7. HOW SHOULD I STORE MY FEEDS?
7.1 Losses and Deteriorative Changes which Occur During Feed Storage
7.2 Storage Procedures
All types of ingredient, as well as completed compound feeds, require special care during storage to prevent deterioration in quality, and loss. Additionally they are very valuable commodities and need to be subjected to careful stock control to prevent theft. Stock control is also essential to enable you to fulfill the feed needs of your animals adequately and to ensure that you have enough, but not excess, of each ingredient available for manufacture when needed.
Good storage is essential because the value of the feed that you present to your animals depends on it. Feed spoils during storage -whether it deteriorates quickly or slowly depends partly on its quality when you receive it but very largely on how you store it on your farm.
In this section of the manual, some of the losses and deteriorative changes which can occur during storage are described. Recommendations for storage procedures are then given. Throughout, it has been assumed that feed will be stored in bags or other small containers, not in bulk bins which are unlikely to be found on small farms.
7.1 Losses and Deteriorative Changes which Occur During Feed Storage
7.1.1 Physical Loss
7.1.2 Water and Heat Damage
7.1.3 Insect Damage
7.1.4 Fungal Damage
7.1.5 Chemical Changes During Storage
Environmental factors, such as moisture (feed moisture content and relative humidity), temperature, light, and oxygen influence deteriorative changes and losses in feedstuffs. These affect the feedstuff either directly or by influencing the rate of development of insects and fungi which consume the feed during storage.
The following are the major factors which affect the quality and weight of feedstuffs during storage:
a) major losses due to human theft, fire and the consumption of scavenging animals, such as rats and birds
b) damage due to rain and condensation, and to high temperatures
c) damage by insects
d) damage by fungi
e) changes in the quality of the feeds due to enzymatic actions and the development of oxidative rancidity
Of the above factors, (b) is probably the most important as it influences the rate of loss or damage caused by most of the others listed. Though oxygen (from air) is necessary for the development of oxidative rancidity and for the growth of fungi and insects, it is impracticable to exclude it from feed storage areas. Oxygen is sometimes replaced by nitrogen or carbon dioxide for the storage of specialized foods for humans but has to be accepted as omnipresent in feed stores.
7.1.1 Physical Loss
Significant loss can occur as an accumulative effect of individually small, but regular theft. Less obvious are the losses caused by scavenging animals, particularly rats and mice. Food stores are notorious breeding grounds for such animals.
Temperature increases sufficient to cause fire (see 7.1.2 and 7.1.4) can occur in stacked feeds. Feed stores are flammable, particularly if they are constantly full of fine atmospheric dust from grinding processes within the store or adjacent areas.
7.1.2 Water and Heat Damage
High levels of moisture content and relative humidity cause direct losses by making it difficult to use the material in its original form. It may be too wet to mix if it is an ingredient, or its physical structure may be destroyed if, for example, it is in pelleted form. More serious is the effect that high levels of product moisture and relative humidity have on insect infestation and the growth of fungi.
Regardless of the initial moisture content of the feed materials put into the store, their actual moisture content will gradually reach an equilibrium dependent on the relative humidity of the air in the store. Generally a safe moisture level for a specific product is that which develops at a relative humidity of 75%. However, relative humidities above this level in tropical areas are common; moisture levels in feeds therefore tend to rise. This is one of the reasons why it is sensible to store feeds for much shorter periods before use in tropical areas than in temperate zones. Cereals will store quite well at 10-12% moisture. In general, moisture levels of 10% or less should be sought. Fungal growth increases moisture content also.
High temperatures also affect the rate of loss and damage in feeds, another reason why feeds in tropical zones should not be stored as long as in temperate areas. High temperatures in feeds may occur not only because of environment and the way in which they are stored but because of the heat generated by the growth of fungi and insects. Increases in temperature within large stacks of feed have been known to cause 'spontaneous combustion' followed by fire losses. Increase in temperature may reduce the availability of the amino acids in feeds.
7.1.3 Insect Damage
Feeds are attractive places for insects, including various species of moths, weevils and beetles, which consume the feed. All grow well at normal temperatures in feed stores. At temperatures from 26-37° C they can reach epidemic proportions. Insects thrive better on ground materials. Whole cereals or oil cakes can therefore be stored longer than meals made from them. Insects cause damage through weight loss, the exposure of the feed to further damage by fungi and through oxidation, and the introduction of contaminating bacteria.
7.1.4 Fungal Damage
Fungi grow at relative humidities above 65%, moisture contents generally above 15% (although some mycotoxin producing fungi grow well at only 9-10% moisture) and temperatures which are specific to the fungal species. Most fungal growth occurs at temperatures above 25° C and relative humidities above 85%. Higher temperatures and moisture levels favour increased growth. Fungal growth itself encourages local rises in temperature and moisture content. Many fungi are killed during the processing of ingredients but their spores are resistant and remain present to re-infect the material later if the environmental conditions become favourable for their development.
Fungal growth causes weight loss, increases in temperature and moisture, staleness (off-flavour), discolouration and, perhaps worst of all, some common species produce mycotoxins (see Appendix XV). Mycotoxins, the best known of which are called aflatoxins, are known to be toxic to some species of fish at least. In addition, as the toxins remain in the flesh of the animal which consumes them, they are also a health hazard to humans. Sorghum, maize and its by-products, groundnut, cottonseed, cassava, coconut and sunflower are ingredients especially prone to contamination with mycotoxins.
7.1.5 Chemical Changes During Storage
The following deteriorative changes can occur in feeds during storage.
Lipids can break down into free fatty acids which make the feeds more prone to the development of rancidity. This breakdown can be caused by the damage resulting from insect infestation and fungal growth. High lipid ingredients are more susceptible to this type of chemical change than others. Carbohydrates may ferment, to produce alcohols and volatile fatty acids.
Lipids undergo oxidation, causing rancidity. Materials with high levels of poly-unsaturated fatty acids and of course, pure lipids themselves, are more prone to the development of rancidity than others. Fish meals, expeller vegetable oil cakes, and rice bran are particularly vulnerable. Grains have natural antioxidants which protect them from rapid deterioration. There are various types of chemical reactions which cause rancidity to develop. The result, as far as feed quality is concerned, is similar. Rancid fats reduce the palatability of the feed and contain toxic chemicals which may depress growth (Appendix XV). Chemicals may also be produced which reduce the availability of amino acids in the feed proteins.
Vitamin potency decreases during storage (and processing), particularly in premixes which also contain minerals. Naturally occuring vitamins in feed-stuffs also deteriorate on storage. Vitamin C is particularly susceptible, as is thiamine (vitamin B[1]).
7.2 Storage Procedures
7.2.1 Specific Notes
7.2.2 General Recommendations for Dry Storage - "Do's" and "Don'ts"
As shown in section 7.1., many problems can occur during feed storage. Some deterioration is inevitable. Thus ingredients should be stored for as short a period as possible and compounded feeds used quickly, expecially in tropical conditions. The method of storage depends on the type of ingredient. Some specific suggestions are given in this sub-section of the manual followed by some 'do's' and 'don'ts' on storage generally.
7.2.1 Specific Notes
Vitamins
Vitamins and vitamin mixes are extremely expensive ingredients and should be given special care. Their volume is usually small because their inclusion rate is low, so storage space is not normally a limiting factor. Vitamins should not be mixed with minerals before storage. Vitamins and vitamin premixes should be kept either in the manufacturer's containers or in air-tight light-proof containers. They should not be kept in hot sunny rooms. They should be kept in the coolest place available, preferably under air-conditioning. Stocks should be turned over at least every six months.
Moist and Wet Ingredients and Compounds
These materials, such as 'trash' fish, must either be used fresh (they can be iced down for up to 12 hours while stocks are being drawn from a delivery for use) or they must be kept frozen. Proper freezing of large quantities of wet materials like these requires a plate freezer and, unless you already have that kind of facility (say for the freezing of your harvested aquaculture product), freezing should be contracted out to a specialist. Once frozen, this type of ingredient can be stored in a cold store. The temperature of the cold store should not be higher than -20° C, preferably below -30° C. Rules must be established to minimize the time that the cold store door remains open and the number of times it is opened, or the product temperature will rise too high. If access to plate freezing facilities run by specialists is unavailable, small quantities of wet materials can be frozen in a cold store. Only very small quantities, though. The material must be spread into thin (1
inch) layers and the store must not be overloaded with huge quantities of unfrozen materials; it will be unable to cope. If you simply put a large drum or bag of trash fish in the cold store it will be several days before it completely freezes; rapid deteriorative changes in the feed will be taking place all that time. Moist compound feeds should be used on the day of manufacture within 2-3 hours. Don't use wet ingredients which smell of ammonia.
Dry Ingredients (Raw Materials)
See section 7.2.2.
Dry Compounded Feeds
These should be treated in the same way as dry ingredients (section 7.2.2.) but should not be stored for such a long time. Mixed feeds are more prone to damage than individual ingredients. This is because of interactions between different ingredients and because of cross contamination with insects and fungi. Mixed feeds which have undergone a heat treatment during production, such as steam pelleting, store better than other mixtures because many of the damaging factors will have been destroyed.
Lipids
Keep in sealed, preferably plastic, containers, in a cool dark place. Ensure that they have had antioxidants added to them when manufactured.
Molasses
No special care necessary in tropical countries but, in temperate zones, molasses may require heating in winter before this product can be used in a mixed feed.
7.2.2 General Recommendations for Dry Storage - "Do's" and "Don'ts"
For simplicity, this section of the manual has been arranged in the form of a series of instructions:
PROVIDE a building for storage which is secure and can be adequately locked. Ensure that its roof will protect the feed from rain and that surface water cannot enter the store. Provide it with ventilation points (windows are not necessary or recommended). Ventilation entry points should be low on the side facing the prevailing wind and high on the opposite side. Orient the building so that one of the long sides faces the prevailing wind. Ensure that all entry points are meshed to prevent entry by birds, rats etc. The drier and cooler you can keep this store the better your feed quality will be.
DO NOT accept deliveries of raw materials which are visibly damp or mouldy or which are obviously infested with insects.
PLAN your ingredient purchases carefully so that you do not need to keep too great a quantity in stock. Obviously you will want to store greater quantities of seasonally cheap or scarce materials but do not be tempted to buy a year's supply just because they are cheap now. It may prove very expensive indeed if half of them have to be thrown away. As a general rule, don't keep materials longer than the following guidelines:
Tropical Zone
Temperate Zone
Ground Ingredients
1-2 months
3 months
Whole Grain and Oilcakes
3-4 months
5-6 months
Compounded Dry Feeds
1-2 months
1-2 months
Vitamin Mixes (kept cool etc.)
6 months
6 months
Wet Ingredients
2-3 hours
2-3 hours
Frozen Materials
2-3 months
2-3 months
ALWAYS keep the store clean. Floors and walls should be regularly swept. Spilled material must be removed and the contents of broken bags or containers used first. Cleared areas of the store must always be cleaned before new materials are placed there.
ARRANGE your store so that new deliveries are not put in front of old stocks. The oldest materials MUST be used first.
MAKE small stacks. Large stacks of sacks lessen insect damage, which occurs mainly at the surface, but cause heat generation, with other consequential damage. In the tropics, I believe that small stacks which are used rapidly are better than large ones which remain stagnant for long periods. If possible, RAISE the sacks off the ground by stacking them on wooden pallets (platforms).
ENSURE that ingredients are clearly and indelibly labelled so that those drawing from the store are sure that they are drawing the correct ingredient (some look very similar when ground) from the oldest batch.
DON'T walk on the stacks of compounded feeds unnecessarily. This will break the pellets on the surface and lead to the production of a lot of wasteful fines (dust).
DON'T allow sacks to rest against the outer walls of the store - leave a space between the stacks and the wall.
DON'T allow staff to sleep or eat in the feed store nor, preferably, to smoke.
Further reading for section 7:
NRC (1973); NRC (1981); ADCP (1980); Lee (1981); Edwards (1978); Sedgwick (1982); Pfost and Pickering (1976); Orme (1971); Sanderude (1971); Stivers (1971).
<section>9</section>
8. IF I DECIDE TO FEED MY ANIMALS, HOW MUCH FEED WILL THEY NEED? HOW DO I FEED AND HOW OFTEN?
8.1 Feeding Rate
8.2 Feeding Frequency and Other Factors
8.3 Biomass Assessment
8.1 Feeding Rate
This topic is vitally important for efficient aquaculture. Underfeeding can result in loss of production. Overfeeding will cause a wastage of expensive feed and is additionally a potential cause of water pollution, a condition resulting in loss of animals or requiring expensive corrective measures. Thus, both overfeeding and underfeeding have serious economic consequences which affect the viability of the farm.
Sometimes you may read a vague instruction, like 'feed 5% of biomass per day' for a dry feed. This might be applied throughout the growing cycle. This would almost certainly result in near starvation in the early stages and gross overfeeding and water quality problems later. Feeding rates should not stay steady throughout the whole of the growing cycle to market size. They must be modified according to the size and age of the fish or shrimp, and to the water conditions.
The quantity of feed to be given to a pond or cage each day should normally be based on a percentage of the biomass present (total weight of animals). Thus, if a pond contains 10 000 fish weighing 10 g on average and the recommended feeding rate (see later) is stated to be 7% per day, the amount of feed to be given daily is:
The percentage of biomass to be fed is not a fixed amount. It should decrease as the animals grow, to reflect their decreasing metabolic rate. Thus the ratio of weight of feed per day to animal weight (biomass) is high at the start of the growing period and lower towards the time when the animals reach marketable size.
Applying a feeding rate accurately depends on an accurate estimate of average animal weight and of the numbers of animals in the production unit (pond, cage, etc.) (survival). Average weight can be obtained directly from weighing samples or by measuring the length of the animals, where an accurate length/weight relationship has been established. Comments on these topics are contained in section 8.3. Accurate record keeping is essential not only to aid efficient feeding now but also to enable you to examine the effect of past actions and to help you predict the result of planned actions during the next growing cycle.
Feeding tables have been constructed for various aquatic species. Many are to be found in the references given in 'further reading' at the end of this section; manufacturers of compound feeds always give a feeding guide for their products. Examples of feeding tables are provided in Appendix XIII. The tables for those species, such as trout, which are reared under highly intensive conditions tend to be more elaborate and reliable because they are based on many decades of accurate observation and measurement. They usually specify feed type and size as well as the daily feeding rate. Similarly elaborate tables will become available for other species as more becomes known about the most efficient ways to present their feed. Meanwhile simple feeding guides for some species are available (Appendix XIII).
It is emphasized that the feeding rates given in tables must not be applied without reference to other factors. Feed should be reduced in quantity or omitted during times of low temperature and, based on operational experience in a specific location and environment, increased when growth rates are predicted to be highest. Daily feeding rates must also be based on your observation of the animals during feeding. At this time feeding activity, water quality (colour), presence of old feed, etc., must be assessed. All feeding tables are merely a guide which, if applied with careful judgement, will markedly improve economic viability. However, if applied rigourously without complementary assessment of conditions, they can result in disaster.
As stated before, feeding rates should be decreased as the animals grow. Feeding a steady percentage of biomass throughout the growing cycle usually results in underfeeding when the animals are small, depressing growth and survival rates, and overfeeding when the animals are larger. The total effect is depressed growth rate, poor survival, and poor AFCR. The more often feeding rates are adjusted, the more efficiently will feed be utilized. Ideally they should be adjusted daily but this would require too much paper work and would confuse those who do the feeding. Also, it is only possible to adjust the feeding rate accurately when the biomass can be estimated by measurement or when it can be accurately predicted from past experience. This is where accurate, long-term records are so important.
In practice, feeding rates are adjusted weekly or twice-monthly for salmonids and catfish, based on estimates of biomass, together with a knowledge of environmental conditions (mainly temperature). Feeding tables for other species are at present less refined and feeding rates are adjusted less frequently. For example, using a feeding table given in Appendix XIII for carp, the amount of feed to be given daily (at 20-23° C) begins at 9% for animals of less than 5 g in size. It changes to 7% for animals of 5-20 g and to 6% for those of 20-50 g average weight. Further reductions, to 5%, 4%, and 3%, respectively for animals weighing 50-100 g, 100-300 g, and 300-1 000 g are recommended in that table. Obviously, changes in feeding rate will be less frequent when this type of table is used, than is possible with the more detailed tables, such as are given in Appendix XIII for salmonids. In practice, more frequent adjustments can be made to feeding rates even when simple feeding
tables are used. In the example just mentioned, feeding rates at 20-23° C could be adjusted more frequently in the following way:
Animal Size (g)
% of Biomass to be Fed per Day
Recommended in Table
Adjusted Actual Rate
Increase in growth can be measured by length or by weight. With some species, notably salmonids, so much is known about their characteristics that simple methods of predicting growth rate under each environmental condition have been derived which enable more complex feeding schedules to be planned one or two months ahead. The ability to do this, particularly for a large farm with many different tanks and animal batches of differing sizes, is essential for forward planning of feed purchases, storage requirements, cash flow, etc.
The following example, adapted from Piper et al., (1982) is given of the way in which this type of feed table can be used:
Salmonids, when reared at constant temperature, increase their length at a constant rate for the first 1 ½ years of life. The weight of fish at each given length is also known. For a certain temperature the amount of daily feed needed can be calculated from the formula:
where:
FCR = the amount of feed necessary to produce a unit of animal weight increase (e.g., 1.2 kg feed to produce an increase of weight of 1 kg is equivalent to an FCR of 1.2).
A = the daily increase in length in centimetres
B = the length of the fish in centimetres at the present time
To calculate 'A' in the above formula, an average monthly growth in centimetres is established from the records of previous years on the farm at the same temperature. This is divided by the number of days in the month to obtain a value for 'A'. The value of FCR is also extracted from previous experience, recorded in the farm data, of animals of the same size category reared with the same type of feed at the same temperature.
This equation enables feeding rates to be predicted in advance and adjusted frequently even when animals are not sampled and measured so frequently. It is emphasized that such a sophisticated system is only possible where there have been many years of experience in rearing the same species and where long-term record keeping has been faithfully attended to. An example of the calculation involved is given below:
Suppose, on 13 April, there are 200 000 fish present in the pond. Their feeding rate was last determined on 1 April, when the fish were 9.07/kg per 1 000 fish (or 1.45 cm in length) 1/. We wish to adjust the feeding rate again now, knowing from past records that at this operating temperature, the average length increase per day (A) will be 0.0075 cm during April and the expected FCR is 1.2.
The new feeding rate is then calculated:
Length, 1 April:
1.45 cm (9.07 kg/1 000) 1/
Plus growth, 13 days x 0.0075 cm (A):
0.0975 cm
= Calculated length today (B), 13 April:
1.5475 (11.03 kg/1000) 1/
1/ From tables of length/weight relationship
Applying the formula, the amount of feed to be given, as a percentage of biomass, is:
Thus the weight of feed to apply is:
As the daily increase in length in constant, and the length/weight relationship is known, this formula can be used to calculate new daily feeding rates frequently even though actual measurements of body length are infrequent.
The above example assumes 100% survival. In practice this is extremely rare so the biomass figure must take into account estimates of animal population as well as size. It is foolish to feed for 200 000 fish if there are, for example, only 160 000 left. (see section 8.3).
Very small fish and shrimp fry are generally fed to excess. Fry should be fed to satiation several times per day. Feeding rates for fry can be as high as 50% of biomass/day for catfish and 100-200% of biomass/day for very young shrimp or prawn postlarvae. Feeding at such high rates, especially if stocking rates are also high, places a strain on water quality which must be relieved by greater water exchange, the removal of waste feed and detritus, etc. The extra trouble and expense involved in such treatments is more than recompensed by the production of healthy, fast-growing fry with good survival rates.
Feeding rates for channel catfish in the U.S.A. average 3-5% of body weight per day throughout the season (see tables in Appendix XIII) because of seasonally changing water temperatures, except when the animals are close to market size. Feeding rate does not, in this case, start high and decrease gradually as it would do if the whole of the growing cycle were conducted at near constant temperature level (as it would for fish grown in tropical zones). An example of feeding rates for channel catfish kept at constant temperatures is also given in Appendix XIII for comparison.
Feeding rate tables for trout, salmon, channel catfish, common carp, tilapia and marine shrimp are provided in Appendix XIII.
Many prawn farmers, for example in Thai freshwater prawn culture, feed 'to demand' rather than according to a feeding rate table. Daily feeding rate is adjusted according to how much of the previous day's feed is consumed. This is reasonably effective where the farmer is experienced particularly where prawns, rather than fish, are being reared. Fish tend to eat more than is really necessary, resulting in poor FCR, if too much feed is presented. Phytoplankton density, measured with a Secchi disk or by hand, which obscures at 25 cm or less, is also used to detect overfeeding and as a means of controlling feeding rate. For a freshwater prawn batch-culture pond, stocked at 5 animals per square metre, the feeding rate starts at about 6.25 kg/ha/day, rising to about 37.5 kg/ha/day at harvest time (New and Singholka, 1982). The final feeding rate is equivalent to about 3% of biomass per day.
8.2 Feeding Frequency and Other Factors
8.2.1 Salmon and Trout
8.2.2 Catfish
8.2.3 Tilapia
8.2.4 Carp
8.2.5 Other Fish Species
8.2.6 Shrimp and Prawns
The most effective method of feeding with respect to location, time of day and frequency varies from species to species. Its cost effectiveness depends also on other factors such as the availability of feeding labour or automatic feeders, size of pond or tank, cost of labour, and the personal preference of the farm manager, based on observations and results. In this section of the manual a brief review of information about each of the major groups of cultured aquaculture species dealt with here is presented.
A number of basic rules, suggested by Piper et al., (1982) are summarized first:
a) for optimum growth and feed conversion, each feed should ideally be only 1% of the body weight. Thus, if 5% of biomass per day is being fed, there should be five feeds per day
b) survival rate is not significantly affected by feeding frequency once the initial feeding stage of the animals has been passed
c) frequent feeding reduces starvation and stunting of small fish; thus the group has better uniformity
d) infrequent feeding results in feed wastage, poor FCR, water quality problems, and the leaching out of water soluble nutrients
e) dry feeds should be distributed more frequently than moist feeds
f) 90% of the feed (for fish) should be consumed within 15 minutes or less of the feeding time.
In narrow or small ponds for fish, feed should be spread evenly around the perimeter. For larger ponds, other methods have to be used to give adequate distribution, especially for species which are territorial in nature. These methods include feeding from a boat, feed blowers towed by a tractor, and (in the U.S.A.) distribution by aeroplane for very large ponds. Boats are, of course, essential for the feeding of moored cages which are not connected to the shore by a walk-way. Information on feeding devices is given in Appendix XIV.
Returning to the subject of feeding frequency, the following sub-sections summarize information on a species by species basis.
8.2.1 Salmon and Trout
In common with other very young fry of fish and shrimp, very frequent feeding is most effective for young salmonids. For swim-up fry of salmonids the daily feed ration is split up into very small quantities fed as often as 20-24 times per day, either manually or automatically. Sometimes a 24-hour lighting regime is used for the first few days to encourage the fry to take dry feed. Feeding frequency is gradually reduced to 1-3 times per day as the fish grow. Rainbow trout start to take food about twenty-one days after hatching when reared at 10° C. Most hatcheries feed at ½ to 1 hourly intervals during an 8-hour day, reducing this to three times per day. After the fish are about 5 inches long (23 g) feeding frequency is reduced to twice per day. Brood fish are fed only once per day. Feeding frequencies quoted by Piper et al., (1982) for coho salmon, autumn chinook salmon and rainbow trout are given in Table 22.
Salmonids are frequently reared in tanks or cages so feed distribution is not a problem. Many different types of automatic feeders are utilized, some of which are mentioned in Appendix XIV.
Table 22 Suggested Feeding Frequencies for Salmonids
Species
Fish Size (g)
No. of Feeding Times Per Day
Coho salmon
Autumn
Chinook salmon
Rainbow trout
Source: Piper et al., 1982
Salmonids tend to feed to satiation and then do not eat again until most of the meal has left the stomach. Once past the fry stage therefore, a feeding frequency of 1 or 2 times per day is sufficient.
8.2.2 Catfish
The information presented here refers to channel catfish; it is reasonable to assume that it is applicable to other species of catfish.
Channel catfish fry begin to feed 5-10 days after hatching, when the yolk sack reserves are used up. As with salmonids, swim-up fry are best fed many times per day. One commercial feed manufacturer, whose feeding table is reproduced in Appendix XIII, recommends 8-10 feeds per day, reducing quickly to 6 per day by the time the fish are about 2.5 cm long. Feeding frequency is further reduced to 3 times per day when the fish reach 7.6 cm in length. Juvenile catfish grow best with two feeds per day, one at mid-morning and one late in the afternoon, seven days per week.
Feeding frequency in ponds depends on water temperature. At 13-29 C, feeding 6-7 times per week is recommended. At times of particularly high or low temperatures, less frequent (4 or 5 times per week) feeding is suggested. Feeding 6, instead of 7 days per week is said to encourage the fish to consume any surplus feed in the pond and lessen the chance of over-feeding. Catfish in cages should be fed daily. There is some evidence that feeding catfish twice per day, especially under raceway conditions, results in a faster growth rate.
Automatic feeders and mechanical distribution of feed is common in channel catfish culture (see Appendix XIV).
8.2.3 Tilapia
In the wild, tilapia feed more or less continuously throughout the day. Manual feeding, several times per day is best for intensively grown tilapia, in cages or raceways for example.
Automatic feeding can be employed and the blower type of feeder is said to distribute feed more adequately for tilapia. Tilapia fry should be fed at least 4 times per day, preferably 8 times per day, in daylight hours. In an experiment with 9 mm total length fry of Oreochromis aureus, New et al., (1984) showed that survival improved with continuous (mechanical) feeding compared to either five or three manual feeds per day. Feeding rates can be less frequent, 4 or 5 times per day for fingerlings. Adult tilapia thrive best on 2-3 feeds per day.
8.2.4 Carp
Again, common carp (and probably Chinese and Indian carps) thrive best on frequent feeds. Jauncey (1982) reports that one researcher found that optimum feed utilization by common carp (at 40 g size) was achieved when the feed was split into nine equal feeds. The best feeding frequency can only be assessed on an individual farm basis, determined by the cost of repetitive feeding operations. From the biological and nutritional point of view it would appear best to feed as frequently as possible.
8.2.5 Other Fish Species
Specific feeding frequency recommendations for the other cultured species of fish covered in this manual are not available. It is therefore recommended that until more information on the optimum conditions becomes available those frequencies found best for catfish and tilapia should be applied. A golden rule would be, when in doubt, to feed as frequently as economics allow. There has been a report, however, that groupers gave best biomass increase and good FCR, fed 'trash' fish to satiation in cages, when fed every second day, as compared to other frequencies varying from once every 5 days to three times per day. However, this result was apparently caused by poorer survival at the higher feeding frequencies. Best growth rate was, again in this case, achieved by feeding two or three times per day.
8.2.6 Shrimp and Prawns
There is a good deal of controversy about the optimum time and feeding frequency for marine shrimp and freshwater prawns. Some species burrow during the day and feed most actively at night. Others feed in the shallower parts of the pond but avoid these areas in daylight when temperatures are highest. For these species it would seem best to feed in the late afternoon or early evening. Most farmers feed once, or at the most twice per day, usually first thing in the morning and last thing in the afternoon.
Shrimp do not consume all of the feed presented at once, unlike most fish. This fact has led to much discussion and research on methods of binding shrimp feeds to prevent wastage and the loss of water-soluble nutrients. Some commercial feeds are extremely water stable (>24 hours) but may not be so palatable as softer feeds. The apparent need to produce such well-bound diets has, in part, been caused by the reluctance to feed shrimp and prawn ponds more frequently than once a day, even though labour is often available and otherwise unoccupied. Feed presented in smaller quantities more frequently would not need to be so efficiently bound and should therefore be cheaper.
In Taiwan many intensive farmers (usually farms are run by a family enterprise, so there is always someone on site) feed tiger shrimp (Penaeus monodon) four to six times per day, the feeds being evenly spaced over the whole 24 hour period.
I suggest that feeding shrimp and prawns as frequently as possible, spreading the daily ration between those feeds, would be the most effective technique. It certainly pays off with young post-larvae, as it does with fish fry. Shrimp larvae do not thrive at all unless maintained in a conditions where food (live food or artificial feed with neutral buoyancy) is constantly available.
8.3 Biomass Assessment
Calculation of the amount of feed to present daily must be based on an assessment of the biomass (total weight of fish or shrimp) in each pond or enclosure.
Regular, accurate, data for average animal size must be obtained through weekly, bi-weekly or, at the worst, monthly sampling of the rearing unit. In tanks or cages it is easier to take representative samples but in ponds it is common to get a biased picture, particularly when a species with uneven growth rate is stocked, such as freshwater prawns. Care must be exercised to take samples in several parts of the pond, not only at feeding points where the larger or more active individuals may congregate. Samples may be taken by seine, cast net or lift net.
If accurate length/weight relationships for the species have been pre-determined under the environmental conditions being used, length measurements are a more accurate means of monitoring growth rate. This is particularly true of crustacea which hold uneven quantities of water under their carapace. Measuring length can be a rapid process with a skilled operator and is less stressful to the animals than trying to determine weight by a standardized technique. Fish length can either be total or, to avoid inaccuracies due to damage to the tail fin, is more accurately measured to the anterior end of the caudal fork. Care must be taken that the method of measurement corresponds with that used when the length/weight ratio was determined. Similarly total shrimp length, because of frequent rostrum damage, is less reliable than measuring from the posterior of the eye orbit to the tip of the telson.
For a pond of 5 000 m^2, stocked at 10/m^2, at least five samples should be obtained at each sampling time and 50 animals from each sample measured. Average weight can either be calculated directly from the total weight of the sample obtained by weighing or by referring the average of the measured lengths to a length/weight ratio.
An assessment of survival is also necessary to calculate feeding rate effectively. This can be illustrated as follows. If a pond is stocked with 50 000 animals and, at a sampling date the average weight is 10 g and the feeding rate to be applied is 3% of the biomass/day, the amount of feed would be:
if it is assumed that all the animals originally stocked are still present. If however, there has been a 20% mortality up to the 10 g size, the correct amount of feed should be:
Besides saving 20% of daily feed costs in this case, an accurate assessment of survival, as well as growth rate, would prevent possible water quality deterioration caused by over-feeding.
Although a good estimate of survival aids an effective feeding programme it is often extremely difficult to achieve. In small cages and tanks it is often possible to make accurate visual observations or to count all the animals during their transfer to another tank or cage. This is normally impossible or impractical in pond culture, except when stock transfer from one pond to another takes place for other reasons. In this case the numbers present can be calculated by taking the total weight of stock and dividing by the average animal weight obtained from samples. Visual observation is also impossible in ponds. In my view, no-one has yet devised a satisfactory way of assessing the stock in aquaculture ponds, which is why this important subject is rarely mentioned.
In practice most farm managers apply an arbitrary survival factor based on the number of days since stocking. This factor is derived from knowledge of previous culture cycles on the same farm or elsewhere in similar circumstances, modified by observation of actual mortalities, knowledge of water quality or disease problems, etc. The factor derived depends on accurate measurement of the number of animals originally stocked and the numbers harvested in each cycle for its accuracy. Thus the importance of careful farm records becomes obvious.
If those records show, for example, that 50% of the animals stocked normally reach market size (barring individual accidents) on the specific farm, it would be reasonable to assume that future growing cycles would show the same survival rate. Similarly, if there is no transfer of animals within the growing period, the highest mortality rate probably occurs after initial stocking (due to the handling stress and the ease of damage and of predation on young animals). Thus, if a 50% mortality is known to occur normally between stocking and harvesting in a 16 week growing cycle, for example, it would be reasonable to assume that 20% of the losses occur within the first 4 week period with a further 10% loss occurring during every 4 week period after that. Thus assessments of biomass in this example at two weekly intervals of a pond stocked with 50 000 animals would be based on multiplying the average animal weight, obtained by measurement of samples by the following number of
animals:
Weeks 1 and 2
Weeks 3 and 4
Weeks 5 and 6
Weeks 7 and 8
Weeks 9 and 10
Weeks 11 and 12
Weeks 13 and 14
Weeks 15 and 16
Thus, to continue this example, if the average weight of prawns at the beginning of week 13 (12 weeks after stocking) was 20 g, and the percentage of biomass to be applied was 5%, the daily amount of feed would be:
Clearly assessment of biomass, particularly in ponds, depends partly on accurate sampling and size measurement but also very much on the manager's judgement based on an accurate record of past experience modified by the history of the particular batch being cultured.
Further reading for section 8:
Piper et al., (1982); Halver (1972); Phillips (1970);Gaudet (1967); Lee (1981); Ralston Purina (1974); Marek (1975); Foltz (1982); NRC (1983); NRC (1981); Pullin and Lowe-McConnell (1982); Jauncey and Ross (1982); New (1986a); New and Singholka (1982); Winfree (1979); Jauncey (1982).
<section>a</section>
9. HOW DO I KEEP TRACK OF THE RESULTS OF FEEDING AND HOW CAN I LEARN FROM EXPERIENCE?
9.1 Records of Feed Type
9.2 Records of Feed Use
9.3 How Do I Use the Records I Have Kept?
9.4 Statistics
The simple answer to this question, which will be elaborated in this section, is ADEQUATE RECORD KEEPING. The maintenance of good records is ESSENTIAL for all aspects of good farm management, not just feeding. Memory is not enough. Memory contributes to the 'gut feeling', or the instantaneous reaction to a situation which you have seen before, but memory is not a substitute for legibly written and carefully kept records. Only with the help of written records can you efficiently plan the management of your farm's next growing cycle. Records will help you to build up factual knowledge of the performance of YOUR animals on YOUR ponds fed on YOUR (or others') feeds. Others can give you guidance in all these topics but no-one else can build up information which is specific to your farm. Other people can help you interpret your data and plan for the future, if you need help, but they will be unable to give more than general advice based on experience elsewhere in similar
conditions if you do not keep your own records.
Accurate records will enable you to compare the performance of different species or varieties on the same feed, different feeds fed to the same species, of feed performance differences between ponds or in different seasons and to assess your feeding efficiency in relation to that achieved by others, or by you in a previous growing cycle. They will enable you to plan for the future - to avoid over- or under-feeding and over- or under-ordering and storage of feed ingredients or compounds. In short, records are the key to keeping your feeding costs to a minimum and to using feed to obtain the highest production of market sized animals from your farm.
Two types of records will be dealt with here - those relating to feed type, and those relating to feed use.
9.1 Records of Feed Type
Whether you buy in your compound feeds or whether you make them on your own farm, changes will occur in their composition and in their cost. Changes in the type or cost of feed used may be the result of your decision based on previous experience or the observation of others, or they may be the result of changes in the availability of ingredients or bought-in compounded feeds. For you to keep track of what feed you have used and to be able to follow the economic results of its use, you must clearly identify each feed you use and keep a record of when each batch arrived or was made, and what type it was.
If your feeding records simply record that, "on 13 November 1988 you started the new feed in pond No. 6", what use will this information be to you in 1989, 1990 or 1991? There may have been several more changes since 1988: will you (or less likely still, will your staff) remember WHICH 'new' feed it was? How could you attribute the success or failure of a specific crop to the feed used if you are not sure which one was used? This simple example is given to emphasize the need for clear concise records of feed type.
All feeds should be identifiable. If bought-in, the manufacturer's name, the product name and the date it was bought should be noted. Some manufacturers put a batch number on the bag or on the label sewn onto it. A record of this number, and its subsequent use in feeding records, would enable you to pin-point a problem arising from a poor quality feed batch. If you make your own feeds you should allot each feed formula a reference number which should be modified if the formula is amended. You should keep a record of each formula number and batch date so that this can be marked in your feeding records for each pond or tank or cage. For example, a carp growers feed might be numbered CG1. If you decided to completely change the formulation, the new feed should be given a new number - CG2, CG3, etc. If the formulation change is minor, the new diet might be referred to as CG1/1 meaning the first modification of the basic formula CG1. This type of number tends to confuse, however,
and it is probably better to change the number completely to another - CG2, CG3, etc., each time any change is made. The date on which each batch is made should also be recorded.
You should then end up with the following records of feed type:
Bought-In Feed:
A file, which records, for each batch of feed delivered, the following information:
- Date delivered
- Manufacturer's name
- Product name
- Batch number from bags or label or invoice
- Amount delivered
- Cost per unit weight
- Notes - any special notes on condition of feed on receipt etc.
Feed made on Farm Site:
(i) A file, which records, in detail, all the formulae used in feed manufacture on your farm. Each formula has its own reference number.
(ii) A file, which records details about each batch of feed made:
- Feed formulation number
- Date and time made (this identifies the batch)
- Name of foreman responsible for manufacture
- Source of each ingredient used
Compound feed containers should be clearly labelled with the feed number and the batch date.
(iii) A file which records changes in ingredient prices so that you can calculate the cost of the feeds you make on your farm at certain dates. Don't just rely on finding old invoices, or on your memory. Update the information on a chart as each batch comes in:
Example of feed price chart: Ingredient Cost (e.g. Indian Rupees/kg)
50% Fish Meal
Exp. Groundnut Cake
Ext. Rice Bran
Maize Meal
Gingelly Cake
Date
Price
Date
Price
Date
Price
Analytical Information
Ideally, information on the chemical analysis of each batch of ingredients and each batch of feed made should also be maintained in farm feed records.
For those who construct their own feed formulations, the link between the records to be kept and improved formulation and feeds in the future should now be obvious.
9.2 Records of Feed Use
9.2.1 General Management Records
9.2.2 Feeding Records
Records of feed use are part of the general records which must be kept in the efficiently run farm. Some of the details about the management of each pond or tank or cage are specific to feed use; others are not (temperature, salinity, water exchange rate, etc.). Knowledge of the latter is however essential if the effect of a particular feeding programme is to be interpreted. For example, it would not be valid to compare the results of using two feeds in different ponds if the water exchange in one was twice that in the other, or if the stocking rates were different.
Two sets of records are therefore essential for monitoring the efficiency of your feeding programme. The first relates to general farm management; the second is specific to feed.
9.2.1 General Management Records
It is not appropriate in this manual, which concentrates on feeds and feeding, to deal with the whole question of farm records - why they are necessary, or how they should be kept. Thus the following list of parameters is incomplete but it aims to include those factors about which information is needed before the effects of your feeding programme can be judged. Records on the following topics should be available:
- Pond or cage or tank number (this identifies its position, depth, size, etc.)
- Water exchange rate
- Salinity records
- Water temperatures
- Dissolved oxygen data
- Weather conditions during growing cycle
- Species stocked
- Source of stock
- Date(s) stocked
- Number(s) stocked
- Size of animals stocked (length and/or weight)
- Any special events (e.g., pump failure; predation or mortalities observed; pond overflow; etc.)
- Date, type and amount of any chemicals used
9.2.2 Feeding Records
The following details, which are specific to or mainly related to feeding practices, must be recorded:
- Type of fertilizers used (if any)
- Quantity of fertilizer(s) applied
- Date(s) of fertilizer application
- Type of feed(s) used (see section 9.1 for details required)
- Date(s) each feed type given (record all changes)
- Feeding frequency
- Feeding times
- Feed amount per feed and per day
- Growth rate (from regular sampling; see section 8.3)
- Survival rate (from previous experience, coupled with observation - detection of mortalities, etc.; or direct counting if possible)
- Quantity harvested
- Average weight of animals harvested
- Size distribution of harvested animals
- Dressed weights (or shrimp head/tail ratio)
- Any special events (animals refuse to feed; obvious feed wastage; etc.)
9.3 How Do I Use the Records I Have Kept?
A lot of record keeping has been recommended; a lot of paper work, you may grumble: 'What am I going to do with it all?'
First of all, record keeping need not be difficult if it is efficiently organized. Well arranged record books and charts should be prepared and all relevant farm workers told exactly how to use them. Their use of them must be regularly monitored by the farm manager to ensure that vital data is not missing when the time comes for analysis.
Secondly, you must store the records carefully until you are able to use them. Keep the raw data as well as the results of your calculations for comparison in future years or growing cycles. Keep the records safe and dry. Illegible records are frustrating.
Thirdly, you should use the records to determine the efficiency of your feeding programme and to help you interprete the reasons why it was successful or not. There are many ways in which the efficiency of the feeding programme can be judged but, in the end, they all boil down to the answers to the following questions:
a) did your animals achieve market size in the fastest possible time, given the environmental conditions, and was the survival rate good?
b) how much did it cost you, per kilogram of marketable product, to feed your animals?
When you have determined growth and survival rate to harvest time, you can answer question (a) above by comparison with your own experience with this pond or species or with others, or with the results achieved by other people. Obviously you will always seek to improve on previous achievements.
The answer to question (b) is a combination of unit feed cost, the apparent feed conversion ratio (AFCR), and the cost (manual or automatic) of feeding operations.
In seeking to explain the results which you have obtained, the other farm records play their vital part. Your conclusions help you to benefit from wise decisions of the past and to learn from your mistakes, with the intention of improving the productivity and economic viability of the rearing unit next time.
9.4 Statistics
If your farm is large, or if you have many different batches of animals under culture you may need to employ statistical techniques to analyse your results. Additionally, should you decide it would be worthwhile and interesting to do some research and development work alongside your farm production, an understanding of statistics would help you to plan meaningful experiments. This subject is not dealt with here but you are recommended to consult the two small books by Parker and Heath listed under 'further reading'.
Further reading for section 9:
Parker (1979); Heath (1970); Jacob (1982); Kannan et al., (1981).
<section>b</section>
10. IF I DECIDE NOT TO MAKE MY OWN, CAN I BUY COMPOUND FEEDS FOR FISH AND PRAWNS? IF SO, WHERE?
An increasing number of animal feed manufacturers are now producing feeds designed for locally grown species of fish and shrimp. Some companies specialize in the production of feeds for aquaculture alone. In addition, feed brokers may specialize in this field; general feed brokers also deal in aquaculture feeds.
A greater range and variety of commercial feeds are made for salmonids (mainly in Europe and North America) and channel catfish (in the USA) than for other aquaculture species. However, in those countries where shrimp culture is active, there are many alternative feedstuffs available for them too. The extreme case is in Taiwan, where there are now more than twenty feedstuff companies producing shrimp feeds. Many aquaculture feed companies export their finished (compound) feeds, concentrates (which can be diluted with locally available ingredients), or premixes to other countries. There are major aquaculture feed producing companies in Taiwan, the Philippines, Japan, Thailand, Singapore, most EEC countries, Scandanavia and the USA. Other countries will become major producers as their aquaculture farms use more intensive techniques.
Lists of feed manufacturers could be obtained from the commercial attaches at embassies. Fish feed manufacturers in the USA are listed in the annual reference issue (usually published in July) of the agribusiness weekly 'Feedstuffs', which contains a Buyers Guide covering ingredients, equipment and services. Aquaculture feed manufacturers are also listed in the annual Buyers Guide usually published in November/December by the American journal 'Aquaculture Magazine'.
If you do not know if or where you can buy commercial feeds for fish or shrimp in your country, ask your local feedstuff manufacturer, if there is one. If he does not make them himself he will be able to put you in touch with someone who does, or he may be able to arrange to obtain feeds for you. Your local feed ingredient broker may also be able to help. Approach the Fisheries Department of your Ministry of Agriculture for guidance.
A list of some fish and shrimp feed manufacturers is given in Appendix VIII.
If no fish or shrimp feeds are available from commercial sources locally, or buying or importing them is too expensive, you should consider two other alternatives. One is to re-consider making your own. It is to be hoped that section 5 of this manual will have shown that, at least for feeds made with simple readily-available equipment, making your own feeds on the farm is not too difficult. Good results can be achieved with reasonable care. The other option is to utilize commercially available feeds designed for other types of animals.
Ask to see the stated composition or chemical analysis of the feeds for other livestock which are sold locally. See if any match reasonably closely with the requirements of the aquaculture species which you are growing. If so, buy some and try it on a small scale first, before applying it to the whole of your farm. Chicken feeds are usually the most applicable. Fresh-water prawns have been successfully grown on chicken feed in Hawaiian pond culture, despite its poor water stability. This form of feed will still, even though not designed for your species, almost certainly be better than feeding a single ingredient and definitely will help you to achieve a greater production than not feeding at all. This is especially true if your stocking density is low and some natural food is available. The exact compliance to known nutritional standards for your species becomes more important as stocking density increases and it becomes the sole or 'complete' feed available to the animals.
Petfoods, such as semi-moist dog foods can also be used to provide a floating fish feed but usually, except for the rearing of post-larval shrimp or fish fry in nurseries, prove too expensive for aquacultural purposes.
If you decide to use feeds designed for other species on your fish farm, try to obtain feeds which do not contain special additives. Some chicken feeds contain high levels of arsenical compounds and other expensive chemicals designed to combat poultry diseases; some pig feeds contain high levels of supplementary copper. Do not expect to get such good feed conversion ratios (AFCR) as you would get with a feed designed specifically for your species. Don't forget that you should not make a direct cost comparison between the cost of a feed designed for your aquaculture species and (say) a local chicken feed. It is not the cost of the feed that matters, it is the cost of producing a unit weight of the species you are feeding with that feed which is important, together with the rate of growth produced. A feed which costs half as much as another is actually more expensive to use
a) if you need more than twice as much of it to achieve the same result and/or
b) the animals do not grow so quickly, thus wasting time, labour, facilities, water, etc., and perhaps causing you to miss a seasonally valuable market for your product and/or
c) the animals do not survive so well on it.
If no fish feed is available a broiler chicken starter feed would probably be the most applicable alternative for catfish, tilapia, carps and freshwater prawns. The use of high protein concentrates designed for other livestock could be considered for other aquatic animals, such as marine fish or some marine shrimp, which have high protein requirements. These can only be considered if the exact composition is known. Excess quantities of minerals and vitamins, such as might be found in some animal concentrates, may have detrimental effects on the growth and survival of your stock.
<section>c</section>
11. IF I MAKE FEEDS MYSELF, SHOULD I SELL THEM TO OTHER FARMERS?
My personal opinion is that the answer to this question is 'no', unless you already have a feedstuff business, quite separately from your fish or shrimp farm.
Feed manufacture for sale is a specialized business and should be dealt with as such. Making feed for your own farm is an important but an ancillary activity to managing the farm itself. Operating a feed mill which sells feed to other farmers is likely to take over as a primary activity from the farm itself, with a detrimental effect on the success of the latter.
Though you may become very efficient in feed manufacture for your own use, mistakes may sometimes occur. You may be able to discover these before any real damage is done, and take remedial action if the feed is confined to your own farm. If you have sold the feed to others you may not be so lucky. You have no control over the methods by which other farmers use or store your feed but, whatever happens, you will be held responsible by them for the result. Remember the feed millers' maxim 'whatever goes wrong on a livestock farm, the FIRST thing that will be blamed is the feed'. Proving that poor feed quality is not the cause of some problem can be very difficult.
Apart from your moral responsibility to those that you sell feed to, you may be subjected to claims arising from loss of stock or poor productivity on other farms over which you have no control.
However, you may decide, despite knowing all the risks, that you wish to develop a commercial feed mill as well as an aquaculture farm as part of your business interests. If so, it should be run as a separate business, selling its product to your farm as well as to others'. It should not be part of the responsibility of the farm manager, who will already have more than enough worries.
If you decide to sell fish or shrimp feeds you must pay even more attention to the quality of raw materials bought, to the conditions under which you store ingredients and finished products, to the way in which they are produced, to quality control, and to stock management than you would if you were only making feeds for your own farm. Also, because of the increased scale of the operations, you will need professional advice on designing the mill. In addition you must make yourself aware of the feed-stuffs regulations which may be applicable in your country. An increasing number of countries are introducing feed legislation to impose controls on the industry. These normally entail stating, on each bag and/or invoice, what the proximate analysis of the product is. You are then liable to have samples taken of your products by your customers or by public bodies for analytical tests to be made. If the products consistently fail to meet the specifications you may be liable to
prosecution. In some countries manufacturers are obliged to list the ingredients in feed (in order of magnitude but not necessarily the inclusion rate), to state what medications are included, to lay out the design of the label and invoice in a defined manner, etc. Such regulations are more prevalent in North America and in the EEC than elsewhere.
However, feedstuffs regulations are known to exist in other countries, for example Cyprus, India, Jamaica, Malta, Peru, the Philippines, and in South Africa. References to the regulations applicable in those countries are given by Cockerell et al., (1975). Similar legislation will follow in other countries. Such legislation is designed to protect the customer (the farmer) and also to protect legitimate and reputable manufacturers from unscrupulous competitors who seek to make profits from unfair practices (such as the inclusion of urea to elevate the apparent (crude) protein content of rations, or to substitute poor quality ingredients for suitable ones).
<section>d</section>
12. WILL I HAVE ANY NEW PROBLEMS THROUGH STARTING TO USE FEED ON MY FARM? IF SO, HOW DO I TACKLE THEM?
12.1 Toxic or Poor Quality Feed
12.2 Water Quality
12.3 Effluent
12.4 Disease
If you have not used feed on your farm before you are bound to ask this question. If you have read through the manual up to this point, most of the likely problems will have already become obvious. Many topics are not exactly problems - it is more that feeding is obviously going to create a lot more work for you and for those who work for you, especially if you decide to make your own feed. However, there will be economic benefits arising from the intensification of your farm to offset this.
I hope that this manual will have stimulated your interest in increasing the productivity of your farm through feeding and that it will have demonstrated that many other farmers find the extra effort it entails profitable. The extra work that feeding causes, if carried out properly, will increase the revenue and profit from your farm. Making your own feed should also increase your margin of profit over the use of commercial feeds, assuming that the quality of your farm-made feed is similar to that which you could buy. Feed ingredients will cost you more than the feed manufacturer, however, because you will not have his bulk buying power.
You may have extra problems to deal with once you start using feed in your farm but most of them will only occur if the feed is not prepared or applied correctly. This section of the manual is a summary of the most likely problems which could occur.
12.1 Toxic or Poor Quality Feed
Toxic feed, which will cause growth depression and possibly mortalities, can occur if you are not careful enough to apply the advice given in this manual. In particular, feeds may be toxic if your quality control of bought-in ingredients or compound feeds is not good enough. The importance of quality control has been covered in section 5. Storage requirements have been dealt with in section 7, while some of the toxic substances which may occur in feeds are listed in Appendix XV. The topic of nutritional fish pathology has been covered in another ADCP manual (Tacon, 1985). Poor results with a specific feed may not necessarily be caused by toxicity, but simply by poor formulation (unsuitable feed) or by old feed (deteriorated quality, such as rancidity or loss of vitamin potency).
ACTION If feed is suspected to be of poor quality, stop using that batch and try another. If the problem resolves itself you will know that the feed was at fault and you will be able to investigate the cause. If the problem continues it is either caused by some aspect of the feed which is common to both batches or it is not related to the feed at all. Before you take your animals off feed, carefully consider what other things might be causing the problem you are experiencing. It is very easy to blame the feed first but it may be unfair.
12.2 Water Quality
The most common problem results from over-feeding, which will eventually cause water pollution in your production unit. Large quantities of excess feed build up on the bottom of the pond or tank or below cages and can result in anaerobic conditions and the production of hydrogen sulphide. Uneaten feed in the water creates an oxygen demand which may reduce dissolved oxygen levels below those necessary for the survival of the species you are culturing. Excess feed also acts as a fertilizer and may cause a plankton bloom with a similar effect on dissolved oxygen levels, especially in the early hours of the morning.
ACTION
If water quality is impaired by excess feeding you must stop feeding at once and change the water in the pond or tank as quickly as possible. The pond should be flushed to reduce the plankton density and remove toxic wastes. Feeding should re-start gradually, based on a re-assessment of biomass and feeding rate and should be more carefully monitored in future.
12.3 Effluent
Feeding is only one aspect of a more intensive approach to farm management. High stocking rates and the use of feed will also increase demands on water supply for exchange purposes. It also will result in the regular discharge of soluble nutrients (waste feed and faecal matter) and an increase in the level of suspended solids during pond drainage for harvesting or other purposes. The nutrients in the effluent of the farm can, if the farm is a freshwater farm, enhance the value of the water for irrigation purposes (act as a liquid fertilizer) although the increase in suspended solids may make it unacceptable for certain types of automatic irrigation systems. Where the farm effluent is discharged into bodies of water where natural exchange is poor it may result in local plankton blooms which may trouble an ecological lobby. Some intensive salmonid farms now use feeds with reduced phosphorous content to minimize this effect. Legislation in some countries forces intensive farms
to treat their effluent in the same way as an industrial user of water, so that it complies with certain standards before discharge. These may include a settlement pond and some form of biological filtration. Some farms grow other species in their outlet channels, such as molluscs or tilapia, which remove some of the nutrients while improving the quality of the effluent.
ACTION
Normally no action is necessary unless it is requested by the government body which controls the water or land into which the effluent is discharged. If you do not comply with their regulations or cause a problem for other users of that water or land, you will be advised by them what action you should take.
12.4 Disease
Diseases of fish can be transferred through the use of fresh, unpasteurized residues of the same or similar species. The use of unpasteurized trash fish as a feed for salmonids has caused this type of problem; fish or fish viscera intended for hatchery feeds is routinely pasteurizied in some countries. I have not seen reports of this type of problem occurring through the use of prawn wastes in shrimp feeds, but it is a possibility. The danger inherent in the use of raw prawn wastes is exampled by Lightner (1984). In his experiments, feeding chopped carcasses of suspect carrier shrimp to other shrimp resulted in signs of IHHN disease within 15-60 days. Pathogenic bacteria, e.g., Salmonella spp., can also be transferred in animal feed and are sometimes passed on to humans.
ACTION
If a disease problem which causes mortality or disfigures the product occurs, you must recruit the help of the local Fisheries Department. They may be able to identify the causative agent themselves or they may be able to enlist the help of specialized pathology departments such as those at the National Inland Fisheries Institute in Thailand, the University of Arizona in the USA and the Institute of Aquaculture in Scotland. If the feed is proved to be the culprit it will be necessary to change the formula or the processing technique.
<section>e</section>
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to thank the Fisheries Department of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations who suggested that I should prepare this manual while I was a consultant and, through the UNDP/FAO Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP), who financed its publication.
My personal thanks are extended to those FAO Fisheries Department staff members with whom I have discussed the purpose of this manual, especially André Coche, Mario Pedini and Michel Vincke. Manuela d'Antoni is also complimented on the drawings which she patiently prepared for this manual.
Thanks are also due to the many authors whose works are cited here and to Dr. U.P. Grunder of Buhler Brother Ltd., who provided cost information and some of the photographs.
Finally I wish to thank my wife Janet and my daughter Sophie for their encouragement and help in the task of preparing this manual and the secretaries who have worked on its various stages of preparation -Mairi Page and Sandra Castrucci.
<section>f</section>
BIBLIOGRAPHY
The following papers and books have either been cited in the text of this manual, listed as relevant 'further reading' at the end of one of the sections or provide additional general information:
Abu Hassan, I., S. Sayuthi, and C.S. Chiam, 1984 Fabrication of feed suitable for smallholder aquaculture. Rome, FAO, FI:DP/MAL/77/008 Field Document 2: pp. 261-78
ADCP 1979, Training in fish feed technology. Rome, FAO, ADCP/REP/79/8: 16 p
ADCP 1980, Fish Feed Technology. Rome, FAO, ADCP/REP/80/11: 395 p
ADCP 1983, Fish Feeds and Feeding in Developing Countries. Rome, FAO, ADCP/REP/83/18: 97 p
Berka, R., 1973 A review of feeding equipment in fish culture. Rome, FAO, EIFAC Occasional Paper No. 9 (EIFAC/OP 9): 32 p
Boonyaratpalin, M., 1982 Fermented trash fish as possible feed for fish under culture. In: Report of the 2nd Advisory Committee Meeting of the NACA, Bangkok, Thailand, 14-15 December, 1983, pp. 110-14
Boyd, C.E., 1982 Water Quality Management for Pond Fish Culture. Amsterdam, Elsevier, Developments in Aquaculture and Fisheries Science 9:318 p
Brandt, T.M., 1979 Use of heat treated full-fat soybeans in channel catfish and golden shiner feeds. In; Proceedings of the 1979 Fish Farming Conference and Annual Convention, Catfish Farmers of Texas, 17-19 January, 1979, Texas A & M University, pp. 52-61
Butcher, J.E., 1976 Simple diet formulation. In: P.V. Fonnesbeck, L.E. Harris and L.C. Kearl (Eds.), Proceedings of the First International Symposium on Feed Composition, Animal Nutrient Requirements, and Computerization of Diets, 11-16 July, 1976, Utah State University, pp. 749-51
Chow, K.W., 1982a India: Carp Nutrition Research at the Freshwater Aquaculture Research and Training Centre, Dhauli. Establishment of a Nutrition Laboratory and Initiation of a Diet Development Programme for Carp Polyculture. Rome, FAO, FI:DP/IND/75/031, Field Document 4:30 p
Chow, K.W., 1982b Artificial feeding for polyculture of carp, tilapia and mullet at the Zaweya Fish Farm, Egypt. Rome, FAO, FI:DP/EGY/80/002:11 p
Chow, K.W., 1982c Diet formulation for selected species for aquaculture in Mexico. Draft Report prepared for project MEX/77/002: Rome, FAO, 24 p
Chow, K.W., 1984 Artificial diets for sea bass, Macrobrachium, and tiger shrimp. Draft consultants report for project MAL/79/018:Rome, FAO, 17 p
Chow, K.W., G.L. Rumsey and P.W. Waldrup, 1980 Linear programming of fish diet formulation. In: ADCP, (Eds.), Fish Feed Technology. Rome, FAO, Report No. ADCP/REP/80/11:pp.241-86
CMFRI, 1982 Manual of research methods for fish and shellfish nutrition. CMFRI Publication No. 8, Cochin, India, Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute, 125 p
Cockerell, I., D. Halliday and D.J. Morgan, 1975 Quality control in the animal feedingstuffs manufacturing industry. London, Tropical Products Institute, (TPRI), Publication No. G 97:37 p
Coll Morales, J., 1983a Fabricacion de Piensos. In: Acuicultura Marina Animal. Madrid, Ediciones Mundi Prensa, pp. 414-32
Coll Morales, J., 1983b Distribucion del Alimento. In: Acuicultura Marina Animal. Madrid, Ediciones Mundi Prensa, pp. 432-48
Cook, H., 1978 Manual on pond culture of penaeid shrimp. Manila, South China Sea Fisheries Development and Coordinating Programme, ASEAN 77 SHR/CUL 3:132 p
Corbin, J.S., M.M. Fujimoto and T.Y. Iwai, 1983 Feeding practices and nutritional considerations for Macrobrachium rosenbergii culture in Hawaii. In: J.P. McVey and J.R. Moore (Eds.), CRC Handbook of Mariculture, Volume I: Crustacean Aquaculture, Boca Raton, Florida, CRC Press, Inc., pp. 391-412
Cowey, C.B., A.M. Mackie and J.G. Bell, 1985 Nutrition and Feeding in Fish. London, Academic Press, 489 p
Csavas, I., F. Majores and L. Varndi, 1979 Technology of pellet feed manufacturing for warmwater fishes in the experimental fish feed mill of the Fish Culture Research Institute, Szarvas, Hungary. In: J.E. Halver and K. Tiews (Eds.), Finfish Nutrition and Fishfeed Technology, Volume II. Berlin, Heenemann Verlagsgesellschaft mbH, pp. 75-85
Davies, S.J., 1985 The role of dietary fibre in fish nutrition. In: J.F. Muir and R.J. Roberts (Eds.), Recent Advances in Aquaculture, Vol. 2. London, Croom Helm, pp. 219-49
Devaraj, K.V. and G.Y. Keshavappa, 1980 The use of poultry droppings as an ingredient in fish feeds. In: D.J. Macintosh (Ed.), Proceedings of the Seminar on Some Aspects of Inland Aquaculture in Karnataka, Mangalore, Karnataka, 14-15 July, 1980. Stirling, Institute of Aquaculture, University of Stirling, pp. 87-93
Devendra, C., 1981 Non-conventional feed resources in Asia and the Far East. Bangkok, FAO, FAO APHCA Publication No. 2:99 p
Deyoe, C.W., 1976 Feed formulation fundamentals. In: H.B. Pfost and D. Pickering (Eds.), Feed Manufacturing Technology. Virginia 22200, USA, American Feed Manufacturers Association, pp. 34-45
Dhamrongrat, S. and P. Kasesunchi, 1981 Feeds for catfish (Clarias batrachus) fry. Rome, FAO, Working Paper No. THA/75/012/WP 11: 10 p.
Dia, A.K. and J.Z. Oteme, 1986 Étude de la qualité de l'aliment et de la densité sur le taux de survie des alevins de Chrysichthys nigrodigitatus. In: E.A. Huisman (Ed.), Aquaculture Research in the Africa Region. Wageningen, Netherlands, Pudoc, pp. 169-74
Disney, J.G. and V. James (Eds.), 1980 Fish Silage Production and its Use. Rome, Italy, FAO Fisheries Report No. 230, 105 p
Disney, J.G. et al., 1978 Development of a fish silage/carbohydrate animal feed for use in the tropics. Tropical Science, 20(2):129-44
Edwards, D.J., 1978 Salmon and Trout Farming in Norway. Farnham, England, Fishing News Books Ltd., 195 p
Edwards, P., 1982 Lecture notes on utilization of animal and plant wastes. In: Report of consultancy at the Regional Lead Centre for Integrated Fish Culture, 1981 Wuxi, The People's Republic of China, October 12 - November 22, Rome, FAO, pp. 87-120
EIFAC, 1971 Salmon and Trout Feeds and Feeding. Rome, FAO, EIFAC Technical Paper No. 12 (EIFAC/T12):29 p
FAO and USDA, 1982 Food composition tables for the Near East. Rome, FAO, FAO Food and Nutrition Paper 26, 265 p
Foltz, J.W., 1982 A feeding guide for single cropped catfish (Ictalurus punctatus). Journal of the World Mariculture Society, 13:274-81
Frey, D.G., Bionomics of natural fish populations: Feeding. In; Lectures 1960 presented at the 3rd International Fisheries Training Centre, Bogor, Indonesia, October 31 - December 12, 1955, Volume I., Rome, FAO, 6 p
Gaudet, J.-L. (Ed.), 1967 Symposium on feeding in trout and salmon culture. Rome, FAO, EIFAC Technical Paper (3):94 p
Gaudet, J.-L., 1971 Report of the 1970 Workshop on Fish Feed Technology and Nutrition, Warmwater Fish Cultural Laboratories, Stuttgart, Arkansas, USA, 7-19 September, 1970. Washington, D.C., US Government Printing Office, EIFAC/Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife Resource Publication 102:207 p
George, T.T., 1976 Observations on the growth of Tilapia nilotica in tropical freshwater fish ponds treated with different fertilizers. In: Symposium on Aquaculture in Africa, Accra, Ghana, 30 September - 2 October, 1975. Rome, FAO, CIFA Technical Paper 4 (Suppl.):625-41
Göhl, B., Tropical Feeds, Rome, 1981 FAO, FAO Animal Production and Health Series No. 12: 529 p
Halver, J.E. (Ed.), 1972 Fish Nutrition. New York, Academic Press, 490 p
Halver, J.E., 1978 Hungarian People's Republic: Fish Nutrition Consultancy. Rome, FAO, Report No. FI:HUN/71/512/5:8 p
Halver, J.E., 1982 Hungary: Fish Nutrition and Diet Development. Rome, FAO, FI:DP/HUN/79/001 Field Document 3, 10 p
Hardy, R., 1980 Fish Feed Formulation. In: ADCP (Eds.), Fish Feed Technology. Rome, FAO, ADCP/REP/80/11:233-39
Harris, L.E. et al., 1980 International feed descriptions, international feed names and country feed names. Logan, Utah, Utah State University, International Network of Feed Information Centers Publication 5:543 p
Hastings, W.H., 1971 Study of pelleted fish foods stability in water. In: J.-L. Gaudet, (Ed.), Report of the 1970 Workshop on Fish Feed Technology and Nutrition, Warmwater Fish Cultural Laboratories, Stuttgart, Arkansas, USA, 7-19 September, 1970. Washington, D.C., US Government Printing Office, EIFAC/Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife Resource Publication 102: pp.75-80
Hastings, W.H., 1973 Projet Regional de Recherche et de Formation Piscicoles (Cameroun-Republique Centrafricaine-Gabon-Republique du Congo): Experiences relatives a la preparation d'aliments des poissons et a leur alimentation. Rome, FAO, FI:DP/RAF/66/051/1:24 p
Hastings, W.H., 1975 Preliminary testing of artificial feeds manufactured from local ingredients for milkfish and shrimp. Rome, FAO, FI:DP/INS/72/003/2:12 p
Hastings, W.H., 1979 Fish Nutrition and Fish Feed Manufacture. In: T.V.R. Pillay and W.A. Dill (Eds.), Advances in Aquaculture, Farnham, England, Fishing News Books Ltd., pp. 568-73
Heath, O.V.S., 1970 Investigation by experiment. London, Edward Arnold (Publishers) Ltd., The Institute of Biology's Studies in Biology No. 23:74 p
Heinen, J.M., 1981 Evaluation of some binding agents for crustacean diets. Progressive Fish-Culturist, 43(3):142-5
Hepher, B. and Y. Prugenin, 1981 Commercial Fish Farming, with special reference to fish culture in Israel. New York, John Wiley & Sons, 261 p
Hew, M. and G. Cuzon, 1982 The use of semi-purified diet to study the effect of lysine, arginine, and their ratio on the growth of Penaeus japonicus juveniles. Journal of the World Mariculture Society, 13:154-6
Hickling, C.F., 1962 Fish Culture. London, Faber and Faber, 317 p
Hopkins, K.D. and E.M. Cruz, 1982 The ICLARM-CLSU integrated animal-fish farming project: final report. Nueva Ecija, Philippines, International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management, Manila and the Freshwater Aquaculture Center, Cental Luzon State University, ICLARM Technical Report 5:96 p
Hubbell, C.H., 1984 Feedstuffs Analysis Table. Feedstuffs, USA
Jackson, A.J., A.K. Kerr and C.B. Cowey, 1984 Fish silage as a dietary ingredient for salmon, I: Nutritional and storage characteristics. Aquaculture, 38:211-20
Jacob, T., 1982 Designing fish and shellfish nutrition experiments. In: Manual of research methods for fish and shellfish nutrition (Chapter 14). Cochin, India, Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute, CMFRI Special Publication No. 8:99-110
Jauncey, K., 1982 Carp (Cyprinus carpio) Nutrition - A review. In; J.F. Muir and R.J. Roberts (Eds.), Recent Advances in Aquaculture, London, Croom Helm, pp 217-63
Jauncey, K. and B. Ross, 1982 A guide to Tilapia feeds and feeding. Scotland, Institute of Aquaculture, University of Stirling, 111 p
Kafuku, T. and H. Ikenoue, 1983 Modern Methods of Aquaculture in Japan, Amsterdam, Elsevier, Developments in Aquaculture and Fisheries Science, 11:216 p
Kanazawa, A., 1984 Feed formulation for penaeid shrimp, sea bass, grouper, and rabbit fish culture in Malaysia. Rome, FAO, FI:DP/MAL/77/008 Field Document 2: pp. 61-78
Kannan, K., et al., 1981 Statistical Analyses. In: M.H. Ravindranath (Ed.) Manual of research methods for crustacean biochemistry and physiology (Chapter IV). Cochin, India, Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute, CMFRI Special Publication No. 7:149-73
Karim, M., 1986 Brackishwater shrimp culture demonstration in Bangladesh. Madras, India, FAO/SIDA, BOBP/REP/35:44 p
Kavalec, J., 1976 Effects of fertilization and food on the pond production of tilapia in Zambia. In: Symposium on Aquaculture in Africa, Accra, Ghana, 30 September - 2 October, 1975. FAO, Rome, CIFA Technical Paper 4 (Suppl. 1):642-58
Kennedy, W.A., 1978 A Handbook on rearing pan-size Pacific Salmon using floating sea-pens. Fisheries Marine Services Industrial Report (Canada), 107:111 p
Kim, Y.C., 1981 Economics of feeding fish. In: The role of feeds in the aquaculture industry. Bangkok, Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia, NACA/TR/81/3:15-24
Kutsky, R.J., 1981 Handbook of Vitamins, Minerals and Hormones (2nd Edition), New York, Van Nostrand Reinhold Company, 492 p
Lee, J.S., 1981 Commercial Catfish Farming. Danille, Illinois, The Interstate Printers & Publishers, Inc., 310 p
Leopold, M., 1981 The effect of feeding and fertilization on the economics of fish culture. In: Problems of fish culture economics with special reference to carp culture in Eastern Europe. Rome, FAO, EIFAC Technical Paper No. 40 (EIFAC/T40):57-69
Leung, W.-T.W., 1968 F. Busson and C. Jardin, Food composition table for use in Africa. FAO, Rome, 306 p
Lightner, D.V., 1984 A review of the diseases of cultured penaeid shrimps and prawns with emphasis on recent discoveries and developments. In: Y. Taki, J.H. Primavera and J.A. Llobrera (Eds.), Proceedings of the First International Conference on the Culture of Penaeid Prawns/Shrimps, Iloilo City, Philippines. Iloilo, SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department, pp. 79-105
Lovell, R.T., 1975 Laboratory manual for fish feed analysis and fish nutrition studies. Alabama, Auburn University, Department of Fisheries and Allied Aquacultures, International Center for Aquaculture, Auburn University, 63 p
MacBain, R., Pelleting - before and after the die. Singapore, CPM/Pacific (no date) (Pte) Ltd., 59 p
MacBain, R., Pellet Mill Operators' Manual. Singapore, CPM/Pacific (Pte) (no date) Ltd., 26 p
Mackie, A.M. and A.I. Mitchell, 1985 Identification of gustatory feeding stimulants for fish: applications in aquaculture. In: C.B. Cowey, A.M. Mackie and J.G. Bell (Eds.), Nutrition and Feeding in Fish, London, Academic Press, pp. 177-89
Malik, M.Y. and M.I.D. Chughtai, 1979 Chemical composition and nutritive value of indigenous feedstuffs. Pakistan, Lahore, Pakistan Association for the Advancement of Science, 69 p
Manik, R., 1976 Preliminary studies on the effect of different pelletized formulated feeds on the growth of Macrobrachium rosenbergii-Bulletin of the Shrimp Culture Research Centre, Jepara, Indonesia, II (1 & 2):187-93
Manik, R., I.S. Djunaidah and B. 1980 Tiensongrusmee, The survival and growth of the post-larval tiger shrimp, Penaeus monodon, reared in the laboratory with formulated feed. Bulletin of the Brackishwater Aquaculture Development Centre, Jepara, Indonesia, VI(1 & 2):422-7
Manik, R., K. Mintardjo and S. Adisukresno, 1977 Potential protein sources of supplementary feeds formulated for shrimp and prawns in Jepara. Bulletin of the Brackishwater Aquaculture Development Centre, 111(1 & 2):223-6
Marek, M., 1975 Revision of supplementary feeding tables for pond fish. Bamidgeh, 27(3):57-64
Mason, T.R., 1976 Formulated of diets by hand. In: P.V. Fonnesbeck, L.E. Harris, and L.C. Kearl (Eds.), Proceedings of the First International Symposium on Feed Composition, Animal Nutrient Requirements, and Computerization of Diets, July 11-16, 1976, USA, Utah State University, pp. 743-8
McVey, J.P., 1983 CRC Handbook of Mariculture, Volume I: Crustacean Aquaculture. Boca Raton, Florida, CRC Press Inc., 442 p
Meriwether, F.H., 1986 An inexpensive demand feeder for cage-reared tilapia. The Progressive Fish-Culturist, 48:226-8
Meyers, S.P., 1977 Israel: Nutrition of marine fish in the region of Elat, Israel. A report prepared for the Development of Marine Farming Project. Rome, FAO, Report No. FI:ISR/73/003/4:18 p
Meyers, S.P., 1977, Indonesia: Development of feed and feed fabrication procedures for shrimp/prawn. Rome, FAO, Draft report produced for project INS/72/003, 22 p
Meyers, S.P., 1987a Aquaculture feeds and chemo-attractants. INFOFISH Marketing Digest 1/87:35-7
Meyers, S.P., 1987b Indonesia: Feed Formulation, Equipment and Training. Rome, FAO, FI:DP/INS/81/008, Field Document 1:26 p
Miller, J.W., 1976 Fertilization and feeding practices in warm-water pond fish culture in Africa. In: Symposium on Aquaculture in Africa, Accra, Ghana, 30 September - 2 October, 1975. Rome, FAO, CIFA Technical Paper 4 (Suppl. 1):512-41
Millikin, M.R., 1982 Qualitative and quantitative nutrient requirements of fishes: a review. Fishery Bulletin, 80(4):655-86
Minsaas, J., 1978 Use of distillers by-products for salmonid feed. In: C.M.R. Pastakia (Ed.), Report of the Proceedings of the Conference on Fishfarming and Wastes, 4-5 January, 1978, London. Institute of Fisheries Management and Society of Chemical Industry, pp. 22-35
Muller, Z.O., 1980 Feed from animal wastes: state of knowledge. Rome, FAO, FAO Animal Production and Health Paper 18:190 p
NAS, 1969 United States-Canadian Tables of Feed Composition. Washington, DC, National Academy of Sciences, NAS Publication 1984:92 p
NAS, 1971 Atlas of Nutritional Data on United States and Canadian Feeds, Washington DC, National Academy of Sciences, 772 p
New, M.B., 1976 A review of dietary studies with shrimp and prawns. Aquaculture, 9:101-44
New, M.B., 1980 A bibliography of shrimp and prawn nutrition. Aquaculture, 21:101-28
New, M.B., 1986a Aquaculture diets of post-larval marine fish of the super-family Percoidae, with special reference to sea bass, sea breams, groupers and yellowtail: a review. Kuwait Bulletin of Marine Science, 7:75-151
New, M.B., 1986b Malaysia: Feeds for seabass and tiger prawns. A report prepared for the Institutional Support for Majuikan Aquaculture Development Project. Rome, FAO, FI:DP/MAL/79/018 Field Document 2, 64 p
New, M.B. and S. Singholka, 1982 Freshwater Prawn Farming: a manual for the culture of Macrobrachium rosenbergii. Rome, FAO, FAO Fisheries Technical Paper (225) Rev.1:118 p (also published in French and Spanish)
New, M.B., K.D. Hopkins and S. El-Dakour, 1984 Effects of feeding frequency on survival and growth of tilapia fry. Kuwait, Kuwait Institute for Scientific Research, KISR 1287:8 p
Nosho, T., (Ed.), 1981 Salmon Broodstock Maturation. Proceedings of Workshop held at Seattle, Washington, May 20-22, 1980 and March 11, 1981, University of Washington, Seattle, USA, 92 p
NRC, 1973 Nutrient requirements of trout, salmon and catfish (Nutrient requirements of domestic animals). Washington, D.C., National Academy Press, 11:57 p
NRC, 1981 Nutrient requirements of coldwater fishes (Nutrient requirements of domestic animals). Washington, D.C., National Academy Press, 16:63 p
NRC, 1983 Nutrient requirements of warmwater fishes and shellfishes. Washington, D.C., National Academy Press, 102 p
Oduro-Boateng, F., 1986 Studies on the feeding of Tilapia discolor in floating cages in Lake Bosomtwi (Ghana). In; E.A. Huisman (Ed.), Aquaculture Research in the Africa Region. Wageningen, Netherlands, Pudoc, pp 115-22
Orme, L.E., Trout feed formulation and development. 1971 In: J.-L. Gaudet (Ed.), Report of the 1970 Workshop on Fish Feed Technology and Nutrition, Warmwater Fish Cultural Laboratories, Stuttgart, Arkansas, USA, 7-19 September, 1970. Washington, DC, US Government Printing Office, EIFAC/Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife Resource Publication 102:172-92
Parker, R.E., 1979 Introductory Statistics for Biology. London, Edward Arnold (Publishers) Ltd. The Institute of Biology's Studies in Biology No. 43:122 p
Pfost, H.B. and D. Pickering, 1976 Feed Manufacturing Technology. Arlington, Virginia, American Feed Manufacturers Association Inc., 574 p
Phillips, A.M., Trout Feeds and Feeding. Manual of Fish Culture, Part 3: 1970 Management, Section B, Hatchery Operations, Chapter 5. US Department of the Interior. Washington DC, US Government Printing Office, 49 p
Pillay, T.V.R., (Ed.), 1967 Proceedings of the FAO World Symposium on Warm-water Pond Fish Culture. Rome, FAO, FAO Fisheries Report No. 44 Vol. 3 (FIR/R44.3(Tri):423 p
Piper, R.G., et al., Fish Hatchery Management. Washington DC, 1982 US Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service, 517 p
Pullin, R.S.V. and R.H. Lowe-McConnell, 1982 (Eds.), The Biology and Culture of Tilapias. Manila, ICLARM, ICLARM Conference Proceedings 7:432 p
Ralston Purina, 1974 Purina Catfish Book. St. Louis, Missouri, Ralston Purina Co., 21 p
Ravindranath, M.H., (Ed.), 1981 Manual of research methods for crustacean biochemistry and physiology. Cochin, India, Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute, CMFRI Special Publication No. 7:170 p
Robinette, H.R., 1977 Feed manufacture. In: R.R. Stickney and R.T. Lovell (Eds.), Nutrition and Feeding of Channel Catfish. Southern Cooperative Series Bulletin (USA) 218:44-9
Robinson, R.A., 1971 The what, how and why of pelleting. In: J.-L. Gaudet (Ed.), Report of the 1970 Workshop on Fish Feed Technology and Nutrition, Warmwater Fish Cultural Laboratories, Stuttgart, Arkansas, USA, 7-19 September, 1970. Washington, DC, US Government Printing Office, EIFAC/Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife Resource Publication 102:43-63
Rumsey, G.L., W.H. Gutemann and D.J. Lisk, 1981Cement kiln dust as an additive in the diets of rainbow trout. Progressive Fish-Culturist, 43(2):88-90
Sadiq, M.M. and C.B. Seng, 1982 Indigenous feedstuffs commonly used in poultry feeds. Karachi, Sind, Directorate of Poultry Production and Research, 31 p
Salevan, J.F., 1981 An evaluation of five types of binders for use in the artificial diet of young American eels. Paper presented at the 12th Annual Meeting of the World Mariculture Society, Seattle, Washington, 8-10 March, 1981
Sanderude, K.G., 1971 Excerpts from Extrusion Cooking Principles and their application for snack food, meats, and other products. In: J.-L. Gaudet, (Ed.), Report of the 1970 Workshop on Fish Feed Technology and Nutrition, Warmwater Fish Cultural Laboratories, Stuttgart, Arkansas, USA, 7-19 September, 1970. Washington DC, US Government Printing Office, EIFAC/Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife Resource Publication 102:68-70
Sedgwick, S.D., 1982The salmon handbook. London, Andre Deutsch, 247 p
Sen, P.R. and D.K. Chatterjee, 1979 Increased production of major Indian carp fry by the addition of growth promoting substances. In: J.E. Halver and K. Tiews (Eds.), Finfish Nutrition and Fishfeed Technology, Volume I, Berlin, Heenemann Verlagsgesellschaft mbH, pp 189-95
Shepherd, A.J., J.L. Iverson and J.L. Weihrauch, 1978 Composition of selected dietary fats, oils, margarines and butter. In: A. Kuksis (Ed.), Fatty Acids and Glycerides. Oxford, Plenum Press, pp 341-79
Simmons, N.O., 1963 Feed milling and associated subjects. London, Leonard Hill (Books) Ltd.
Smith, L.S., 1980 Digestion in teleost fishes. In: ADCP (Eds.) Fish Feed Technology, Rome, FAO, ADCP/REP/80/11:3-18
Smith, R.R. and G.L. Rumsey, 1976 Nutrient utilization by fish. In: P.V. Fonnesbeck, L.E. Harris and L.C. Kearl (Eds.), Proceedings of the First International Symposium on Feed Composition, Animal Nutrient Requirements, and Computerization of Diets, July 11-16, 1976, Utah, Utah State University, pp 320-26
Srissuwantach, V., R. Soungchomphan and P. Sitasit, 1981 Comparison of the effects of trash fish and pelleted diets in Clarias grow-out operations. Rome, FAO, THA/75/012/WP 15:21 p
Stanton, W.R., and Quee Lan Yeoh, 1977 Low salt fermentation method for conserving trash fish under SE Asian conditions. In: Proceedings of the Conference on the Handling, Processing and Marketing of Tropical Fish. London, Tropical Products Institute, pp 277-82
Stevenson, J.P., 1980 Trout Farming Manual. Farnham, England, Fishing News Books Ltd.. 186 p
Stickney, R.R., 1979 Feeds, Nutrition and Growth. In: Principles of Warmwater Aquaculture, New York, John Wiley & Sons, pp 161-221
Stivers, T.E., 1971 Feed manufacturing. In: J.-L. Gaudet (Ed.), Report of the 1970 Workshop on Fish Feed Technology and Nutrition, Warmwater Fish Cultural Laboratories, Stuttgart, Arkansas, USA, 7-19 September, 1970. Washington, DC, US Government Printing Office, EIFAC/Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife Resource Publication 102:14-42
Szumiec, J., 1977 Principles of applying pelleted foods in intensive carp farming. In: J. Olah, I. Osengeri and M. Turi (Eds.), International Seminary on Fish Nutrition and Diet Development, 19-24 September, 1977, Szarvas, Hungary, pp 155-69
Tacon, A., 1981 The possible substitution of fish meal in fish diets. In: P.J. Landless (Convenor), Proceedings of the Fish Farming Meeting, Oban, 1981. Scottish Marine Biological Association and the Highlands and Islands Development Board, pp 46-56
Tacon, A.J., and M. Beveridge, 1981 Analysis of NIFI Clarias Diet No. 12. Rome, FAO, THA/75/012/WP 12:6 p
Tacon, A.G.J., 1985 Nutritional fish pathology. Rome, FAO, ADCP/REP/85/22:33 p
Tacon, A.G.J., 1986a Aquaculture feeding options and choice of feeding strategy. Paper presented at 1st Inter-American Congress of Aquaculture, September 14-21, 1986, Salvador, Brazil, 17 p
Tacon, A.G.J., 1986b Papua New Guinea: Development of carp feeds. Rome, FAO, FI:TCP/PNG/4503 Field Document 3:42 p
Tacon, A.G.J. and C.B. Cowey, 1985 Protein and amino acid requirements. In: P. Tytler and P. Calow (Eds.), Fish Energetics: New Perspectives, London, Groom Helm, pp 155-183
Tacon, A.G.J. and A.J. Jackson, 1985 Utilization of conventional and unconventional protein sources in practical fish feeds. In: C.B. Cowey, A.M. Mackie and J.G. Bell (Eds.), Nutrition and Feeding in Fish, London, Academic Press, pp 119-45
Taechajanta, K. and P. Sitasit, 1981 Assessment of a vitamin and mineral premix in an artificial feed for pla duk oui (Clarias macrocephalus). Rome, FAO, THA/75/012/WP 12:6 p
Thomson, D.B., 1979 Intermediate technology and alternative energy systems for small-scale fisheries. Manila, South China Sea Fisheries Development and Coordinating Programme, SCS/79/WP/87:69 p
Vincke, M., 1969 Compte-rendu d'activité année. Division des Recherches 1969 Piscicoles, Centre Technique Forestier Tropical, Tananarive, Madagascar, 30 p
Vincke, M.M.J., 1976 La rizipisciculture et les élevages associes en Afrique. In: Symposium on Aquaculture in Africa, Accra, Ghana, 30 September-2 October 1975. Rome, FAO, CIFA Technical Paper 4 (Suppl. 1):659-707
Viola, S. and Y. Arieli, 1982 Nutrition studies with a high-protein pellet for carp and Sarotherodon spp (Tilapia). Bamidgeh, 34(2);39-46
Viola, S. and Y. Arieli, 1983 Evaluation of different grains as basic ingredients in complete feeds for carp and tilapia in intensive culture. Bamidgeh, 35(2):38-43
Viola, S., et al., 1981 Experiments in the nutrition of carp: replacement of fishmeal by soybean meal. Bamidgeh, 33(2):35-49
Viola, S., et al., 1982 Partial and complete replacement of fishmeal by soybean meal for intensive culture of carp. Aquaculture, 26:223-36
Viveen, W.J.A.R., et al., 1985 Practical manual for the culture of the African catfish (Clarias gariepinus). Wageningen, Netherlands, University of Wageningen, 121 p
Williams, M.A., 1986 The preparation of floating and sinking fishfeeds by extrusion. INFOFISH Marketing Digest 4/86:43-44
Winfree, R.A., 1979 Feeds and Catfish Feeding. In: Proceedings of the 1979 Fish Farming Conference and Annual Convention, Catfish Farmers of Texas, 17-19 January, 1979, Texas A & M University, Texas, USA, pp 94-101
Woynarovitch, E., 1975 Elementary guide to fish culture in Nepal. Rome, FAO, 131 p
Woynarovitch, E. and W.W. Kuhnhold, 1979 Report of consultancy to Penang, Malaysia, regarding animal waste management problem. Manila, South China Sea Fisheries Development and Coordinating Programme, SCS/79/WP/86:59 p
Wright, N.A. and D.H.S. Kenmuir, 1981 The economics of fish culture: a survey of costs associated with tilapia (Sarotherodon mossambicus) production. Zimbabwe Agricultural Journal, 78(4):151-65
Yang, W.T., 1979 Indonesia: Shrimp Culture Research. Rome, FAO, FI:DP/INS/72/003/7:34 p
<section>g</section>
APPENDIX I: EXAMPLES OF VITAMIN AND MINERAL MIXES
The following appendix contains the composition of the premixes used in the formulae in Appendix II:
Mineral Mix No. 1 (Trout, Carp, Tilapia and Catfish)
Ingredient
mg/g of Premix 1/
Fe
Cu
Co
Mn
Zn
I
Se
Source: Chow, 1982c
1/To be used at 0.1% in diet
Mineral Mix No. 2 (Catfish) 2/
2/Siluris sp.
Ingredient
Amount (g) 3/
Calcium Carbonate
MnSO[4] H[2]O
ZNSO[4] 7H[2]O
CuSO[4] 5H[2]O
FeSO[4] 7H[2]O
KI or KIO[4]
Na H[2] PO[4]
MgSO[4]
NaCI
Source: Halver, 1982
3/Premix to be used at 1.2% in moist diet
Mineral Mix No. 3 (Trout)
Ingredient
g/kg of premix 1/
ZnSO[4]
FeSO[4] 7H[2]O
CuSO[4]
MnSO[4]
KIO[3]
Inert Carrier
Source: Piper et al., 1982
1/To be used at 0.1% in diet
Mineral Mix No. 4 (Indian Carps)
Ingredient
ppm in final diet 2/
CuSO[4] 5H[2]O
Cu = 10
FeSO[4] 7H[2]O
Fe = 100
MnSO[4] H[2]O
Mn = 50
ZnO
Zn = 50
CaCI[2] 6H[2]O
Co = 0.05
KI
I = 0.1
CaHPO[4]
(Filler)
Source: Chow, 1982
2/When mineral mix used at 0.1% of diet
Mineral Mix No. 5 (Tilapia)
Ingredient
For Use For Diets For Fish in Freshwater
(g/kg premix) 3/
For Use For Diets For Fish in Seawater
(g/kg premix) 4/
CaHPO[4] 2H[2]O
MgSO[4] 7H[2]O
NaCl
KCl
FeSO[4] 7H[2]O
ZnSO[4] 7H[2]O
MnSO[4] H[2]O
CuSO[4] 7H[2]O
CoSO[4] 7H[2]O
Ca(IO[3]) 6H[2]O
CrCl[3] 6H[2]O
1 000.0000 g
1 000.00 g
Source: Jauncey and Ross, 1982
3/To be used at 4% in diet
4/To be used at 1% in diet
Vitamin (and Mineral) Mix No. 1 (Warm-Water Fish)
Ingredient
mg/kg of dry diet
Vitamin A
6 000 I.U.
Vitamin D[3]
1 000 I.U.
Vitamin E
60 I.U.
Vitamin K
Vitamin C
Vitamin B[1]
Vitamin B[2]
Panthothenic acid
Niacin
Vitamin B[6]
Biotin
Folic acid
Choline Chloride
Vitamin B[12]
Fe
Cu
Mn
Zn
I
Co
Se
Source: Chow, 1982a
Vitamin (and Mineral) Mix No. 2 (Rabbit Fish, Sea Bass and Grouper)
Ingredient
mg/kg of dry diet
Thiamin HCl
Vitamin B[2]
Pyridoxine HCl
Nicotinic Acid
Calcium Pantothenate
Folic Acid
Biotin
Vitamin B[12]
Inositol
Choline Chloride
Sodium Ascorbate
Vitamin E
Vitamin K
Vitamin A
5 000 I.U.
Vitamin D
1 000 I.U.
Zn
Mn
Cu
I
Co
Vitamin Mix No. 3 (Freshwater Prawns, Marine Shrimp and Sea Bass)
Ingredient
mg/g of premix 1/
Vitamin A
500 I.U.
Vitamin D[3]
100 I.U.
Vitamin B[1]
Vitamin B[2]
Pyridoxine
Vitamin B[12]
Nicotinic Acid
Calcium Pantothenate
Folic Acid
Vitamin K
Vitamin C
Source: Chow, 1984
1/ Used at various amounts in diet according to species
Vitamin Mix No. 4 (Marine Shrimp)
Ingredient
mg/kg of dry diet
Thiamin HCl
Vitamin B[2]
Pyridoxine HCl
Nicotinic Acid
Calcium Pantothenate
Folic Acid
Biotin
Vitamin B[12]
Inositol
Choline Chloride
Sodium Ascorbate (Vit. C)
Vitamin E
Vitamin K
Vitamin A
5 000 I.U.
Vitamin D
1 000 I.U.
Source: Kanazawa, 1984
Vitamin Mix No. 5 (Trout, Carp, Tilapia and Catfish)
Ingredient
mg/g of Premix 1/
Vitamin A
1 000 I.U.
Vitamin D[3]
200 I.U.
Vitamin E
10 I.U.
Vitamin K
Vitamin B[1]
Vitamin B[2]
Pantothenic Acid
Niacin
Pyridoxine
Biotin
Folic Acid
Vitamin C
Choline Chloride
Vitamin B
Ethoxyquin
Source: Chow, 1982c
1/To be used at 0.6% in the diet
Vitamin Mix No. 6 (Catfish) 2/
2/Silurus sp.
Ingredient
mg/kg premix 3/
Vitamin A
100 000 I.U.
Vitamin D[3]
50 000 I.U.
Vitamin E
1 000 I.U.
Vitamin K (Menadione)
Vitamin C
Biotin
Choline
Folic Acid
Niacin
Pantotheic Acid
Pyridoxine
Vitamin B[2]
Vitamin B[1]
Inositol
Vitamin B[12]
BHT
or Ethoxyquin
or 5 000
Add Maize or Wheat
to 1 000 g
Source: Halver, 1982
3/To be used at 0.8% in the diet
Vitamin Mix Nos. 7 (Oregon Salmon) 1/and 8 (Trout)
1/Pacific salmon
Ingredient
Amount per kg of Premix
No.7 2/
No.8 3/
Vitamin A
1 653 000l.U.
Vitamin D
110 200l.U.
Vitamin E
33 501 I.U.
88 160 I.U.
Vitamin K (sodium bisulphite)
1 201.12 mg
2 755.00 mg
Vitamin C
59.51 g
165.30 g
Biotin
39.67 mg
88.20 mg
Vitamin B
3.97 mg
5.51 mg
Folic Acid
848.50 mg
2 204.00 mg
Inositol
17.63 g
g
Niacin
12.56 g
55.10 g
D-Calcium pantothenate
7.05 g
26.45 g
Pyridoxine HCl
1 179.10 mg
7 714.00 mg
Vitamin B[2]
3.53 g
13.22 g
Vitamin B[1] (mono nitrate)
1 714.70 mg
8 816.00 mg
Add Cereal Carrier
Source: Piper et al., 1982.
2/To be used at 1.5% in diet
3/To be used at 0.4% in diet
Vitamin Mix No. 9 (Indian Carps)
Ingredient
mg/kg of Diet 4/
Vitamin A
5 000 I.U.
Vitamin D
600 I.U.
Vitamin B[1]
Vitamin B[2]
Pantothenic Acid
Niacin
Vitamin C
Source: Chow, 1982a
4/When vitamin mix used at 0.1% of diet
Vitamin Mix No. 10 (Tilapia)
Ingredient
Amount in g/kg Premix 1/
Vitamin B[1]
Vitamin B[2]
Vitamin B[6]
Pantothenic Acid
Inositol
Biotin
Folic Acid
Para aminobenzoic Acid
Choline
Niacin
Vitamin B[12]
Vitamin A
100 000 I.U.
Vitamin E
Vitamin K
Vitamin C
Vitamin D[3]
500 000 I.U.
Source: Jauncey and Ross, 1982
1/To be used at 2% in the diet
Vitamin Mix No. 11 (Marine Percoidae) 2/(Provisional)
2/Yellowtail, sea bass, sea bream, grouper
Ingredient
mg/kg dry diet
Vitamin A
6 000 I.U.
Vitamin B[1]
Vitamin B[2]
Vitamin B[6]
Vitamin B[12]
Folic Acid
Inositol
Niacin
Pantothenic Acid
Vitamin C
Choline
Vitamin D
2 500 I.U.
Vitamin E
Biotin
Vitamin K
Source: New, 1986a
Vitamin Mix No. 12 (Sea bass, grouper and siganids)
Ingredient
mg/kg dry diet
Vitamin A
5 000 I.U.
Vitamin B[1]
Vitamin B[2] (Thiamin HCl)
Vitamin B[6] (Pyridoxine HCl) H[2]O
Vitamin B[12 ]
Folic acid
Inositol
Niacin
Calcium pantothenate
Vitamin C (Sodium ascorbate)
Choline HCl
Vitamin D
1 000 I.U.
Vitamin E (Tocopherol)
Biotin
Vitamin K. (Menadione)
Source: Meyers, 1987b
Vitamin/Trace Element Mix No. 13 (Common Carp)
Ingredient
mg/kg pelleted feed
Vitamin A
8 000 I.U.
Vitamin D
900 I.U.
Vitamin E
2 I.U.
Vitamin K
Vitamin B[2]
Niacin
Choline Chloride
Pantothenic Acid
Vitamin B[6]
Vitamin B[12]
Mn
Zn
Fe
Cu
I
Co
Source: Viola et al., 1982
Vitamin (and Mineral) Mix No. 14 (Freshwater Prawns)
Vitamin Mix
Amount/kg diet
Mineral Mix Amount/kg diet (mg)
Ingredient
Ingredient
Vitamin A
5 500.0 I.U.
Zinc oxide
Vitamin D
1 237.0 I.U.
Ferrous sulphate and
Vitamin E
4.1 I.U.
carbonate
Vitamin K
0.8 mg
Manganous oxide
Vitamin B[2]
3.3 mg
Ethylenediaminedihydroiodide
Pantothenic acid
4.9 mg
Niacin
24.7 mg
Cobalt sulphate
Choline chloride
67.1 mg
Sodium chloride
Vitamin B[12]
8.2 mg
Copper oxide
Folic acid
0.3 mg
Sodium selenite
Source: Corbin et al., 1983
<section>h</section>
APPENDIX II: EXAMPLES OF FORMULATIONS FOR AQUACULTURE SPECIES
1. Atlantic Salmon:
Wet Food Mixture
(UK)
Industrial Clupeid
Saithe Offal
White Fish Offal
Vitamin Meal 1/(Thiamin added)
Calculated analysis: 23.3% cl; 47.8 cp; 21.7% carbohydrate, on dry matter basis.
Source: Sedgwick, 1982
1/Composition unspecified. Includes 1% Carboxymethycellulose or Hydroxypropylmethylcellulose as binder.
2. Pacific Salmon:
Moist (Oregon) Starter Mash (%)
(USA)
Herring Meal
Wheat Germ Meal
Dried Whey
Vitamin Mix No. 7
Tuna Viscera
Turbot, Salmon viscera or Herring
Herring Oil
Choline Chloride
Source: Piper et al, 1982
3. Trout:
Dry Fingerling (PR 6) (%)
(USA)
Fish Meal (60% CP)
Soybean Meal
Maize Gluten Meal
Wheat Middlings
Dried Brewers Yeast
Dried Whey
Dried Fermentation Solubles
Alfalfa Meal
Soybean Oil
Vitamin Mix No. 8
Choline Chloride (50%)
Mineral Mix No. 3
Source: Piper et al., 1982
4. Rainbow Trout:
Moist Pellets (Solberg) (%)
(Denmark)
Raw Minced Industrial Fish
High-Fat Fish Meal
Extracted Soy Meal
Fish Oil (with 0.2% Raloquin Antioxidant)
Lecithin
Potassium Iodide
Sodium Chloride
Dicalcium Phosphate
Thiamin
Vitamin E
Alginate H 120 (Binder)
Source: Sedgwick, 1982
5. Trout:
Dry Fry/Fingerling Feed (%)
(Mexico)
Extruded Whole Soybeans
Fish Meal
Maize Gluten
DL-Methionine
L-Lysine
Vitamin Premix No. 5
Mineral Premix No. 1
Source: Chow, 1982c
6. Channel Catfish:
Dry Pellets (%)
(USA)
Menhaden Fish Meal (60% CP)
Blood Meal (80% CP)
Feather Meal
Ext. Soybean Meal
Dec. Cottonseed Meal
Dried Distillers Solubles
Rice Bran
Wheat Shorts
Dehydrated Alfalfa (17% CP)
Iodized Salt
Vitamin Premix 1/
Source: Lee, 1981
1/Details not available
7. Channel Catfish:
32% Protein Extruded Dry Pellet 2/
(USA)
(% of diet)
(% of diet)
Menhaden Fish Meal
Soybean Meal (48% CP)
Soybean Meal (44% CP)
Corn (Maize)
Rice Bran or Wheat Middlings
Meat and Bone Meal
Dried Whey
Dicalcium Phosphate
Trace Mineral and Vitamin Mix 3/
N.S. 4/
Organic Pellet Binder
Fat 3/ (Sprayed After Pelleting)
Trace Mineral Mix 3/
Vitamin Mix 3/
Coated Vitamin C
Source: NRC, 1983
2/Diets do not add to 100%
3/Details not specified
4/Amount unspecified
8. Catfish (Clarias & Ophicephalus spp):
Dry Diet(%)
(Thailand)
Fish meal
Rice Bran
Peanut Meal
Alpha Starch
Fish Oil
Vitamin/Mineral Premix 1/
Basfin (Binder)
Source: Tacon and Beveridge, 1981
1/Details not available
9. Brackishwater catfish
(Chrysichthys nigrodigitatus)
Fry Feed (%)
(Côte d'Ivoire)
Fish meal
Wheat Bran
Maize Meal
Cottonseed Oil Cake
Soybean Oil Cake
Vitamin Mix 1/
Cod Liver Oil
Source: Dia and Oteme, 1986
1/Details not available
10. African catfish
(Clarias gariepinus)
Growers Diet (%)
(Central African Republic)
Dry Brewery Waste
Rice Bran
Maize
Cottonseed Oil Cake
Groundnut Cake
Sesame Oil Cake
Blood Meal
Vitamin/Mineral Mix 1/
Dicalcium phosphate
Bone Meal
Salt
Palm Oil
Source: Viveen et al., 1985
1/Details not available
11. Catfish (Silurus glanis):
Moist (%)
(Hungary)
Pasteurized Fish Flesh Waste
Wheat Mill Run
Reground Rice Bran
Maize
Distillers Dried Yeast
Vitamin Mix No. 6
Mineral Mix No. 2
Source: Halver, 1982
12. Common Carp, Channel Catfish & Tilapia spp:
Dry Growers Feed (%)
(Mexico)
Extruded Whole Soybeans
Sunflower Seed Meal
Maize Germ Meal
Sorghum
Wheat Bran
Molasses
Calcium orthophosphate
Limestone Powder
Vitamin Mix No. 5
Mineral Mix No. 1
Source: Chow, 1982c
13. Common Carp
Test Fry Diets
(Egypt)
(% Composition)
Imported Fish Meal (CP 70%)
Ext. Soybean Meal
Meat Meal (CP 45%)
Poultry by-products
Ext. Cottonseed Meal
Ext. Rice Bran
Maize
Maize Gluten Meal
Table Salt
L-Lysine
Vitamin Mix 1/
Source: Chow, 1982b
1/A poultry vitamin mix providing (per kg diet): A 5 000 I.U.; D[2] 600 I.U., B[1] 10 mg, B[2] 20 mg, Pantothenic acid 30 mg, Niacin 50 mg, Pyridoxine 2 mg, Vitamin C 200 mg.
14. Common Carp:
Pond Diet (25% CP) (%)
(Israel)
Menhaden Fish Meal
Soybean Meal (44% CP)
Wheat
Sorghum
DL-Methionine
Vitamin/Trace Element Mix No. 12
Source: Viola et al., 1982
15. Indian Carps:
Dry Fry Test Feed(%)
(India)
Groundnut Cake
Rice Bran
Dicalcium Phosphate
Table Salt
Mineral Mix No. 4
Vitamin Mix No. 9
Source: Chow, 1982a
16. Indian Carps:
Dry Fry Test Diet(%)
(India)
Groundnut Cake
Sesame Cake
Fish Meal
Rice Bran
Dicalcium Phosphate
Table Salt
Mineral Mix No. 4
Vitamin Mix No. 9
Source: Chow, 1982a
17. Indian Carps:
Pond Mixtures 1/ 2/
(Indian Sub-Continent)
Groundnut Oil Cake
or Cottonseed Oil Cake
or Rapeseed Oil Cake
Rice Polishings
or Rice Bran
Source: Author's observation
1/Not pelleted
2/Sen and Chatterjee (1979) reported that fry of rohu (Labeo rohita), mrigal (Cirrhinus mrigala) and Catla (Catla catla), fed a 1:1 mixture of groundnut oil cake and rice polishings grew better if a cobalt supplement of 0.01 mg/day/fish was presented, particularly in the case of rohu.
18. Common Carp and Tilapia Hybrids
(T. nilotica × T. aurea)
Dry Growers Pellets 3/(Israel)
' Standard' (%)
'High Protein' (%)
Fish Meal (CP 70%)
Sorghum Meal
Wheat Meal
Source: Viola and Arieli, 1982
3/No supplementary vitamins or minerals were used.
19. Tilapia (T. nilotica) and Common Carp
Fingerling A (%)
Test Diets B (%)
(Egypt)
Ext. Cottonseed Meal
Ext. Soybean Meal
Ext. Rice Bran 4/
Bone Meal 4/
Table Salt
DL-Methionine
L-Lysine
Vitamin Mix 5/
Source: Chow, 1982b
4/These two ingredients were boiled with water equivalent to 100% of the whole diet to promote a binding capability. Other ingredients were added, the mixture extruded though the 2mm die of a mincer, sun dried and crumbled.
5/A poultry vitamin mix providing (per kg diet): A 5 000 I.U., D2 600 I.U., B1 10 mg, B2 20 mg, Pantothenic acid 30 mg, Niacin 50 mg, Pyridoxine 2 mg, Vitamin C 200 mg.
20. Tilapia (T. mossambica):
Cake Feed (%)
(Philippines)
Rice Bran
Chopped Snails
Source: Pullin and Lowe-McConnell, 1982
21. Tilapia (T. Mossambica and T. nilotica):
(Philippines) (%)
Rice Bran
Fish Meal
Source: as per No. 20
22. Tilapia (T. nilotica):
(Central African Republic) (%)
Cottonseed oil cake
Wheat Flour
Cattle Blood Meal
Bicalcium Phosphate
Source: as per No. 20
23. Tilapia (T. mossambica):
(Sri Lanka)
Rice Bran
Coconut oil cake
Cattle Blood
Wheat Flour
Source: as per No. 20
24. Tilapia (In Freshwater):
Dry Feeds (Experimental) 1/
(UK)
Animal Size
Fry-0.5g
0.5-35g
35g-market
Brown Fishmeal
Hydrolysed Feather Meal
Meat Meal
Soybean Meal
Groundnut Meal
Cottonseed Meal
Rice Bran
Dried Distillers Solubles
Vitamin Premix No. 10
Mineral Premix 2/
Lipid Supplement 2/
Source: Jauncey and Ross, 1982
1/The authors state that these formulations have certain amino acid deficiencies.
2/Type not specified.
25. Tilapia (Tilapia discolor)
Experimental Feeds for Cage Culture
(3-10 g size) (%)
(Ghana)
Fish Meal
Brewery Waste
Maize Bran
Cowpea
Groundnut Cake
Starch
Source: Oduro-Boateng, 1986
26. Marine Shrimp (Penaeus monodon):
Grow-out Feed
(Malaysia)
Semi-moist (%)
Dry(%)
Fish Meal (55% CP)
Shrimp Head Meal
Wheat Pollards
Vitamin Mix No. 3
Water
Source: Chow, 1984
27. Marine Shrimp (Penaeus monodon):
Dry Grow-out Pellets (%)
(Indonesia)
Squid Head Meal
Fish Meal
Soybean Cake
Shrimp Meat
Wheat Flour
Aquamix (Vitamin Mix 1/
Kelco Alginate
Source: Manik et al., 1980
28. Marine Shrimp (Penaeus monodon & P. merguiensis):
Dry Pellets (%)
(Malaysia)
Fish Meal
Meat & Bone Meal
Soybean Meal
Exp. Sesame Cake Meal
Exp. Groundnut Meal
Maize
Coconut Cake
Extracted Rice Bran
Leaf Meal
Tapioca
Vitamin Mix No. 4
[+BHT 0.02% and Ethoxyquin 0.015%]
Source: Kanazawa, 1984
29. Marine Shrimp:
Practical Pond Diet 2/ (%)
(USA)
Fish Meal (61% CP)
Ext. Soybean Meal
Shrimp Waste Meal
High-Gluten Wheat Flour
Rice Bran
Fat 1/
Binder (Hemicellulose or Lignin Sulphonate: by-products of wood processing)
Vitamin Mix 1/
Trace Mineral Mix 1/
Dicalcium Phosphate
Coated Vitamin C
Source: NRC, 1983
1/No details available
2/Diet does not add to 100%
30. Marine Shrimp (various spp):
Moist/Dry Pellets 1/
(Bangladesh)
Animal viscera
'A' grade fish meal
Rice bran
Wheat flour
Source: Karim, 1986
1/These moist diets were fed moist or sun-dried, stored and used later. This was the pioneer shrimp, feed in Bangladesh.
31. Freshwater Prawns:
Dry Pellets
(Thailand)
Fish Oil
Shrimp Meal
Fish Meal
Peanut Meal
Soybean meal
Broken Rice
Rice Bran
Guar Gum
Source: New and Singholka, 1982
32. Freshwater Prawns:
Dry Pellets (%)
(Indonesia)
Fish Meal
Soybean Meal
Rice Bran
Coconut Oil Cake
Tapioca
Pfizer premix A 2/
Source: Manik, 1976
2/No details available.
33. Freshwater Prawns:
Dry Pellets(%)
(Indonesia)
Shrimp Head Meal
Soybean Meal
Rice Bran
Coconut Oil Cake
Tapioca
Agar
Pfizer Premix A 1/
Source: Manik, 1976
34. Freshwater Prawns:
Dry Pellets
(Hawaii)
Ingredients
Waldron's
Broiler
Starter(%)
Waldron's
Game-cock
Pellets(%)
Waldron's
Prawn No 1.
Waldron's
Prawn No. 2.
Alfalfa
Corn
Cottonseed Meal
Soybean Meal
Meat and Bone Meal
Tuna Meal
Vitamin Mix 1/
Mineral Mix 1/
Molasses
Source: Corbin, et al., 1986
35. Freshwater Prawns:
Grow-out feed
(Malaysia)
Semi-Moist(%)
Dry (%)
Fish Meal (55%) CP)
Wheat Pollards
Rice Bran
Soybean Meal
Vitamin Mix No. 3
Water
Source: Chow, 1984
1/No details available
36. Pacu:
Test Diet
(Fingerlings)
(Brazil)
Anchovy Meal (65% CP)
Soybean Meal (44% CP)
Orange Pulp Meal (5% CP)
Orange Seed Meal (30% CP)
Wheat Bran
Vitamin/Mineral Mix No. 1
Source: Personal communication from K.W. Chow to F.A. Pagan-Font, 18/3/83
37. Milkfish:
Steamed Water Stable Cake %
(Indonesia)
Fresh Fish (or dried fish plus water equivalent)
Fresh Cassava
(or dried cassava plus water equivalent)
Copra (coconut cake)
Rice Bran
Tahu Waste (90% H[2]O) 1/
Soybeans, Peanuts, leaves or similar
Water
Source: Hastings, 1975
1/Soybean cake waste
38. Rabbit Fish:
Dry Pellets (%)
(Malaysia)
Fish Meal
Soybean Meal
Groundnut Meal
Rice Bran
Copra Cake Meal
Leaf Meal
Wheat Flour
Corn Meal
Vitamin Mix No. 4 2/
Source: Abu Hassan et al., 1984
2/Although Vitamin Mix No. 4 was used at 0.5% the project consultant recommended Vitamin Mix No. 2 to be used at 1%.
39. Sea Bass:
Juvenile Test Diets
(Malaysia)
Trash Fish
Fish Meal
Wheat Pollards
Soybean Meal
Vitamin Mix No. 3
Water
Source: Chow, 1984
40. Sea Bass and Grouper:
Moist Pellets (%)
(Malaysia)
Freshly Minced Fish
Fish Meal
Soybean
Rice Bran
Groundnut Meal
Wheat Flour
Vitamin Mix No. 4 1/
Source: Abu Hassan et al., 1984
1/Although vitamin mix no. 4 was used at 0.5%, the project consultant recommended vitamin mix no. 2 to be used at 1%.
41. Sea bass (Lates calcarifer)
Juvenile Test Diet (%)
(Malaysia)
Fresh trash fish
Chinese extracted soybean meal
Wheat pollards
Thai fish meal (55% CP)
Cod liver oil
Vitamin mix 2/
Fresh whole squid
Source: New, 1986b
2/ 10 g Roche vitamin concentrate No. 428/3, 20 g Chinese vitamin C, 970 g wheat pollards.
42. Sea Bass and Grouper:
Semi-Moist Grow-Out Feed (%)
(Indonesia)
Ground Fresh Fish
Fish Meal (Local - 56% Protein)
Soymeal (Ext.)
Meat and Bone Meal (Australian)
Wheat Pollards
Fish Oil (Local)
Seaweed Binder 1/
Mussel Meal
Vitamin Mix No. 12
Source: Meyers, 1987b
43. Finfish (Sea Bass and Grouper)
Experimental Broodstock Diet (%)
(Indonesia)
Fresh Ground Fish
Fish Meal (Local)
Ext. Soybean Meal
Wheat Pollards
Fresh Mussel Meat
Fish Oil
Soybean Lecithin
Vitamin Mix No. 12
Seaweed Binder 1/
Source: Meyers, 1987b
1/See Meyers (1987b) for method of preparation
<section>i</section>
APPENDIX III: NAMES AND ADDRESSES OF FEED MANUFACTURING EQUIPMENT SUPPLIERS
The following list is incomplete. The inclusion of a specific company does not imply recommendation, nor does exclusion imply inadequacy.
Amandus Kahl Nachf: Hamburg GmbH & Co., Postfach 1246, D 2057 Reinbekbez, Hamburg, W. Germany
Anderson International Corp., 6200 Harvard Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio 44105, USA
E.H. Bentall & Co. Ltd., Maiden, Essex, UK
Buhler Brothers Ltd., Engineering Works, CH-9240 Uzwil, Switzerland
Buhler-Miag Ltd., D-3300 Braunschweig, West Germany
Buhler-Miag Ltd., 03-29/33, 3rd Floor, Manhattan House, Chin Swee Road, Singapore 0316
California Pellet Mill Co., 1114 E. Wabash Avenue, Crawfordsville, Indiana 47933, USA
Champion Products Ltd., 7875 Fuller Road, Eden Prairie, Minnesota 55344, USA
Christy & Norris, Chelmsford, Essex, UK
CPM/Pacific (Private) Ltd., 17 Liu Fang Road, Jurong Industrial Estate, Singapore 2262
Demaco (De Francisci Machine Corporation), 280 Walkabout Street, Brooklyn, New York 11206, USA
Fujimizuho, Hyashi Ironworks Co. Ltd., Aichi Prefecture, Japan
The Getz Corporation, Pasong Tamo, Makati, Metro Manila, Philippines
Hiraga Kosakusho Co. Ltd., 5-5, 3-Chome, Mizukasa-Dori, Nagata-Ku, Kobe 653, Japan
Idah Machinery Co. Ltd., No. 9 Alley, 14 Lane, 333 Hsin Ming Road, Neyhwu District, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C.
Insta Pro., 10301 Dennis Drive, Des Moines, Iowa 50322, USA
C. Itoh & Co. (H.K.) Ltd., 38th Floor, Connaught Centre, Connaught Road Central, Hong Kong
Jaybee Engineering Pty Ltd., 227 Princes Highway, Dandenong, Victoria 3175, Australia
Korima-Maschinenbau P. Hauser KG, POB 1160, D 7844 Neuenburg a.Rh.l, West Germany
Limes Industrieanlagen GmbH, Postfach 5620.6231 Schwalbach a Ts., West Germany
R.A. Lister Farm Equipment Ltd., Dursley, Gloucestershire, UK
Ottevanger Machinefabrieken B.V., Moerkapelle, Postbus 3, Moerk, Zijde 32, The Netherlands
President Mollerimaksiner A/S, DIL-4300 Holbaeck, Denmark
Richard Sizer Ltd., Hull, UK
Scottish Mechanical Light Industries Ltd., Scotmec Works, Ayr, Ayrshire, UK
Skiold, Saeby Jernstoleri & Maskinfabrick A/S, DK 9300, Saeby, Denmark
Sprout Waldron Division, Koppers Company Inc., Muncy, Pennsylvania 17756, USA
Sun-Young Equipment Co., Fung Lok Commercial Building, 4/F., 156-163 Wing Lok Street, Hong Kong
Van Aarsen Machinefabriek BV, Postbox 5010, 6097 ZG Panheel-Holland
Wenger International, One Crown Center, Suite 510, 2400 Pershing Road, Kansas City, Missouri, 64108-2581, USA
Yashima Bussan Co. Ltd., Chugai Building, 5-13-5 Nishi-Tenma, Kita-Ku, Osaka 530, Japan
<section>j</section>
APPENDIX IV: FEED COMPOSITIONAL TABLES
The feed compositional tables provided in another FAO Document (ADCP, 1983) are reproduced here, with a few additions. These tables are only a preliminary guide to the subject. Further, more detailed, tables are discussed and referenced in section 3.2.2. of this manual.
The tables which follow give data for proximate composition, calcium and total phosphorus, and digestible energy.
Some data on the essential fatty acid composition of several lipids are given in Appendix V, under 'Lipids'.
At the end of this appendix, tables for amino acid composition, extracted from NRC (1983) have been provided. Seperate figures for lysine and methionine plus cystine are also given in the first set of tables.
APPENDIX IV (PART A)
Feed Compositional Table 1/ 2/
APPENDIX IV (PART B)
Amino Acid Composition of Common Warmwater Fish Feed Ingredients (Data expressed as % of total feed on dry matter and as-fed basis
<section>k</section>
APPENDIX V: INGREDIENT DESCRIPTIONS FOR AQUACULTURE FEEDS
1. GRASSES
2. LEGUMES
3. MISCELLANEOUS FODDER PLANTS
4. FRUITS AND VEGETABLES
5. ROOT CROPS
6. CEREALS
7. OIL-BEARING SEEDS AND OIL CAKES
8. FEEDS OF ANIMAL ORIGIN
9. MISCELLANEOUS FEEDSTUFFS
This appendix is intended to provide introductory descriptions of the major ingredients used in aquaculture feedstuffs. For more detailed descriptions of these and the many other feedstuffs which are available, you should consult the list given in 'further reading' at the end of section 4 of the manual. The feed categories given below are the same as those used in that section of the manual.
Analytical information on some of the ingredients dealt with in this appendix are given in Appendix IV. Analytical information on the others can be obtained by consulting more elaborate feed compositional tables and other papers, such as Göhl, 1981; Manik et al., 1977, Malik and Chughtai, 1979, Hubbell, 1984, NAS, 1971, Devendra, 1981, NAS, 1969, and Sadiq and Seng, 1982.
1. GRASSES
DRIED GRASS. If available, this expensive ingredient can be used as a source of protein and vitamins. It contains vitamins of the B group and, more importantly, b -carotene, a precursor of vitamin A. Its high fibre content and its cost would prevent more than a minimal inclusion rate. If added as a source of vitamin A, its potency must be measured because the amount of b -carotene in grass meals depends on standards of drying, the grass species and variety, age at harvest and age of the product. With the limitations noted above, undried grass could, if well chopped, be included in moist rations.
2. LEGUMES
2.1 Foliage
2.2 Seeds
2.1 Foliage
Foliage of several legumes has been utilized in aquaculture feeds. That of other leguminous plants is probably also satisfactory but its successful use has not yet been specifically reported in the literature. Amongst those plants whose foliage has been used are alfalfa (lucerne) and ipil-ipil (wild tamarind).
Ipil-ipil is a deep rooted tree or arborescent shrub cultivated widely as a fodder crop. Its leaves and seeds contain the glucoside mimosine which is reduced in level if they are stored for a week before use or are soaked in water and dried. It has been used successfully in shrimp and fish feeds at low levels (5-10%).
Alfalfa is a deep rooted perennial herb extensively grown for fodder purposes and as a major compound feed ingredient. It is a safe and valuable ingredient for fish feed, contributing protein and fat-soluble vitamins. In compound feed it is included as a dried meal.
2.2 Seeds
Apart from the oil-bearing leguminous seeds (which are included in section 7 of this appendix) many other leguminous seeds or their by-products have potential as aquaculture feed ingredients, though their successful use has not yet been fully documented. These include the following:
Leguminous seeds with aquaculture feed potential
Common name
Special notes
Horse gram
low fibre
Cow pea
low fibre
Mung bean (black gram)
no glucosides; successfully used in aquaculture feeds
Tamarind
high fibre
Sesbania
Saman (rain tree)
high protein; high in tannins; used in experimental fish feeds
Red gram (dahl)
as good as soybean for poultry
Split peas (red dahl)
high protein bran
Lupin
high protein; bitter varieties contain alkaloids and must be soaked before use
Algaroba
ripe pods palatable to other animals
Senegal gum
high protein
Most of the leguminous seeds eaten by humans may be too expensive for use in aquaculture feeds but those of other legumes, either alone or together with the foliage of the plant, remain relatively unexploited sources for aquaculture. Care should be taken to check their palatability and to remove toxic substances before their large-scale use, however.
3. MISCELLANEOUS FODDER PLANTS
Sisal hemp leaf waste pulp could be used in small quantities in moist feeds but its protein is not very digestible. The leaves of the pawpaw (papaya), which are high in protein yet quite low in fibre could be a useful ingredient. The leaves of coffee are low in protein but high in fibre. Water hyacinths could be a useful ingredient for moist feeds if first boiled to form a paste. Kangkong (swamp cabbage), is another water plant, this time a rooted one, which has similar potential. Small quantities of sago palm starch can be used in feeds - its ease of gelatinization improves feed stability.
4. FRUITS AND VEGETABLES
In many countries large quantities of citrus wastes are available. Whole fruits are sometimes wasted when they cannot be marketed quickly enough. Dried citrus pulp, a waste from juice production, citrus molasses and citrus seed meal, an oilcake, are available. However, the seed meal is toxic to chicken and pigs and may be so to fish. Most wastes from fruits e.g., coffee are very high in fibre and therefore of limited use in fish feeds. Coffee wastes are also unpalatable to other livestock and depress growth. Banana plants have some potential as ingredients. Banana waste has been used as a binder in crustacean feeds. Banana peels are rich in tannins and cannot be used until they are yellow. Limited quantities of various banana wastes could be utilized as sources of carbohydrate.
5. ROOT CROPS
Root crops cannot be used at a very high level in aquaculture diets because of their high carbohydrate level and their high value as human food. However, at least four, cassava, sugar beet molasses, and meals made from potatoes and sweet potatoes have been used for their binding qualities in aquaculture feeds. Sometimes potato or cassava starch is used in its raw form, sometimes in a pre-gelatinized form.
6. CEREALS
Ground whole cereals which can be used in fish feeds include the millets (various species), oats, barley, sorghum milo or dari, wheat, and corn or maize. The quantity of grain used depends on its cost and the limited utility of high carbohydrate ingredients for fish. However, many cereal by-products are available and potentially useful for aquaculture feeds. The major ones are defined as follows:
BROKEN RICE
damaged rice separated out after rough rice has been dehulled and polished. It has the
same chemical analysis as polished rice and is often sold as human food
RICE HULLS
an extremely high fibre material, not recommended for fish feeds.
RICE BRAN
a good source of B group vitamins, it is the material scoured off before initial rice polishing, It has a higher protein content than the original grain and, in the unextracted form, has a high lipid level which is prone to rancidity. Rancid rice bran is much reduced in feed value. The oil is often extracted for human use and the resultant rice bran is favoured, because of its keeping quality, by feed millers. The fibre in extracted rice bran absorbs water and leads to a water unstable pellet.
RICE POLISHINGS
this is the part of the starch endosperm which is removed during polishing, to improve the appearance of the polished rice for human use. It is therefore lower in protein and fibre than rice bran. It has the same keeping problems as rice bran.
RICE POLLARDS
a mixture of rice bran and rice polishings, usually sold as a grade of rice bran.
RICE MILL FEED
a mixture of all the rice milling by-products, typically 60% hulls, 35% bran, and 5% polishings.
RICE (GENERAL)
there are many intermediate products between those identified above. The secret of their origin is in their chemical analysis. From the original rough rice (padi) about 50-60% becomes polished rice, 20% hulls, 10% bran, 3% polishings and 1-17% broken rice.
WHEAT BRAN
contains most of the vitamins and protein of the wheat grain. It is the fibrous coating of the grain beneath the husk. It does not contain the wheat germ. There is a coarse outer layer and a fine inner layer to the bran area. It is quite high in protein and fibre. Like extracted rice bran, wheat bran can cause water stability problems in fish feeds.
WHEAT MIDDLINGS
this is a mixture of 'shorts' (itself a mixture of fine bran and feed flour - the outer endosperm layer) and wheat germ. It is sometimes known as WHEAT POLLARDS or MILL RUN. It is less fibrous than wheat bran, has a higher feed value and contains more wheat protein (gluten). It is thus better from a water stability point of view.
MAIZE (CORN) GLUTEN FEED
a by-product of the wet-milling of maize for the manufacture of corn starch or corn syrup, corn gluten feed is usually 20-30% protein and quite high in fibre. It contains the corn colouring pigment. Like other maize products it is very lysine deficient.
MAIZE (CORN) GLUTEN MEAL
this corn by-product is much higher in protein and lower in fibre content.
MAIZE-GERM OIL MEAL
MAIZE-GERM OIL CAKE
MAIZE OIL-MEAL CAKE
this is a high oil/low protein by-product of the same industry.
7. OIL-BEARING SEEDS AND OIL CAKES
The major oil-bearing seeds contribute large quantities of by-products which are used in animal feeds, all of which have potential as aquaculture feed ingredients. An explanation of the various descriptive terms (expeller, extracted, etc.) used in conjunction with these products, which indicate their analytical characteristics, is to be found in section 4.1.7. of the manual. The following is a list of the major plants contributing products to this category of ingredients:
COMMON NAME OF OILCAKE OR MEAL
SPECIAL CHARACTERISTICS
GROUNDNUT
(PEANUT)
methionine deficient; prone to aflatoxin development; extensively used in carp diets.
MUSTARD)
RAPE)
also used in carp diets but need great care, as non-detoxified meals contain a range of toxins.
COCONUT
(POONAC)
prone to rancidity; absorbs water, thus water unstable feeds; low in protein; high in fibre.
OIL PALM
kernel high in protein; fats saturated; (African oil palm).
SOYBEAN
high protein; low lipid; generally good source of EAA's including lysine but methionine deficient; contains a trypsin inhibitor and urease but these are destroyed during processing; with EAA supplementation it is a potential partial replacement for fish meal.
COTTON
screw-press cake contains high level of free gossypol which is toxic; high in fibre; potentially valuable but knowledge of effect of gossypol on fish not adequately known (see ADCP, 1983).
SUNFLOWER
richer in methionine and cystine than soybean; lysine deficient; no toxins.
SAFFLOWER
poorer in the EAA's lysine and methionine than sunflower.
PARA RUBBER
must be de-toxified to remove prussic acid; suitability probably similar to coconut.
FLAX (LINSEED)
like para rubber, contains an enzyme and a glucoside that produces prussic acid but normal processing destroys the enzyme; not known whether its additional toxicity to poultry (which can be eliminated by supplementary vitamin B[6]) affects fish or not.
SESAME (GINGELLY)
rich in methionine but deficient in lysine; would be good ingredient in conjunction with soybean; value for Indian carps has been demonstrated.
8. FEEDS OF ANIMAL ORIGIN
High protein meals from animal sources are of great value in aquaculture feeds, particularly if they are of marine origin. Lipids from animals, as well as plants, are dealt with in section 9 of this appendix. Animal proteins are generally rich in EAA's especially those (lysine and methionine) which are often limiting in plant proteins. They also are good sources of vitamins, unidentified growth factors and trace minerals. The major ingredients of this type are:
MEAT WASTE
only available where offal is not valued for human food; may be contaminated and spoiled before use; may also contain animals condemned as unfit for human consumption. Meat scraps and trimmings after fat removed are dried into meat meal. This is inferior to fish meal or soybean meal and is prone to damage (evidenced by low available lysine) by poor processing. If refrigeration is available or the waste can be collected daily both it and blood are potential moist feed ingredients.
BLOOD
blood is often widely available and can be used fresh or as a dried meal. Dried meals are often poorly produced, however, and the protein may be damaged. Blood has an extremely high protein content but does not have such a good amino acid profile as meat waste. The digestibility of its protein is high but its leucine/isoleucine ratio is unbalanced.
BONE MEAL
bone is sometimes mixed with meat meal to form 'meat and bone meal'. Some bone meals contain quite high levels of 'crude' protein but the nitrogen detected in the analytical test comes mostly from indigestible collagen. Bone meal is not usually needed as a calcium and phosphorus source in aquaculture feeds but may become so as less fish and meat meals are used in them.
LIVER MEAL
a source of B group vitamins, if available.
POULTRY BY-PRODUCTS
poultry feet, heads and undeveloped eggs which, like other slaughterhouse wastes are of no value as human food locally, can be used fresh or as a dried meal. Gizzards and intestines can also be used if their contents are removed. Similar in value to meat meal. Very rich in choline.
HYDROLYSED POULTRY FEATHER MEAL
feathers hydrolysed by cooking are a highly digestible source of nitrogen for ruminants. However as it is severely deficient in most EAA's this product can only be used in aquaculture feeds in small amounts if well balanced by other, good quality, protein. It is believed to be of more value in crustacean than in fish diets.
'TRASH FISH'
'trash fish' is difficult to define because it differs from location to location in species composition. It consists of fish which are too small, too large, or disliked to an extent to make them unmarketable. What is 'trash' fish in one location may be highly prized elsewhere. What is 'trash' when in super-abundance in one season of the year may be scarce and more valuable at others. Often it is used for fish meal production and may be mixed with crustacean waste. It is much used as an aquaculture feed alone, or mixed with other materials, or as part of an extruded moist feed. It must be used fresh or refrigerated. Unless pasteurized, some species especially contain the enzyme thiaminase which destroys vitamin B1, in the other dietary components 1/. Trash fish is a valuable aquaculture ingredient which is becoming increasingly exploited. Local analysis is necessary before it can be accurately formulated into a compound diet.
FISH MEAL
this is either made by crude processes locally or forms part of the quite sophisticated manufacturing process of an international feed commodity. Fish meals vary widely in their analysis according to the nature of the raw material and the method and care by which it is processed. White fish meal (e.g., South African, Scottish) is made from whole non-oily fish and fish residues which are oven dried and ground. Dark coloured fish meals involve cooking the raw material, pressing it to remove the oil, drying the residue in a steam jacket and grinding it. Shark and dogfish need to be processed by the latter method as they are of little value unless cooked. Peruvian and That fish meals are of the dark variety but differ greatly. That fish meals are made from the whole by-catch (mixed species); Peruvian fish meal is made from one species, the anchovy, and is much higher in its crude protein content. Fish meals are often overcooked, causing damage to the quality of the protein, or
undercooked, causing contamination with Salmonella bacteria. Fish meals are often adulterated with urea (which, with a nitrogen content of 46%, has an apparent (N × 6.25) crude protein level of 288%), to make low grade products seem like high protein fish meals. If of good quality, there is no better high protein ingredient readily available for aquaculture feeds. Fish meals should have less than 2% salt and should contain an antioxidant. They are also a considerable source of poly-unsaturated fatty acids, particularly of the higher members of the n-3 series. The key to the successful use of fish meals is a knowledge of the processes and quality control standards used by the factories producing them and regular analysis by the user for component quantity and quality. Fish meal is a very costly ingredient.
FISH SOLUBLES
this product, which is the watery material remaining after the oil is removed from the substance pressed out during the manufacture of brown fish meals, can be condensed and sold separately as a liquid (condensed fish solubles) if not mixed back into the press cake, or dried to form dried fish solubles. Much of the protein of this product is in a non-protein form but it is sometimes used in small quantities in aquaculture feeds as an attractant. It is high in the B group vitamins and contains an unidentified growth factor for poultry.
FISH SILAGE
see Appendix VI.
SHRIMP MEAL
a dried meal similar to fish meal, made from the waste heads and shells of large prawns or shrimps, or from whole small shrimps or crustacea of no human food value. Its true protein value is only about 50-70% (depending on the proportion of heads to shells in the original material) of the apparent, or 'crude' protein content. This is because much of it derives from an indigestible (nitrogen containing) polysaccharide, chitin. However, it is an important source of this chitin for shrimp feeds, it is high in choline and it is used for pigmentation as it contains important carotenoids. Both shrimp and fish meals, unless finely ground, give poor stability to aquaculture feeds. Again, as with fish meals, it is important to know the source of the material and to analyse it. Some meals are nearly all shells, with little value. Waste shrimp heads and shells can, if available fresh or refrigerated, be used as excellent ingredients in moist aquaculture feeds, especially for shrimp.
SQUID MEAL
if available, this is an excellent ingredient for shrimp feeds, but expensive. It appears to have growth promoting properties. Fresh squid can also be used in moist diets.
MOLLUSCS
as for squid meal. Can also be utilized fresh in moist diets.
SNAILS
can be of value, if cooked and dried.
SILKWORM PUPAE
where available in quantity, this is a valuable ingredient, especially for shrimp feeds. The lipid is prone to rancidity. Only 75% of the total protein is available because, as in the case of shrimp meal, it is partially chitin. Cocoons have no value.
MILK BY-PRODUCTS
surplus or damaged milk powder is sometimes available and, if its cost is acceptable, of potential value in aquaculture diets. Whey, a residue for the production of cheese, as well as a high-protein waste from the refining of animal ghee, are utilizable up to a 10% inclusion level, at least for salmonids. Whole milk powder has an EAA profile which is generally regarded as better than fish meal and close to the 'ideal' food, chicken egg protein. Skimmed milk has a similar EAA profile.
1/Raw tissues from freshwater fish, clams, mussels and shrimp are particularly likely to contain thiaminase
9. MISCELLANEOUS FEEDSTUFFS
As the grouping implies, these feedstuffs are diverse in origin and only a few are mentioned here:
SEAWEEDS: Seaweed meals are of value in aquaculture diets, particularly in those for shrimp. They are a source of trace minerals and vitamin A and probably increase palatability. Shrimp are able to digest cellulose better than fish. (See Appendix XII).
CANE MOLASSES: This diluted by-product of cane sugar refining can be used as a partial source of energy, as a 'filler', as a binder and as a possible attractant. It is cheap and widely available, except where fermented for alcohol production.
BREWERS SPENT GRAINS: This material, the extracted malt, is a valuable source of protein and energy which is often thrown away or used as a fertilizer. It is very wet. If dried it is an excellent ingredient but often no market has been developed for it. It could be used fresh as an ingredient in moist diets if transport costs for such a moist product (75-80% moisture) to the farm site are not prohibitive. If not boiled before use, its enzymes may ferment carbohydrates in other ingredients to produce alcohol.
BREWERS YEAST: Dried brewers yeast, if available, is an excellent raw material. It is a by-product of beer production. Like brewers spent grains, the fresh material requires boiling to inactivate the enzymes present before use as a wet ingredient. It is a rich but expensive source of B group vitamins and protein. This yeast is usually Saccharomyces spp.
GRAIN DISTILLERS BY-PRODUCTS: These by-products of ethanol or acetone butanol production vary in analysis according to the method of production (see Göhl, 1981) and the type of raw cereal used. They are generally of greater value than brewery wastes and more expensive. They appear to stimulate growth in poultry but it is not known whether they would be as effective in aquaculture feeds. Useful if economically available.
LIPIDS: Many different natural animal tallows (solid above 40° C), lards (melting point between 20-40° C) and oils (liquid below 20° C) are available. Generally tallows come from cattle or sheep, lard from pigs, horses and any type of bones, and oils from marine animals. The vegetable lipids which are available are also mainly oils. Processed animal lipids are not always available but vegetable oils are; however they may be very expensive because they are refined for human food. They may thus be quite an expensive source of energy and EFA's for livestock. Soapstocks, materials which are used in the production of soap, consist of the sodium salts of free fatty acids and traces of protein. Some also contain carotenoid pigments. Soapstocks can be used as sources of energy and fatty acids in feeds.
Fish oils and most vegetable oils are high in PUFA's and need to have antioxidants added to them during processing to delay the onset of rancidity. Hydrogenated (hardened) fats made from fish oils and beef tallow are poorly digested if their melting point is above 40° C. Table 1 shows the levels of PUFA's for a range of lipids. The fatty acid profile varies from sample to sample but Table 1 gives broad indications of quality. It can be seen that although vegetable oils are very rich in TOTAL PUFA's, the quantity of the higher (HUFA) n-3 series fatty acids, which are so important for fish and shrimp feeds (see section 3.1.2), is nil. Amongst the vegetable oils listed in Table 1, only soybean oil has a higher content of linolenic acid (18:3n-3) than the marine oils. Linseed and rapeseed oils are also high in linolenic acid. The main difference is that the marine oils have significant levels of HUFA's (n-3 series) whereas the vegetable oils do not.
MICROBIAL PROTEINS: Bacterial proteins, grown from aqueous solutions of mineral salts with a nitrogen source, using methane as an energy source, and yeasts (mostly 'torula' or fodder yeasts) grown on paraffins and industrial wastes, such as molasses, sulphite waste liquor from the paper industry, fruit wastes, etc., are becoming increasingly available as ingredients for animal feeds. Both types, especially the bacterial type, are rich in protein. The presence of large quantities of nucleic acids limits their use as human food but it is unknown if this is a problem in their use for fish feeds. The amino acid profile varies according to the type and the media on which it is grown. Some yeasts are particularly deficient in methionine while some are very high in lysine level.
Table 1: Major PUFA 1/ Contents of Various Lipids (% of Lipid)
ALGAE: Dried unicellular algae - like microbial protein, sometimes referred to as single cell protein (SCP) (mostly Chlorella, Spirulina and Scenedesmus species) - are high in protein but usually too expensive for use in animal feeds. Those fed alive to larval aquaculture stock are specially cultured. Algae are rich in carotenoids.
MANURE: Animal manures and litter wastes can be used in fish and shrimp feeds in addition to being used as manures. However, over 50% of the crude protein of manures consists of non-protein nitrogen, such as uric acid. It is believed that in most cases where manures have been used as an ingredient in compound aquaculture feeds the true effect has been to fertilize the natural food in the pond. However, there have been reports of the successful use of small quantities of poultry manure in shrimp feeds and of tilapia being fed a trout feed with up to 30% dried poultry waste in it without any depression of growth rate. For further reading on this subject, see Edwards (1982), Müller (1980), and Woynarovitch and Kühnhold (1979).
NON-PROTEIN NITROGEN (NPN): Although there are conflicting reports about the ability of some species of fish and crustacea to utilize sources of NPN, such as urea, biuret and ammonium phosphates, it has not yet been recommended that these materials should be used in fish feeds.
MINERALS AND VITAMINS: These materials have been dealt with in section 3.1 of the manual.
BINDERS: See Appendix XII.
<section>l</section>
APPENDIX VI: FISH SILAGE
Basically the manufacture of fish silage is a means of preserving 'trash' fish, waste fish heads and viscera, prawn waste, etc. The waste marine material is ground and mixed with sulphuric, hydrochloric or, preferably, propionic or formic acid (alone or in mixtures) to cause liquifaction and to prevent bacterial decomposition. The product of this process is sometimes known as acid silage. An alternative technique consists of introducing lactic acid producing organisms into a ground fish-carbohydrate mixture. The result is sometimes referred to as biological fish silage and the process as lactic acid fermentation. The lactic acid bacteria produce the acid necessary to preserve the fish in the latter alternative. The protein splitting enzymes (proteolytic enzymes) of the fish, under the acid conditions produced, cause the product to become more liquid. The resulting product may be stored as a liquid or mixed with various dry materials to form a material which can be used
directly as a fish feed or used as an ingredient in a compound feed. Fish silage has been used with some success in fish feeding but has not yet found favour as a shrimp feed. There is no fundamental reason why it should not be a good ingredient for shrimp feeds, however.
There are many different ways of preparing fish silage (see 'further reading' below).
Further reading for Appendix VI:
Disney et al., 1978, Disney and James, 1980, Stanton and Yeoh, 1977.
