<title>ADCP/REP/87/28 - Women in Aquaculture</title>
<section>1</section>
WELCOMING ADDRESS by Dr. A. Lindquist
Armin Lindquist
Assistant Director-General, a.i., Fisheries Department, FAO
On behalf of the Director-General of FAO, the two hosts - the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme and the Norwegian Agency for International Development - and the Fisheries Department and myself, may I extend a warm welcome to you all, the participants of this first workshop on Women in Aquaculture.
I address you, primarily the principal participants, as you are all women who are active contributors to the development of aquaculture worldwide. You therefore have specific knowledge on the current status of women's participation in the sector. As you all ably demonstrate, aquaculture is proving to be a very appropriate sector for the employment of women, much to their economic and social benefits. No doubt this workshop will be the first of many on the subject.
Women are proving to be admirably suited to all the many new activities of the sector, beyond their well-established and traditional roles in fisheries in marketing and administration. Notable contributions have been made for some time in research and development, but now there is increasing evidence of the growing numbers of women in extension services, in the administration of credit and, most significantly, in farming itself. Women are also proving to be excellent production technologists in hatcheries and field stations which supply other farmers with fingerlings.
Aquaculture is a growth sector in the food industry. The projection for global production by ADCP is some 22 million metric tonnes by the year 2000. Technically this is feasible, but it will require much investment in capital and in training human resources. If this total is to be reached, there have to be innumerable opportunities for women to demonstrate their skills and to find employment. The immediate need is for women to be prepared to take advantage of these opportunities as they arise. This workshop is therefore the first step in coordinating these preparations by establishing the current baseline and identifying programme directions.
I hope that you will fulfill the many tasks you have ahead of you during these next four days, and have a productive workshop. Also, I hope that you all enjoy your visit to Rome, many of you for the first time, and to the Fisheries Department in FAO. It gives me great pleasure to declare the workshop on Women in Aquaculture open.
<section>2</section>
OPENING ADDRESS by Dr. C. E. Nash
Colin E. Nash
Programme Leader, Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme
It is with great pleasure that I welcome you all to WOMEN IN AQUACULTURE. This workshop has been instigated jointly by the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) and the Norwegian Agency for International Development (NORAD). Together, ADCP and NORAD have conceived this event to try to quantify the present participation of women in this emerging technology of aquaculture.
Women are already very active in aquaculture, but we have never been able to answer accurately the question which is repeatedly asked of us, 'How many women work in the sector?'. But documenting the evidence of their activity is only a small part of the task we have set for ourselves. As with all information, it is only of value if it is put to good use. In our case, we need to analyse the information to show where there are opportunities to improve their participation, and where we can exploit new or further opportunities to get more women involved.
Consequently, may I quote once again the objectives of the ADCP/NORAD workshop, and the purposes of your presence and the parameters of your contributions during these next three days. The first objective is to identify where there are needs and opportunities to:
(i) reinforce the participation of women in the sector, and
(ii) advance their skills so that women can participate in the sector.
The second objective is to recommend approaches and outline development projects which can train and/or utilize the participation of women for both public and private investment in aquaculture.
I do not have to remind you Chat the more you can get into the second objective, the greater will be your contribution to the speed with which your colleagues have opportunities to participate in the future.
It has been a very difficult task to select the participants in the workshop. Once it was known that such a session was planned, many of your equally deserving friends and associates wanted to come. However, selection has been based on a number of criteria, which merit some explanation.
(i) At this stage it was important to get the baseline information of the present level of participation of women in the sector. It was necessary to have individuals who had spent time actively in the sector and who had quantifiable data at hand. Consequently, I requested eight of you to prepare working papers, and the rest to bring one page of factual data which could possibly be added to the working papers.
(ii) It was important to get broad representation of the sector, and to have individuals from every sub-sectoral component, such as management and administration, as well as education and research; I also needed producers from both the public and the private sectors, as well as individuals involved in consumption and marketing. Consequently, I divided the sector into its six accepted components and invited about five or six of you to represent each one, each with some different background or experience.
(iii) It was also important that the industries in the geographic regions of the world were represented. Aquaculture production differs widely from region to region and, although the principles of aquaculture are common, the resources and therefore the applications are at times very different; I needed individuals who could provide information over a broad background of the aquaculture industries worldwide, so that between you any country, any aquaculture system, and any species technology were known. Consequently, I tried to obtain representatives from all regions with diverse backgrounds.
(iv) Finally, and not least, the participants were all women active in the sector.
I would like to explain the background of the structure of the workshop, as several of you may not understand my motivation fully.
I believe that too much attention in the past has been given to the biotechnical problems of aquaculture, to the neglect of the non-biotechnical problems (such as economics, sociology, marketing, planning, management, etc.). The need for the future is to make certain that attention is given equally to all these components simultaneously. I believe that the best assistance we can give to aquaculture development at the present time, and that is for all countries, is assistance which builds the capacity of each country to enable it to advance and maintain aquaculture as a food-producing industry. Gone are the days for aquaculture to be considered as a popular pastime and an interesting technology dominated by biological researchers.
Capacity building for a sector requires attention at six levels. The first two are concerned with the primary beneficiaries of the industry, namely (1) the Consumers of the Product, and (2) the Producers of the Product. The remaining four levels are concerned with the support services behind the primary beneficiaries and the infrastructure of the sector; these are called (3) Local Infrastructure, (4) National Infrastructure, (5) National Sector Management, and (6) Global and Regional Management.
Each level of the sector has three dimensions. These are socio-economic, technical and managerial, with managerial dimensions having nine activites covering information, planning, marketing, financial, personnel, etc. The resulting matrix therefore describes all the building-blocks of a sector, and also acts as a check-list. Obviously at each level the individual building blocks will merit different emphases, but at least each one will receive some attention.
I will not burden you with more of this capacity building theory now, but I can assure you that efforts towards capacity building will influence development projects more and more in the next decade. Consequently, by structuring the workshop on these six levels I am anticipating the framework into which your final results and recommendations will be most readily placed, and subsequently used to the greatest benefit.
Thus, I look forward to your very professional participation in this workshop, giving due consideration to all the levels of the sector for women to participate in, and not just those levels which are relatively easy to discuss and to think about. You will have to concentrate on the approach, and conscientiously avoid prolonged attention to one or two levels.
If you are successful in abiding by this framework (and I am certain that you shall), the workshop will be a landmark event on this basis alone, and it will enable the ADCP to focus more attention on capacity building as the right framework for planning effective development. I also think that the framework will help the final results and recommendations to be phrased in language suitable for the findings of professional managers, administrators, and representatives of a viable and economic industry, and not merely part-time players.
I am contributing to the workshop two papers of my own which are being published under the auspices of the ADCP. They have some purpose.
The first is 'Observations on International Technical Assistance to Aquaculture' (ADCP/REP/86/23). You will notice immediately that the structure of the paper follows the framework behind capacity building. I would draw your attention to a number of facts relevant to your thoughts over these next three days.
(i) Although one of the roles of aquaculture often stated in national policies is to increase employment opportunities, aquaculture itself is not a labour intensive industry. There are good opportunities for employment, but aquaculture is not a panacea for countries with large numbers of unemployed.
(ii) The mainstay of the aquaculture sector, the producers or farmers, are individuals who are entrepreneurs who have a desire to farm. In planned development projects, the farmers have therefore to be carefully selected. It is a mistake to generalize and mass target groups - such as the unemployed, or displaced fishermen, or women - as primary beneficiaries without considerable socio-cultural research and analysis.
(iii) Governments, on the whole, make poor producers. Consequently, recommending more government production projects supported by technical assistance is not going to help the sector get established, or women more opportunities.
My second paper is 'Future Economic Outlook for Aquaculture and Related Assistance Needs' (ADCP/REP/87/25). Again, I draw your attention to the following points which are relevant to your thoughts for the future of women in the industry.
(i) Although the future of aquaculture is very promising and is clearly a growth sector of the food industry, there has to be realism on the part of investors - using the word in its broadest meaning. Aquaculture products must compete on the marketplace with those of the capture fisheries, and with the cheap white meats, poultry and pork. Furthermore, the aquaculture industry must compete with other industries for resources, especially agriculture for water and the tourist industry for space. Consequently, not every country has aquaculture as a high economic priority or needs aquaculture at all, no matter how interesting it may be to a few individuals.
(ii) The ADCP is currently trying to work on labour analyses of the aquaculture industry to help guide national investment in capital facilities, and in training and education, but as yet we have little data. However, it is clear that some countries are investing substantially in infrastructure and training, and the potential value of the industry does not merit it. In this paper you will find the most recent production data of over 175 countries. If you approximated a value to these figures, and estimated the future potential for some countries, then you will determine quickly that large scale national investment in infrastructure and training, no matter how worthy, is not justified.
I have one thing more to say before I close. This workshop deals with Women in Aquaculture. I have invited only women to manage and be the principal participants in the workshop. The aquaculture staff of the ADCP, and that includes myself, and the FAO Regular Programme, are welcome to attend the sessions as contributors, but they are not principal participants.
I have been criticized for the organization of this workshop on two counts. First, I have been criticized (and only by women, no less) for not inviting men as principal participants. But I have no good reason to do so. Frankly, even in this small workshop of thirty carefully selected participants, there is probably not one question I can ask about aquaculture which cannot be answered by one of you. Thus, if during the next three days you need to know the typical labour force of a shrimp hatchery, or the organization for a credit programme in Africa, or the requirements of a project development document for UNDP, someone here among you will have the answer.
Second, I have been criticized for not holding this workshop in the field where production is going on. This, I feel, is the traditional thinking which has constrained aquaculture development. Production is obviously important, but no more than the other five levels of the sector as I have already explained. I believe that a wealth of field experience is gathered in this room to enable us to modernize our approach to development and achieve the objectives in the proper framework. Furthermore, but depending on the outcome of this workshop, the ADCP will seek financial support for regional conferences on the subject.
Consequently, I hope that you will prove me right in confining the participation only to women and holding the event here in Rome, and you prove my critics and your colleagues wrong.
With that I close. Both NORAD and the ADCP look forward to your results and recommendations on Thursday with considerable anticipation. Again, on behalf of the ADCP and NORAD, my thanks to you all for coming, and our good wishes for a most successful meeting.
<section>3</section>
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The participants in the Workshop recognize that aquaculture is itself an emerging technology. In many developing countries there is no aquaculture sector as yet, or the sector is no more than the extent of an international technical assistance project which is trying to establish its foundations. Consequently, the opportunities for both women and men to participate in aquaculture at all have been restricted.
In those countries where an aquaculture sector has been established, women have rapidly become involved in aquaculture at every level. Not only have they expanded their traditional fisheries roles in marketing, processing, and credit, but they have become active in farming itself (production), and are well established in technological research and education. The degree of participation, however, decreases down the sector towards management, and in many countries women are noticably absent from national management, particularly in aquaculture policy-making and planning - although national management as a whole is a sub-sector of weakness.
The status of aquaculture development varies from country to country. In many countries, particularly in Africa, the aquaculture sector is based almost entirely on extensive farming practices primarily for subsistence and barter, with any surplus being sold in rural markets; in others, notably Asia, Latin America, and most developed countries, it is based on semi-intensive and intensive systems for profit and trade, including exports. The participation of women throughout the industry of aquaculture worldwide therefore covers a broad spectrum, as diverse as the many levels of sophistication attained in each country. Unfortunately, the quantitative data to measure the degree of participation is lacking. This ADCP/NORAD Workshop is the first effort to collect this important information in one place, and structure it in an understandable framework.
The level of support required to enhance the participation of women in the aquaculture sector is clearly determined by the status of national aquaculture development in each country, and particularly by the respective government policy towards the sector. The government, after all, is responsible for the development of all economic sectors in the country, including the emergent sector of aquaculture. However, an economic sector cannot be developed in isolation, and aquaculture is proving to be a sector of far-reaching consequence. It continues to be tied closely to both agriculture and fisheries. It is therefore important that all national policies and plans for economic development include consideration of an aquaculture component, and identify women as key participants among the human resources required.
The Workshop has made a number of recommendations which will benefit the participation of women in the sector indirectly, as they are relevant to the development of the sector as a whole; and certain recommendations which have direct benefits as they concern projects which are specific to women.
1. The Workshop recognizes that the groundwork it has prepared is still far from complete. The present recommendations require continuous refinement, and more constructive proposals can be made as more data become available. As an initial step towards the attainment of these and subsequent recommendations, the Workshop recommends the preparation of a number of country case studies on aquaculture development in which various levels of participation of women are highlighted. These will serve as models for other developing countries in supporting aquaculture as a sector in national economic development programmes. These studies should be an adjunct of the Workshop and led by ADCP (FAO) and NORAD, and with the assistance of other donors.
2. The Workshop believes that there is a substantial need to communicate its findings to the women in aquaculture at large, and continue the momentum initiated by ADCP (FAO) and NORAD. Communication at present is most timely as the information can influence policy formulation; most developed and developing countries are only now recognizing the increasing importance of aquaculture and are structuring policy and formulating national plans. The Workshop recommends a number of regional conferences on the subject of Women in Aquaculture (possibly in association with proposed regional conferences on aquaculture development as a whole, or other similar events), which would in turn assist in the promotion of national workshops.
3. The Workshop recognizes that there is a need to continue the collection of statistics on the participation and contributions of women to the human resources of the aquaculture sector. A databank, similar to or in association with FARMAP (the Agricultural Farming System) should be established. Such a system would collect and code the activities performed by women in the sector to quantify and identify their labour inputs. In addition, it is a source of information necessary for directing both public and private investment in the sector.
4. The Workshop recommends a significant increase in the number of aquaculture projects which are both specific to women and to women's participation. This recommendation is relevent to all projects, and not only those requiring technical assistance.
However, greater attention is required in the overall identification, execution, and evaluation of all projects in terms of both positive and negative impacts on women. This is especially important for non-aquaculture projects which may impact existing women's enterprises in aquaculture.
In particular, the Workshop notes:
(i) The vital importance of professional market research at base level for production projects cannot be overstated to ensure total viability of each project regardless of size. In particular, handling and marketing are proven fields of acceptable employment of women, and projects aimed at reinforcing and building on these roles should be given priority if there is an existing basis for success.
(ii) Production projects invariably require a credit component. As access to credit and lack of credit management skills are constraints to the participation of women as producers, projects must have the facility to provide resources to meet these needs.
(iii) All projects at all levels (not only those for women) need more prolonged preparation, in particular to develop the baseline on which the project is appropriately planned and executed, and against which the impact can subsequently be assessed. The baseline should be established in the proper framework (that is, on site in the case of production projects, and in the right institutional location in the case of other projects), and involve qualified women.
(iv) Training and education of women are required at all levels to increase their opportunities for participation in the sector. Although no one area merits higher priority, particular attention should be given to training for women in extension especially in locations where women are active as producers. Promotion of careers for women in aquaculture can begin in the schools. Time is a major constraint for women to receive training, and consequently training should be scheduled with this in mind.
(v) Information prepared and distributed for aquaculture projects (or by projects) should reflect the existing participation of women at all levels. This is common for consumer education, but is equally appropriate for extension materials and training manuals.
IN SUMMARY, the Workshop recognizes a strong economic relationship between the growth of the aquaculture sector worldwide and the growth of employment opportunities for women. Both can profit and benefit mutually. The need is for more well-directed efforts to involve women, and to confirm their impact on the industry.
<section>4</section>
CONCLUSIONS OF THE WORKING GROUPS
Level 1. Consumption and Marketing of Aquaculture Products
Improved nutrition and food self-sufficiency are two of the main priorities quoted in the policies of the governments of developing countries. Aquaculture is being recognized increasingly as a sector which can provide nutritious products of quality and contribute either directly or indirectly to the food resources of the country. Based on this premise, government support should be directed towards those production systems which can be operated within the confines of the purchasing power of the communities as a whole, and at locations close to the markets.
Handling and marketing of fish are activities in which women traditionally predominate. However, support facilities for promotion and marketing aquaculture products, particularly in remote rural areas unaccustomed to fish, are not adequately provided to lessen the constraints on women engaged in local distribution and marketing.
Full recognition should be given to these traditional and existing roles of women, and increased attention should be paid to chose local commercial and social factors which can either limit or enhance their expansion into aquaculture, for example, storage facilities, transportation systems, trading procedures, distribution networks, etc. The need for transportation systems and distribution networks, particularly the former, must be recognized as constraints in all fields of development for women. Until overcome, this constraint often negates the efforts of assistance.
Existing and successful women's groups should be enhanced by the creation of marketing-based trade associations structured on mutual cooperation and codependency. The sharing and distribution of essential market information, for example, production figures and cycles, price structures, consumer preferences, etc., must be encouraged to the benefit of all concerned in the buying chain. Such associations can effectively provide self-financed market support services for their members to the greater benefit of the community as a whole. These benefits may be in the form of credit availability, stable food supplies and price structures, consumer education, market facilities, etc. In addition, successful trade associations can expand into other complimentary commodity areas or development activities, and serve as valuable and effective liaison with outside contacts or as a producer lobby tool.
Motivation towards aquaculture marketing at all levels is vitally important. Based on current government policies for aquaculture development, such as increased employment, optimal exploitation of natural resources, food self-sufficiency, etc., governments should support and encourage processing, marketing, and distribution networks for the benefit of both producers and consumers.
The success of women's participation in trade associations should be furthered by free access to formal management and marketing skills, encouraged by available training.
Level 2. Aquaculture Production
The active participation of governments in the infrastructure of the sector is necessary but, with certain exceptions, governments should not themselves be involved in commercial production.
Women are eminently capable, both physically and technically, of participating in all three basic systems of aquaculture production and their many adaptations. Their participation is evident in family groups, in communal or rural groups, in specific women's groups, and in commercial concerns. Particularly evident is their work in intensive production systems in hatcheries. All of these enterprises can therefore be encouraged.
A number of specific social, economic, and cultural constraints limit the opportunities for women to participate in aquaculture as producers. The extent of these constraints are location-specific and therefore special provisions are often required to overcome them. Women's economic activities must be integrated with their domestic activities, and their financial resources are generally limited. Associative forms of aquaculture production are therefore more suited to these general constraints.
Time is a major constraint for women in rural areas. This is relevant to aquaculture production as certain production practices are demanding on time. Production enterprises have therefore to be selected carefully, and again associative enterprises are more appropriate for women in rural areas.
Many opportunities exist for women to participate in aquaculture production but more specific identification of opportunities to upgrade and expand their activities is needed. For example, support activities of production, both upstream and downstream, are generally neglected but provide important opportunities for women's employment and income. These activities include production of fry and fingerlings (juveniles) in hatcheries, networking, processing, etc., and should be considered in addition to end production.
Greater attention is required in the identification, planning, and execution of all aquaculture production enterprises, but particularly those which involve women. Better preparation can be achieved through studies of the baseline, which should be carried out on site and involve qualified women. The baseline should take into account the components of marketing as well as production and local infrastructure. The time for the baseline study should be adequate for the magnitude of the proposed development. Follow-up systems are also required to monitor the impact of development activities on women, and to publicize the data.
Level 3. Local Infrastructure
The infrastructure necessary to support the primary beneficiaries of aquaculture as a whole is constrained by many common problems. Among the most important are the ownership rights of land, and legal access to water. In this regard, the local administrative structure is often an added constraint. These constraints are more acute for women than for men, and unfortunately these problems in many countries will not be easily resolved for some time.
Technical problems, such as the need for basic resources of seed, feed, fertilizer, and equipment are constrained more by access to capital or credit than by anything else. Again this constraint affects women more than men. Access to credit and training in credit management skills are important requirements for women investing effort in aquaculture. Credit should be readily provided to women, especially those who have demonstrated the financial viability of their enterprises and a market for the increased production. Where necessary, assistance should be provided to undertake such analyses as it is imperative that the enterprise is viable.
Training of women in extension work, equipment maintenance, hatchery and farm management and operations, and skills for dealing with local administration, have been almost totally neglected and are of prime importance. As time is a major constraint for women, training must be scheduled appropriately. Relatively few obstacles exist to women's participation in aquaculture at this sectoral level with the exception of training. In many activities, such as in hatcheries, women are preferred. The presence of women in the sector at this level is important as it sets examples for others. As a certain level of education is often required (especially to be employed as a government extension agent), women should be included in mid-level training and scholarship programmes.
There is a great priority for women in extension services. Women extension agents respond to the needs of women producers and also create awareness about possibilities for women. Constraints for women in extension are the lack of training and basic education, time, the requirement and the means to travel, and the poor pay. Most government extension services, particularly in the new field of aquaculture, suffer from a lack of funds and facilities. Compensation can be assisted through incentives.
Extension services must be geared towards the needs of rural women. As many women share the responsibilities of production they need to have the information, and there are also good socio-cultural reasons; for example, there are often prohibitions for women to speak to foreign men. For women, training and visit systems by a few women extension agents combined with local demonstration farms owned and run by women may be preferable to the traditional cadre of uniformed government extension agents.
More attention to the components of this level are required in the planning and execution of development projects for women. In particular:
(i) Preparation must take into account the existing local infrastructure and the ownership and utilization of land and water. Access to these fundamental resources must exist in the area before the creation of the infrastructure becomes meaningful.
(ii) Extension activities must be brought to where the women are, and women should be included in planning extension services.
(iii) Pilot or model farms, including some operated primarily by women, should be established and given exposure to other farmers in the area, both male and female. Demonstration farms (possibly also staffed by women) are useful to reflect actual farm conditions, and can be readily accessible to women.
(iv) Training and visit extension systems should be implemented and utilized.
(v) Women extension workers should be recruited and have access to means of transportation; female link workers should be trained, and both link workers and extension agents should conduct on-the-farm training.
(vi) Information materials should be deployed by extension services which are responsive to and indicative of women's presence in the sector.
At this level there is a continuous need for updating training to keep pace with an advancing sector. In addition to the need for short-courses and workshops on technology, there is a continuous requirement for workshops on financial management for women, on business, credit, and credit management. These should be held in areas where women operate viable aquaculture businesses.
Level 4. National Infrastructure
At this level of the sector, there are in general few differences in male and female performance. However, many regional constraints exist for the equal participation of women. These must be recognized and eventually overcome.
Education and training at this level (middle and upper management) have not been major issues for the participation of women. The constraints have been the shortage of suitable short and long-term courses for the sector as a whole, and the narrow range of subject matter. Courses have been predominantly on biotechnology to the neglect of the important non-biotechnical subjects, such as economics, socio-economics, marketing, management, administration, etc.
When training courses are arranged it is important that women are notified that they are eligible. If necessary, special provisions (such as child care) have to be organized to ensure their participation, and at times training courses for women only may be necessary. Governments should be encouraged to make long-term commitments to train women as extension leaders and station/hatchery managers, as well as researchers and administrators in aquaculture.
Training should include other disciplines than those related to the biotechnology of aquaculture. Non-biotechnical disciplines are equally important for women. Training should be given by professionals in these disciplines, including women. In regions where the wives participate in marketing and management of male-run farms, these women should be eligible and included in appropriate training courses on management.
Higher education in aquaculture is, however, needed for women in many countries and the resources are not readily at hand; for example, in Africa and parts of Latin America appropriate educational centres are few. It is important that external training, particularly in inter-regional and regional training programmes, includes women. As suitable candidates may be scarce women with training in aquaculture-related fields (agriculture, biology, veterinary sciences, agriculture economics, etc.), should be selected for additional training in aquaculture. Scholarships for women provided by assistance agencies are important in this context.
For the long-term investment in education and training, special consideration should be given to promote the idea of the non-traditional professions for girls. Aquaculture has opportunities for both academic and vocational employment for women at all levels.
There are few (if any) constraints for qualified women to enter aquaculture research. On the contrary, in many countries women have easier access than men to research professions. There are numerous examples of women active as researchers, and members of the professional organizations.
Research for aquaculture development should be adaptive and farmer-oriented in areas where the level of aquaculture development is low; research should identify and incorporate technologies which can suit women. Where the level of aquaculture development is higher, more sophisticated approaches can be applied. Again, research and development should not be restricted to biotechnology. Ideally suited for women researchers are cultural, social, and economic problems, in addition to the traditional fields of marketing research and consumer education.
The organization at a national level of inputs into the sector can benefit from the participation of women, in particular the management of programmes for credit, loans, guarantees, and development grants, etc. This would ensure that women have equal access to such inputs, and all documents had paragraphs appropriately worded for women. However, credit programmes aimed only at women should be avoided.
Level 5. National Sector Management
National sector management of aquaculture as a whole has been weak in both developed and developing countries. Most governments must still determine their need for aquaculture, and establish a policy and development plan accordingly. In those countries where development has been established, there remains the need to maintain an enabling environment to maximize the national resources - and this includes the participation of women.
At a national level, governments must foster aquaculture by establishing policies and plans, both short and long-term, which are adaptable to change, and must implement them through legislation, fiscal policies, administration, demonstration, training, and education. In addition, governments must foster the position of women in the sector. This can be achieved by:
(i) A national plan for aquaculture development which addresses women within target groups at every level. This requires a commitment on the part of the government to remove obstacles which impede or limit access of the target groups to productive resources and education.
(ii) Secure adequate resources and funding to implement the plan through the creation and/or strengthening of the national infrastructure. To ensure the participation of women it is vital that the expertise of women in economic, social, and technical affairs, etc., are involved in the planning processes, and in subsequent sector development and analysis.
Level 6. Global and Inter-regional Management
Intervention at a global level and inter-regional level continues to be vital in establishing aquaculture, particularly for developing countries where no sector has yet been established. Advice and the direction of technical assistance to national governments to promote their aquaculture development in general, and the involvement of women in particular, remains a high priority.
As women have demonstrated their ability to work successfully at all levels of the sector, it is important to continue to construct an environment conducive to their greater participation and mutual benefit. Further opportunities must be created. This can best be achieved at the global level, predominantly through the collection and dissemination of information (as demonstrated by this Workshop), and the transfer of technology between countries. For example, the proceedings of this Workshop should be brought to the attention of international and inter-governmental organizations (such as the FAO Committee on Fisheries), and other international institutions to make governments aware of the need to provide policy support for the participation of women in the sector at all levels, and to adopt the other recommendations of the workshop.
Continuous dissemination can also be achieved through organization at a global level of international conferences not only to up-date regional and national aquaculture programmes by bringing together decision-makers to reorientate development strategies for aquaculture as a whole, but also to develop strategies in which women and men can benefit mutually. Such regional conferences could promote individual national initiatives for workshops and training courses for women.
Several on-going efforts specific to women in aquaculture development exist. It is important that these are evaluated through country case-studies, not only to highlight the participation of women at all levels but also to identify and resolve recurring issues; also to determine successes and failures as bases for formulating and planning future programmes for women. These can best be undertaken at a global level.
Similarly, impartial monitoring of women's participation in the entire spectrum of the aquaculture sector, including collection of statistics, can only be carried out at a global level. A better definition of the active labour input by women into the sector is necessary, particularly as it relates to long-term investment planning by both governments and private industry. One mechanism for this might be an existing databank, such as FARMAP (the Agricultural Farming System) which collects and codes the activities of women in the sector to quantify and identify their labour inputs.
Recognition of the contributions being made by women to the sector can be made effectively at a global level. This can be achieved by promoting and exchanging technical information between women through TCDC principles, and requiring the support of international and bilateral agencies. This will also encourage the multilateral, bilateral and national agencies, and donors to continue their policies to favour the integration of women in the sector.
Greater awareness of women's participation in aquaculture is required. This can be achieved through the better use of opportunities, particularly in published materials. Consumer education uses this technique almost entirely, but there are opportunities at all levels to make readers or viewers more aware of women active in aquaculture. Such initiatives can be instigated at a global level.
<section>5</section>
WOMEN IN AQUACULTURE PRODUCTION IN WEST AFRICA (B. Trottier)
by Bernadette Trottier
Via Nicola Fabrizi 1, 00153 Rome, Italy
1. INTRODUCTION
Throughout West Africa women are the main producers of food. Their time is usually fully taken up by a multitude of domestic and production tasks. It is therefore clearly thoughtless to envisage yet further development, in this case the farming of fish, to add to their overall burden. Furthermore, they are unlikely to take up any activity which is not already related in some way to their existing responsibilities. Attempts to develop fish farming will have an impact on all members of the household, including their fishing activities, and this impact could be negative. The participation of women in aquaculture production in Africa therefore has to have good reason.
This paper describes the position and roles of women in fish farming production in West Africa, from Chad to Zaire, and to Senegal. The literature on aquaculture is characterized by an almost total absence of references to people, not least women. The source material therefore includes many personal communications and personal experiences, and answers to a questionnaire survey (Annex III). A total of 38 people from 18 West African countries sent back the questionnaires. Some added information on East African countries. The results are patchy and have no statistical value, but they serve as a useful starting point to describe the current status of women in production in African countries, particularly in West Africa.
The questionnaire was aimed at identifying places where women are already producers of fish or other aquatic animals, such as clams and oysters, with information describing this activity in terms of environment, motivation, and techniques. It also aimed at locating places where women are already active in improving their fishing activities with such things as stocking fish in ponds and feeding.
2. WOMEN IN TRADITIONAL FISHING
According to much of the early anthropological literature almost everyone, whether man, woman, or child, is an occasional fisherman in the traditional economies of West Africa. Without almost any exception rural women carry on this traditional fishing activity. Therefore, a better understanding of this role may provide clues on how women might benefit (or not) from the implementation of fish farming projects.
Women dive for oysters in the coastal lagoons of Benin and Togo, and they harvest oysters in saline mangrove swamps in Senegal and the Gambia. In Guinea Bissau, shrimp fisher women make up the largest category of producers in fisheries. In practically every region women catch fin fish, with the exceptions of the Korhogo region of northern Côte d'Ivoire and in an unidentified part of Cameroon where women do not do any fishing at all. Other places of course exist but they are the exception rather than the rule. In Sierra Leone fishing is left to women as it is not worthy of a man's time. In Gabon a significant number of fishing canoes in the estuary of the River Gabon near Libreville are operated by the wives and daughters of the Yoruba owners.
The intensity of the fishing activity of women ranges widely. It may be not at all or taboo (as in Korhogo, Côte d'Ivoire), or very occasionally (Senegal River Valley), or every day (Tombali Region, Guinea Bissau); the majority of women, however, go fishing when they are free or have time during other activities. In the dry season, for example, they go fishing more often when cropping activities are minimal. Women go fishing individually but especially in groups, adding a significant social content to the activity.
The motivations for fishing range just as widely. They catch fish for an occasional family meal (Zaire), or for cash sale (Benin and Senegal); but the most common motivation is to supplement the family's protein intake and then to sell or exchange small surpluses.
The literature on fisheries development makes little or no mention of the fishing activities of women, however relevant they may be. This is due to the fact that women do not fish full-time, or do not use efficient gear, or fish only for subsistence. On the other hand, the recognized part-time fisherman may only make two or three efforts a week, and then may not even sell any fish. A woman who does the same, as in many regions of Guinea Bissau, for example, (Hochet, 1979), is said to be fishing for the family. It is recognized as one of her domestic tasks and not considered an occupation any more than any other tasks.
Most of the fishing carried out by women is through wading in shallow waters. The fishing methods of women consist mostly of managing permanently set traps or baskets, or diving, or building a weir or dam and then draining it. Hooks and lines, and nets are used but are generally pieces of commercial gear salvaged and fixed together.
It is often said that women are not real fishermen because they do not use canoes. It is true that they do not use costly equipment, mostly because paying off such investments requires a level of activity beyond what their other duties permit. Women use canoes practically everywhere, and in some places (in the Lower Volta region in Ghana) a husband's gift to his bride is a canoe (Lawson, 1972).
Fishing activities of women in West Africa suffer from the invisibility which characterized their cropping activity until a few years ago. For example, in Guinea Bissau several projects are being considered or implemented for the integrated farming of fish/shrimps and rice. The national fishing traditions in this country are ignored and the importance of the fishing activity of women in this tradition is not recognized. However, Hochet (1979) reports that among the Balante rice farmers of Tombali region a fishing tradition exists and largely in the hands of women.
The role of women in fishing in Guinea Bissau is important although their presence and efforts are still not recognized ostensibly because they do not fish full-time, and use inefficient gear. Although most reports deplore the absence of a national fishing tradition in the country, authors do not recognize the present work of women.
3. TRANSITIONS FROM FISHING TO FARMING
Women in rural areas cannot devote themselves totally to any one activity for many obvious reasons. The specialization of men in any one activity, particularly on a commercial level, results in the almost systematic abandonment of that activity by women or their specialization in support functions. Women have therefore exploited other environments for fishing and the places where women fish are generally shallow, seasonal, or limited in size and cannot sustain a capture fishery.
Pollnac (1984) discussed the division of labour by sex and its evolution with respect to fishing communities. The example of Tongu, Sierra Leone, was documented by Hendrix (1984); and in Kossou Lake in the Côte d'Ivoire it was foreseen by Dravi (1972) and later confirmed by Gnielinski (1979).
Economic development efforts aimed at women have focussed on other sectors, such as cropping or market gardening, as these are more lucrative for women than traditional fishing. Fishing by women has therefore declined into a pastime or has been abandoned altogether. Several environments, such as wetlands, are unexploited and both the land and the time could conceivably be reallocated to fish farming by women.
Lawson (1972) described some traditional practices of fishing which have been carried out by women to improve the natural productivity of fisheries. One example was the restocking of clams (called "afani") by Ewe-speaking women on the Lower Volta River in Ghana in the early '50s. Some 1000 to 2000 women collected clam seed from the saline reproduction areas and replanted them in staked-out areas of sandy river bottom along 50-60 km of freshwater reaches. The total output in 1954 was estimated to be worth twice the value of the other two (male) fisheries combined.
With the impoundment of the Akosombo Dam in the early '60s the fishery was moved but eventually became extinct as swifter currents made diving more difficult. Unfortunately, no attempt was made to inform the women about the change or to introduce them to farming. New projects were introduced to retrain men as lake fishermen, and this caused problems for the women as they were expected to carry out support functions. Possibly the clam industry could not have been helped, but it is significant that the opportunity was not seriously considered and that the only alternative activity open to women was in support of the men's fishery, where they did not have established rights to compensation.
Another example was reported in Gabon (Vincke and Wijkström, 1982) who mentioned the existence of a traditional form of fish culture where women caught fingerlings to stock in ponds owned by their husbands.
Similar efforts to develop fish farming, like that intensifying the traditional forms of ponding in the fadamas of Sokoto State in Nigeria (FAO/UN,1969), exist in a number of countries. In Liberia, for example, almost all the women of the Gio, Mano and Kpele tribes of Nimba Country stock small catfish and turtles in barrage ponds. This is a traditional activity carried out by both men and women and is distinct from formal aquaculture where women work along with men.
Many of the women have developed techniques for concentrating and holding fish for subsequent use, or when they are larger. For example, many women of the Bassa tribe in Bassa County in Liberia, as well as the women of the Gio and Mano tribes of Nimba County, build fences of bushes, reeds, or branches to keep fish in a place to grow larger. In Gabon some women in almost every tribe in the regions of Franceville, Ogooué, Ivindo, Nyanga, and Moyen Ogooué make large baskets which they keep in the water to store live fish. Women of the Lari, Lingala and MBochi tribes in La Cuvette and Pool regions in the Congo build fences, small dams, or dig holes in which to trap fish, and in the Gambia about half the women of the Jola, Manjanjo, and Mandinka tribes build fences and dams but do not wait before bailing out the water. In the Côte d'Ivoire almost all the women of the Guérés tribe in the west build fences and dams but wait about seven days before bailing out to collect the fish.
In Zaire many women build small dikes at an angle to river or stream banks and place "medicine" in the tip to attract fish; in Nigeria a few women in Bendel State tribes keep fish in pens; and in Senegal women in the Basse Casamance are involved in a traditional form of rice/fish culture. In Guinea Bissau two groups of Papel women near Bissau, about 50 in all, have taken over unused land where they raise fish in the depressions. In Senegal women collect branches covered with small oysters and replant them in more convenient locations for future harvesting.
Where women have fish they feed them with kitchen wastes. Stocking fingerlings from the wild in ponds is less common as a totally spontaneous practice. These practices can conceivably be starting points for the introduction and development of pond culture, and even cage culture as practised in Gabon, or pen culture in Nigeria and Ghana. As these practices and other related activities are carried out by women the time currently spent on them might be reallocated to fish farming.
4. WOMEN IN AQUACULTURE PRODUCTION
4.1 Owners and Operators
Women who own or operate (manage) fish farms are extremely few in number. In the Côte d'Ivoire a cooperative operating fish ponds at Salomougou contains 23 women members. Also in the Côte d'Ivoire there are known two women owners; about 20 in the Central African Republic; about 30 in Congo; less than one hundred near Accra and one in the Lower Volta region of Ghana; two in the Lebemba region of Gabon, and four or five in the Kananga region of Zaire. Most of these owners have inherited their farms, but some had reportedly invested money earned from trading.
A survey (Sluijer, 1983) of the role of women in fish farming in the Central African Republic indicates that 52% of the wives of fish farmers near Bangui had accepted the gift of ponds in exchange for which they also worked on their husband's remaining ponds. This arrangement enhanced their economic security and actual ownership was not an issue. As there were 8700 fish farmers in CAR in 1984, the number of women who operate at least one pond is significantly larger than the 20 reported by the questionnaire. Another survey (Low, 1985) on the work of Peace Corps in West Kasai in Zaire suggests that up to 10% of the fish farms may be owned by women; these women are called 'secondary adopters' as development was explicitly directed towards male heads of households.
Only the women of Benin appear to be barred from the production side of fish farming, where the raising of fish in acadjas is traditionally a man's job. However, women are everywhere on the water to buy the fish from the acadja farmers. Women of the Toffin and Pedah tribes finance men to build fish holes and acadjas in the lagoons of lower Benin.
Little is known about the level of husbandry practised by women but it appears that not much is done on ponds which have been obtained through inheritance. These women did not construct the ponds and apparently felt that they only added to their work load. These women have not been the targets of training and extension, and do not comprehend the effort and time required to manage them.
Women who constructed their own ponds, hiring male labour to build them and sometimes to operate them, are more likely to seek advice. Such women, although still a minority, have recorded some of the highest yields ever obtained in West Africa, and are systematically quoted.
The great majority of female fish farmers are wives and mothers, and their primary preoccupations are their families and their crops. These have priority, a fact which can be disconcerting to extension agents. Extensive fish farming in the rural areas must be viewed within the real constraints of the life of the target populations. Fish can provide vitally needed animal protein but rural women know that the staples of food security are cereals and tubers; anything else can only be a supplement.
4.2 General Labour
The literature on fish farming in Africa rarely makes reference to people, except in terms of labour as an input to be quantified. No subdivision by sex is made. The authors evidently consider that it is the practice itself which is important. Surveys of labour input are usually performed by men, and for the most part they will expect and be expected to speak with men. Women are seldom seen at pond side meetings and their participation is therefore downplayed.
Women participate extensively and actively in all phases of work performed on fish farms throughout West Africa. This is confirmed by anthropologists and social observers, particularly women, who lived in the villages following the day by day operations of fish farms. The types of work which women do are illustrated by Table 1. Women help with practically every Cask; the exception noted (raising ducks or pigs) is because integrated fish and animal husbandry has yet to be introduced in many regions. In Tanzania. for example, women raise ducks on their husband's ponds.
The work which women do now in fish farming, a new activity to them, is a transfer of their labour from cropping. Some tasks, such as land preparation, are usually considered to be too heavy for a woman, and others are accepted to be man's work due to the use of a specific tool. This pattern is common; women do not dig, excavate, or construct ponds, and women in Zaire do not cut weeds or compost materials. In almost every country women help by carrying dirt and/or cooking meals for working parties during construction, and assist or assume total responsibility for almost all other tasks which do not require physical strength. Where ponds are not self draining, women in the family and their friends are called on to help drain and harvest the fish, much as they do when barrage fishing. Wives will also help in disposing of the harvest in the same way that they help in distributing cereals or root crops to family and kin who have helped; and they usually sell the rest. However,
fish farm yields from the small ponds rarely produce a surplus exceeding local demand.
The Côte d'Ivoire is one country where women appear to have a minor role in fish farming, although this is not confirmed (Kena-Guede, 1985). In a survey of fish farmers in the Cote d'Ivoire it was reported that assistance for most tasks is provided by male kin, mainly boys and youths, or hired male labour. About 10% of the farmers were assisted by wives, mothers, or daughters and this was exclusively for feeding. At Salomougou, the female members of some working teams (10 men, 5 women) established for a cooperative project cooked meals while the men worked on the ponds.
In Zaire a survey (Low, 1985) recorded that the participation of women and children was important for success because of their work collecting and transporting materials for composting. For this same reason, older men were more successful than younger men. It was noted that men who left the ponds in charge of their wives for long periods tended to be less successful because their wives had rarely received any training or extension. In the three districts surveyed, the highest percentage of both male and female participation in pondwork occurred among the 31-49 year age group, and older. All of the men and women in this group were active in some way in Luiza, while all the women but only 50% of the men participated in Dibaya. Among the 16-30 year group, 83% of the women in Luiza and 50% of the men were involved in pond work; but in Dibaya all the men worked but only 80% of the women.
In Central African Republic 70-80% of the women interviewed in the survey said that they had participated in construction, 70% had helped with feeding (the owner also carried out feeding tasks in 60% of the cases), and over 90% emptying ponds and selling fish. These women said that they helped their husbands to have fish, or because it was one of their domestic duties as a wife. Two-thirds of the wives obtained fish once a week or once a month, and the rest only at harvest. This confirms the importance of fish for the family as motivation for helping on the farms and for fishing in general.
Most women work for their husbands and receive fish as part of the proceeds or in lieu of remuneration. Women who help with harvesting are given fish in the same way they might receive baskets of rice, grain, or tubers. This practice must be recognized as a form of remuneration. The value of the gift, quantified on the basis of comparative urban prices, is often quite out of proportion to the work performed. It is also apparent that successful fish farmers located near a market often abandon the traditional rural practice of redistribution typical of subsistence societies. Farmers in Salomougou in the Côte d'Ivoire, for example, asked extension agents to market the fish to avoid giving fish away (Lazard, 1984). This is always a possible negative effect on women if they are prevented socially from taking up paid employment.
The questionnaires, in summary, indicate that women are good fish farmers in African countries because they are patient, meticulous, and diligent. The lack of training and the opportunity for obtaining credit are the main constraints preventing more women practising farming.
There are a number of reasons which make women a good target group for fish farming development: (i) because of their children and their crops women are less likely than men to be away from home for long periods; therefore they can give continual attention to pond husbandry if the ponds are close; (ii) because they are accustomed to daily routine women are more likely to provide the constant attention required for good husbandry, and know and can use a variety of by-products (such as kitchen wastes, weeds and crop residues) for composting; (iii) because a typical rural fish pond does not provide full employment women can accommodate fish farming tasks to other duties. Tasks which require greater labour inputs can be scheduled appropriately around others as the fish are not at risk if harvesting is delayed; and (iv) because of their responsibility Cowards the family, women give priority to family needs. Benefits aimed specifically at the head of the household do not
necessarily accrue to the household, and often there has been a resulting negative economic and nutritional impact on the position of the wife and family.
5. PROMOTING FISH FARMING BY WOMEN IN AFRICA
There is a definite need for explicit recognition of women's contributions to the development of aquaculture in West Africa. This requires better documentation of evidence of their participation, and particular attention to involving and evaluating their existing activities in further development. A number of constraints must be recognized which limit the participation of women as owners/operators.
(i) The main constraint is time to allocate to a new activity, especially one which requires substantial commitment such as fish farming. This is reinforced by women themselves, particularly those who are not familiar with fish farming. However, for the most part, only large fish farms provide full-time employment; typical extensive rural ponds of West African countries which may be only a few ares in size require little time to maintain in addition to the production of compost.
The time for pond construction, which may require some 20-30 days of effort for a 100 m pond, is less the constraint than the hiring of labour and obtaining credit. Other tasks of maintenance can be integrated with other periods in the cropping cycle.
As many women are not fully aware of the real demands of fish farming on their time their reluctance to take on another task reinforces a bias in development towards men. The time constraint is often advanced to rationalize the absence of women as producers, but it is not necessarily justified.
(ii) The constraint of land ownership is common to both men and women, but it is especially difficult for women to resolve. Land tenure in Africa is traditionally communal, and land for cultivation is an inalienable right of every adult but allocated through the village elders who are all male. In some communities, women do not have direct access to the elders but must approach a father, husband, or brother for some of the land allocated to the family. In some countries women are barred from obtaining title to land as an occupant or owner, or may not be able to buy or rent land. Even women with inherited land may only have the right to usufruct until male children are of age.
Both men and women often encounter resistance if they want land for permanent usufruct, which is required for tree crops, irrigation development, and fishponds, etc. Lack of long-term tenure is often cited for disinterest in productive investments on the land, and a handicap for credit programmes. Several governments dealing with land reforms have responded with regulations for occupancy or privatization, but these are generally reserved for men.
Villages in Africa often have traditional rights to adjacent water bodies or streams, and may even have sexual subdivisions of usufruct. In the Lower Volta Region of Ghana, for example, in the early 50s women had the prerogative on clam diving and men the prerogative on fishing in creeks and lagoons (Lawson, 1972); in Benin it is mostly the women who catch shellfish in the coastal lagoons. Such user rights are good reasons for allocating women land for fish farming.
Women who require land to establish a fish farm usually approach the village elders directly, or their husbands. Women may rent or buy land in Cameroon, Congo, Ghana, and Nigeria. They can inherit land in almost every country, and inheritance is in fact the most common way women become owners of fish ponds.
(iii) Although land is a principal requirement for aquaculture, credit and the labour to develop it are important constraints for both men and women. Again, women are more affected than men. Credit is often a continual need for seasonal inputs, such as fingerlings and other supplies; but the constraint of labour is removed almost completely once the pond is constructed.
Excavation and construction of ponds are activities considered too heavy for women. They must therefore hire male labourers, and this requires capital. Tables 2 and 3 illustrate possible sources of money for women to construct and operate a fish farm.
Women have less access than men to formal sources of credit, such as banks or credit unions. They rarely have the collateral required, usually land title. Therefore women rely mostly on family, their savings, or money lenders. Some women, such as successful traders, do not need credit or can obtain loans on good terms. This is not the case of rural woman, however, particularly the female head of a rural household who is particularly needful and vulnerable in most African societies.
(iv) A significant constraint which operates against women becoming fish farmers is the lack of access to extension and training. Women are rarely included in extension meetings, often because they are planned with reference to the schedule of the men. Unless special provisions are made by extension agents to include women in the meetings, women will not fully understand fish farming, and ponds left in their care will be left untended. More particularly, greater benefits can be gained by having more women extension agents. This would help to overcome and eliminate some of the social barriers inhibiting many women from taking up fish farming.
(v) The major external factor to the participation of women in aquaculture is the failure to make explicit provisions for them in the target group. As experiences in agriculture have demonstrated, benefits for the heads of households do not necessarily accrue to the family. Furthermore, provisions for participation are often poorly understood by the women themselves, or are unacceptable for social or cultural reasons.
There remains a propensity to overlook women in aquaculture production, even though women are recognized to be the main food crop producers in Africa. The need is to involve more women in the development process, not only in planning and administration but particularly in extension where direct communication is necessary.
6. POTENTIAL IMPACTS OF AQUACULTURE ON WOMEN
The failure to recognize the contributions and constraints of women in the development of aquaculture in African countries can have significant effects on their position. This has occurred in agriculture and it is occurring in fish farming. For example, (i) introducing fish farming into some key areas may involve the introduction of new species for higher value markets, and even exports. If this were done in Benin and Togo, for example, where women already fish for oysters, they could be displaced. This should justify some compensatory alternative, such as provision to establish them in a marketing role which women dominate in the traditional acadja fishery; (ii) introducing fish farming mainly or exclusively for male beneficiaries usually adds tasks to the workload of women. This produces a predominantly negative impact on the women unless there are returns to them and they understand the work itself; (iii) access to fish ponds often liberates women from other fishing
duties, and there are opportunities to obtain fish more conveniently and regularly throughout the year, and (iv) fish pond responsibilities may interfere with other activities, such as cropping, which have established rights of remuneration.
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to thank sincerely all the 38 colleagues, acquaintances and friends who returned the completed questionnaires around which the information in this paper has been prepared.
Many other people offered their personal communications from their present or past experiences over many years of work in Africa. I would therefore like to add my thanks to Julian Nyuiadzi in Togo, Cyrus Tiah in Liberia, the Depelchins in Côte d'Ivoire, Ambrose Asamoah in Ghana, and Jan Low in Malawi; also Vi Allread and Eileen O'Hara, two ex-PCVs in Zaire and Togo, respectively; also Christopher Nugent, Michel Vincke, Dora Blessich and Francois Vallet of FAO; Leonardo Garuglieri of the EEC, Brussels, and Alberto Caratelli of Idroconsult, Italy.
Table 1. Work performed by women
Table 2. Economics
Table 3. Loan sources
<section>6</section>
WOMEN IN AQUACULTURE PRODUCTION IN ASIAN COUNTRIES (E. Baluyut)
by Elvira Baluyut
Inland Resources Development Corporation
Suite 111, Mercantila Insurance Building
Gen. Luna corner Beaterio Sts.
Intramuros, Manila, The Philippines
1. INTRODUCTION
Since the Proclamation of the UN Decade of Women in 1975, a number of major initiatives have been launched by FAO and other international organizations to draw attention to the contribution of women in rural development and agriculture, including fisheries. For example, in the 19th Session of the Indo-Pacific Fisheries Commission (IPFC) on the development and management of small-scale fisheries, several delegations expressed wholehearted and genuine interest in the increased participation of women in small-scale fishing activities. The Center for Integrated Rural Development for Asia and the Pacific (CIRDAP) launched its first action programme in fisheries communities in Indonesia, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, and Vietnam, convinced that women in fishing commmunities are among the most disadvantaged groups in many parts of the Asia-Pacific region. The Bay of Bengal Programme (BOBP), implemented by FAO with financial assistance from the Swedish International Development
Authority (SIDA), has likewise focused on improving the social status of women, particularly those in small-scale fishing communities, by enabling them to participate in development and to engage in economic activities on equal terms with men.
By comparison with small-scale capture fisheries, little has been published and not much work has been done to improve the scope of women's participation in aquaculture, or to bring women into the mainstream of aquaculture development efforts. This paper attempts to define the present role of Asian women in the various types and stages of aquaculture production, quantifying whenever possible the extent or value of such participation in the countries of the region. It reviews areas where women's involvement can be strengthened or expanded in view of the increasing importance of aquaculture in fish production in Asia and the Pacific.
2. WOMEN'S INVOLVEMENT IN AQUACULTURE PRODUCTION IN ASIA
In traditional fisheries women are not usually directly involved in fishing activities, either on account of the physical strain and the long hours away from home and family, or because of social taboos, customs, and beliefs which prohibit them from boarding fishing vessels. Women are thus confined to shore-based activities, such as fish handling, processing, distribution, marketing, and net-making/mending.
In contrast, the role of women in fish farming, especially in small fish farms, has long been predominant (Yap, 1980a). Women take part in actual production in most types of aquaculture - brackishwater or freshwater fish ponds, fish pens or fish cages - whether on an extensive, semi-intensive, or intensive level on a small, medium, or large scale, and in various stages of fish farm development (planning, construction and actual operation), and from seed production to grow-out/rearing, harvesting, and post-harvest handling.
The scope and magnitude of women's participation in aquaculture production in Asia are influenced to a large extent by the level of aquaculture technology in a particular country vis-a-vis the role and status of women in that society. For example, China, Thailand, and the Philippines, with their high literacy rates and their comparatively liberal value systems, boast of large pools of trained and skilled women fish farmers, technicians, extension workers, and professionals who are directly or indirectly involved in various capacities in fish production through aquaculture.
In contrast, in countries in South Asia (e.g., Bangladesh and India) where 90% of rural women are functionally illiterate (FAO, 1986d) and where prevailing social and cultural values limit their access to training opportunities and development assistance, women are necessarily confined to such domestic-based or auxiliary tasks as feed preparation, fish feeding, and even pond construction.
In China where freshwater aquaculture, mainly of complementary carp species in polyculture and integrated with agriculture and other forms of farming, has attained recent rapid progress the woman undoubtedly plays a key role in fish production. The Chinese woman is an equal partner with the Chinese man in the task of fish production, giving reason to believe that she deserves much credit for the spectacular success of the Chinese aquaculture programme. In 1979, China produced about 813 000 t of fish (or about 80% of total freshwater fish production) and about 41 billion carp fry mostly by artificial fertilization or controlled spawning (FAO, 1983b).
The Chinese woman is involved in all aspects and stages of aquaculture, including pond construction, where she may excavate the pond manually, cut soil blocks, and transfer these to dikes. As most fish ponds in China are made of earth and constructed by manual labour, the role which women play in pond construction alone is significant. One (FAO, 1983b) report states that an average of 1 875 m^3 of earth were dug and transferred per man-day at the Baitan Hu-State Farm in Hubei Province. In two consecutive winters, about 1.5 million m^3 of earth were moved manually by 4 000 persons working 200 days. As there are about three women in a construction team of 12 to 13 workers, about 1 000 women may have been involved in the earth moving alone. In people's communes, where the work is done by all members, the women must also put in an equal share of labour in pond construction.
The operation of the fish farms also involves women at each step - from preparing the ponds to stocking fry/fingerlings, preparing feed, feeding and harvesting - especially as the farms are mostly integrated and operated by people's communes, whether fish culture or agriculture communes.
If in a fish commune composed of thousands of families, as in the Lelai People's Commune in Guangdong Province, the only female adult is the wife, there would be 17 000 women workers doing fish culture-related tasks in a production area of 2 400 ha, and helping to produce the commune's annual production of 7 700 t of food fish and 140 million fry (Table 1). This scenario is likely to be repeated in various other similar communes in the rest of China, as well as in hatcheries and associated industries.
In commercial hatcheries, which produce about 95% of over 40 million fry produced in China per year, women are involved in the various stages of hatchery/nursery operation. For example, in broodfish selection and transfer, weighing of broodfish and induced breeding, spawning and egg incubation, artificial fertilization, packing, and fry transportation.
Women are also employed by State Farms to work as officers or technicians in charge of supervising fish production activities. They are also female researchers and technicians who conduct experiments on fish culture, for example with the intensive culture of grass carp and Japanese eel at the Quingshan Reservoir.
Table 1. Main features of a people's commune specializing in aquaculture
People's Commune
Lelui PC Guangdong
Surface cultivated
4 950 ha
Population
Number of persons
Number of families
Production brigades
Production teams
Integrated, agricultural production
fish, sugarcane, mulberry trees, silk-worms, livestock (mainly pigs)
Industrial production
glass, paper, printing, plastics, alcohol, oil, tools, medicines, electronics, agricultural machinery, boats, insecticides, limestone, bricks, etc.
Annual average income per caput
Yuan 260
FISH CULTURE
Production surface
2 400 ha/8 350 ponds
Annual production
7 700 t food fish
140 million fry
Percentage total income
Cultural system
Semi-intensive polyculture
Source: FAO, 1983b
The presence of the Filipina in the aquaculture industry is all-pervasive and her contribution to its impressive growth in the past decade substantial.
A number of significant pioneering efforts in Philippine aquaculture have been made by women. For example, the highly successful fishpen technology was developed and introduced in Laguna de Bay in 1971 by a Filipina. This technology has raised fish production in Laguna de Bay substantially, yielding some 84 000 tons of highly valuable tilapia and milkfish valued at about Philippine pesos 1.4 billion (or about US$ 0.7 million) from some 25 000 hectares of fish pens and cages in 1984.
Similarly, the rapid growth of the penaeid shrimp hatchery industry in the Philippines has been helped substantially by the wide adoption of the eyestalk ablation method pioneered in the country by a female researcher at the SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department in the mid-70s.
At present a number of women figure prominantly, either directly or indirectly, in the Philippine aquaculture production scene. One of the biggest milkfish fish pond operators in the country is a woman; one of the more successful commercial shrimp hatchery operators is a woman, as is the owner-manager of one of the bigger tilapia hatchery farms in the Philippines; it is also a woman who runs one of the leading Filipino management consultancy firms involved in planning, development, and operation of aquaculture projects in the Philippines.
The Filipina is usually involved in all phases of fish farm planning, development, and operation; in all types and scales of aquaculture, and in all stages of fish production. She may be any of the following: owner/operator, fish farm manager, hatchery or pond technician, fish pond caretaker or worker, technical consultant, or any combination of these.
As owner/operator, she manages the farm herself with the help of technicians and caretakers, or hires a fish pond manager, who could also be a woman, to supervise the project on her behalf. As fish pond manager, she is responsible for overseeing the various operations of the fish pond through the different stages of development - from planning to construction to operation. An increasing number of fish pond owners/operators in various parts of the country have, in fact, expressed preference for female resident managers or technicians because of their diligence, conscientiousness, patience, and their trustworthiness. For example, the International Development Research Centre (IDRC) Tilapia Fish Farm Project in Santa Rosa, Nueva Ecija, has a female project manager; and a fish pond owner in Lubao, Pampanga, has three female technicians in his technical staff of six.
As shrimp hatchery technician, the Filipina woman is involved in specific aspects of hatchery operation - as induced maturation, larval rearing, and natural food production. As shrimp hatchery owner/manager, she supervises the different areas of hatchery operation to ensure that production targets are attained and problems are minimal.
As fish pond technician or worker the Filipina usually takes charge of the lighter tasks, such as application of fertilizers and pesticides (after the ponds have been excavated and prepared by the men), preparation of feeds, fish feeding, growth monitoring, assistance in harvesting, and post-harvest handling (sorting, icing, transport), and marketing.
Unlike the women of China, India, and Bangladesh, the Filipinas are not generally involved in manual fish pond construction. In rare instances, though, they may help the men while the latter construct the fish pond manually - for example, by acting as relays in the physical transfer of cut soil blocks from the area of excavation to the site where they are to be used later in dike construction.
In addition, Filipina women are indirectly involved in aquaculture. As wives, mothers, daughters, or sisters of fish pond owners/operators or of fish pond/fish pen caretakers, they assist in the performance of their menfolk's various tasks, keep house at the farm site, and manage the financial resources.
In the Philippines, therefore, there may be at least 20 650 women indirectly involved in brackishwater pond production, if it is assumed that for every ten workers in a farm there would be a woman assisting them in routine tasks (Table 2). If marine and freshwater farms are included, the total number of women involved in aquaculture production is much greater. Seaweed farming alone involves thousands of coastal village women in the growing, harvesting, and drying of seaweeds, mainly of the Eucheuma variety. Women are also involved in the post-harvest handling of oysters and mussels in many parts of the Philippines. The SEAFDEC/PCARR (1977) socio-economic survey of the Philippine aquaculture industry (as cited in Yap, 1980a), estimates that the females comprise only 1% of all employed help in fish ponds in the Philippines. This figure is now much increased as the industry has grown rapidly in the past decade.
Thailand has a progressive aquaculture industry which has been the focus of development. Thailand has large areas for aquaculture and several important fish species suitable for farming (Potaros, 1987). Thai women are extensively involved in aquaculture production - both in coastal areas where shrimp farming and mollusc culture are the dominant activities, and in freshwater areas where the major cultivated species are various catfishes, carps, and the giant freshwater prawn, Macrobrachium rosenbergii.
In the majority of the small fishing villages in Thailand, women are generally involved in fishing activities at a subsistence level, with their domestic activities such as duck, poultry, and pig raising combined with fish farming. Women also manage the small backyard shrimp and fish hatcheries while their men work elsewhere. In large fishing villages and towns, the women are actively engaged in fishing on a commercial scale, the most important being fish processing and freshwater fish farming.
Although no official statistics are available on the number of women involved in aquaculture production in Thailand, it could be safely said that each fish farm would have at least one woman working on the farm. That means that there would be at least 43 613 women involved in aquaculture (Table 3), of which some 35 751 would be working in the country's freshwater farms (Table 4), about 5 332 in coastal shrimp farms (Table 5), and about 2 530 in mollusc farms (Table 6), not including the professional women directly or indirectly involved in fish farming.
Table 2. Resume of information on brackishwater fish ponds in operation, 1980-84
Item
Area (in hectares)
Investment (thousand pesos)
Men employed^3
Production (metric tons)
Value (thousand pesos)
Source: BFAR (Philippines), 1984
^1 Based on the average development cost of P 10 000 per hectare
^2 Based on the average development cost of P 30 000 per hectare
^3 Based on the average of one-man employee of every hectare
Table 3. Number of fish farms in Thailand
Type of Farm
Number
Freshwater
Pond
Paddy field
Ditch
Cage
Coastal
Shrimp
Mollusc
Total
Source: Department of Fisheries (Thailand), 1983 and 1984
Table 4. Quantity and value of production from freshwater farms in Thailand in 1983
Type of Farm
Number of Farms
Area (rai)*
Production (t)
Value ($'000)
Pond
Paddy field
Ditch
Cage
Total
Source: Department of Fisheries (Thailand), 1983
*1 rai = 1 600 m^2
Table 5. Present and potential shrimp farming areas in coastal Thailand
Province
Existing
Potential Area (ha)
Area (ha)
Number of Farms
Bangkok
Samut Sakhon
Samut Songkhram
Phetchaburi
Prachuap Khiri Khan
Chumphon
Surat Thani
Nakhon Si Thammarat
Songkhla
Pattani
Narathiwat
Trat
Chanthaburi
Rayong
Chon Buri
Chachoengsao
Samut Prakan
Ranong
Phuket
Phangnga
Krabi
Trang
Satun
Total
Source: Department of Fisheries (Thailand), 1985
Table 6. Total area and production from mollusc culture in Thailand
Species
Area (hectare)
Number of Farms
Production (t)
Green mussel
Bloody cockle
Oysters
Horse mussel
Pearl shell
Source: Department of Fisheries (Thailand), 1984
While there is a general awareness of the important role women play in small-scale fisheries development in India, Bangladesh, and Sri Lanka, the women are subjected to a restrictive division of labour by sex in that all domestic work is done by them. As a result, their participation has been generally limited to such auxiliary functions as fish marketing, post-harvest handling (fish drying and salting, shrimp paste-making), prawn seed collection, and net making/mending, among others (Ayazi and Utbult, 1980).
In India the role of women has always been supplementary to that of bread-winners - although their contribution to the family is positive, their activities are only part-time and restricted mainly to cooking and tending the household (Chandrasekharan, 1979). Moreover, their participation is constrained by lack of education and training, a low literacy rate, and a total lack of training facilities.
In Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, and Andhra Pradesh, their involvement in aquaculture has been limited to prawn seed collection from estuaries and brackishwaters which is not profitable as aquaculture is not yet important in coastal areas of India.
In Sri Lanka only a minority of women are active in every aspect of small-scale fisheries in fishing villages. In a survey conducted by the Women's Bureau of Sri Lanka in eight fishing villages, only 8% of the women from fishing families did work connected with fishing, or any income-generating activity, for that matter, as most women remained at home. Women have therefore not been considered a target group for fisheries development activities, as the scope for promoting their employment and developing their skills in fisheries is believed to be limited.
The situation is much the same in small-scale fishing communities of Bangladesh - where women only operate households and take part only indirectly in fisheries activities. Recently, some women have been turning to aquafarming and prawn seed collection (Ayazi and Utbult, 1980), on account of a number of schemes in rural and coastal areas supported by national and international organizations. For example, the FAO/SIDA-sponsored Bay of Bengal Programme (BOBP) initiated a pilot project in three fishing villages near Chittagong, Bangladesh, with a combined population of more than a thousand. It helps fishing families, particularly the women, to improve their lot through a number of productive, home-based activities including carp culture. In one village, two fish ponds were leased for the culture of three varieties of Indian carp (Catla catla, Catla mrigala, and Labeo rohita). The women were trained to provide supplementary feed (oil cake and rice bran), to put sticks into the
pond to discourage poachers, and to protect the ponds.
Despite recent efforts to integrate women into economic and social development, rural women in Bangladesh are, to a great extent, subjected to a restrictive division of labour by sex, to social taboos which hinder their socio-economic development, and to a value system which does not acknowledge and appreciate their contributions to national development and progress As a result, they have limited access to social services and technical assistance which in turn could be the most likely reason for the failure of certain fish farming projects (Natpracha, 1986).
3. SCOPE FOR INCREASED WOMEN PARTICIPATION
There is much scope for increased participation of women in aquaculture production, particularly in Asia where aquaculture has risen to prominence as a major source of food fish. Aquaculture is a logical answer to problems of depleted marine resources and displaced fishermen and their families.
The scope for increased women's involvement exists both in terms of large potential areas for development (and therefore of recruiting more women into production) and of increased responsibilities given to women, especially those who are now involved. In those countries presently engaged in aquaculture production to a great extent (as in China and in most countries of the Association of South East Asian Nations, (ASEAN), more women could join the ranks of fish farmers and/or be trained in new skills which would enable them to take up additional or alternative tasks in specific aspects of production.
In coastal aquaculture alone, Shang (1986) estimates that the potential area for coastal aquaculture development in just six countries (China, Japan, the Philippines, Thailand, Indonesia and India) is over 3.3 million hectares. Based on estimates of coastal aquaculture production and the corresponding labour employed in these six countries in 1984 (about 2.4 million t of fish, shellfish, and seaweeds from approximately 772 000 hectares and employing more than 570 000 persons), the potential area for expansion of coastal aquaculture would require an additional work force of about 2.4 million (at the present average ratio of 0.7 persons per hectare). If at least one woman is employed per group of ten workers, that would mean an additional 240 000 women recruited into the coastal aquaculture production sector in Asia if the potential expansion area is utilized to the full in the six countries alone. If other countries in the region, and new areas for expansion are considered,
the labour demand would be very impressive, especially if one realizes that countries like Sri Lanka, Pakistan, and Bangladesh have yet to exploit aquaculture even partially.
In addition to the considerable scope for entry of large numbers of females into the work force in Asia, there is also substantial scope for expansion of their role in production. In Asia, particularly in India and Bangladesh where female literacy rates are low and where women are unaware of public services for infrastructure, credit, welfare, or extension, the greatest need is in general education and training for a variety of skills (FAO, 1986d) which could effectively increase their contribution to the development and promotion of aquaculture (Yap, 1980b). Women can be trained for pond management (pond preparation, stocking, feeding, fertilization, harvesting), handling, transport, and marketing - activities which do not involve highly sophisticated methods and techniques (Table 7). Integrated fish farming can also be promoted as a means of better utilization of land and water resources, and as a source of additional family income. In addition, there is opportunity for
more women to be involved in the highly technical aspects of aquaculture, as in hatcheries or seed production units, where they can be trained in many of the simple procedures.
Before all of these opportunities can be taken, however, there must be a basic recognition by governments that women can contribute substantially in aquaculture development, especially if they are given the necessary technical assistance and extension to gain new skills, or improve on old skills, in fisheries-related activities.
Table 7. Possible areas of training for women in aquaculture production
Aspect of production
Training required
Construction
- of fish ponds
- of fish pens/cages
Techniques of manual pond construction Fabrication of nets and attachment of sinkers and floats Preparation and cleaning of bamboo poles prior to installation
Pond preparation
Pond weeding, drying, or draining Control of pests and predators Fertilizer application/manuring Regulation of water entry into pond prior to stocking pH management by liming
Stocking
Timing of stocking Acclimation of fry/fingerlings to pond temperature before stocking Counting of fry/fingerlings by aliquot sampling
Feeding
Formulation and preparation of simple feeds Determination of feed quantity as percentage of fish biomass Apportioning of daily feed ration Feed distribution by broadcast or trays Monitoring of feeding and recording
Monitoring
Regular sampling of fish and vital water quality parameters Data keeping
Pond water management
Water exchange practices Pump operation/control Pond gate operation/regulation
Harvesting
Methods/techniques of harvesting Recording of harvest data Counting of fingerlings (from nurseries)
Post-harvest handling
Washing, sorting, and icing Methods of packing and transport (especially for fry/fingerlings) Simple methods of preservation (drying, smoking, salting, or even canning)
In addition, it has been suggested by FAO (1985) that women's projects, in order to be successful, have to incorporate the following four key elements:
(i) Preliminary fact-finding,
(ii) Provision of incentives
(iii) Careful monitoring, and
(iv) Women's participation in decision-making
4. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
In contrast to capture fisheries where they are traditionally limited to the shore, either by force of necessity or because of social customs and beliefs, women have been active participants in Asian aquaculture production - whether secondary to their men as in most of Asia, or as their equals as in China after 1949. The extent of this participation varies from one country to another and is usually a function of the state of importance of aquaculture and the level of technology on the one hand, and the existing socio-cultural value systems on the other. Women in China are involved in practically all aspects of aquaculture (from pond construction to harvesting), and rural women in Bangladesh and India confined to pond construction and prawn seed collection because of their limited education.
With increasing emphasis placed on aquaculture as an alternative source of fish protein and employment for the masses of Asia, the present role of women can be greatly expanded - both in terms of increased recruitment into the industry and of greater participation within the sector.
With the support of local and national governments, and assistance from multilateral aid agencies and international organizations, the problems of rural communities in general, and of rural women in particular, can be more adequately and directly addressed by means of well-planned projects which put emphasis on manpower development at the grassroots level.
5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I wish to acknowledge many personal communications in the preparation of this manuscript, particularly T. Bhukaswan of Thailand, and S. C. Castro and R. Esguerra of the Philippines. I also wish to recognize the resources of the Bay of Bengal Programme of FAO and the Swedish International Development Authority, and the many relevant articles published in the BOBP News, particularly those written by L. O. Engvall, S. R. Madhu, D. Tempelman and M. Wanigasundara.
<section>7</section>
WOMEN IN AQUACULTURE PRODUCTION IN LATIN AMERICA (M. Lizarraga)
by Margarita Lizarraga
Permanent Representation of Mexico to FAO
Viale Pasteur 65, 00144 Rome, Italy
1. BACKGROUND
Aquaculture activities in Latin America with the exclusive aim of production are relatively new. In many countries pre-hispanic antecedents of aquaculture exist, such as the handling of wild stocks in ponds or in fixed constructions, or interventions which can be considered as forms of extensive management. Until the end of the last century, the interest of scientists from institutes and universities in aquaculture in Latin America was known through bibliographic compilations or experiences and observations abroad. Many European technologies were described, and between 1872 and 1884 several species, like trout and carp, were introduced and schemes proposed for farming development.
For the last fifty years interest has been renewed in aquaculture in Latin America and further introductions of technology and species have increased. Aquaculture now occupies a place in the national development strategies of a number of countries, with respective plans, programmes, and legislation. This has produced encouraging results and allowed rapid development of the sector within a short time.
In aquaculture, and all other sectors of development, the situation of women in rural zones in Latin America is in evolution, with many differences from one country to another. This is partly due to advances in agrarian reform models, and also to many programmes concerned with economic advancement and employment of women.
Data collected directly and/or confirmed by Information from the United Nations International Labour Organization (ILO) and other organizations (United Nations, 1976; FAO, 1979c) indicate that Latin America has the lowest participation of women in rural activities (17% compared with an average of 52% world-wide). The reasons are the low salary of the family, the large size of the family, the absence or presence of a male head of the family, the size of the family plot of land, the organization of culture, etc. These have determined renewed requests to complement the family's salary, the capacity of the female working force, the possibility of access to credit schemes, and other conditions. As a consequence of measures taken to provide these incentives there have been rapid and positive responses.
It is important to point out the adverse economic conditions which the region is experiencing. The burden of external debt, and fluctuations of international markets for basic and other commodities, all add to the problems of the countries at the production level, particularly the lack of credit and high cost of labour. All these factors stress the regional phenomenon of women migrating to the cities in search of employment, aggravating the problem of excessive urbanization. Therefore, urgent measures are needed to allow women to remain in the country with the opportunity for employment which will gratify their role in the family and in society.
Quantifying the role of women in an activity not yet consolidated (in this case aquaculture) results in what is a difficult analysis, as the development of the sector is still new and continuously advancing. However, the following analysis of women's participation in aquaculture production considers three types of activity. The first in many ways parallels that of agriculture and animal husbandry in general, as rural-level aquaculture is an integrated part of all development in Latin American countries. Other forms of industrial aquaculture make up the second. Work of this kind is more technical and intensive. Other supporting forms of aquaculture, the third, include production activities such as government-owned hatcheries or research and training centres where the role of women is extremely important.
For the analysis information has been sought from various sources in each country. Although in most cases the answers received from government organizations responsible for aquaculture gave valid information on the state of aquaculture in the country, few answers referred to the role of women. Those which did referred to it imprecisely.
2. WOMEN IN RURAL AQUACULTURE PRODUCTION
In Argentina, Uruguay, and Chile rural aquaculture is still in the research and development phase, or at the pre-industrial development level (Pedini Fernandez-Criado, 1984). Women are reportedly not taking any part in these activities. On the coast of Chile, for example, women participate among a force of 11 000 individuals collecting algae, and among 1 000 individuals collecting molluscs. This has led to the need for re-stocking and culture by the government as well as by private enterprise. Women are taking part in the collecting, processing (cleaning or stripping off the shells), other post-harvest industrial activities, and in marketing. They are also working in trout farms, and in the Chilean and Argentinian lakes which have been re-stocked with trout and other valued species. Women participate in harvesting only occasionally, but it is certain that they work in processing and marketing.
In Peru and Bolivia participants in agrarian reform schemes include women, but without remuneration for their work. In the Andes, women participate in aquaculture and fisheries, harvesting as well as post-harvest handling and marketing. In projects for trout culture in cages, women participate in construction, feeding, and maintenance. In rural pond farming, which has developed through international assistance projects, women participate in the management of ponds and feeding the fish. They are involved also in harvest and post-harvest handling, even though the present level of development is at a subsistence level.
In Brazil rural aquaculture is more advanced. Many programmes and a high level of organization by farmers have permitted greater development of aquaculture. There is evidence that in continental fisheries with certain aquacultural components, women participate in a proportion of about 20% in harvesting, and almost equally in post-harvest handling and marketing as well as in manufacturing and repairing of fishing gear. Post-harvest handling in the rural environment in Latin America is generally limited to evisceration and preservation on ice (when ice is available), or cured and/or smoked.
With the development of pond farming, particularly in northeast Brazil, cooperatives and other groups have been organized with a view to obtain credit and exploit land and water rights. Within these groups are women who, in general, are the heads of the family. In the same way, in land-and-cattle projects aquaculture is promoted more and more. Fish ponds are integrated and managed by groups or individually by the intended beneficiaries. If the ponds are close to living quarters, or if the property belongs to the women or to the family, women will take care of the husbandry and management of the pond, and will participate in harvesting. If production is organized by groups or cooperatives, the marketing is also organized; and if preparation for cold-storage or semi-industrial storage is needed, women will take part in these activities. No accurate figures on women's participation for these projects in Brazil are available, but estimates indicate that around 1 500 women may be
involved at the production level.
In Colombia, Venezuela, and Ecuador several inland-area projects executed through international technical assistance include fishpond production with plant and animal husbandry. The majority of these projects operate at subsistence level, but others are at pilot or pre-commercial scale. In all three countries women participate, particularly as they are motivated to improve nutrition for their families. In projects where women manage the ponds these are better kept and give higher yields. The numbers of women involved are still low. Perhaps less than a hundred women are involved in each project. The Villavicencio project in Colombia involves small-scale commercial production of colossomids, and credit has been made available to farmers through the project itself. One effect of the project has been the growing participation of women. More women have been attending the meetings than men and, in some cases, have received credit for their own enterprises (Martinez Espinoza,
In Panama aquaculture development is undergoing definite expansion. The position of women is equal to that of men due to the agrarian reforms for the distribution of land and social organization. Aquaculture projects in Panama are generally at a semi-intensive level, expanding mainly in marginal areas with production aimed at self-consumption as well as national and international trade. At the present time more than 1 000 fish farms exist with a variety of manually-constructed ponds. They are used in integrated agro-aquaculture schemes, which include reafforestation with fruit trees for wood production, and integrated farming with pigs, chicken, ducks, rabbits, goats, and cattle. In general, agriculture is the prime activity, and by-products and residues are used to feed the fish. In the same way vegetables are planted at the lower levels of the pond to take advantage of the water and to minimize wind erosion. Production through integrated farming and polyculture generally
includes tilapia, carp, colossomids, freshwater prawns, and other species.
Recently further expansion has taken place in agro-aquaculture in Panama with the support of credit schemes. Some 650 women in the rural environment are dedicated to aquaculture production, supported by some 50 women at the technical level, among whom are biologists, nutritionists, extension workers, and other specialists.
In Costa Rica, Nicaragua, El Salvador, Honduras, and Guatemala there are several semi-intensive production programmes associated with external assistance food projects. Others are managed with credit obtained under integrated rural development schemes. These include ponds managed by families or cooperatives. Active participation of women, at least on a part-time basis, is recorded. As development in these countries is recent, it is probable that participation is limited to about one hundred women in each country. Special mention is made, however, of the way in which women have adapted to this type of activity and by the fact that, when their participation is remunerated, production is increased.
In El Salvador the Quezalapa project is managed exclusively by women. According to the extension agents, this project has fewer problems and operates more efficiently than other similar projects. The success of the project is attributed to its profitability. Although tilapias are harvested every three weeks for home consumption, tilapia fingerlings are sold for cash income. The principal market for the fingerlings is the tilapia cage culture project in Ilopango (Martinez Espinoza, 1986).
In Guatemala nearly 600 small ponds have been constructed in recent years by the Peace Corps and governmental technical assistance. The ponds are managed on subsistence and semi-commercial levels. Tilapias are harvested for home consumption and surpluses are sold in local markets. Women are responsible for the daily management and feeding of these ponds while the men are primarily responsible for pond construction and harvest.
In Mexico the role of women in the rural environment and the development of aquaculture is of utmost importance. Agrarian reforms applied through development programmes for rural integration are now in full expansion. At present, a programme for the development of 126 projects in 6 States of the Republic is being implemented; where agro-industrial farms exist the objective is to integrate women and the family in general. Within this programme 18 aquaculture production units are already in operation with more than 300 women members; at least another 500 are still to join in both aquacultural fisheries and activities in ponds and small barrages located on communal land. Aquaculture production models are at three levels, namely extensive, semi-intensive, and intensive. Models are similar to those described for Brazil and Panama, with rural integration varying according to climate and activities integrated with land and animal husbandry. In addition to the native species
previously mentioned, catfish are reared in monoculture and in polyculture, as well as some local species (striped mojarra fish, black bass, whitefish). An important element in polyculture programmes is the use of waterlilies, aquatic plants which cause bio-fouling in lakes and hydro-electric projects. In polyculture farms, waterlilies are harvested and fermented, and used in combination with other ingredients as fodder for pigs; in turn, their waste is used to fertilize the ponds.
There are a number of programmes designed for women in the rural environment in Mexico. For example, in the State of Morelos there is a cooperative with 30 rural women occupied in producing 20 tonnes of tilapia, running a self-sufficient fry production unit, feeding and cleaning ponds, and harvesting and marketing; in the State of Colima three units are in operation and two are being constructed for the production of tilapia, carps and freshwater prawns; and in the State of Tlaxcala 16 units for polyculture with carps have been developed for integration with agricultural schemes.
In Cuba, much aquaculture activity is concerned with developing culture-based fisheries in reservoirs. Fingerlings of various species are released each year. A start has been made with the construction of ponds for integrated farming, even though the sites are limited as the major part of agricultural land is cultivated with sugar-cane. Participation by women is reported to be the same as that of men but no accurate figures can be obtained.
3. WOMEN IN INDUSTRIAL AQUACULTURE PRODUCTION
Industrial aquaculture, as described at the beginning of this document to differentiate it from rural aquaculture programmes, although commercial in character, includes activities operated by individuals or groups (cooperatives). These activities are technologically more advanced and require substantial capital investment. Industrial aquaculture includes production at an intensive and semi-intensive level. In some cases only part of the process is intensive, such as semi-intensive production of fingerlings before transfer to intensive systems, such as cages, ponds, and raceways.
Development of industrial aquaculture is more recent in Latin America and the participation of women has not been established. There is some evidence that, because of their meticulous attention to handling the initial life-stages of organisms under culture, women are proving to be ideal for this technical and manual work.
In Argentina, industrial production is confined to farming rainbow trout. There are 13 private hatcheries employing 11 technicians of whom only one is a woman (Pedini Fernandez-Criado, 1984). No mention is made of women involved in other hatchery operations.
In Chile the participation of women on farms which produce coho salmon, oysters, mussels, and algae, is well known, but no numbers are available. There is an indication that there are 390 authorizations (including individuals, firms, institutions, etc.) at this level of the industry, but no specific mention of women.
In Brazil prawn culture has expanded following experiments in Rio Grande do Norte to make use of salt-flats which have been abandoned. Presently several individual enterprises and groups are exploiting this system. In the post-larval hatchery stage, participation by women in the farms is about 30% among technical and support personnel. Every unit consists of 10 to 15 persons depending on production capacity. This accounts for about 50 women at this level. This number may increase as the projects expand into grow-out phases of shrimp farming.
Shrimp cultivation in Peru has developed semi-intensively, as post-larvae are captured from wild stocks and are then fattened in tanks. Women's participation has not been reported in production, except in governmental technical support in which one or two women biologists are taking part.
Ecuador and Panama are currently the largest producers of cultivated shrimps. The initial expansion has been achieved by fattening wild stocks of post-larvae in ponds built particularly in the low-lying coastal areas. Following conflicts with artisanal and industrial fisheries, farmers have begun to work with the hatchery-reared post-larvae. In these projects participation by women is of the order of 30-35%, which is approximately 50 women. In the grow-out process there are no accurate records. It appears that women work on a part-time basis as on most farms there is only supplemental feeding to do. About 150 women may work in production in both countries.
Within the shrimp industry, women participate most in post-harvest handling, particularly shelling and/or packing and freezing of shrimp for export. No exact figures are available but there could be approximately 200 in Ecuador and 100 in Panama.
In El Salvador, Honduras, and Guatemala there are farms which produce both freshwater and marine shrimp. In coastal areas cultivation is carried out partly by collecting wild post-larvae and partly by intensive hatchery production with foreign participation. The role of women is again mostly limited to processing (cleaning, washing, peeling, and packing). There are about 40 women working part-time in production in these countries.
In Mexico the cultivation of shrimp is expanding due to legislative changes defined in a new fisheries law. Increases in both types of cultivation are projected and new hatcheries are being installed. As the level of participation of women at technical levels is high, women may in the future form 50% of the work force in the centres producing seed. In the next 10 years this could provide 500 jobs. The shrimp processing industry currently employs more than 5 000 women. A further 3 000 women may be added to this number due to the projected expansion.
Another important industrial activity in the Latin American countries is the culture of molluscs (oysters, mussels, and clams). As with shrimp, the practice is to collect seed from wild stocks and reinforce supplies with hatchery resources propagated under controlled conditions using skilled labour. It is precisely because of these requirements that a high proportion of female labour is used (FAO, 1986a). In the grow-out stages female labour is also used, and women participate in processing (cleaning and shucking) and in marketing.
Although data on the participation of women in the production of molluscs cannot be obtained, the industry is expanding in Chile, and to a lesser extent in Argentina, Peru, Brazil, and Venezuela. Probably some 200 women in Chile and 100 in Argentina and Brazil are working in this field. Peru is still at a pre-commercial stage, and Venezuela has small-scale production with possibly 10-20 women involved.
In Mexico there are 5 industrial plants for seed production of molluscs, where about 30 women work at technical and support levels. In the manufacture of collectors about 800 women participate during certain months of the year, as well as in processing and marketing. The exploitation and cultivation of oysters is reserved for cooperatives. The extensive and semi-extensive cultivation of oysters has been practised for more than 20 years but, except in rare cases, women form part of an existing cooperative and the work is paid at piece rate. At present women are active members of many cooperatives, and there are two cooperatives composed exclusively of women in Sonora in the North East of Mexico.
In Cuba the production of oysters in hatcheries is increasing and there is almost equal participation of women in the industry.
4. SUPPORT UNITS FOR AQUACULTURE
In most countries the role of women in support units (hatcheries and research centres) is of great importance, or is beginning to be so. In contrast to other regions, where aquaculture has been a traditional occupation in the private sector, in Latin America the governments, local universities, and research centres have developed or adopted aquaculture technologies, and adapted them to local conditions. Furthermore, they continue to promote and provide support for aquacultural activities.
In the last 30 years women have been increasing their participation in the aquaculture sector in Latin America. This has been achieved in part by the opportunity for careers in marine biology, oceanography, and other fishery sciences and, in so far as national policies have allowed, by the infrastructure (research centres, hatcheries and other support services) for aquaculture production.
This paper focuses on those centres which provide support for production, in particular the production of fingerlings in hatcheries and development centres. An estimate of the number of women employed in production activities in Latin American countries is given in Table 1.
5. FUTURE TRENDS
In most Latin American countries there is great Interest in developing aquaculture. Aquaculture has significant economic potential and it can be integrated readily into rural activities. The development of aquaculture in Latin America is limited mainly by the high initial investment, the lack of credit, the reliable supply of fingerlings, and the support of extension services.
The economic situation in Latin America is complex at the present time, but most countries are investing in aquaculture with great determination. They are negotiating credits with the Inter-American Development Bank, the World Bank, and with national banks. At the same time they are reinforcing their existing government support services, particularly for the rural and social sectors, and opening up and encouraging private investment.
Table 1. Estimates of numbers of women employed in production facilities, by country
Number of Production Facilities (hatcheries)
Women in Workforce (%)
Estimate of Number of Women in Production Facilities
Official
Private
Technical level
Argentina
Bolivia
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
El Salvador
Guatemala
Honduras
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Peru
Uruguay
Venezuela
Sources: Pedini Fernandez-Criado, 1984; personal communications
The FAO Regional Conference for Latin America and the Caribbean held in Barbados (FAO, 1986a) revealed that there was significant development in the participation of women in rural areas. Although the following estimates are without documented evidence to support them, it is probable that in Brazil, Ecuador, Mexico, and Panama the number of women employed in aquaculture production is counted in thousands; in Chile, Colombia, Cuba, and Nicaragua it may be about one thousand; and in Argentina, Bolivia, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras the number is between 100 and 500.
6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to recognize many individuals who provided personal communications about the activities of women in aquaculture in the region; in particular, Laura Luchini, Argentina; Roberto Cabezas Bello, Chile; Florecita del M. del Valle, Guatemala; Ricardo Juarez Palacio, Mexico; Ma. Amanda del Carmen C., Nicaragua; Richard Pretto Malca, Panama; Enrique Sanchez Vazquez, Peru; and Juan Jose Salaya A., Venezuela.
<section>8</section>
WOMEN IN AQUACULTURE PRODUCTION IN OCEANIA (R. Busch)
by Ruth Busch
Route 3, Box 188, Lafayette, AL 36862, U.S.A.
1. INTRODUCTION
The role of women in aquaculture, like their role in the rest of the economy, is shaped by the changing division of labour in each society. Women seem to have had a well-defined role in gathering, collecting, or harvesting wild fish and other water-grown foods from reefs and lagoons on many islands. Nevertheless, general anthropological references usually list fishing, especially fishing outside the reef, as a task almost exclusive to men.
Women's involvement in fishing within the Pacific region more often than not is in the capacity of consumer rather than producer. A number of barriers limit women's involvement in production in the cash economy. The underlying problem lies in the sexual division of labour, in which females perform mainly non-productive labour in the home and males perform largely productive labour outside the home. Preconditions for this pattern of division of labour were set by the pre-colonial society but since then the division has become more pronounced. In many cases, the female role in the cash economy is one of consumer and unrecompensed producer (Fahey, 1985).
Women's role in fisheries in the South Pacific is characterized by several paradoxical facts, namely:
(i) the subsistence contribution of women's fishing activities to daily household diets is indispensable in most coastal communities, yet women have minimal access to boats, new technology, or extension assistance from the government fisheries department.
(ii) fishing follows an established but culturally variable division of labour between men and women which is often a practical and mutually supportive arrangement, yet where fisheries activities have been formally planned and developed women are largely excluded from direct participation.
(iii) traditional fishing grounds of women, such as the inshore area, shores, swamps, lakes, and rivers, are areas in which various forms of aquaculture are possible, yet in trial aquaculture projects in the region women have not been involved.
The traditional secondary status of women in many fishing communities prevents women from owning capital goods such as canoes and fishing nets, because these are scarce and prestigious. Even if women were able to obtain money to purchase them, it is likely that they would be controlled by men who traditionally exercise control over wealth and property.
Geographically, two distinct types of islands should be recognized. There are high islands whose mountainous interiors collect or create rainfall and store water, thus producing permanent water courses with opportunities for fresh water ponds. The low islands and atolls get no more rainfall than the surrounding sea, have limited fresh water, and have limited potential for aquaculture. The largest high island in Pacific Oceania (and second to Greenland in the world) is New Guinea with 820 033 km , about two and a half times the area of the British Isles. It has a mountainous spine rising 4 000 metres. Melanesia has several smaller islands which are similarly well watered. Micronesia, as the name implies, has small islands. There are both high and low islands in Polynesia, although the total area with Hawaii excluded is only about 3 times the area of Micronesia. The two biggest islands in the Caribbean are Cuba (114 525 km) and Hispaniola (Haiti and Dominican Republic, 76 029
km). The Asian Islands also include many which are large and mountainous. Mountains and water have always been important to island populations. It is often the supply of fresh water which limits both the size of populations and the agriculture (and aquaculture) which can be practised.
2. OCEANIA
2.1 Micronesia
Micronesia consists primarily of small island atolls. These low atolls have little fresh water available for use in aquaculture. The capture fishery is still rich in Micronesia. Fish production in Micronesia is most likely increased more efficiently through reef enhancement than through aquaculture.
In the past, women gathered crabs, shellfish and finfish caught in tidal pools in Ulithi (Lessa, 1966). On Palau (Barnett, 1979) they gathered sea urchins and clams. Women were fish collectors in Truk, on Puluuat, and on Hall Islands where they also joined men in 'night speak fishing' (a sport) and helped in fish surrounds. Women also set up independent surrounds using small handnets in groups of 12 or more women. Women fish the reefs and lagoons using nets, pots and lines, spears and rafts.
Change has been occurring in Micronesia. Severance (1977) documents the shift in a fishing community from an older pattern where men supported their sisters to the present support of wives. The society has changed from matrilineal to patrilineal organization in response to the influence of modernization. Women's power in the society has diminished as a result.
Men apparently dominate activities which are seen as monetary or modern. Aquaculture is experimental and, like much of the agriculture in Micronesia, may be in the hands of Philippine or other Asian expatriates. To the extent that aquaculture is perceived to be part of the modern commercial sector, it will be seen as the province of men.
2.2 Polynesia
Polynesia consists of both high and low islands. The high islands of Papua New Guinea, Hawaii, and Tonga have greater potential for aquaculture development than the low island atolls of Tikopia and Samoa.
On Nukumanu, a Polynesian Island politically within Papua New Guinea's North Solomons Province, women seem never to have had an important role in harvesting the sea (Feinberg, 1986). Yet the development of a commercial economy, first in copra (a coconut product) and later in beche-de-mer (sea cucumber), and trochus (shells), has lowered the status of women. In earlier times the power and prestige of women rested on the staple food, a variety of swamp taro which has been replaced as a staple by wheat flour and rice, and whose cultivation was made difficult by mosquitos. Feinberg says: "On rare occasion, young women will dive to spear fish; but this is very much the exception. More commonly, but still unusual, a woman can collect beche-de-mer or shellfish on the reef during low tide." Nukumanu has had a particularly strong division of the sexes. Men have dominated lagoon, sea, and coconut; women tended taro and the domestic scene.
Women on Tonga are reported gathering crustaceans and shellfish, usually working in groups and sometimes under male supervision. Local raiding by neighbours bent on abducting the women themselves seems to have accounted for the male escort (Mariner, 1818; Gifford, 1929; Beaglehole & Beaglehole, 1941). Reports in the 1970s (Maude, 1973; dark, 1974) say that Tongan fishing was insufficient to meet domestic demand. Imported canned meat and fish were substituted.
The present strategy of developing Eucheuma farms in Tonga and Kiribati is through family groups whereby farm ownership belongs to a man. Schoeffel opines that Eucheuma should be promoted through village women's committees in Western Samoa, Tuvalu and Kiribati as women's communal projects. The reasons for this are:
- in a family project, it is likely that women will be doing most of the work anyway, since attaching the plants to ropes, checking plants for predators, and cutting the plants for harvest are routine tasks requiring a dexterity and patience attributed to women in most Pacific countries;
- Eucheuma farming falls within the traditional scope of women's fishing, utilizing the shore area which women glean for shellfish;
- as a technically new project, farming Eucheuma through a women's group minimizes the risk (and the shame and ridicule) of failure by individuals or families;
- Eucheuma requires daily attention to the beds and plants; if women's committees were to farm Eucheuma as a communal venture, they could spread the labour requirements among members; women's committees in Western Samoa, Tonga, Kiribati, Tuvalu and Fiji have a tradition of carrying out communal projects to raise funds for the community;
- by pioneering Eucheuma production through women's groups, rural people could learn about the crop and gain experience towards eventual individual cultivation if they wished;
- despite the usual legal provisions which accord ownership of the shore and sea to the state. Pacific islanders tend to have a collective proprietary interest in the shoreline close to their traditional land holdings. Competition and conflict over use of the shoreline zone would be minimized if seaweed was farmed as a project which benefited everyone in the community.
The pattern repeats itself through the ethnographic literature, where the reader finds descriptions of male deep sea fishing, the "hunting" of bigger and more dangerous fish, and females poking about on the reefs and in the shallows, "gathering" clams, crabs, octopi, and some fish. The men's work is risky, both in danger and in possibility of failure. The women's work is usually more secure in profit and in person (except where warfare makes the women themselves the prey of enemy men).
Pollnac (1982) suggests that aquaculture, when introduced to communities which have been supported by marine fishing, may be seen as women's work, and could not then be successfully introduced through men. Both the nature of the cultivar (shrimp, crabs, seaweed, fish) and the aquacultural activity (shallow water, safe, economically secure and mildly profitable) might lead to its definition as a woman's role. On the other hand, the modern, monetized sector seems to attract men.
In a number of locations men and women have participated together in harvesting the sea. Both sexes may spear fish or grab them by hand while swimming or wading in sheltered water. Both use nets, although in many places the nets used by each sex are quite distinct. Under the influence of commercial economies the division of labour by sex may become relaxed, as Firth (1984) shows on Tikopia. Men became scarce as they went off-island for wages, and women did "men's" work. But the division of labour became more rigid at Kelantan (Malaysia) where fishing itself was commercialized.
Firth (1930) says that women fished only with scoop nets on the reef at Tikopia, although they participated in important rituals regarding fishing. They carried baskets of caught fish, under strict taboos which enforced their total silence while they were identified with female deities. In the 1930s men exclusively handled canoes, line fishing, setting large nets in the lake, and catching flying-fish by torchlight, while women fished with hand nets on the reef and collected shellfish. However, Firth (1959) noted that some young women were paddling canoes, even in the difficult exercise of catching flying-fish. Firth attributes the extension of the role of women to the shortage of men due to wage-labour recruitment from abroad. Ceremonial canoes were still banned to women.
On Samoa both men and women participated in collecting from the sea, but used different techniques or captured different prey. Men fished for octopus from a canoe using baited lines. Women looking for octopus waded in the lagoon at low tide poking sticks in caves and cracks in the coral, or reaching into holes with their hands. Men and boys fished with nets, lines, and torches. Women gathered invertebrates, and occasional fish in tidal pools. Men fished from canoes, but women might occasionally "poke about with sticks from a canoe in shallow water." (Grattan, 1948). Men, women, and children participated in communal netting of fish in the lagoon: men handled the nets but women and children beat the waters, and might catch escaping fish which they could claim as their own (the netted catch belonged to all who participated). Men and women together participated in gathering the palolo worm (Grattan, 1948): "... as the method is to gather up the swarming worm in scoops of
mosquito netting or cheese cloth, the catch is taken from a canoe or other boat. Women in this case fish together with men from a canoe."
Mead (1928) says of Samoan girls fishing that "Once they are regarded as individuals who can devote a long period of time to some consecutive activity, girls are sent on long fishing expeditions. They learn to weave fish baskets, to gather and arrange the bundles of faggots used in torchlight fishing, to tickle the devil fish until it comes out of its hole ... to string the great rose-coloured jelly-fish ..."
A practice approaching cultivation arose in the lagoons of Samoa: rocks were piled to make "resting places" for fish (Buck, 1930); women might grope for the hidden fish by hand, or hold baskets near the rock pile while disassembling it from the far side. Both men and women swam or drifted with eyes under the surface in shallow water, carrying a stick with which they could rest without cutting themselves on the coral, or spear a fish.
2.3 Melanesia
Several aquaculture projects have been undertaken in Melanesia which include fish, shrimp, clam and oyster culture in Fiji, New Caledonia, New Hebrides, and Papua New Guinea. None of the project reports address the participation of women.
The Melanesian islands, except New Zealand, are generally major importers of fishery products (Kent, 1980). The islands have few exports yet import much of their food. Modern commercial fisheries for local consumption have not been developed and subsistence fishing has declined with the growth of wage labour. Canned fish from abroad are now cheaper than local fresh fish. The islands are protein short and have serious nutritional problems.
As women in the islands are primarily responsible for domestic production for home consumption, aquaculture may be a feasible production alternative for women. This would particularly be true in the higher islands which have the water resources necessary for aquaculture production.
Aquaculture when introduced as new, modern, and western becomes the province of men. The ethnographic record shows, however, no serious impediments on most islands to the involvement of women. Women have long poked about on the reefs and in the lagoons. Aquaculture, especially for domestic consumption, should be accessible to women.
People of the highlands have no traditions surrounding fish. Tilapia have been spread through the islands since World War II, and, until recently have been regarded as trash fish. New Guinea produces tilapia and exports trout from highland establishments run, presumably, by expatriates. As women participate in gardening and in pig raising, aquaculture production by women should not be a problem.
Ciguatoxication of warm water fish may present a constraint for women in fish production in Oceania. Ciguatera is a poison found in some types of fish in some places. Reef and other fish caught in shallow water are more commonly implicated. Ciguatoxic fish seem to be more common where reefs have been damaged by construction, dumping, or other pollution. Predatory fish (higher on the food chain) are often the most toxic. Women tend to fish primarily in shallow water and their catch may have a greater incidence of ciguatera, especially where reef enhancement projects have been implemented. An extensive study of historical records (Halstead, 1967) yielded a tally of more than 4 508 victims of ciguatera of whom more than 542 died, giving a death rate of about 12%.
3. CARIBBEAN ISLANDS
Fisheries in the Caribbean were little described until after they were dominated by commercial fishing. Carib women fished small streams and ponds along the sea by stunning the fish with the juices of certain plants which the women pounded and threw into the water (Taylor, 1938). Many communities which once subsisted from the sea no longer have fishing technology. They are left with sea stories and minimal shore fishing skills; they may not even have access to a boat.
Jamaican shore villagers still find fish production important. Fishing itself seems to be a man's job, but women participate in marketing. The long distance higglers, women who trade from the sea to inland towns, will buy farm products, trade them for fish (and profit), and return inland with the fish. Local higglers may buy fish to sell cooked to market crowds (Steward, 1956). In fishing villages, most women are involved somewhere in the fishing industry but never directly in fish production. In a few areas women may invest directly in fish harvesting, owning, for example, the pot traps.
Modern aquacultural development is occurring in Jamaica. Women and children take care of the small (less than one acre) ponds all over the islands. Some women also own commercial aquaculture farms in Jamaica but numbers are not available. There are women biologists and extension workers in Jamaica. A frequent comment on women in the Caribbean was: "If it is work then it is done by women."
On Grenada an artisanal fishery competes with a commercial fishery on the opposite side of the island. Women participate in marketing the fish caught with traditional beach seines. Women have no role in the commercial fishery which has been subsidized by the government through provision of a wharf and fish market (Epple, 1977).
Table 1 describes a number of new projects, both government and private, which have been implemented in the Caribbean in more recent years.
Table 1. Development projects implemented in the Caribbean region
Island Project
Measure of size ($, hectares, tons)
Cultivar
Puerto Rico
Prawn
Sabana Grande
Langostinos de Caribe
Antigua
6 t, 2 ha grow-out ponds
Shrimp
Martinique
4 000 000 PLs/year 20 ha
M. rosenbergii
Guadeloupe
16 000 000 PLs/year
M. rosenbergii
Cayman Islands
15 000 year
Turtles
Maritek, Bahamas
10 000 ha planned needs funds, hatchery (40 ha developed)
Shrimp
There is no mention of women in connection with any of these projects. That omission cannot be taken as evidence that women are not involved in aquacultural production; if involved, they are 'invisible'.
Women are probably involved in day-to-day care of all Caribbean small-scale fish ponds, but numerical data are not available. Women, including Auburn University graduates, are involved as biologists and extension agents in the region.
4. SUMMARY
Published information indicates that island communities have begun the development of aquaculture (Pollnac, 1982) Investment by the developed countries, either through the private sector or through development grants or loans, has been enthusiastic but capricious: projects are started and abandoned. Commercial development of export crops gets more publicity than development of small-scale, subsistence aquaculture for domestic consumption. Expatriate advisers (fisheries. Peace Corps, agriculture) Observe that women are involved in small-scale, subsistence aquaculture in the Caribbean, and in the non-production aspects of larger scale, commercial aquaculture in many places. That is, women are everywhere involved in production, extension, marketing, and processing of fish.
In Oceania the role of aquaculture in fish production is decidedly minor. A survey of fishing throughout Oceania fails to mention any aquaculture at all for about half the island groups. Low islands are seldom involved in aquaculture, although baitfish, clams and shrimp ventures sometimes occur on low islands. Elsewhere aquaculture seems to be just starting, both experimental and commercial, and thus apparently taken to be in the province of men. There are hints of aquaculture failure followed by emergent success in small ponds on New Guinea; tilapia for subsistence; trout for export.
In general, islanders are enthusiastic about fish. Most islanders, anomalously, have to import fish to meet local needs. There are many suggestions for development to meet these needs. Small-scale, local, commercial capture fishing, using modern equipment, is one approach. Artisanal fishing, using more traditional equipment, is another. Aquaculture may also be an option.
Although the data which back a conclusion are sparse, it would seem that women would participate more easily in subsistence aquaculture in island communities than in commercial schemes. Their Oceanian practice of poking about collecting fish for family consumption, or of tending the small ponds in the Caribbean, show that women are already involved with fish for subsistence. This is important to the nutrition of islanders; increased protein intake appears to be needed. Yet patterns of intervention seem to vacillate between support of local self-sufficiency and dedication to an economics of specialization and trade. When islanders specialize and trade, their best trade seems to be to rent their fishing rights to those better equipped to do the fishing. Such capitalism has several problems: the fishers from afar enter the island waters on an open access basis (Bailey, et al., 1986) and they may abuse the fishery. The island owners are powerless to enforce their right to
collect rent or to require proper conservation and they are dependent on good faith. Because of male predominance in the political realm, women and children may not profit fairly from the rental payments.
Women and children who are not already incorporated into the modern economy would, perhaps, profit most from development directed at subsistence aquaculture. Their entry into commercial aquaculture would be best accomplished at levels other than fish production.
5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Thanks are due to many people: to the Department of Fisheries and Allied Aquaculture at Auburn University, particularly to Professors John Grover, Don Moss, Brian Duncan and Ron Phelps and to Secretary Jackie Adams. Rural sociologists Conner Bailey and Joe Molnar have shared their experience in the social science of fishing, Conner Bailey supplying my orientation to the field. Auburn's Dean of the Graduate School, Norman Doorenbos, supplied information on ciguatera. Auburn graduate students Brian Nerrie, Steven Meyers, and Susan Holland have contributed. Cited in the report are telephone conversations with Nancy Blanks, returned Peace Corps director for Micronesia now at Western Carolina University, and Ray Lett, Department of Interior, Washington, D.C. Paul Starr, Auburn Sociology has been helpful as always. My peripatetic husband, Charles Busch, now of La Molina, Peru, did library work for me when last he passed through Auburn. And I must thank my typist, a 1983 Kaypro,
upon whose 18 inch shoulders I'll lay the blame for all small errors in this report. The major errors, however, remain my own.
<section>9</section>
HANDLING, PROCESSING, AND MARKETING OF AQUACULTURE PRODUCTS (P. Spliethoff)
by Petra C. Spliethoff
International Agricultural Centre
Postbus 88, 6700 AB Wageningen, The Netherlands
1. INTRODUCTION
The handling, processing, and marketing of fish products are essential complementary functions of all food production systems. Women traditionally have played a major role in these activities. In most developing countries women dominate the markets either as buyers or sellers of food. For most women marketing is a secondary activity which provides the only source of cash income.
The marketability of fish products is an important constraint in the development of aquaculture. Moreover, processing and marketing activities provide the greatest opportunities for employment within the aquaculture industry.
The objective of this paper is to describe the role of women in the handling, processing, and marketing of aquaculture products. In the absence of adequate statistics, this paper relies heavily on studies of the role of women in processing and marketing in general, and of fish in particular. The performance of "fishmammies" is highlighted to gain insight into the abilities, capacities, and constraints of women as fish processors and traders.
2. THE ROLE OF WOMEN IN POST-HARVEST ACTIVITIES
The main concern of small subsistence households is to secure a steady living year-round for the family. In many instances, extensive aquaculture may provide a means of spreading production risk and of improving overall farm output. Women often view fish as a savings account to draw on when food supplies are scarce, or when cash is needed. Surplus production can be bartered for other goods or sold for cash.
In more intensive production systems, the handling, processing, and marketing of fish may constrain the development of aquaculture. These systems rely on preserving and processing techniques, traders, transport, and market facilities.
The success of fish farming is highly dependent on the income elasticity of the consumer and the substitution effects in the market. Fresh aquatic products, in many areas, are high-quality substitutes for other sources of protein in the market.
Traditionally, there is a quite distinct division of labour between the sexes. Although labour utilization patterns differ from region to region, women generally are responsible for fish processing and marketing (FAO, 1977). Men will sometimes assist their wives in drying, smoking, or grilling but women are primarily responsible for these activities. Women generally sell fresh fish in small quantities at local markets or to wholesalers. They may also sell processed fish dried or smoked. Men may sell fresh fish to a cooperative, or will sell fresh or processed fish in large quantities to traders.
2.1 Handling
Pond harvest is highly labour intensive. The help of the entire family, as well as other villagers, is generally required. Men seine the pond, while women use baskets to catch the remaining fish. In most rural areas all fish are seined at the end of the culture period. The smaller fish are kept for home consumption and the larger fish are sold. All people involved in harvesting the pond receive a share in the production.
Multiple stocking and harvest imply careful handling and restocking of fish of unsuitable size. This practice is usually found on well-managed farms in Asia. Multiple harvest offers better opportunities for women than single harvesting; small quantities (up to 20 kg) which require less time and capital can be marketed more easily by women. Large-scale production farms generally use other marketing channels; often women traders are only found further down the marketing chain.
The timing of pond harvests must be tailored to meet the local supply and demand patterns. The time lapse between fish harvest and purchase by customers is critical for fresh fish. In Asia, the harvested fish are kept in fish holding cages for on-farm sales for a maximum of one day before being sent to the market. Men are trained to transport and sell fish to hotels, supermarkets, and wholesalers. Market facilities (such as containers with aeration devices) may not be accessible to smaller, private retailers (FAO, 1983a).
Fresh fish cannot be held for long periods of time without serious losses. If necessary they are processed. Fresh fish, especially live, are highly preferred by consumers but they present transport and storage problems. Local transport may include baskets or containers carried on the head, on bicycles, or in small pickup trucks. Transport by boats can be found in estuarine areas in Bangladesh, China, Guinea Bissau, and Benin.
The transport of fresh or live fish requires: (a) location of ponds close to the market to minimize handling and to limit transportation time, (b) early morning harvests to transport fish at cool temperatures, and (c) markets equipped with ice facilities or water tanks (cement or small tin containers) with aeration devices and a drainage system.
Transport of live fish to remote markets is a more complex handling operation and requires investment in trucks with fish holding cages, pumping systems to circulate the water, and aeration devices in the tanks. Long distance transport of fresh fish further requires ice, or trucks with cooling devices. It may not be economically feasible to transport fresh or live fish to rural markets unless economies of scale can be achieved through high-volume transport. Transport is expensive and may be unreliable or unavailable along bad roads during certain seasons. Live transport may only be feasible for urban centres where consumers are willing and able to pay higher prices for quality products.
Women do take part in the transportation of fish, but only at a minor level with less professional means. Most women do not have the necessary cash to invest in modern means of transport or the time for long distance travel.
2.2 Processing
Women have always predominated in the fish processing sector on small-scale private, cooperative, or industrial levels. Small-scale enterprises can be characterized by a high degree of flexibility, and are capable of responding to the supply of fresh products and consumer preferences. Although most processing enterprises are run on a small-scale basis, their importance to the economy needs to be stressed. Large numbers of woman can find employment and income in this type of industry.
The processing methods used can vary greatly and are dependent on:
(a) consumer taste,
(b) availability and costs of the processing material,
(c) technical knowledge,
(d) time needed for processing,
(e) price of the final product,
(f) storage facilities,
(g) marketability and seasonal fluctuations.
In extensive and semi-intensive production systems, fish are processed when the product cannot be sold fresh, when cold storage plants are not present, or when the product is destined for remote markets. Small-scale salting, smoking, drying, and fermenting are performed by women near or inside the house, and are considered domestic activities. The introduction of special processing facilities off-farm or near the market is often not acceptable to women. Processing at home is preferred because women are able to combine processing activities with other domestic duties. Young girls often help their mothers with different methods of processing. The final product is stored in or near the house for fear of theft. The processed fish is either sold to wholesale traders in large quantities, or brought to the markets for private selling.
Economic pressure to shift from production for subsistence to commodity production has often resulted in reshaping the role of women. Small-scale enterprises tend to be taken over by modern processing plants. Most of the fish processing plants are oriented towards export markets and not for home consumption. The range of fish species available on local markets and the marketing opportunities for women changed as a consequence of the development of industrial processing.
Women have been seriously affected by this process. Inadequate analysis and neglect of the possibilities of traditional processing and marketing structures have excluded women from their main source of income. The need for cash income to buy basic goods has driven large numbers of women to the fish processing industries. Lack of education and vocational training push women into less skilled and lower paying jobs. For example, the deheading of shrimp is primarily a processing task executed by women. Most of these women do not have other options for work and generally belong to the lower social strata of the society. During periods of peak supply they often work through the night to earn some extra income. The number of female workers in the fish processing sector in Southeast Asia tends to be very high.
The fish and seafood processing industries in particular suffer from seasonal fluctuations in supply. These fluctuations affect women more than men because most women are employed as low category workers on a casual basis. Although these fluctuations in supply often predominate in artisanal fisheries, the small-scale processing industry is capable of compensating for periodic deficiencies in supplies. Women may shift to less valuable fish, for example, or fish can be dried and kept for several months as a kind of savings account.
Seasonal fluctuations can be somewhat offset by planning aquacultural harvests. For example, instance shrimp farmers can try to plan their harvest to coincide with a time of slack supply of marine products. Close contact between the industry and the producers, and knowledge about market fluctuations is needed. In Asia for instance a market survey and analysis of world shrimp aquaculture is regularly published which includes wholesale price trends and projected supplies. In the catfish industry in the USA, 88% of the catfish production is sold to the processors, so that 85% of the plant can be utilized during the year. The remaining 12% of catfish production is sold to live handlers who carry the fish to distant markets. This centralization in processing regulates the supply to the markets, stabilizes prices, and guarantees long term employment for the processors.
2.3 Marketing
Restricted time budgets, and social and cultural factors limit women's ability to participate in marketing. Marketing of home products usually provides rural women with their only source of income. Part of the gains are often reinvested in business dealings, with the rest spent to cover domestic and personal expenses such as food, clothing, health care, school fees, etc.
In rural areas the customers become aware of a pond harvesting by informal contacts and buy their fish at the pond site. Most of the customers are women, who use the fish for home consumption or local marketing (CIFA, 1975).
The closer the market is to the farm, the fewer intermediaries and the greater the chance that women become actively involved in marketing aquatic products. In general, women have been quick to respond to opportunities created by growing demand for their produce. In Africa and Latin America, women have been able to consolidate their position as food sellers. In Asia, however, women often have lost their predominant market position to big traders and are forced to become petty traders.
Confined to domestic tasks, the majority of women are small entrepreneurs on a part-time or seasonal basis. Only a few women have established themselves as full-time traders. Dorjahn (1962) said, "Many women try bonga trading, when they assemble sufficient finance, but the majority abandon it after a few trips and use the income to set themselves up in a less arduous, less aromatic, and more highly regarded profession. It is said that only those who have bounced over the 'washboard' dirt roads, tended smokey fires in the wet season, and inhaled the variety of odours can properly appreciate the arduousness of the bonga trade. Then, too, a successful trader will sooner or later hear slurs on her character in the form of pointed remarks about what some women won't do to obtain fish when the catch is small. Those few who persist in the trade for some time make a lot of money, but the profession is not highly regarded and bonga traders have low status in the eyes of most Temne."
Women fish traders either handle the crop of their husbands or buy fish from different sources. Fishmammies collect fish directly at the landing places. Most fishmammies are in some way related to the fishermen and often take part in financing fishing operations. These financial commitments guarantee their share in the fish harvest. Fishmongers with a fixed relationship to the fishermen only pay the fishermen after the product is sold. In all other cases the fish is sold directly by auction. In most fishing communities the customers' groups are restricted by traditional relationships. New traders may be barred from entering the business (Spliethoff, 1984).
There are often distinctive patterns of division in selling different products. Generally the sale of products requiring large capital investment or long-distance travel is in the hands of men. Although it is impossible to separate factors like freedom of mobility, the efforts and costs of travelling, and transporting goods to the market, etc., women are less mobile and have less access to financial support than men. Ottenberg and Ottenberg, (1962) said, "In the Afikpo market (Nigeria) three categories of dried fish were sold. First, the stockfish from Europe was sold exclusively by the men. Indigenous riverfish like the bonga and the enya oca, were sold by both men and women. The smaller dried river fish was exclusively sold by the women, often in combination with a wide range of other food products."
Women acquainted with fish processing and marketing readily include aquaculture products, especially if pond harvest coincides with the slack season in capture fisheries. In societies where aquaculture is a new or alien enterprise and no capture fisheries can be found, the women are often not acquainted with processing and trading perishable products like fish. Aquaculture products have to compete with traditional products. If aquaculture production is focused on a highly preferred product already available on the markets, it will have to compete through price. When new products are introduced, the customer often requires a period of time to accept the new product. Consumer preferences for size, external features, taste, and price must all be taken into consideration.
2.4 Price Determination
Fish can be obtained by money, barter, or through gift exchange. In non-monetized societies the barter equivalents are fairly standardized, although bargaining does occur at the retail level as well as in transactions between traders and wholesalers.
The transition from a barter to a money economy has seriously affected existing market patterns. The increase in production as a result of the modernization of the fisheries sector has attracted traders formerly not engaged in fish processing and marketing. Women have often been displaced by new groups of traders with bicycles, greater access to cash, and greater mobility.
In a free market system the prices of fish are not fixed and are determined by a complex of factors. These include:
(a) transport cost,
(b) production cost,
(c) supply and demand,
(d) competition,
(e) processing technique,
(f) variety of fish.
Traders will take into account their transport and marketing costs as well as prices of substitute foods when deciding what price to charge. Price fluctuations can be explained largely in terms of availability, quality, and purchasing power of the customer. Prices are generally lowest during fish harvest, and rise as supplies diminish. The purchasing power of rural consumers is greatest just after the agricultural harvest while it is greatest in urban centres at the beginning of the month after pay day.
Greater capital investment in aquaculture will lead to higher market prices. Intensive systems usually supply urban centres where large quantities can be absorbed and high prices obtained. Depending on the intensity of the system, the investment in aquaculture can be quite considerable, compared with the family budget. In the absence of banks, fish farmers often have to borrow money from a money-lender (including market women). Sometimes money is borrowed in exchange for the fish yield. In such a case the money-lender makes a contract with the fish farmer at an agreed price.
In more intensive systems the fish harvest is often sold to fixed traders or by auction. The fish farmer has to know the costs of production to determine his lowest acceptable price. The price obtained will depend on the quality of the fish and the numbers at the auction. On the one hand this can give the fish farmer the security that his products are all sold, while on the other the price might be below the average price for that moment.
Road construction around the intensive farms makes the fish landing sites more accessible to traders with modern trucks. Most fishmammies are not able to modernize because of time, education and cash constraints. Their role is consequently reduced to petty trader of less valuable fish, or as a wage labourer in the processing industry. Only those women who have established an independent financial position are capable of keeping and extending their position as fish traders in this situation.
On the other hand, the flow of money which comes from the development of market transactions and urban centres has opened up new possibilities for market women to extend their trade and even become money-lenders. The dependency of urban centres on rural production is in fact greater and more direct than it first appears. However, urban wholesalers must buy bulk quantities from retailers in local markets. High preservation, transport, and purchase costs therefore raise the prices in urban markets. Consequently, many city dwellers are still willing to travel to rural markets to buy at low prices.
3. CONSTRAINTS TO THE PARTICIPATION OF WOMEN IN POST-HARVEST ACTIVITIES
Many of the problems and constraints encountered in handling, processing and marketing are common to both men and women. Limited access to resources, insufficient credit facilities, inadequate transport means, bad roads, poor processing and marketing facilities, price policies, etc., are all factors constraining the development of processing and trading enterprises.
Production policies and projects often ignore the role of processing and marketing. Interventions usually concentrate on modern enterprises and distribution to larger markets, instead of supporting individual or collective activities. Insufficient incentives and financial support will continue to constrain rural distribution systems.
Apart from the constraints common to both men and women, women often face an extra set of gender-specific problems. Domestic activities, limited time disposition, no title to land or cattle, and no access to credit, make women more disadvantaged compared with men.
An analysis of the role of women in the production, processing, and marketing sectors is often lacking in project planning. The introduction of a new production system or technology often ends up demanding more labour from women while allocating most of the benefits to men.
Project planners cannot foresee the risks and disincentives for women. Processing plants and markets have been constructed without prior consultation with the intended users. On many occasions the inappropriateness of new technologies and constructions could have been avoided if participatory development was pursued.
Small-scale processing and marketing is a competitive rather than a cooperative action. A spontaneous solidarity of women generating a communal enterprise to obtain credit and to protect themselves against other commercial traders is not to be expected.
4. SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Women's participation in aquaculture is not taken into account by planners and policy-makers. A full understanding of the role of women as traders indicates their economic significance for the functioning and further development of aquaculture. Opportunities for women to discuss their constraints and opportunities can draw attention to the risks and disincentives not foreseen by project planners.
In extensive and semi-intensive aquaculture production systems, harvesting the pond is a communal activity and the fish are primarily destined for local consumption and marketing. Women are actively involved in the handling of fish from small-scale production with local transportation. Small-scale handling has been neglected by project planners. The handling of fish in extensive and semi-intensive systems needs more attention in the form of training, extension, and credit.
Particular attention is needed to improve quality control of fish to prevent deterioration during fish handling operations, and to develop more products for domestic consumption.
Processing of aquatic products is considered to be women's work. Although most processing enterprises are run on an informal basis, their scale and way of operation makes these enterprises important for the employment and income generation of women.
Inadequate analysis and neglect of these enterprises has often resulted in a disruption of the rural fish supply and the position of women. Support of small-scale processing is critically needed. The development and extension of appropriate fish preservation and processing technologies should be promoted. Training of women should be arranged in such a way that disruption of the daily work is avoided.
Intensive systems are capital intensive and their produce is primarily destined for urban centres where better prices can be obtained. Transport to urban centres requires sophisticated equipment and good roads. Women's access to selling and transport is limited by lack of cash, transport, and market facilities. More attention to appropriate transportation services and marketing facilities at local markets can be of benefit to people and can reduce transportation costs.
Inadequate market facilities, such as lack of ice plants, containers with aerating devices, processing facilities, protected (cold) storage facilities, good roads, shelter, transport facilities, etc., often limit the development of trading enterprises. Strategies to overcome constraints for marketing would benefit both sellers and buyers. A seminar (FAO, 1977) on market women in West Africa gives the following recommendations:
(a) more attention to the role of traders in the formulation and development of policies,
(b) development of appropriate technologies for food processing and preservation,
(c) construction and maintenance of rural roads,
(d) provision of transportation and spare parts,
(e) promotion of the establishment of trade associations,
(f) increase of credit facilities to traders by involving trade associations as guarantors for individual loans,
(g) vocational training (bookkeeping, application forms for credit),
(h) improvement and expansion of existing market facilities (storage, loading space for vehicles, shelter, childcare centres, health clinics),
(i) provision of information by marketing advisory services,
(j) supply of essential inputs for farms (fertilizers, seeds, etc.),
(k) improvement of communication channels between traders, producers and relevant local extension agencies and government institutions.
Markets can be focal points for rural development. The better the market facilities, the more people are motivated to participate. Insufficient support and domestic duties often force women to restrict these activities and to continue production and marketing on a limited scale. There are, however, several examples of women exploring new activities and setting examples for others who are equally poor. Freedom to handle marketing and finances are critically important for women and result in a better living for the family.
Equal access to credit and participation in market development for women is needed to consolidate their position as traders. Women are often not acquainted with official credit facilities. The existing household funds are usually the only source of money for women. Self-help savings groups and rotating funds provide a good basis for the development of credit opportunities (FAO, 1983a).
Examples of trade associations specialized in aquaculture products are found in China on several administrative levels. These associations are responsible for the purchasing, distribution, market supply, and storage of farm and fish products. The fish are purchased on the basis of a contract negotiated between the association and the producers. Payment in advance is possible; moreover the association supplies necessary inputs to the fish farms like fertilizers, seeds, and feeds. Because of their close contacts with the producers and their capacity to control supply and demand at the markets, they can be considered as an important regulating and promotional agency. Although different in many aspects, these associations have a somewhat similar role to the fishmammies in small-scale capture fisheries. These similarities include:
(a) interdependency between producers and traders,
(b) secure delivery and marketing,
(c) financial management to the benefit of both parties,
(d) social services in times of misfortune.
It is imperative to regulate the distribution and marketing of perishable products like fish and shellfish. Instead of trying to introduce deliberate changes into the marketing systems which involve completely new roles for women, it is advisable to adapt local production and marketing patterns towards multi-functional trade associations.
<section>a</section>
WOMEN IN TRAINING AND EXTENSION SERVICES IN AQUACULTURE (C. Engle)
by Carole R. Engle
Department of Economics, School of Business,
Auburn University at Montgomery
Montgomery, AL 36193-0401, U.S.A.
1. INTRODUCTION
Women around the world are involved in aquacultural production. It is generally the women who feed the fish and manage the ponds. Yet, aquaculture is almost universally considered men's work; the woman's role has gone largely unrecognized, undocumented, and ignored. Women have almost no direct access to training or to extension agents which would enable them to acquire the knowledge necessary to increase productivity. Only some 10-15% of the participants and trainers in training courses worldwide have been women. The percentage of women extension agents is even lower.
A literature search revealed that little has been written on women's involvement in aquaculture. Few development project reports make specific references to women's participation. To obtain information, several hundred letters were sent to institutions, individuals, and offices involved in aquacultural development around the world. Responses were sparse; most computerized rosters have not been programmed to sort by gender. As a follow-up to letters, a survey was conducted of women aquaculturists from nations in all regions. As a result of the information obtained, this paper presents an overview of the role of women in the field of aquaculture. It also examines their current roles in training and extension, identifies specific obstacles which obstruct their participation, and recommends programmes which would more effectively involve women.
2. THE ROLE OF WOMEN IN AQUACULTURE
Women play a major role in agricultural/aquacultural production around the world both as labourers and as managers of the production process. Women generally are responsible for daily pond maintenance and fish feeding. Men may construct the ponds, but once built, the ponds usually become the woman's domain (Deceuninck, 1985; Low, 1985). Pond management complements the woman's role in the care of other small animals and in the production of subsistence crops.
The high degree of women's involvement in the management of fisheries enterprises has been ignored (FAO, 1979b; Chakroff, 1981; Maynard and Molnar, 1985). No specific efforts have been made to integrate women into aquacultural extension and training programmes (Acharya and Bennett, 1982). However, in light of their role in subsistence production, it is important to make technical information and advice available to women involved in food production in order to increase the output of these crops (FAO, 1979a; FAO, 1986b).
Numerous development projects implemented over the years have failed. One major contributing factor is the oversight of the fundamental role which women play in agriculture (Bhasin, 1979; FAO, 1980; Morss and Gow, 1985). For example, case studies have shown that defaults on loans in aquaculture projects were high when women were not involved in the loan negotiation process (Hourihan, 1986). In many countries, particularly in Asia, women have the responsibility for managing the budget and for the repayment of loans. The inclusion of women in the design phase of loan projects greatly increased the rate of loan repayment.
While women play important roles in agricultural production, studies have shown that rural women have constituted a socially and economically marginal group compared with the male population (FAO, 1979b). Within demographic sectors classified below the poverty threshold, women increasingly form the lowest, poorest subsector. An important consequence of this rural poverty is a higher rate of female malnutrition than male malnutrition. Maternal mortality in Bangladesh, for example, is 27% (among women 10-49 years old) and the female literacy rate is 14%. Women belonging to the growing class of landless households, and households headed by women have been identified as the population sector most in need of improved nutrition and of employment (Scott and Carr, 1985). Aquaculture technology can potentially address both these needs, but women must first be reached through extension services and trained in training programmes to do so.
3. CURRENT STATUS OF WOMEN IN TRAINING IN AQUACULTURE
Training is a broad term which is applied to very different levels of education. This section of the paper will emphasize formal middle-level training programmes and farmer training sessions. Farmer-level training will be discussed in the section on extension.
Middle-level training programmes in aquaculture are conducted by FAO, various private voluntary organizations (PVO's, such as CARE, Lutheran World Service, Catholic Relief Services, Heifer Project International, etc.). Auburn University (U.S.A.), the Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center in the Philippines (SEAFDEC), the University of Rhode Island (U.S.A.), the Leetown Center of the Fish and Wildlife Service (U.S.A.) and others.
The Peace Corps conducts training on various levels. It trains its own Peace Corps Volunteers (PCV) either in the United States or in their assigned countries in the technology of aquaculture. In-country aquaculture programmes may include training of counterparts to the Volunteers, formal farmer training programmes, and informal farm-level training. Formal training programmes for fish farmers undoubtedly exist within extension services in many countries. Data on women's participation, however, were obtained only for Panama.
3.1 Middle-Level Training Programmes
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), operates a number of regional aquaculture training centres; for example, the Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia (NACA) headquartered in Thailand with two centres in China and the Philippines; the Latin American Regional Centre (CERLA) in Brazil; the African Regional Aquaculture Centre (ARAC) in Nigeria; and the Mediterranean Regional Aquaculture Programme (MEDRAP) headquartered in Tunisia with a training centre in Southern Italy. The programmes are of 6-12 months duration and train participants at the level of senior aquaculturist. NACA's course in the Philippines is affiliated with SEAFDEC and the University of the Philippines (Visayas) and certain candidates qualify for the M. Ag. degree. ARAC is affiliated with the Rivers State University of Science and Technology and certain candidates qualify for the degree of M. Tech. in Aquaculture.
The FAO centres, to date, have not made any special efforts to recruit women and have no specific scholarships for women. They have, however, generally admitted all qualified women candidates who have been nominated by the governments concerned.
Table 1(A) indicates the number and percentage of all women participants by year and by country for three of the FAO training centres; the data of NACA are included in Table 1(B). At ARAC, 18 of 131 total participants (13.7%) have been women. Of these women, half (9) participated in the sixth course in 1986. In this last course, women comprised 30% of total participants and indicated a dramatic increase in women's participation compared with previous years. At CERLA, 13 of 70 (18.6%) were women. These data were for the 1982, 1983 and 1984 sessions. The 1985 session was postponed and data were not available for the 1986 session. MEDRAP has held three 8-month training courses for aquaculture technicians in Policoro, Southern Italy. Of a total of 67 participants over a three year period, only 4, or 6%, were women even though women from all Mediterranean countries were asked to participate. More women participated in short (1-2 weeks) training sessions on specific topics at a
higher level. Topics covered included intensive culture and fish pathology. For all three centres, a total of 35 women of 268 total participants (13%) have been trained at the regional centres. In the principal training courses of NACA, 22% of the trainees on the one-year course in the Philippines were women, and 13% of the trainees on the four-month course in China.
The Private Voluntary Organizations (PVO), a consortium of private voluntary organizations, has sponsored a series of training programmes in aquaculture since 1983. Funding for these programmes is provided by the organizations themselves, which include CARE, Catholic Relief Services, Save the Children, Heifer International, and the United States Agency for International Development (US AID). A Joint PVO/University Rural Development Centre has been established at Western Carolina University in the United States to provide direction for the project. Six training courses have been held from 1983-85; two at Auburn University, one in Panama, one in Indonesia, one in Rwanda (for East Africa), and one in Cameroon (for West Africa). Table 2 lists percentages of women participants per programme. Eight participants out of a total of 89 (9%) were women. The project director for the PVO programme is a woman and has participated in all but one training programme.
The Aquaculture Training Programme (ATP-Auburn), at Auburn University in Alabama (U.S.A.), runs a 10-week non-degree training course for international students. The course is financed primarily through scholarships from the US AID, although some participants obtain independent funding. The equivalent of a high-school diploma is required for entrance. Since its inception in 1979, 12 of 130 participants (9.2%) have been women. Countries which have sent women to ATP-Auburn include: Nigeria (2), Mexico (4), Italy (1), Dominican Republic (1), Rwanda (1), Cameroon (1), Peru (1), and Spain (1).
Table 1(A). Women participants in FAO regional training programmes by training centre by year
Year
Number of Women
Total number of participants
Nationality
% Women's participation
Port Harcourt
Sudan (2)
Nigeria (1)
Congo (1)
The Gambia (1)
Nigeria (1)
Mali (1)
Nigeria (1)
Guinea (1)
Nigeria (6)
Tanzania (2)
Zimbabwe (1)
Sub-total
Pirassununga
Bolivia (1)
El Salvador (1)
Paraguay (1)
Brazil (1)
Nicaragua (1)
Panama (1)
Brazil (3)
Brazil (1)
Nicaragua (2)
Mexico (1)
Sub-total
Policoro
Yugoslavia (1)
Greece (1)
Yugoslavia (1)
Greece (1)
Sub-total
TOTAL
Source: Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP), FAO, Rome
Table 1(B). Women participants in training courses organised by NACA
Table 2. Women participants in PVO training programmes by training location and year
Training Programme
Date
No. of Women
Total No. Participants
% Women's Participation
Auburn
Auburn
Panama
Indonesia
Rwanda
Cameroon
TOTAL
Source: Blanks (unpublished). Joint PVO/University Rural Development Center, Western Carolina University, NC., USA
Auburn University has also conducted short (2-3 week) training programmes overseas. Table 3 indicates the number and percentage of women participants by country and by year.
The Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center (SEAFDEC), through its Aquaculture Department in the Philippines, has offered short-term non-degree training courses since 1975. Topics covered include, among others: tilapia cage culture, prawn hatchery management, tilapia training, and a training course for senior aquaculturists. Although the courses offered are open to international participation the majority of participants come from the Philippines. Of the 1 352 persons trained in the various courses from 1975 to mid-1986, 824 (60.9%) were women.
The SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department has a significant number (over 50%) of female professional research staff. Training expertise for the short-term courses comes largely from the staff and, hence, women play an important role as trainers in this programme.
The University of the Philippines in the Visayas (UPV) has trained a number of fish farmers and extension workers in aquaculture. The majority (73%) of the participants in these programmes in 1986 were male. Table 4. Classes on fish pond operations have been attended mostly by male participants. However, shrimp culture techniques, feed formulation, and fertilization topics attracted more women than men.
Table 3. Women participants in Auburn University training programmes overseas
Training Programme Location
Year
No. of Women
Total Number Participants
% Women's Participation
Colombia
Dominican Republic
Dominican Republic
Mexico
Panama
Egypt
TOTAL
Source: Maynard and Molnar, 1985
Table 4. Women Participants in Training and Extension Programmes in Aquaculture of the University of the Philippines in the Visayas
Programme
Total
Female
No.
No.
Shrimp culture technique
Acid sulphate soils and feed formulation
Pond management for prawn/tilapia
Fertilization
Extension classes for fish pond operation (by location)
Hinamaylan
Pangasinan
Aklan
Total
Source: Philippine Council for Agriculture and Resources Research and Development (PCARRD) contributed by Aida Librero, Director
3.2 Formal Farmer Training
Panama has held three different types of training programmes: Divisa training programmes (a government hatchery, and training and demonstration center), training programmes in specific rural communities, and training programmes conducted by the regional offices of the agricultural ministry. At the Divisa Hatchery 27 women have participated in training courses representing the Provinces of Colon, Chiriqúi, Panamá, Veraguas, Coclé, and Gambúa, as well as representatives of the Institute of Public Health (Salud Pública). The Nursing School has also sent 200 women students for a one-day training session. Thirty-nine women have been trained in rural communities in Gavilán-San Pedro, La Yeguada, Subí, Bisballes, Centro Cató1ico San José, and Rincón Sucio. Fifty-three women have been trained regionally in Regions R-8, R-4 and R-3.
There have been over 500 women Peace Corps Volunteers (PCV's) in aquaculture (25%) since the programme began. Currently, about 100 (40%) of the volunteers working in aquaculture are women. All aquaculture volunteers have as a minimum a BA/BS degree with at least 10-15 semester hours of biology or a related area. Approximately 80% have their BS in biological sciences and less than 1% have graduate degrees. All Volunteers participate in a pre-service technical training programme either in the United States or in their assigned countries. Responses were received from five country programmes (Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras, Sierra Leone, and Zaire). Of these, only Zaire indicated any involvement with formal farmer training programmes.
4. CURRENT STATUS OF WOMEN IN EXTENSION SERVICES
Women are noticeably absent from fisheries extension services. In Thailand, for example, even though 17% of fisherfolk in 1970 were women, there were no female extension agents. Although a high percentage of university graduates in fisheries were women, the That extension directors claimed that no woman can qualify for the extension service (Hourihan, 1986).
A project to prepare and implement a training programme for women fisheries extension workers was developed in India. Although women in India play an important role in fish marketing for local consumption, fish curing, shrimp processing, and net making, it was found that extension work related to these specific technologies had been geared towards men.
In India cultural problems related to village women being approached by strange males prevent access to information on new technologies. The Fisherwomen Extension Service of the Department of Fisheries in Tamil Nadu developed a programme to train two fisherwomen to function as group organizers and to train link workers to serve as liaisons between fisherwomen and government officers and institutions.
The specific functions of link workers are: to mobilize fisherwomen for constructive group action, to improve their social and economic conditions, to create an understanding of the need for change in socio-cultural attitudes among men and women, to encourage women to utilize the services of governments and other institutions, and to stimulate government institutions to respond to the objectives and felt needs of target groups. Women trainees were selected based on: literacy, marital status (married below the age of 40), acceptance by all women in the village, willingness to participate in residential training course, awareness that training did not guarantee employment, and willingness and interest to work with groups of women.
Twenty-three women participated in the 10-week course. Course participants were trained in the basics of group dynamics. Field visits were organized and the residential training was followed by 2 months of on-the-job training. Link workers assisted individual women in determining their most urgent needs, identified means of meeting their needs, and registered cooperative societies of fisherwomen. The Department of Fisheries provided continuous close support through the Fisherwomen Extension Service. As a result of this project, more than 250 women from five villages received loans of Indian Rupees 200-500 each at 4% interest. Some cooperatives started savings deposits and others joined educational programmes.
The FAO project in the Côte d'Ivoire has 3 women professionals in a total staff of 11. The extension agent who has won the national competition (based on the highest total fish production by farmers under her care and for general excellence) in the past 3 years has been a woman, even though only 8-9% of all extension agents were women. Although women are integrated into the project staff, only 2 of 2 000 fish farmers are women. Positions held by women have included: Deputy Director in charge of technical coordination, station head in charge of fingerling production, head of fish culture sector in charge of evaluation, implementing and follow-up of projects, and assistant to the public relations director. There are no programmes designed specifically for rural women, but women are integrated into the project on the same level as the men.
In Jamaica, the US AID Fish Production Development Project awarded 4 scholarships to women for MS-level training at Auburn University in the United States. Upon their return, these 4 women held the positions of farm manager, station head of research, chief of marketing extension, and extension chief. Of the total project staff, 40% were women. Even though less than 10% of the Jamaican fish farmers were women, approximately 15% of the extension agents were women. Recent budget cuts have severely reduced the programme and most project staff have transferred to other positions.
Although the Government of Kenya maintains that fish farming is men's work, the FAO Lake Basin Development Authority Project is working with 396 female farmers and 161 women's groups of a total of 3 615 farmers. Extension agents are selected by Lake Basin Development Authority Project personnel without consultation with FAO experts, and all are men. Most of the women fish farmers have expressed a desire to receive technical advice from female extensionists.
In Nigeria there is one trained woman working in the fisheries extension service. As women's traditional roles in the fisheries sector have been in fish marketing and fish processing, extension efforts currently seek to enhance these roles.
In 1986, there were 54 women working in fish culture in rural areas of Panama. The emphasis of the extension programme was on pond fertilization, fish feeding, pond management, stocking, partial harvest, community marketing, and fish preservation. In Panama, 33% or 48 of 146 government employees in aquaculture were women in 1986. There were 6 female extension agents working full-time in 3 different provinces of Panama.
Women participate actively in aquaculture extension in the Philippines. Nationwide, 44% of all extension agents in 1986 were women, Table 5. In some regions, 70% of extension agents were women. Women also dominated in the fish processing extension services. A total of 99% of all extension agents working in this area were women in 1986.
US AID has funded a fish culture development project in Rwanda. The emphasis of the project is on production, training, and extension. About 300 women were directly reached by the Rwandan fish culture project's extension service in 1985. This included 2 women who inherited ponds from deceased husbands, 10 women's cooperatives with a total of 173 members, and 18 mixed women/men cooperatives including 113 female and 145 male members. There were also 15 women-oriented institutions with fish ponds including health centres, schools, a prison, and community development groups. Approximately 50-100 women per year per institution participate in the project. In addition to these institutions, 10% of fish farmers reached by project extension agents were women, although many women managed ponds classified as belonging to husbands. Project extension agents are all male and are encouraged to try to augment the number of women-owned fish ponds. Agents are at an advantage in working with
women because women tend to follow their advice better than the men; the agents themselves are evaluated on the basis of their farmers' productivity. Most local officials are amenable to including women's groups in assigning pond construction sites.
Table 5. Female Extension Agents in the Philippines by Region, 1986
Region
Aquaculture
Fish Processing
No. of Women
Total
% Women
No. of Women
Total
% Women
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX
X
XI
XII
TOTAL
Source: BFAR (Philippines), 1986
As most rural women cannot leave their families for a week at a time due to their substantial workload and responsibilities around the house, project directors plan to implement training programmes to reach the women where they gather at health and nutritional centres. The project plans to train female health and nutritional link workers (monitrices) to work with fish farmers in pond management, fish preparation, and fish preservation.
The Peace Corps (PCV) has never specifically documented women's roles and participation in aquacultural training and extension. The general assumption is that women are affected by any increase in income or protein which may result from aquacultural activities.
The PCV aquaculture project in Guatemala began in 1982. It has worked in 21 municipalities in 9 departments in eastern and northern Guatemala in rural areas characterized by scarce economic resources. The principal objective of the project is to supplement the family diet with fish and a secondary objective is to generate income.
Fish ponds are constructed by the father of the family, but the daily management is done by the women and children. Women, with sole responsibility for the diet, enjoy having an additional source of protein close at hand.,-Approximately 500-600 ponds have been constructed which average 100-200 m in size. At least one woman is involved in the care of each pond. Extension agents work with the men during pond construction. Feeding technology, on the other hand, is taught in educational sessions attended by the entire family.
Twenty-one volunteers currently (1986) work with local promoters. About half of the volunteers are women. Of the 26 promoters (all rural), two are women. The programme is considering expanding the number of female promoters employed. A total of 4 117 people have been served by this programme. Approximately 120 fish ponds have been constructed, 55 rehabilitated and 426 attended in all. Over 120 courses, talks, and demonstrations have been presented.
Language problems have been encountered with women, but the Volunteers train local counterparts who then translate during educational sessons. Team work is emphasized which involves a division of labour along the traditional lines prevalent in communities.
One PCV in Honduras is working with several projects run by women. ,-In the community of Porvenir, 9 women constructed 2 ponds (230 m^2 and 350 m) in 1985 and are currently (December, 1986) planning construction of a third. Ten women in the community of Maye constructed a 280 m^2 pond in 1985, and planned to construct a second pond. A third project in Guayamen composed of 10 women constructed a 320 m^2 pond in 1985. This group, however, disbanded in February 1986 when some women stole fish from the pond. A general lack of leadership and unity within the group contributed to its failure. In addition, there were several women heads of household in the area who had small (50 m^2) ponds which were maintained in good condition. Average production of Tilapia nilotica, common carp, and guapote (Cichlasoma managuense) in polyculture was 1 667 kg/ha/yr.
The PCV in Costa Rica serve through either the Ministry of Agriculture or the National Bank's Technical Extension Service. Each volunteer works with approximately 48 small and medium-scale farmers. In 1981, there were 3 male volunteers; in 1982, there were 4 men and 1 woman; in 1983, there were 7 men and 5 women; and in 1985, there were 7 men and 5 women.
There are no female PCVs in aquaculture in Sierra Leone and no women involved in aquaculture at the government level. Yet, a significant percentage of farmers working with volunteers are women. Numbers were not available.
In Zaire, twenty-five of the 53 PCV's (47%) working in fish culture were women in 1986. Within the government fisheries infrastructure, however, of a staff of 60 only 6 were women. Of these, only 2 were involved with extension or training. One woman managed a small fish station and occasionally presented technical sessions at training courses. The other woman, based at a regional office, was responsible for farmer visits and training at the village level. There were approximately 15 female fish farmers of a total farmer population of about 3 500. In all cases, these women became involved with fish farming after their husbands either died, abandoned their ponds, or left the village.
Women did get involved with the daily management of their husband's ponds however; women helped feed fish and fertilize with compost. The traditional involvement of women in the fisheries sector was in fish marketing. No attempt has been made to increase the number of female farmers. The female farmers who participated in the project received the same attention and training as male farmers. In fact, the highest recorded harvest in the project, 125 kilograms of fish in 6 months from 250 m^2, or 10 tons/ha/yr, was produced by a woman.
5. CONSTRAINTS FOR WOMEN IN TRAINING AND EXTENSION
Training and extension services are male-oriented and are traditionally carried out almost exclusively by men. In Madagascar, for example, a main condition for extension agents was that they be male. Of 158 candidates, 5 were women. Only 1 woman of 76 applicants took written exams but was not requested to take oral exams (Claeys, 1986). There is consequently a shortage of trained female extension personnel at all levels of most extension services.
Preconceived notions on the part of middle administrators, planners and project directors can prevent assistance from reaching women. If they perceive aquaculture as strictly men's work, programmes and project resources will not be advertized nor made available to women (Hourihan, 1986).
For this reason, simple promotion of aquaculture will not necessarily draw in more women. In many cases there are socio-economic constraints which must be overcome first (Yap, 1980a). Women's access to training, credit, and extension information is often hindered by attitudes that aquaculture is men's work and of no interest to women.
For cultural reasons men cannot work with women in many areas of the world (FAO, 1986b). For example, purdah in Moslem nations prevents women from talking with unknown men. When invited to training courses women are expected to, and do, act reticently and deferentially to males. Trainees are hesitant to ask questions of a male instructor (Hourihan, 1986).
In areas where aquaculture is not a traditional activity, teaching by example is the most effective way of reaching the rural poor. Yet many extension agents, particularly women who have not been encouraged to participate in field work, may lack the practical experience to carry out this type of programme (FAO, 1986a).
Time is a crucial issue. Time spent away from the household must be justified in terms of the increased income (Acharya and Bennett, 1.982). They can find time only by placing greater household burdens on their children or by working on tasks which can be accomplished simultaneously with household work (Scott and Carr, 1985). It is difficult to get women off the farm; women responsible for households, children, and small animals cannot leave for long periods of time. Demonstration farms located at research and training centres are often not accessible to women for these reasons (Hourihan, 1986). Dormitory facilities sometimes lack facilities for women. These problems tend to make formal training programmes inaccessible to many women.
Available jobs are often limited and most women, with some exceptions, have not had a basic education. Language problems can be important barriers. Many women have not learned to ride bicycles or motorcycles, and are not attracted to extension work because it is not considered fashionable.
6. A SURVEY OF WOMEN IN TRAINING AND EXTENSION
A survey was conducted of a sample of women aquaculturists from various nations to identify recommendations for increasing women's participation in training and extension services. The following is a summary of their responses.
Aquaculture, in most countries, was considered men's work. Women in aquaculture must constantly prove themselves; their work may be more carefully examined. It may be more difficult for women to advance in the field of aquaculture because of their gender. At the same time, the few women who are self-confident enough to pursue a career in aquaculture have often become prominent persons in the field. Others, however, do not continue in aquaculture even when trained because t-.hey see little chance for advancement.
Women need to be aware that aquaculture is a field with potential for them. Both men and women need to be educated about the accomplishments and activities which women have already achieved in aquaculture. Successes and opportunities for women in aquaculture should be publicized so that others will be attracted.
Women have been confined mostly to the "safety" of laboratory work and experimental ponds with few venturing into commerical aquaculture. Most women are channelled into laboratory research during their training and are less prepared than their male counterparts for extension work which requires substantial field experience. Specific barriers to women's participation in aquaculture which were mentioned included: (i) girls are taught early on to dislike fish, (ii) many trainers discourage women and do not take them seriously, (iii) people are often surprised and doubtful of the qualifications and knowledge of women in the field, and (iv) there is aversion to hiring women for work on a fish farm.
Directors of institutions should give equal opportunities to men and women to be trained. Women need to be trained in field skills and specifically in the use of machinery and heavy equipment, aerator maintenance, pump and generator maintenance, mowers, chain saw handling, and repair of tools, cars, and tractors. Fish farms which are owned and operated by women could serve as effective demonstration units.
Women should be offered internships concentrating on field activities. Women-only training sessions may be necessary to provide women with particular skills which in general women lack, such as equipment operation and maintenance. On-the-job training programmes or volunteer work during high school and early college years should be developed. Women need farm exposure and strong mathematical skills. Successful women need to be found and made visible to younger women to serve as role models.
The women surveyed indicated a need for more women to get involved as trainers. Women trainers would serve as role models for female trainees. Other means suggested included: promotion of aquaculture at the high school level through field trips to private farms and hatcheries, establishment of scholarships for women, and letters and personal contacts explaining the potential benefits of aquaculture.
Although fewer women are involved in extension than in training, greater numbers are needed, especially in countries where women are responsible for growing and selling fish. In Nigeria, for example, women play a prominent role in marketing and preservation of fish, and it is necessary to have women in the extension services to transfer new technologies in these areas to the women.
Women should be actively recruited for extension programmes. Incentives must be offered because extension agents are of ten asked to go into depressed areas. Most of the women surveyed had no experience with women extension agents, but pointed out the importance of individual differences. Whether the clientele is male or female will influence the effectiveness of individual extension agents; there are situations in which women are more effective than men, and vice versa.
7. RECOMMENDATIONS
(i) The training programmes of on-going projects should be evaluated to determine their accessibility to women. Periodic reviews should be conducted which gather and evaluate the following types of data:
(a) numbers and percentages of women applying for fellowships for national or international training,
(b) numbers and percentages of women receiving fellowships for national or international training,
(c) numbers and percentages of women trained at fisheries centres,
(d) numbers and percentages of women graduates of fisheries training centres who continue to work in aquaculture,
(e) numbers and percentages of women graduates of fisheries training centres employed to work with fish farming families,
(f) potential for women to participate in refresher courses,
(g) potential for women study tours and women's training groups (FAO, 1979b).
(ii) Efforts should be made to utilize more women trainers in on-going training programmes.
(iii) The feasibility of village-level training programmes should be evaluated in all aquaculture projects which have a significant training component.
Training in specific production, processing, or marketing technologies should be integrated with literacy and numeracy training (Acharya and Bennett, 1982; Engle, 1982). Slide shows, video presentations, and hands-on demonstrations are extremely valuable (Hourihan, 1986). Provision for child care, programmes which enable women to acquire tools, representation of women on project committees, and support for hiring women, are critical considerations for the success of training programmes (Scott and Carr, 1985).
(iv) Extension activities must focus on generating income for women.
(v) Current extension services must be evaluated to determine their effectiveness in transferring technology to women.
A major overhaul of the current male-oriented approach to agricultural extension is long overdue (Acharya and Bennett, 1982). An extension service for and by women may be required in some areas to let fisherwomen benefit from technical improvements in fishing activities traditionally carried out by women. Special sections for rural women may need to be created and staffed by female extension agents. Existing women's extension programmes must be expanded (FAO, 1986b).
(vi) Female extension agents should be recruited, trained, and incorporated into extension services.
As cultural perceptions of women talking to men are not nearly so intense as men talking to women, female agents can deal directly with both men and women farmers. There is a need for more active recruitment of women at the pre-college level. Women extension agents from other fields could also be trained in fisheries skills (Hourihan, 1986).
(vii) Female village-level extension agents (link workers) must be trained and employed in mobile training programmes.
(viii) Contacts between male extension agents and women need to be improved.
Male extension workers at all levels must be made aware of women's major role in agriculture and of the need to reach women as well as male farmers (Acharya and Bennett, 1982). Group meetings between male extension agents and small numbers of women at selected farms on a regular, steady basis should be organized. The first few visits should include a female extension agent.
8. SUMMARY
The role of women in aquaculture around the world has gone largely unrecognized. For this reason, little effort has been made to incorporate women into training programmes and extension services. Approximately 10-15% of trainers and trainees are women with even fewer women involved in extension services.
Although aquaculture in most countries is considered "men's work", it is often the women who are responsible for managing the ponds and often repaying loans. Yet these women have virtually no access to information on new technologies. Even in activities where women visibly predominate, such as in marketing and fish processing, extension efforts are generally directed towards men.
Case studies have shown that the effectiveness of technology transfer in aquaculture depends on the development of means of reaching women. These include training women extension agents, utilization of female link workers, and men/women team approaches to extension activities.
Efforts must be made to publicize the work which women are doing in aquaculture through research, pamphlets, newspaper articles, and other media. By increasing people's awareness of women's roles, the involvement of women in on-going training programmes and extension services will increase. As more women participate in these key components of development, higher rates of project success and technology transfer can be expected.
9. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to thank sincerely the many people from around the world who took the time to respond to letters and to the survey, and who provided additional contacts. In particular I want to thank the following persons who went to the trouble of compiling data from their respective areas: Agnes Ajana, Nigerian Institute for Oceanography and Marine Research, Lagos, Nigeria; José Albizurez, Peace Corps, Guatemala; Nancy Blanks, Joint PVO/University Rural Development Center, Western Carolina University, Cullowhee, North Carolina; Juan Coward, Peace Corps, Costa Rica; Donatella Crosetti, Rome, Italy; Kevin Doyle, Peace Corps, Sierra Leone; Edeltraud Drewes, Bay of Bengal Project, India; Richard Edwards, Peace Corps, Philippines; Sally Hoh, Peace Corps, Honduras; Narayan Kutty, FAO Team Leader, ARAC, Port Harcourt, Nigeria; Nola Mignott, US AID, Jamaica; Kim Norgren, Auburn University, Alabama; Brian Nerrie, Auburn University, Alabama; Chris Nugent, FAO, Côte d'Ivoire; Ron
Phelps, Auburn University, Alabama; Richard Pretto Malca, National Aquaculture Director, Santiago de Veraguas, Panama; Jorgrenne Primavera, SEAFDEC, Philippines; Diana Putman, US AID, Indonesia; David Rouse, Auburn University, Alabama; Harry Rhea, Peace Corps, Washington; Brian Steinwand, Peace Corps, Zaire; Constantino Tapias, Regional Fisheries Officer, FAO, Santiago, Chile; Francois Vallet, FAO/UNDP, Kisuma, Kenya; Karen Veverika, Auburn University, Alabama, and Stella Williams, University of Ife, Ife, Nigeria;
<section>b</section>
WOMEN'S ROLES IN INSTITUTIONS AND CREDIT (A. Librero)
by Aida M. Librero
Socio-Economics Research Department
Philippine Council for Agriculture and Resources Research and Development
Los Banos, Laguna, The Philippines
1. INTRODUCTION
The output of cultured aquatic species has continued to increase, especially in Asia. At a level greater than 10 million tonnes, aquaculture production accounts for over 11 percent of the total world harvest of fish and shellfish. The annual growth rate of aquaculture output during the period 1975-80 was over 77, compared with about 2% for the aggregate growth rate for all food producing sectors. Furthermore, output of world aquaculture production is predicted to increase at approximately 5.5% per year between 1985 and 2010.
Realization of this development potential will not take place, however, without considerable capital investment. Private investment will have to be greatly reinforced by financial investment from the rural banks through the traditional mechanisms of credit and grants. Aquaculture development has potential to advance the role of women in rural communities. This paper examines the role and status of women in aquaculture at the present time, and focuses on credit and institutions.
The role which women play in fisheries is less reported at the national level than their role in agriculture, in spite of abundant studies available. This is true in Ghana and the Philippines, for example, where there are as many women as men involved in the fishing industry (FAO, 1986c).
In small-scale aquaculture, women are involved in all stages of fish production, processing, and distribution. Yap (1980a) states that a wife looks after the pond, feeds the fish, and prepares the feeds, but her involvement declines as fishfarm size increases and male labour is usually hired. In the Philippines, however, there are large ponds managed by women and women labour is hired. According to the President of the Philippine Fishfarmers Technical Assistance Foundation, Inc., women are hired because they are more efficient for certain activities.
2. ACTIVITIES IN ASIA
In Bangladesh it is estimated that about 30% of women in rural coastal areas are directly or indirectly engaged in small-scale fishing activities. Among fishing families, all female members are engaged on a part-time or a full-time basis. These activities extend to all aspects and sectors of the industry (Drewes, 1980). Of more recent origin, undertaken to a large extent by women in rural areas, is the farming of freshwater fish.
The government policy in Bangladesh is to employ more women in public institutions and organizations. Ten percent of positions in government agencies are set aside for women; however, this quota hardly gets filled.
There are women's cooperatives in Bangladesh. Their purpose is to enable women to pursue economically profitable activities through group association and discipline, to provide training in productive skills, and to provide mechanisms for disseminating information about health, nutrition, family planning, and literacy. However, it is only among landed families where females are engaged in income-generating activities within the family farm (Westergaard, 1982).
A voluntary agency, the Village Education Resource Center (VERC) , gives women training in budgeting and suggests a savings plan after studying the fisherfolk's status, incomes, and savings. VERC also provides loans to women on a trial basis. About 38 loans of Takas 100-200 have been given to the women for fish marketing, and five loans of Takas 300 to 500 for fish drying. The women repay in small installments whenever they can. The proceeds provide a 'revolving fund' to finance a community hall in the village, and to buy twine or tyre cord to keep women gainfully employed.
In India, in the State of Tamil Nadu, fish drying and curing, and fish marketing are the two main activities in which women are involved in both marine and inland fisheries. In brackishwater aquaculture women are engaged in prawn seed collection from estuaries and backwaters. To a lesser extent women are involved in shrimp processing.
In a few places along the coast of the State of Andhra Pradesh, women are seasonally engaged in collecting molluscs and shells. A number of cooperatives have been established to organize women for handbraiding of fishing nets, supply of twine, etc. These groups are given financial support by the Cooperative Central Bank. Commercial banks also provide loans to women who are engaged in fish marketing. Repayment of such loans has been exceptionally good. In rural coastal areas there is much scope for further development of women in such fields as brackishwater and freshwater aquaculture.
Current activities in Andhra Pradesh vary from fish curing, seed collection for aquaculture, organized fish transportation, and institutional credit to increase women's working capital for fish marketing. Few banks have experimented on small-scale loans to fisherwomen to increase fish marketing or establish petty shops. Initiated in 1976, the Grameen Bank Project has aimed at extending banking facilities to poor men and women. A proposal for pilot fisherwomen extension activities in Andhra Pradesh has been prepared whereby the Department of Fisheries assigns two extension officers to implement the proposed activities, and banks institute new loan procedures to increase repayment rates and to enlarge women's economic base for income-earning activities.
In Malaysia women are involved only in shore-based small-scale fishery activities, the most important of which is the processing of fishery products. Few programmes or organizations in the country deal specifically with improving the role of women in fishing communities. There are several extension programmes which include training courses in improved fish processing and freshwater fish culture directed at women. The Rural Community Development Authority conducts courses in home economics for rural areas which also reach women in fishing communities. The number of women officers in the fisheries administration of Malaysia is very limited. There are only four women officers concerned with research and extension.
In the Philippines employment trends in fisheries are difficult to document because the data are compiled under the general heading of agriculture, fisheries, and forestry. The fishing industry employs approximately 900 000 workers, which is 10% of all agricultural workers and about 5% of the total work force. A majority, about 67%, are engaged in municipal fisheries, 5% in commercial fisheries, 22% in aquaculture and other inland fisheries, and 6% in fish processing. The distribution of employed persons in agriculture, forestry, fishing, and hunting in 1983 was 29.8% female and 70.2% male. Using these proportions, out of the 198 000 workers in aquaculture, about 59 000 workers are women and 139 000 are men.
A nationwide survey of milkfish (the predominant fish cultured in the Philippines) pond operators and caretakers in the Philippines included a systematic random sample of 1 175 respondents (Librero, et. al., 1977). Of the 783 owners interviewed only 7% were females and of the 392 caretakers (caretakers were interviewed if owners were not available) only 1% were female. There was, however, an unequal female distribution among the eleven administration regions. The percentage of female owners ranged from zero to 19%. Indeed, there were female owners managing their own fishponds.
While women may not be the entrepreneurs in fishpond businesses managed by their husbands, they hold the purse and are instrumental in planning and budgeting. Certainly women participate in decision-making, not only in the house but also in the aquaculture business.
During the same year Nicolas et al.,(1976) undertook a socio-economic study of fishpen aquaculture. Out of 193 fishpen operators studied, 6 were women. A survey of mussel farms (Orduña and Librero, 1976) in Nacoor Bay, the biggest producer of mussels in the Philippines, showed that all operators were male. Women, however, do participate in processing and preparing mussels for the market. Similarly the oyster industry is dominated by the male sex. About 96% of the farm operators studied by Librero, et al., (1976) were male while only 4% were female. For tilapia freshwater ponds, 7% are operated by women and 93% by men (Tidon and Librero, 1978).
In the Philippines the rural banks, the Development Bank of the Philippines, the Philippine National Bank, commercial, and other banks, all provide credit for aquaculture regardless of sex of the borrower provided that the borrowers fulfil the requirements of the banks and provide collateral. Special credit programmes have been implemented for fisheries, for example, the Biyayang Dagat programme, but no special projects have yet been designed to encourage women to borrow for aquaculture purposes.
While several organizations in the Philippines have been reorganized as channels of technology and a conduit for credit and other services, few fishfarmers, whether male or female, join such associations. In 1975, a study (Librero, et al., 1977) on milkfish pond operators showed that only 11% were members of fisheries organizations. In 1981, another study (BFAR, 1981) reported that less than 30% of fishfarmers join organizations, and of these only about one-third joined fishfarmers' associations. Among the members almost one-half claimed to have derived no benefits from their organization. However, 22 (out of 134) did benefit by the fry allocation scheme. Seventeen reported that the organization assisted them in the procurement of fertilizers while 25 were given technical information, but few received any credit assistance.
In Thailand about 50% of the female working population live in the rural areas. More than one-half (54.4%) of the rural women workers are agricultural labourers who work for wages or as hired labourers. These women belong to the poorest section of rural society (Chandratat, 1983).
Specific studies on the condition of women in small-scale fishing communities have not been conducted in Thailand. However, it is estimated that in the majority of small fishing villages women are generally involved in all fishery activities rather than at any higher commercial level (Drewes, 1980).
The Centre on Integrated Rural Development for Asia and the Pacific (CIRDAP), convinced that women groups in fishing communities did not receive adequate attention, launched its first action programme for women in fishing communities in Indonesia, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, and Vietnam in 1984, with financial and technical assistance from the Government of Japan and FAO. The objectives of the programme are to improve the living and working conditions of rural women and their families in fishing communities and to provide necessary inputs and services to help meet their basic needs. One of the immediate tasks is to assist rural women in establishing their own economically-viable income generating activities.
Of the four country projects, those in the Philippines, Indonesia, and Sri Lanka involve marine fisheries, while that of Vietnam is for aquaculture, specifically shrimp culture. In Vietnam government loans have been previously provided on a long-term basis (3-5 years) and with very low interest, through cooperatives. CIRDAP funds for the credit scheme are being disbursed to women through cooperatives. The Vietnam National Sea Products Export Corporation (SEAPRODEX) implements the action programme. Selected widow beneficiaries are provided with loans and allocated land for shrimp cultivation. By phases, additional beneficiaries can be involved, and local authorities and beneficiaries are active in the programme. Accordingly, the local financial agency has created favourable conditions by providing loans with few procedural complications. A mid-term consultation held in Bangladesh in August 1986 found that the implementing agencies in the respective countries should focus not
only on fishery-related activities but should also consider other income-generating schemes.
Since 1981 the Bay of Bengal Programme (BOBP) has operated several pilot projects in which women from fishing communities constitute the target group. Promotional work was started in 1979 by conducting a workshop on Fisherwomen Extension Workers. The main objective of the programme is to improve the social status of women by enabling them to participate in developing and governing their communities. This attends to their interests and gives them opportunities to engage in economic activities. The BOBP's role is to demonstrate new technologies in pilot projects, hoping that results can be applied widely by the governments concerned. For fisherwomen the BOBP adopts three different strategies, one of which is to organize women in groups for different purposes (income generation, acquisition of consumer goods, provision of communal facilities, services, social activities, etc.). The choice for income-generating activities in the village is meagre and the remuneration low, yet
the women continue to try to earn some money, and even save from the low incomes.
A BOBP project in Thailand is attempting to improve the living standard in a village through self-help stimulating community development, and the women are increasing their incomes by acquiring skills in handicraft and fish processing. Training courses have been held in handicrafts for younger women, and in processing, e.g., improving quality of shrimp paste, and making fish products such as fish sausages and shrimp biscuits, mainly for older women.
Women from fishing communities in Sri Lanka are improving their living conditions by engaging in economic activities such as coir making, garment manufacture, and handicrafts (Drewes, 1985). Incomes earned through these activities, although lower than those of their husbands, are high enough for the women to start participating in financial decision-making in the family. Only 8% of the women interviewed engaged in fisheries activities such as fish trade, fish handling and processing, net mending and repairing, or backwater fishing. The extent of women's participation in these activities varied according to the economic development of the region, level of technology applied, existing infrastructure, and cultural/religious backgrounds, as well as topographical conditions. In some northwestern coastal villages women engage in fish handling, processing and marketing. In the southwestern villages, however, with their well-developed infrastructure (roads, harbour, ice plants,
larger motorized craft) most women, barring a few who are the sole earners in the family, rarely engage in any fishery-related activities. Changes in fisheries technology, such as net-making machines, imported machine-made nets, modern forms of fish handling and marketing, mechanized and motorized transport, have apparently induced withdrawal of women from fishery-related activities.
In three villages in Chittagong, Bangladesh, a BOBP project has undertaken to help traditional fisherwomen supplement their incomes by net-making, pond culture of carp, and animal husbandry. Women are supplied with twine to make nets and earn wages; they receive loans for fish marketing and purchase goats or poultry, and also initiate fishpond culture. The project is executed jointly by the BOBP and the Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock with some initial assistance in the logistics of group organization by Ghashul, a voluntary agency. The fishponds are obtained on lease or a nominal rent of Takas 1 500 per year. Women are trained in fish husbandry and pond management. After harvest, costs of culture operations are deducted and net proceeds distributed among the women participants.
3. ACTIVITIES IN AFRICA
In most African countries the production of food has always been a major role played by women. It has been estimated that women perform 30 to 60% of the agricultural labour in Africa.
In addition to other economic activities, such as farming and trading, many women in Africa are engaged in fish-related activities on a seasonal basis (Dey, 1984). Men are responsible for all marine fishing and most inland fish production throughout the continent while women usually smoke, dry, and market the fish. In some countries, for example, in the Côte d'Ivoire, Togo, the United Republic of Cameroon, and Nigeria, fish processing and marketing are dominated by women, while in other countries, e.g. Madagascar, both men and women are involved in smoking and trading fish. Where women are involved in fish processing and marketing they generally work on their own account, keeping their financial affairs separate from their husband's. Sometimes fish for smoking are even purchased from the husband.
In a number of African countries, such as the Central African Republic, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Sierra Leone, Togo, the United Republic of Cameroon, and Zaire, women are traditionally engaged in harvesting fish in small streams, lakes, and swampy areas at the end of the dry season,
Fishfarming is being assimilated in many countries with women mainly involved in harvesting. Women also take part in the construction of ponds and fish feeding. In the Central African Republic, Cote d'Ivoire, and Zaire, some women own and manage fish ponds. Fishfarming is being promoted for women in Africa as it can be combined with other agricultural and domestic activities. Women's role in fish feeding complements their domestic work. Compound and village sweepings (dung and vegetable peelings) can be used for pond composting.
Often land is the required collateral for institutional loans. Non-ownership of land therefore inhibits both men and women from credit and borrowing. In Kenya, for example, few women have land registered in their names. This is in accord with the custom that women do not own land. Only all-male groups have been involved in implementing land reform which has left the positions of widows ill-defined (Palmer, 1985). In Western Kenya patrilineal rules of inheritance, which confine women's access to wealth, have gradually changed and land titles held largely in men's names are now alienable (Staudt, 1985). Nevertheless few women own land. In Nyanza Province women own only 6% of land parcels (Okeyo, 1980). With no control over land women lack collateral for loans.
Existing credit and marketing systems in African countries are generally inadequate in meeting rural women's needs (Bey, 1984). Due to institutional regulations they are often unable to receive credit in their own names, Moreover, as they have few assets they cannot provide the collateral required by lending institutions. Coupled with lack of financial resources this restricts women's adoption of improved technologies for food handling.
Some examples of international efforts to design institutional credit schemes to facilitate greater access to credit by rural women in Africa are the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Women (which considers applications for revolving funds for women's groups); the Women's World Banking, which has developed a fund to be used to secure bank loans to local groups; and the African Regional Credit Association (AFRACA) which is cooperating with FAO to develop and implement a series of sub-regional projects for women's agricultural credit and banking.
African women traditionally have considerable decision-making and managerial power in food production, processing, storage and marketing. Likewise, in many African countries, women have traditional social organizations which are separate from the men's and regularly consulted by the village elders. However, most development associations, such as cooperatives or irrigation committees, rarely permit women to register as members unless they are household heads (Dey, 1984).
4. ACTIVITIES IN OCEANIA
Women's involvement: within the Pacific Region more often than not is in the capacity of consumer rather than producer, A number of barriers limit women's involvement in production in the cash economy The underlying problem lies in the sexual division of labour in which females perform mainly non-productive labour in the home and males perform largely productive labour outside the home.
Concerning the availability of credit as an adjunct to income-raising activities by women in the South Pacific, Cole (1985) summarized bank activities with reference to lending to women clients. The Development Finance Institutions (DFIs) in the South Pacific offer a wide range of credit opportunities for commercial, industrial and agricultural purposes. For example, the Development Bank of Western Samoa (DBWS) has no specific policy of encouraging women clients, but the board welcomes staff involvement in projects geared to women's participation. A staff of 90 include 30 women among whom are a senior security officer, a senior accountant, and 9 loan officers. Eight percent of all industrial and 10% of all agricultural loans are for women. For fishing, only one woman made use of credit in 1980, 2 each in 1981 and 1982, and another one in 1983. In loan preparation and understanding of obligations men and women do not differ greatly, but women are more responsible in their
attitude to repayments and in cooperation with bank staff.
The Development Bank of Solomon Islands (DBSI) has no policy of discrimination between sexes in lending and no special effort to encourage women to borrow. One-fourth of the staff are women, including one loan officer and one securities officer. Fishing/rural transport (combined in the classification) had 3 women customers in 1980, 4 in 1981, 3 in 1982, and 5 in 1983. Women appreciate obligations better than men. Those who seek loans are Chose who have been employed either in the government or the private sector.
The Papua New Guinea Development Bank (PNGDB) does not discriminate against or in favour of women lending. The criterion for loan approval is the likelihood of success rather than sex. The National Development Bank of Palau (NDBP) commenced operations only recently and so far has not provided loans for aquaculture. Of the three staff members, two are women. The Business Development Advisory Bureau in Tuvalu (BUDAB) has no discrimination on male or female loan applicants. Of the two staff members, one is a woman. One loan has been made to a woman for a fishing venture. Women are keen to use credit from the bank to develop joint ventures and single proprietorship operations, but lack management and financial skills. The Tonga Development Bank (TDB) has one third of the staff female. One is a Finance Manager and another a Chief Clerk Administrator. No special policies favour women clients. Women concentrate on domestic activities better, and are involved in trade stores,
sewing, hotel operations, handicrafts, and restaurants. The Niue Development Finance Fund states that women are treated no differently from men. The three female borrowers are involved in garment making, agriculture, and manufacturing. The National Loans Board, Kiribati, states that commercial Loans are provided regardless of sex; however, no women have applied for loans.
The Fiji Development Bank (FDB) has no discrimination against or in favour of women. In Fiji, a Women's Interest Office has been established to cater to particular problems of women in relation to training in rural areas. The activities of the office, however, have concentrated on home economics and handicrafts. The Fiji Development Bank established a commercial and industrial loan scheme specifically directed towards encouraging indigenous Fijians in commercial and industrial activities. However, while loans have been provided to women (110 or 5%, out of 2 167 borrowers involving an amount of F.$ 700 000 or 4% of F.$ 16 151 000), none was for aquaculture.
5. SUMMARY
Published information on the role of women in aquaculture is limited. The literature available often presents women in general in rural areas or in fisheries without qualification.
The role of women in aquaculture has to be publicized more before they will be accepted and involved in credit and in institutions. Farm credit is usually provided in cash and has to be repaid in cash, hence the extent to which women are involved in the cash economy both in terms of earning and spending has to be better understood.
The extent of women's participation in aquaculture (or other sectors) depends on a number of macro- and micro-level factors, such as price policies, availability of credit for different enterprises, and the stage of the family cycle including the ages and needs of children. However, the main factors appear to be cultural patterns for the male/female division of labour; socio-economic status; competing demands on women's time and hence their opportunity costs; and the amount of land and other productive resources available.
Few institutions cater specifically to the financial needs of women. One, Women's World Banking (WWB), serves as a financial intermediary between local community organizations and lending institutions. It primarily utilizes local leadership and provides management training. WWB has 30 affiliates in 27 countries; 27 affiliates in formation and regional operations in Latin America, the Caribbean, Eastern and Southern Africa, and West Africa. Over 2,729 guaranteed commercial bank loans have been granted with over 10,000 additional loans extended by WWB affiliates. No defaults have been reported to date. A record like this will unquestionably attract other rural development banks to increase the availability of credit for women to invest in the aquaculture sector.
Although WWB has not yet granted loans for aquaculture projects, it is interested in receiving requests from fish farmers. It can provide training in the development of business plans and credit management as necessary.
<section>c</section>
WOMEN IN THE AQUACULTURE PROFESSIONS (C. Brown)
by Carol M. Brown
47 Bulkley, Suite 10
Sausalito, CA 94965, U.S.A.
The evolution of aquaculture from subsistence production levels into a viable food production industry in many parts of the world has generated demand for a host of new professional specialties. The relatively recent appearance of aquaculture in many countries has precluded a legacy of professional involvement. Few, if any, established biases regarding participation of women at the professional level have developed.
For the purposes of this paper, the term "professional" has been defined as "college-trained" and having a career interest in aquaculture. The paper presents data on women receiving graduate degrees in aquaculture, women's participation in aquacultural research, women occupying administrative positions in aquaculture, women's involvement in supportive programmes, and opportunities and constraints for women in the aquaculture professions.
Statistics are very sparse. In the few instances where they have been collected they are most commonly aggregated into the fisheries sector as a whole. The data presented in this paper are intended to illustrate and emphasize rather than to provide a comprehensive quantification of women in aquaculture at the professional level.
1. EDUCATION AND QUALIFICATIONS
It is difficult to attain professional positions in the aquaculture industry without education, training, and advanced degrees. In countries where there is both an established commercial industry and a supportive educational programme there is considerable competition for positions in aquaculture. A Bachelor's degree is considered minimal for jobs in commercial production, and an advanced degree is frequently required for positions in research, education, or extension management.
Graduate level training is evident throughout the industry. For example, of the 641 women members of the American Fisheries Society (or 9% of the total membership), 36% have a Bachelor's degree, 53% a Master's degree, and 10% have a Ph.D. (A.F.S. 1982). An estimated 20% of the individuals engaged in commercial aquaculture production in Hawaii have Ph.Ds.
Since the founding of the Institute Pertanian Bogor in West Java, Indonesia, in 1964, 856 fisheries graduates have included 197 women (23%). Of the 405 students currently enrolled at the University of Hasanuddin in South Sulawesi, 117 (29%) are women. Almost half of the current enrollment of 86 students at the University of Pattimura in Moluccas is comprised of women.
The College of Fisheries of the University of the Philippines has awarded Diplomas in fisheries since 1948. Since then, 66 (38%) of students receiving diplomas, 238 (60%) of those receiving B.S. degrees, and 11 (50%) of those receiving M.S. degrees in fisheries, have been women. At Bicol University in 1982, 109 (57%) of the recipients of Diplomas and 119 (60%) of the B.S. degree recipients in the College of Fisheries were women.
The Departamento de Ciencias Marinas of the University of Puerto Rico, Recinto Mayaguez, has awarded five M.S. degrees to women and currently has four women enrolled in the programme. All but two of these women are Puerto Rican.
The University of Stirling in Scotland has awarded 31 degrees to women in aquaculture and related fields since 1975. Of these, ten were at the Ph.D. level and seventeen at the Master's level.
A number of universities in the United States of America now offer educational qualifications in aquaculture: (a) Auburn University offers B.S., M.S., M.Aq., and Ph.D. degrees in Fisheries and Allied Aquaculture. Since 1969, 735 Master's degrees have been awarded in aquaculture. Of these, 35 (5%) have been awarded to women. The number of degrees awarded to women has increased significantly over the life of the programme. More importantly, this increase has occurred despite a more or less constant number of students in the programme. During the summer of 1986, for example, 12 women (11% of all students) were working towards degrees in aquaculture: (b) Michigan State University reports two undergraduate students specializing in aquaculture and one in the Ph.D. programme. During the past six years seven women have enrolled in an elective course in fish culture: (c) Oklahoma State University has had one woman seeking a B.S. degree in fish culture, and Louisiana State University
has graduated three women at the M.S. level: (d) Texas A & M University has graduated 12 women at the B.S. level in aquaculture including one Honduran and one Mexican. There have been 5 graduates at each of the Master's and Ph.D. levels. The former includes students from Panama, the Philippines and Puerto Rico. One student from Sri Lanka received a Ph.D; and (e) The University of Rhode Island has four foreign female students in aquaculture-related programmes, including two from Ecuador, one from Costa Rica, and a Peace Corps worker in the Philippines.
2. PROFESSIONAL ACTIVITIES
In Egypt the General Authority for Fisheries Resources Development (GAFRD) operates a National Aquaculture Centre at El Abassa, in addition to regional aquaculture centres. Of a staff of 60, 15 (25%) are women. Of these, 5 women of 25 staff are located at the National Aquaculture Centre. These include 1 biologist (M.S.), 3 agricultural engineers, and 1 general technician.
Three of the educational institutions specializing in fisheries in Indonesia employ a combined total of 34 women, out of a total of 176 staff. Half of these (17) are employed at the Institute Pertanian Bogor in West Java. Women at these institutions are working in the areas of aquaculture, fisheries management, soil fertility, economics, genetics, marine oceanography, nutrition, and environmental science. In the Directorate General of Fisheries of the Ministry of Agriculture, the following positions are held by women: Subdivision Head for National Fisheries Extension, Director of Freshwater Research Station in Jakarta, Director of Carp Hatchery in Sumatra, Division Chief of Brackishwater Aquaculture at the national level. At the Agency for Agricultural Research and Development, women hold the following directorships: Freshwater Fisheries Research Sub-Institute, Lowland Fisheries Research Institute, Division of Fish Nutrition, Freshwater Fisheries Research Institute,
Subdivision of Marine Fish Research.
In Norway women participate on a variety of professional levels in the aquaculture industry. Approximately 38% of private sector personnel working in aquacultural research and administration are women. In the public sector, 3 of 4 senior executive officers in the Division of Aquaculture within the Ministry of Fisheries are women.
In the Philippines a major problem in research and development is the lack of well-trained leaders, particularly at the Ph.D. level. The problem is exacerbated by low pay scales at universities and government compared with high-paying consultancies both at home and abroad. Although research funding and grants have become more available, all too frequently the work is performed in absentia. The grants tend to be small and widely distributed resulting in incomplete conclusions and minimal collection of data and reporting of results.
In the Philippines 43% of all researchers in aquaculture and all of the researchers in fish processing are women (Table 1). The involvement of women decreases, however, at higher educational levels. At the College of Fisheries of the University of the Philippines, 24 of 46 staff are women. One half of the SEAFDEC research staff are women.
More top government positions in aquaculture in the Philippines are held by men than by women (Table 2). At the level of Section Chief and Regional Directorships women are hired in equal numbers as men. The Planning and Programming Division of the Bureau of Fisheries is led by a woman and all sections of the Fish Propagation and Fish Processing Divisions are headed by women.
Table 1. Women graduates in aquaculture research and fish processing, Philippines (excluding SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department)
Aquaculture
Fish Processing
Total
Women
Total
Women
No.
No.
No.
No.
Ph.D.
M.A./M.S.
B.S.
Diploma
Total
Source: Philippine Council for Agriculture and Resources Research and Development (PCARRD) contributed by Aida Librero, Director
Table 2. Women officials of the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources, Philippines
Level
Total
Female
No.
No.
Director and Assistant Director
Division Chief
Section Chief
Regional Director and Assistant Director
Total
Contributed by: Aida Librero, PCARRD
On a higher and more technical level of aquaculture there is relatively greater participation by women. A workshop on aquaculture technology conducted by the University of the Philippines in the Visayas in 1986 had 11 women out of a total of 38 participants. A seminar workshop on research directions and methodologies had more women (21) than men (19). A national workshop on tilapia economics in 1983 had a participation of 43 researchers, 18 of whom were female.
At the international level the female participation rate is lower compared with that in the Philippines. A workshop on aquaculture economics in Asia sponsored by the International Development Research Centre in 1981 had 30 participants with 27 men and 3 women.
The Fisheries Research Society of the Philippines has 119 members, 32 (27%) of whom are female. Of this total, 41 are in aquaculture, 7 (17%) being female.
During the construction of fish farm projects it is not uncommon to have women civil engineers acting as construction supervisors - as is the case in the construction of the hatchery and nursery complex of the Laguna Lake Development Authority where three of six inspectors are women. Filipina women are also active as engineering and technical consultants, either members of consulting firms, research agencies (such as SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department), or faculties of local universities, A roster of the FAO/Indo-Pacific Fisheries Council (1986) includes 32 women among a total of 123 Filipino inland fisheries and aquaculture specialists in the region.
In Scotland, records of the University of Stirling indicate that 4 of their graduates are working towards more advanced degrees; 9 are employed in research and education, 7 in fish production, and 6 hold government positions at professional levels.
In the United States of America, a survey of women members of the American Fisheries Society indicated that of the 350 women members employed, 41% are engaged principally in research. Only 8% are engaged in fish culture which is not specifically research oriented (American Fisheries Society, 1982).
Over 60% of women graduates from the Fisheries and Allied Aquacultures Department of Auburn University are involved to some degree in research (Table 3). Participation in commercial production (36%), teaching (30%), extension (30%), administration (30%), and consulting (24%), was lower. Of the responses indicating perceived areas of opportunities for women, 80% were in research.
In Hawaii, where there is a significant public as well as private employment base in aquaculture, women hold approximately 11% of the 240 professional positions. It is estimated that they hold 12% of the positions in commercial production, education and research, and approximately 9% in consulting. Almost 30% of the individuals seeking advice from the State on employment are women.
Table 3. Professional employment and perceived opportunities for women graduates in aquaculture by area of employment
Area of Employment
Women Currently Employed*
Perceived Area of Opportunity for Women**
Commercial Production
Research
Extension
Administration
Teaching Consulting
Source: Maynard and Molnar, 1985, based on the responses of 33 fisheries/ aquaculture graduates of Auburn University employed and responding to the survey.
* Reflects both total and partial involvement
** Indicates positive responses to perceived employment opportunities
3. SUPPORTIVE PROGRAMMES
Within the past few years there has been a demonstrable recognition of the contribution women can make to the economy and directly in the production of food. Women throughout the world are actively participating in establishing policies and forming and administering aquaculture programmes. Women hold positions of influence and policy-making within such international agencies as the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center (SEAFDEC), and FAO. All of the major international organizations and many universities have established divisions specifically focused upon encouraging the participation of women, although rarely is aquaculture a specific target of these programmes.
FAO has established an office for Women in Food Systems. Although to date no projects in aquaculture have been initiated through this office, considerable interest, especially in West Africa, has been indicated. An FAO fish culture project in the Côte d'Ivoire employs 3 women professionals as part of its 11-member staff, and an FAO project in the Congo has a woman as national director.
The Asian Development Bank (ADB) now requires inclusion of a subsection addressing women in every project preparation report. This is consistent with the recommendations submitted to the ADB by an independent consultant (Hourihan, 1986). The emphasis in such analyses is primarily focused upon the impacts on women labourers; however, education, training and opportunities for placement of women in instructional and research positions are not overlooked.
The ADB has funded a training and extension programme in aquaculture in Indonesia as part of a US$ 50 million loan package for shrimp aquaculture. A total of 200 extension agents will be hired and trained for the programme. Of these, 25 will receive 6 months foreign training. There were 40 applicants for the foreign training programme. Of the 24 accepted, 4 were women. Two of these declined, apparently due to social pressures. In order to be considered for this training programme a B.S. degree was required. Tests were given in English comprehension, loyalty, and technical competency. Of the total applicants one woman ranked in the top 5 and another in the top 15. Each trainee has a contractual commitment for 5 years at the senior technician level. Strong support for this programme has come from the Indonesian Government.
The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) established an office of Women in Development in 1974 in recognition of the valuable role women play in the economic and social fabric of developing nations. Through this office, there is a focus for support in education and training of women as well as a watchdog effort to ensure that the impact and opportunities are responsibly addressed in all USAID-sponsored projects. One of the areas of emphasis of this programme has been increasing employment for women in the private sector through the co-funding of a worldwide banking/loan guarantee programme. The goal of this programme is to increase the role of women entrepreneurs in the private sector. The availability of this type of funding should be of interest to women seeking professional opportunities i-n the aquaculture field. The Rwanda Fish Culture Project supported by USAID has a woman project leader and 4 women, including 2 nationals, involved in aquaculture
development.
4. OPPORTUNITIES AND CONSTRAINTS
Several large-scale aquaculture development programmes are being prepared and implemented which could afford excellent opportunities for specialized training and job opportunities in a variety of professional areas. For example, the Bangladesh Second Aquaculture Development Project will focus on the construction and operation of shrimp hatcheries as well as inland aquaculture development. The project has recommended training women in the care and maintenance of both fish and shrimp in hatcheries. This programme calls for training 22 individuals at M.S. and Ph.D. levels as well as practical training in fish and shrimp culture, aquaculture engineering, fisheries management, and shrimp hatchery operation.
Professional positions in aquaculture are increasing, but still remain few compared with job opportunities in traditional agriculture, fisheries, and animal husbandry. Aquaculture, because it combines some elements of each of these sectors, frequently becomes a step-child of an existing agency or department. This creates a tendency to transfer established biases on the roles of males and females which do not reflect the professional responsibilities of the aquaculture industry. This is especially true at the senior professional level where a new activity such as aquaculture is viewed as an opportunity to promote valued staff members through the creation of new positions. All too frequently these positions are filled on the basis of tenure rather than merit. Women with advanced or specialized training in aquaculture often are unable to compete for jobs with individuals who are tenured in more traditional disciplines.
Hatchery management is one area where women are making significant inroads. In Ecuador several women manage hatcheries for the production of marine shrimp seed. There appears to be a trend to select women in preference to men for many hatchery positions.
Farm ownership and management by women is increasing in many parts of the world. However, land ownership and investment financing continue to pose difficult problems for women.
In some countries, a surplus of trained professionals exists. In the Philippines a government survey concluded that among the graduates of agriculture, forestry, and fisheries programmes, the largest proportion of delayed employment was in the fisheries sector where approximately two-thirds of the graduates had to wait an average of 2.5 years before becoming employed. Among those who did not get immediate employment 44% were unemployed for 3 or more years. Although this does not specifically reflect surpluses of trained professionals in aquaculture, it is estimated that 22% of the 900 000 individuals employed in the fisheries sector are engaged in aquaculture and other inland fisheries activities (Schmittou et al., 1985).
One of the serious problems cited in obtaining jobs, especially in countries where there is a tradition of aquaculture production, is that graduates in fish culture have not been actively sought by the private sector. Their expertise is frequently viewed as inferior to the hands-on practical knowledge of farm owners and operators. This same stigma is often carried over to extension workers and erodes their credibility.
Educational programmes frequently have not kept pace with the needs of the industry. Those completing training courses and those with post-graduate training have fared far better in the job market. They are better able to contribute to the advancement of aquaculture technology and thereby win the confidence of the private sector. However, highly trained individuals tend to be promoted into administrative positions.
Not only has the industry occasionally outpaced the educational system, the social evolution in many countries is lagging. Although aquaculture appears to be an extremely suitable profession for women, positions often require travel and field situations which may not be considered socially acceptable for women. In Pakistan, for example, one woman with equal training to her male counterparts is reportedly unable to travel into the field due to social constraints; she is assigned to office duties which are largely secretarial.
Many aquaculture professionals are responsible for one or more subordinates. The Auburn University survey revealed that 69% of the female aquaculture/fisheries graduates supervised an average of 5 others. It is difficult in most societies for a man to accept fully a woman superior.
Women often feel a need to out-perform their male counterparts and particularly to avoid showing any weakness to their subordinates. All too frequently outstanding performance is the only way in which women will be selected in preference to a male candidate for a professional position.
The Auburn alumnae survey revealed that the majority of respondents did not feel that being a woman resulted in discrimination in terms of pay, promotion, or responsibilities (Table 4). Many (45%) women, however, were not considered for a position because of their sex, and others (36%) did not have their work taken seriously.
Table 4. Auburn University fisheries women alumnae affected by job discrimination
Type of Discrimination
Percent of Women Affected
Paid less for equal work
Passed over for promotions
Excluded from professional organizations
Not considered for a position
Denied responsibility
Work not taken seriously
Given unusual advantages
Isolated from professional contacts
Refused a job
Subject to lower expectations
Source: Maynard and Molnar, 1985
Recent interviews with 17 women in the United States who selected aquaculture as a career revealed that the majority believed aquaculture will remain a male-dominated profession. Increased employment of women was foreseen, particularly in research. Brief mention was made of instances of insufficient physical strength for tasks. However, the respondents unanimously indicated that the single most important disadvantage of being a women in the aquaculture profession is the perception on the part of male colleagues of the inability of women to perform the duties required of their job. Once a woman has demonstrated her competence, the problems encountered are not gender related (Rosenbury, 1983).
5. CONCLUSIONS
There is a need to recognize the special expertise required in aquaculture. In most instances this will lead to the realization that women are at a parity with men in terms of their ability to contribute professionally; women should therefore enjoy equal opportunities in education, training, and employment. Aquaculture professional opportunities are more technically and less physically demanding than most professional opportunities in fisheries or agriculture.
At all levels it is necessary to create an enabling environment through education and policies which encourage the training and placement of women in positions in which their social background and orientation can be most effective. In particular these include the management and operation of hatcheries, extension, teaching, and research. However, segregating the roles and opportunities for women should be avoided. Professional employment opportunities should be identified within the context of the needs of the industry not merely as opportunities to enhance employment and participation of women.
Aquaculture is a comparatively new industry in most of the developing world and as such has few social or political biases. It is important to maintain a distinction between aquaculture and agriculture to avoid the transference of traditional stereotypes.
Women clearly are making valuable contributions in the aquaculture industry. Given the increasing number of women receiving advanced degrees in aquaculture, the number of women in the aquaculture professions will undoubtedly continue i-.o grow.
6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The assembly of this data has relied a great deal on personal communications from many individuals. I would particularly like to acknowledge Aida Librero and Medina Delmendo for the statistics of the Philippines; to Diana Putnam for Indonesia; to Lillian Andreassen for Norway; to James Muir for Scotland; to Richard Fasler for Hawaii, U.S.A.; and to many others. Their contributions are greatly appreciated.
<section>d</section>
ANNEX I: BIBLIOGRAPHY
Acharya, M. and L. Bennett, 1982. Women and the subsistence sector; economic participation and household decision-making in Nepal. World Bank Staff Working Pap., (526).
American Fisheries Society, 1982. Directory of respondents. In Survey of women members. Bethesda, Maryland, American Fisheries Society.
Ayazi, A.R. and G.D. Utbult, 1980. Report of the review mission, 2 Nov-10 Dec 1980. Madras, India, Development of Small-Scale Fisheries in the Bay of Bengal, FAO/SIDA (GCP/RAS/040/SWE). Rome, FAO.
Bailey, C., Cycon, D. and M. Morris, 1986. Fisheries development in the Third World: the role of international agencies. World Development, 4(10/11).
Barnett, H.G., 1979. Being a Palauan. New York, Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
Beaglehole, E. and P. Beaglehole, 1941. Pangai; a village in Tonga. Mem. Polynes. Soc. New Plymouth, N.Z., (18).
BFAR (Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources), 1981. A baseline study on small-scale fishermen, fish farmers, fish processors, and fishing communities. Manila, Philippines, BFAR.
Bhasin, K., 1979. The role of women and the social organization of the traditional fishing communities. In Report of the workshop on social feasibility in small-scale fisheries development. Madras, India. 3-8 September 1979. Madras, Development of Small-Scale Fisheries in the Bay of Bengal, FAO/SIDA (GCP/RAS/040/SWE), BOBP/REP/5:22 p.
Buck, P.H., 1930. Samoan material culture. Bull. Bernice P. Bishop Mus., Honolulu, (75).
Chakroff, M. , 1981. Aquaculture extension services case studies. FAO Fish. Circ., (740):27 p.
Chandrasekharan, F., 1979. The present status of women in small-scale fisheries in Mahabalipuram, a fishing village in Chingleput district. In Report of the workshop on social feasibility in small-scale fisheries development. Madras, India. 3-8 September 1979. Madras, Development of Small-Scale Fisheries in the Bay of Bengal, FAO/SIDA (GCP/RAS/040/SWE) BOBP/REP/5:22 p.
Chandratat, S., 1983. The role of That women in rice production. Los Banos, Laguna, Philippines, International Rice Research Institute (IRRI). CIFA (Committee on Inland Fisheries in Africa), 1975. Symposium on aquaculture in Africa. Accra, Ghana, 30 Sept-2 Oct 1975. CIFA/Tech. Pap.(4) Supl. 1: 791 p.
Claeys, D., 1986. Vulgarisation de la pisciculture et développement de la pêche continentale. Rapport technique, FAO/PNUD (MAG/82/014) 9 p.
Clark, W.F., 1974. Population, agriculture, and urbanization in the Kingdom of Tonga. In Human relations area files, microfiche ethnographic files, New Haven, Connecticut.
Cole, R.V. , 1985. Access to development finance. In Women in development in the South Pacific; barriers and opportunities. Canberra, Australia, Development Studies Centre, The Australian National University.
Deceuninck, V., 1985. Etudes nationales pour le développement de l'aquaculture en Afrique, République centrafricaine. FAO Circ. Pêches. (770.13):68 p.
Dey, J., 1984. Women in food production and food security in Africa. FAO Women Agric. Ser., (3):101 p.
Dorjahn, V., 1962. African traders in Sierra Leone. In Markets of Africa; eight subsistence economies in transition, edited by P. Bohannan and G. Dalton New York, Anchor Books.
Dravi, M., 1972. Lake Kossou fisheries (Sociological studies). Report to the Bandama Valley Authority (AVB). Provisional report. Rome, FAO, FI: DP/IVC/26/71/526/2:pag.var. (Restricted)
Drewes, E., 1985. Income-earning activities for women from fishing communities in Sri Lanka. Madras, India, Development of Small-Scale Fisheries in the Bay of Bengal, FAO/SIDA (GCP/RAS/040/SWE), BOBP/REP/21:27 p.
Drewes, E., 1980. Role of women in small-scale fisheries of the Bay of Bengal. Madras, India, Development of Small-Scale Fisheries in the Bay of Bengal, FAO/SIDA (GCP/RAS/040/SWE), BOBP/REP/4:41 p.
Engle, C.R., 1982. Aquaculture technology; a tool for women in development. In Women in natural resources, an international perspective, edited by J. Force and D. Ehrenreich. Moscow, Idaho, University of Idaho Press.
Epple, G. M., 1977. Technological change in a Grenada, W.I. fishery, 1950-1970. In Those who live from the sea, edited by M. Smith. Amer. Ethnol. Soc. Mono., (62). St. Paul, Minnesota, West Publishing Company.
Fahey, S., 1985. Producers or consumers; women's entry into the cash economy in Medang, Papua New Guinea. In Women in development in the South Pacific: barriers and opportunities. Canberra, Australia, Development Studies Centre, The Australian National University.
Feinberg, R., 1986. Market economy and changing sex-roles on a Polynesian atoll. Ethnology, 25(4).
Firth, R., 1930. Report on research in Tikopia, Oceania. Vol. 1. Canberra, Australian National Research Council.
Firth, R., 1959. Social change in Tikopia. New York, Macmillan Company. Firth, R., 1984. Roles of women and men in a sea fishing economy; Tikopia compared with Kelantan. In The fishing cultures of the world: studies in ethnology, cultural ecology, and folklore, edited by B. Gunda. Budapest, Hungary, Akademiai Kiado.
FAO/UN., 1969. Report to the Government of Nigeria on fishing technology relating to river and swamp fisheries of northern Nigeria. Based on the work of W. Reed. Rep. FAO/UNDP(TA),(2711):90 p.
FAO., 1977. Market women in West Africa. Report of the seminar on the role of women in marketing local farm and marine produce, Accra, Ghana, 12-16 Dec 1977. Rome, FAO, 29 p.
FAO., 1979a. Integration of women in rural development. FAO summary paper for Africa (ECA). Regional Preparatory Meeting for the United Nations World Conference on the UN Decade for Women, Lusaka, Zambia, Oct 1979. Rome, FAO, 30 p.
FAO., 1979b. Report of a meeting on training of women extension workers. Madras, India, Development of Small-Scale Fisheries in the Bay of Bengal, 23-27 Apr 1979, Madras, India. FAO/SIDA (GCP/RAS/040/SWE), BOBP/MR/4:63 p.
FAO., 1979c. Review and analysis of FAO policies, programmes (1975-1979) on the integration of women in rural development and future programme trends (1980-1985): countries of the Latin America region. Rome, FAO, 26 p.
FAO., 1980. Guidelines for the integration of women in development. The ad-hoc Sub-group on Women in Rural Development, Working Group on Rural Development. Rome, FAO.
FAO., 1983a. Expert consultation on women in food production; promoting the participation of women in food marketing and credit. Rome, FAO, Dec 1983, 17 p.
FAO., 1983b. Freshwater aquaculture development in China. Report of the FAO/UNDP study tour for French-speaking African countries. FAO Fish. Tech. Pap.,(215):125 p. Issued also in French.
FAO., 1985. The case of the invisible rural women. UW/ACC Task Force. Rural Dev. Newsl., (5).
FAO., 1986a. Aquaculture and rural development. In Informe de la decimonovena conferencia regional de la FAO para Americana Latina y el Caribe. Bridgetown, Barbados. Rome, FAO, LARC/86/REP/1, 12 p. (mimeo)
FAO., 1986b. Role of women in food and agricultural production in the region. FAO Eighteenth Regional Conference for the Near East. Istanbul, Turkey. Rome, FAO, NERC/86/5 (mimeo).
FAO., 1986c. Women in developing agriculture. In FAO Women Agric. Ser. 4:105.
FAO., 1986d. Women in agriculture and rural development. FAO Eighteenth Regional Conference for Asia and the Pacific, Colombo, Sri Lanka. Rome, FAO.
Gifford, E.W., 1929. Tongan society. Bull. Bernice P. Bishop Mus. Honolulu,(61).
Gnielinski, S. von, 1979. Aspects sociologiques et économique de la pêche du lac Kossou. Rapport préparé pour le projet de développement des pêches du lac Kossou. Rome, FAO, FI:DP/IVC/77/006/1/IFI:33 p.
Grattan, F.S.H., 1948. An introduction to Samoan custom. Apia, Samoa, Samoan Printing and Publishing.
Halstead, B.W. and D.A. Courville, 1967. Poisonous and venomous marine animals of the world; Vol. 2. Vertebrates. Washington B.C., US Government Printing Office, 1070 p.
Hendrix, M.K., 1984. Technical change and social relations in a West African maritime history: a development history. Sierra Leone, Peninsula of Freetown. CMRD Work. Pap. Univ R.I., (21):29 p.
Hochet, A.M., 1979. Etudes socio-économiques conduites dans les régions administratives de Tombali et de Quinare-Sud-Ouest. European Economic Community, Doc. No.6.
Hourihan, J.J., 1986. Women in development; guidelines for the fisheries sector. Report to the Asian Development Bank, Manila, The Philippines.
Kena-Guede, J.F., 1985. Evaluation du project de développement piscicole, FAO/PNUD (IVC/77/003 and IVC/84/001), Abidjan, Centre de formation et de recherche en animation rurale, 94 p.
Kent, G., 1980. The politics of Pacific Island fisheries. Boulder, Colorado, Westview Press.
Lawson, R., 1972. The changing economy of the Lower Volta, 1954-1967; a study on the dynamics of rural growth. London, Oxford University Press.
Lazard, J., 1984. La pisciculture, outil du développement: exemple de la Côte d'Ivoire. Paris, Centre Technique Forestier Tropical (CTFT).
Lessa, W.A., 1966. Ulithi; a Micronesian design for living. New York, Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Librero, A.R., Callo, R.A., Dizon, J.P. and E.R. Pamulaklakin, 1976. Oyster seafarming in the Philippines; a socio-economic study. Los Banos, Laguna, Philippines, SEAFDEC-PCARR Research Paper Series, 6:101 p.
Librero, A.R., Nicolas, E.S., Banasihan, A.L., Fabro, R.M., Lapie, L.P., Nazareno, A.M. and E.O. Vasquez, 1977. Milkfish farming in the Philippines; a socio-economic study. Los Banos, Laguna, Philippines, SEAFDEC-PCARR Research Paper Series, 8:367 p.
Low, J.W., 1985. The economics of tilapia culture in Kasai Occidental, Zaire. Cornell Int. Agric. Mimeogr. Ithaca, N.Y. , (109).
Mariner, W., 1818. An account of the natives of the Tonga Islands in the South Pacific Ocean. John Murray.
Martinez Espinoza, M. , 1986. La acuicultura rural en America Latina; casos de estudio en Colombia, El Salvador y Costa Rica. Universidad Central de Venezuela, 1:125p.
Maude, A., 1973. Land shortage and population pressure in Tonga. In The Pacific in transition; geographical perspectives on adaptation and change, edited by H.C. Brookfield. Canberra, The Australian National University Press.
Maynard, M. and J. Molnar, 1985. Auburn women in fisheries; a world-wide survey. Auburn, Alabama, Auburn Univ.
Mead, M. , 1928. Coming of age in Samoa. New York, William Morrow.
Morss, E.R. and D.D. Gow, 1985. Implementing rural development projects; lessons from US AID and World Bank experiences. Boulder, Colorado, Westview Press.
Nash, C.E., 1986. Observations on international technical assistance to aquaculture. Rome, FAO/UNDP, ADCP/REP/86/23:21 p.
Nash, C.E., 1987. Future economic outlook for aquaculture and related assistance needs. Rome, FAO/UNDP, ADCP/REP/87/25:14 p.
Natpracha, P., 1986. Fisherwomen's activities in Bangladesh; a participatory approach to development. Madras, India, Development of Small-Scale Fisheries in the Bay of Bengal, FAO/SIDA (GCP/REM/040/SWE) BOBP/REP/24:38 p.
Nicolas, E.S., Librero, A.R., Callo, R.A. and E.R. Pamulaklakin, 1976. A socio-economic study of fish aquaculture in the Philippines. Los Banos, Laguna, Philippines, SEAFDEC-PCARR Research Paper Series, 5.
Okeyo, A.P. 1980. Daughters of the lakes and rivers. In Women in colonization, edited by M. Etienna and E. Leacock. New York, Praeger.
Orduña, A. and A.R. Librero, 1976. A socio-economic study of mussel farms in Bacoor Bay. Los Banos, Laguna, Philippines, SEAFDEC-PCARR Research Paper Series, 8:41 p.
Ottenberg, S. and P. Ottenberg, 1962. Afikpo market, 1900-1960. Jn Markets of Africa; eight subsistence economies in transition, edited by P. Bohannan and G. Dalton. New York, Anchor Books.
Palmer, I., 1985. The impact of agrarian reform on women. West Hartford, Connecticut, Kumarian Press.
Pedini Fernandez-Criado, M. (ed), 1984. Informes nacionales sobre el desarrollo de la acuicultura en America Latina. FAO Inf. Pesca (294) Supl. 1:138 p.
Pollnac, R.B., 1982. Sociocultural aspects of implementing aquaculture systems in marine fishing communities. In Aquaculture development in less developed countries, edited by L.J. Smith and S. Peterson. Boulder, Colorado, Westview Press.
Pollnac, R.B., 1984. The division of labor by sex in fishing societies. Kingston, R.I., Univ. R.I., 13 p.
Potaros, M., 1987. Management of fisheries and aquaculture in mangrove ecosystems in Thailand. FAO Fish. Rep. 370 Suppl.
Rosenbury, R., 1983. Aquaculture - a woman's perspective. Aquacult. Dig., 8(10).
Schmittou, H.R., Grover, J.H., Peterson, S.B., Librero, A.R., Rabanal, H.B., Portugal, A.A., and M. Adriano, 1985. Development of aquaculture in the Philippines. Res. Dev. Ser. Int. Cent. Aquacult. Auburn Univ., (32).
Scott, G.L. and M. Carr, 1985. The impact of technology choice on rural women in Bangladesh; problems and opportunities. World Bank Staff Work. Pap., (731).
Severance, C.J., 1977. Land, food, and fish; strategy and transaction on a Micronesian atoll. Thesis. Department of Anthropology, Univ. Oregon, Corvallis, Oregon.
Shang, Y.C., 1986. Coastal aquaculture development in selected Asian countries; status, potentials, and constraints. FAO Fish. Circ., (799):63 p.
Sluijer, J. 1983. Le rôle de la femme dans la pisciculture a Bangui, République centrafricaine. Div. Sociologie Rurale des Régions Tropicales et Sub-tropicales, Wageningen, Pays-Bas, 15 p.
Spleithoff, P.C., 1984. Traditionale vishandel in Noord West Lombok, Indonesie. Wageningen, The Netherlands, International Agricultural Centre (IAC).
Staudt, K., 1985. Agricultural policy implementation, a case study from western Kenya. West Hartford, Connecticut, Kumarian Press.
Steward, J.H., 1956. The people of Puerto Rico; a study in social anthropology. Urbana, Illinois, University of Illinois Press.
Taylor, D., 1982. The Caribs of Dominica; anthropology papers. Bull. Bur. Am. Ethnol., (119).
Tidon, A. and A.R. Librero, 1978. A socio-economic study of tilapia farming in the Philippines. Los Banos, Laguna, Philippines, SEAFDEC-PCARR Research Paper Series, 10.
United Nations, 1976. Report of the United Nations regional seminar on the participation of women in economic, social, and political development; obstacles that hinder their integration. Buenos Aires, Argentina, 22-30 Mar 1976. New York, United Nations, ST/ESA/SER.B/CI 20 p.
Vincke, M.M.J. and U.N. Wijkstrom, 1982. Développement de la pisciculture au Gabon. Rome, FAO/UNDP, ADCP/MR/82/16:98 p.
Westergaard, K., 1982. Pauperization and rural women in Bangladesh; a case study. Comilla, Bangladesh.
Yap, C.L., 1980a. Women in fisheries. Proc. IPFC, 19(3):964-77.
Yap, C.L., 1980b. The potential technical and economic role of women in fisheries. In The role of women in small-scale fisheries of the Bay of Bengal (Appendix 4). Madras, Development of Small-Scale Fisheries in the Bay of Bengal, FAO/SIDA (GCP/RAS/040/SWE), BOBP/REP/4:41 p.
<section>e</section>
ANNEX II: LIST OF PRINCIPAL PARTICIPANTS
ANDREASSEN, Lillian
Hordakurs
Lars Hillesgt. 30
N-5000 Bergen
Norway
BALUYUT, Elvira
Inland Resources Development Corporation
Suite 111
Mercantile Insurance Building
Gen. Luna corner Beaterio Sts.
Intramuros
Manila
The Philippines
Tel. 484227/483633
Telex ITT 40069 PN TXBX 1017
BISHOP-YUEN, Becky
Casilla 2766
Manta
Ecuador S.A.
BJOERU, Kirsten
Fisheries Division
NORAD
Ministry of Development Cooperation
Victoria Terrasse 5/7
0251 OSLO 2
Norway
Tel. 02-314055
BROWN, Carol
47 Bulkley
Suite 10
Sausalito
CA 94965
U.S.A.
Tel. (415) 331 8338
BUSCH, Ruth
Route 3
Box 188
Lafayette
AL 36862
U.S.A.
Tel. (205) 749 8474
CHEN, Sei-Poh
Fish Utilization and Marketing Service
Fisheries Department
FAO of the United Nations
Via delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome
Italy
Tel. 57976313
Telex 61181
COURTNEY, Amanda
British Trout Association Ltd.
P.O. Box 189
LONDON SW6 5LY England
Tel. (01) 736 1659
CRISPOLDI HOTTA, Adele
Fishery Information, Data and Statistics Service,
Fisheries Department
FAO of the United Nations
Via delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome
Italy
Tel. 5797 6454
Telex 61181
CROSETTI, Donatella
Dip. BAU - University of Rome
Via Borelli 50
00161 Rome
Italy
Tel. (06) 490123
DELMENDO, Medina
55-B Matatag Pinyahan,
Quezon City
The Philippines
Tel. 922 5528 or 973617
DREWES, Edeltraud
2816 Brammer-Kirchlinteln
Federal Republic of Germany
ENGLE, Carole
School of Business
Department of Economics
Auburn University at Montgomery
Montgomery
AL 36193-0401
U.S.A.
Tel. (205) 271 9561
GRUNDVIG, Kari
Fisheries Division
NORAD
Ministry of Development Cooperation
Victoria Terrasse 5/7
0251 OSLO 2
Norway
Tel. 02-314055
HOLM, Marianne
Institute of Marine Research
Division of Aquaculture
P.O. Box 1870
5011 Nordnes-Bergen
Norway
Tel. 47-5-318500
Telex 42297 OCEAN N
KOUBAKOUENDA, Henriette
Projet FAO Developpement de la Pisciculture Rurale
c/o FAO Representative
B.P. 972
Brazzaville
Congo
Tel. 810346
Telex FOODAGRI 5348 KG
(CONGO)
LIBRERO, Aida
Socio-Economics Research Department
Philippine Council for Agriculture and
Resources Research and Development
Los Banos
Laguna
The Philippines
Tel. 50014/20
or Manila 8323773
Telex 40860 PARRS PM
LIZARRAGA, Margarita
Representacion Permanente de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos ante la FAO
Viale Pasteur 65, Int. 8
00144 Rome (EUR)
Italy
Tel. 5911604/8
MERMILLOD, Marie-Jane
Women in Agricultural Production and Rural Development Service (ESHW)
FAO of the United Nations
Via delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome
Italy
Tel. 57973351
Telex 61181
NAUEN, Cornelia
Directorate General for Development
European Communities
Rue de la Lot 200
B-1049 Brussels
Belgium
Tel. 235 2796
Telex 21877 COMEU B
ONG, Doris
P.O. Box 1055
91008 Tawau
Sabah
East Malaysia
Tel. 089-776146
Telex MA 83191 SPUTWU
PIRIZ, Laura
National Swedish Board of Fisheries
Box 2566
402 17 Gothenburg
Sweden
Tel. 0046 031 630300
Telex 27108 NATFISH S
SAAVEDRA, Maria Auxiliadora
INPESCA
Apartado 2020
Managua
Nicaragua
Tel. 31951
Telex 1309
SPLIETHOFF, Petra
Secteur Pêches et Aquaculture
Centre Agricole International
B.P. 88
6700 AB WAGENINGEN
The Netherlands
Tel. 08370-19040
Telex 45888
STOLL, Inger
Fisheries Division
NORAD
Ministry of Development Cooperation
Victoria Terrasse 5/7
0251 OSLO 2
Norway
Tel. 02-314055
TROTTIER, Bernadette
Via Nicola Fabrizi 1
00153 Rome
Italy
Tel. 5896367
VAN NIEKERK, Susan
National Federation of Women's Institutes of Zimbabwe
P.O. Box 89
Kariba
Zimbabwe
Tel. 2622
Telex 4584 ITL ZW
WALSH, Michaela
Women's World Banking
104 E 40th Street
(Suite 607)
New York, N.Y. 10016
U.S.A.
Tel. (212) 953 2390
Telex 5101012670 (WWB)+
WOODFORD-BERGER, Prudence
Department of Social Anthropology
University of Stockholm
Stockholm
Sweden
Tel. 08 16 20 00 Ext. 3626
Observers and Other Participants
NASH, Colin E.
NEW, Michael B.
VINCKE, Michel M.V.
Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme
Fisheries Department
FAO of the United Nations
Via delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome
Italy
Tel. Rome 5797.6470
Telex 610181 FAO I
BLESSICH, Mrs. Dora F.
HENDERSON, Francis H.
MARTINEZ-ESPINOZA, M.
MUIR, JAMES E.
TIETZE, U.
Fisheries Department
FAO of the United Nations
Via delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome
Italy
Tel. Rome 57971
Telex 610181 FAO I
<section>f</section>
ANNEX III: QUESTIONNAIRE (B. Trottier)
INTENSIVE FISH CULTURE
A great deal has been written on fish culture in West Africa, but very little of it describes any differences that may exist between a man's work and a woman's work. I hope that you will be able to help me find out this information regarding the country where you live and/or work. Please answer with a brief note or by putting one or more crosses in the boxes.
To save time and postage, you may use the enclosed self-addressed envelope to send the questionnaire back to me via FAO Services. Thank you.
Bernadette TROTTIER
1. Have you ever seen or heard of women (even one or two) who own or operate a fish farm?
Yes
No
2. If your answer to question 1 is "Yes", please provide the following information concerning each situation:
Situation 1:
State and town:
Tribe and/or language:
How many women own or operate a fish farm?
Name and address of someone who could give more information:
Situation 2:
State and town:
Tribe and/or language:
How many women own or operate a fish farm:
Name and address of someone who could give more information:
3. If your answer to question 1 is "No", why do women not own or run fish farms?
Women already have too much work to do.
Fish farming is a man's job
Women do not have the land to build a farm
Women do not have the money for building a farm.
Other reasons (Please describe):
I don't know
4. Have you ever seen or heard of women who work on a fish farm?
Yes
No
5. If your answer to question 4 is "Yes", please indicate what kinds of work women do and do not do on a fish farm:
Only women do this kind of work
Women help in doing this kind of work
Women do not do this kind of work at all
- Clearing bush
- Digging/excavating
- Carrying dirt, wood
- Building/construction
- Cooking food or brewing beer for the workers
- Cleaning the ponds or pools (pull weeds, scrape off silt or slime)
- Stocking the ponds with small fish or animals
- Feeding the fish (soaking cassava roots in the water throwing peelings)
- Fertilizing (using special fertilizers, dung, manure)
- Raising ducks
- Raising pigs
- Harvesting
- Cleaning/gutting
- Drying/smoking
- Selling the fish
- Other jobs (please describe):
6. If your answer to question 4 is "Yes", please provide the following information regarding each situation:
Situation 1:
State and town:
Tribe and/or language:
How many women are involved:
Almost all
About half
Only a few
Name and address of someone who could provide more information:
Situation 2:
State and town:
Tribe and/or language:
How many women are involved:
Almost all
About half
Only a few
Name and address of someone who could provide more information:
7. If your answer to question 4 is "Yes", please indicate who these women are working for:
Their village
The clan or family
Their husband
Their father
Another relative
Their women's society
Other: (please describe):
A civil servant
The government
A school
A cooperative
A businessman
8. Do the women who work on fish farms receive any money or gifts for their work?
Yes
No
What do they receive?
Money as a wage
A share of the profits
A gift of money but the employer decides how much
Fish to eat whenever they want some
Fish once in a while
A gift (please describe):
9. If a woman wanted to start a fish farm, what kind of problems would she have?
Lack of land
Lack of money
Lack of time
Lack of labour
People will not take her seriously: fish farming is man's work.
She will have less difficulty if she does this as a member of a women's group.
She will have other problems (please describe):
10. How can a woman get the land for building a fish farm?
Ask the village elders
Ask her husband
Ask her father
Ask someone else (who?):
She can rent the land
She can buy the land
She can inherit land
Other ways (please describe):
11. Is it easier for a women's group to obtain land?
Yes
No
12. How can a woman get the money she needs to build a fish farm?
She usually uses her own money.
She can get a loan
Someone gives her the money (who?):
13. If a woman uses her own money to build a fish farm, how does she earn that money?
By selling:
fish
crops (cereals, vegetables, ...)
animal products (eggs, milk, hens, ...)
food (cooked meals, beer, ...)
something which she makes (baskets, pottery, ...)
something else (describe)
By working for pay:
in someone else's field
on fish farms
other (please describe):
Other ways (please describe):
14. If a woman wants a loan, who does she ask for it?
A member of her family
Her women's society
Her cooperative society
A bank or credit union
The government or a development project
A local businessman
A local businesswoman
Somebody else (please describe):
15. Do you believe that women would be:
good fish farmers.
poor fish farmers.
Why?
16. If you feel that I have overlooked something important, please write it down below.
THANK YOU FOR YOUR HELP
<section>g</section>
EXTENSIVE FISH CULTURE
The aim of this questionnaire is to try to find out where women may be doing something that includes one or more elements of fish culture. This may, for example, be traditional methods of stocking pools or lagoons with small fish or aquatic animals, feeding the fish in a closed-off water body, trapping the fish in a pond or pool so that they will stay there until they get bigger ... anything that a woman may do to increase the natural productivity of the fishing grounds. Please answer the questions with a brief note or by putting one or more crosses in the boxes that describe the situation in the country where you live or work. If you prefer, you may describe the situation in your own words.
To save time and money use the enclosed self-addressed envelope to send the questionnaire back to me via FAO Services. Thank you in advance for your help.
Bernadette TROTTIER
1. Do the women of your country do any fishing at all?
Yes
No
Why?
Only for their family.
Mostly for the family, but they sell some too.
Mostly to sell.
Fishing is a man's job.
Women have no time to fish, they have too much work.
It is taboo for a woman to go fishing.
2. If your answer to question 1 is "No", there is no need to continue.
Please send the questionnaire back to me because it is important to know that women do not do any fishing and why. Thank you for your help.
3. If your answer to question 1 is "Yes", please indicate where the women normally go fishing:
In streams and small rivers
In large rivers
In lakes
In pools when the flood goes down
In rice fields
In lagoons along the coast
In the sea
Along the shoreline (among the trees, for example)
Elsewhere (please describe)
4. How deep is the water?
Up to their knees
Up to their waists
Up to their shoulders
Over their heads
5. How do they do their fishing?
Walking in the shallows
From canoes or rafts
From the shore (they do not go into the water)
Diving underwater
Individually
In groups
6. They use:
Nets
Traps or baskets
Hooks and lines
Other gear (Please describe):
7. Do women like to go fishing?
Yes
No
Why?
8. Have you ever seen or heard of women who "build" something to trap the fish in a place?
Yes
No
What?
Fences of bushes, reeds or branches
Small dams
They dig holes or ditches in shallow water
They build something else (describe)
9. If your answer to question 8 is "Yes", do the women wait until the fish get bigger before they catch them?
Yes
No
10. If your answer to questions 8 and 9 is "Yes", please provide the following information for each situation:
Situation 1
State and town where they live:
Tribe and/or language:
How many women are involved:
Almost all of them
About half of them
Only a few of them
Name and address of someone who could provide more information on their activity:
Situation 2
State and town where they live:
Tribe and/or language:
How many women are involved:
Almost all of them
About half of them
Only a few of them
Name and address of someone who could provide more information on their activity:
11. Have you ever seen or heard of women who "feed" the fish by throwing things into the water?
Yes
No
12. If your answer to question 11 is "Yes", please indicate what the women throw into the water:
Kitchen wastes (peelings, leftovers, etc.)
Crop residues (straw, leaves, maize husks, etc.)
Leaves or branches of wild plants
Manure or cow dung
They soak cassava roots in the water
Something else (describe)
13. Have you ever seen or heard of women who collect small fish or water animals in order to "plant" them in a place closer to home?
Yes
No
14. If your answer to question 13 is "Yes", please provide the following information concerning these women:
Situation 1
Tribe or the language they speak:
The region where they live:
How many women do this?
Where do they go to get the small fish or animals?
Name and address of someone who could provide more information:
Situation 2
Tribe or the language they speak:
The region where they live:
How many women do this?
Where do they go to get the small fish or animals?
Name and address of someone who could provide more information:
15. What are the local names of the fish or animals that they collect and plant?
16. Describe the place where these women "plant" the fish or animals that they have brought in from somewhere else:
Lagoons along the coast
Pools that form when floodwaters recede
Pools closed off from a river or stream by a dam
Areas in rivers (which rivers?)
Areas in lakes (which lakes?)
Somewhere else (describe):
17. Is there anything else you would like to add about what the fisherwomen do in your country?
THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR YOUR HELP
