<title>ADCP/REP/87/27 - Aquaculture Sector Development</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Aquaculture is simply defined as the farming and management of aquatic animals and plants. When practised efficiently it provides marketable products competitive in price to those harvested naturally.
Aquaculture has many advantages. It requires less energy and gross space than land-based husbandry of domestic farm animals, poultry or crops, and is capable of high yields. Its products are often high in immediately-utilizable protein, and favoured for dietary health. Although still a minor resource of food for human consumption, its importance relative to existing natural resources is increasing rapidly. The two economic driving forces behind this are the escalating costs of intensive agriculture dependent on oil-derived fertilizers, and lower returns from traditional capture fishing as wild stocks are depleted.
Investment in aquaculture is increasing (using the word 'investment' in its broadest sense of both expended effort and capital investment), but at a rate insufficient at present to support all the development opportunities which arise. The rate of investment, however, has not been helped by a high incidence of endeavours and ventures which have not fulfilled their production targets or economic projections. A selection process is therefore necessary to ensure that all investments which consume national resources and skilled people are deployed to best effect. This process involves good quality planning and management, and requires evermore critical attention as this emergent sector, now based on modern and often sophisticated technology, becomes an important national economy.
The enduring success of investment depends on the unequivocal commitment of government. Recognition of aquaculture as a valuable economic entity in the national structure of development is manifest in many ways, notably in statements of government policy and legislation. Clear pronouncements by government ease the institutional and legal obstacles to progress. Collectively, these measures attract interest and investment from a wide variety of sources among which, in developing countries, are international assistance agencies which sponsor projects designed to persuade entrepreneurs to invest.
There are many conflicting national, social, and economic interests which have to be reconciled before organized sector development can take place, and governments often have difficulty establishing a coherent and realistic policy to justify the inclusion of aquaculture in their strategic plans. Few countries have the experienced human resources which can command the knowledge necessary for identifying the relevant details of these conflicts, and for analyzing all aspects of long-range sector planning for aquaculture development. Considerable information on aquaculture development has been assembled and analyzed by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). This agency recognizes its responsibility to take the lead in initiating and guiding the policy-making process.
This report is prepared by the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP). By its publication, ADCP continues to fulfil a commitment to advise and inform governments on the new technology of aquaculture. It is intended as a guideline document only, prepared in simple outlines, aimed at countries which see a role for aquaculture in their economic development programmes. It describes one methodology for the generation of an aquaculture sector plan which can be integrated, in turn, into a large national development plan. The key elements in the sector which need attention are identified. It recommends activities which need special study (and by whom), and the analytical procedures to follow. This methodology, for the most part, is based on previous planning efforts by governments and organizations, and on practical experiences by many individuals.
The report can also be used as the basis for organizational and even corporate planning. It acknowledges, in fact, that many development agencies themselves have not established a consistent policy towards sector growth, and have not always given sufficient weight to capacity building in their investments. They have been preoccupied with biotechnology rather than the social and economic factors which are the true justification for the work. A well-executed project may achieve little unless linked with others to consolidate and expand the bridgehead created.
Finally, it must be recognized that professional planners in aquaculture do not exist. Any sector plan is therefore prepared by the collective endeavours of a multi-disciplinary team created for the express purpose. However, experience shows that such a team grows in stature and wisdom, once established, and its continuity proves useful as a driving force for the sector as well as an impartial advisory unit. Through such a group, a country gains the means to conceive and manage its own projects and, most importantly, controls the size of the sector in proportion to its economic worth.
Colin E. Nash
Programme Leader, ADCP
<section>2</section>
1. THE OBJECTIVES OF NATIONAL PLANNING
1.1 General Objectives
1.2 Aquaculture Sector Objectives
1.1 General Objectives
Any national economy is built up of several sectors broadly categorized as, for example, heavy industry, manufacture of goods, production of food, supply of services, tourism, etc. All generate wealth in some form and compete for resources in order to do so.
A National Economic Development Plan will analyse the country's objectives and priorities in relation to all these sectors in response to well-identified national needs. It will propose and justify an overall plan in which the role of individual sectors, including aquaculture as a source of food, can be seen in context.
A well-researched and reasoned policy document is of immense value to a country in the allocation of its scarce resources. It relates the scope and timetable of projects to the resources available and the benefits which will accrue. It enables realistic and achievable decisions to be taken.
The private sector looks for a stable and sympathetic environment in which to invest securely and profitably. A national plan provides the evidence to make positive decisions.
In developing countries, a national plan also meets the need of the international development banks and donor organizations to make loans or to provide technical assistance to selected national projects with a clear understanding of the benefits, and assured of the government's own wholehearted commitment. Without them, a project has little meaning or purpose. The national plan also enables these different organizations to avoid wasteful overlap and competition by coordinating their respective programmes.
Finally, the government which sees fundamentally what must be done to secure its country's prosperity can act purposefully to bring it about. It can take strategic decisions which determine the course of events long into the future.
1.2 Aquaculture Sector Objectives
As a component of a National Economic Development Plan, a sector plan for aquaculture development will ensure that the legitimate claim of aquaculture to a share of resources is known and understood.
The priorities which dictate selection of sector targets are best described by the framework of needs which an effective industry helps to satisfy. In aquaculture the principal needs are considered to be four.
(1) Domestic production of food, and nutritional health
All countries give highest priority to national food security to supply basic nutrition and to improve diet. As food is not usually distributed evenly, identification of national needs are often by region or possibly a smaller demographic unit.
The importance of cultured aquatic foods as development targets for domestic consumption is determined to some degree by government policy, but there is always evidence of consumer trends and import statistics to interpret. For example, the high-protein content of fisheries products and medical support for their wide use in health programmes are undeniable benefits repeatedly in evidence.
Low production and distribution costs are prime advantages of nationally produced commodities. These are especially important for cultured aquatic products which are trying to establish a share of an existing and often long-established market. Even if production is not viewed primarily as a source of profit, as is the case in some assistance or social projects, those for whom it is intended must be able to pay.
There may be persuasive strategic arguments for some high-cost indigenous aquaculture production to replace cheap imported products. However, the long-term viability of even this investment depends on the reduction of local costs. The potential to achieve reduced costs must exist and be provided for.
(2) Foreign trade
The existing and forecast balance of trade figures are often used to identify a national need for products which can be exported to earn foreign currency. Typically, for aquaculture, these include the high-value marine products, namely fish and shellfish, and raw or processed marine algae.
As with investments for domestic food production or nutritional improvement, the common denominator in every export-based proposal is that investments not adequately rewarded by conventional profit will struggle to survive.
(3) Commercial profit
The incentive to exploit any accessible resources is to generate corporate profit or, at a lower level, to create income and thereby contribute to an improved standard of living for the producer. This is the most fruitful basis for aquaculture development, even when the resources may be little more than a natural water body or point of water source.
Among the rural poor in developing countries, aquaculture projects which have the profit incentive are a priority. The prospect of profit is self-motivating and attracts ongoing investment for a viable progressive industry.
(4) Job creation
In countries where high levels of long-term unemployment exist, the social implications of sector development may dictate priorities in favour of targets which are labour intensive. At times, some forms of subsidy or investment incentive are necessary, and economic and more appealing targets may have to be sacrificed or postponed as part of the national strategy or plan.
Wherever employment opportunities are limited, the major deprived group is often the less educated and unskilled. These untrained resources impose obvious constraints on the types of aquaculture development which will meet this need. The aquaculture industry, particularly at the level of production, is not labour intensive, although large farms employ significant numbers seasonally for harvest. The post-harvest industries, such as processing and packaging, require higher manning levels.
In summary, having established how aquaculture might meet these four principal needs, the purpose of the sector plan is to secure a favourable environment for investment in the broadest sense - knowledge and effort of all kinds, as well as finance. This will be referred to again, but examples are the designation of land and water zones for aquaculture development, and fiscal legislation which encourages more potential investors. For a description of the many components of the sector, and a framework in which they can be analysed, the reader should refer to Annex I.
<section>3</section>
2. PREPARATION OF AN AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT PLAN
2.1 Organization
2.2 Procedure
2.3 Justification
2.1 Organization
2.1.1 General requirements
2.1.2 Proposed organization
2.1.3 Terms of reference for the Working Party
2.1.1 General requirements
It is presumed that there exists in every country a central planning organization which manages the national economic model. It will commonly be a development and planning ministry. Its fundamental purpose is to define social and economic objectives, to identify national needs, to determine how resources are deployed to best effect in fulfilling them, and to promote the environment in which progress can be made.
This body will prepare and maintain a National Economic Development Plan. This is, logically, the synthesis of a series of sector studies, of which aquaculture is one sector.
The central planning organization could initiate a sector study for aquaculture by appointing and briefing a service institution, or company, or working party, then allow the study to proceed unsupervised. This is not recommended.
Without an external control mechanism, it is more probable than possible that the focus of the study will drift from the course set and produce a sector study which does not fulfil the intended purpose.
Equally important, work may show that the original course should be modified. A mechanism which recognizes this in good time and makes the change as a positive decision will avoid delay and save effort.
2.1.2 Proposed organization
The mechanism proposed is that the central planning body appoints a Steering Committee with a wholly management function. As befits the purpose of a national study, its members would be nationals. However, developing countries or those with little background in aquaculture might include representatives of development agencies or international experts. Both public and private sector representation are essential on such a committee. In all likelihood, a member of the central planning body would act as chairman.
It is the Steering Committee which will set up a Working Party to undertake the study, lay down the parameters within which it will be carried out, and exercise control.
The Steering Committee will be responsible for:
- drafting the Terms of Reference for the study
- appointing and briefing members of the Working Party
- procuring funds and facilities
- receiving and responding to interim reports at specified intervals
- approving the final report(s) as the Aquaculture Development Plan
- sponsoring inclusion of the recommended programme in the National Economic Development Plan.
2.1.3 Terms of reference for the Working Party
The terms of reference are the rules which govern the study. They have a major bearing on how well it is done and should be drafted with the utmost care. The points to be covered are therefore discussed in some detail.
(1) Title
The choice of title is important. It must describe accurately what any reader will wish to know if he or she refers to the document.
(2) Membership
The Working Party will comprise up to 6-10 members. Each will have a specific contribution to make and will take the lead in his own expert field. It is important to minimize overlap of interest and to establish clearly which member is responsible for a particular action.
There will be a Coordinator who is appointed by the Steering Committee at the start to take part in drafting the Terms of Reference and nominating other Working Party members. The Coordinator will be chosen primarily for leadership qualities and ability to maintain momentum and direction. A background in aquaculture is desirable but not essential as expert subject knowledge will be provided by other members. Organization and management skills are more relevant.
Others on the Working Party may include, depending on the objectives and background,
- a biotechnologist,
- an engineer experienced in aquaculture, or a mechanical/hyrdrological engineer,
- an irrigation engineer,
- a geographer, or land-use planner,
- an environmental scientist,
- an agriculturist,
- a sociologist,
- an economist,
- an accountant,
- someone with food-related production expertise,
- someone with food-related marketing expertise,
- an educationalist,
- a logistical coordinator and secretary.
They may be employed consultants or staff seconded from parent organizations for the duration of the study. They should, if possible, be nationals of the country and, as with members of the Steering Committee, both the public and private sectors should be represented. In practice, many of these people are willing to give their professional services free and this can be allowed for when preparing the budget.
Not all these skills need to be provided by Working Party members. The budget will allow for investigations by co-opted consultants, and the Coordinator's authority to employ such people will be defined.
(3) Origin and authority
The study will have been originated by the central planning organization, which, for practical purposes, vests authority on the Steering Committee as managing agent. The Steering Committee will, in turn, delegate powers to the Working Party sufficient for it to cary out the assigned task. These delegated powers must be unambiguous and in a form which will be acknowledged by organizations and individuals whose cooperation is sought. This will accompany an obligation to respect information given in confidence.
The Steering Committee must be available throughout the study to deal with problems raised by the Working Party and to resolve issues not covered by these powers.
(4) Objectives
The objectives should be explicit, detailed and quantitative, and should focus on 'ends' and not 'means'. The Working Party should understand precisely what is expected of it. A list of specific goals is preferable to general statements.
They may be specific aquaculture targets but these are more likely to be described in terms of economic and social targets to be achieved through aquaculture development.
(5) Background
The background material should be explanatory rather than historical narrative. It should justify the task to be undertaken.
(6) Activities schedule
It is a point of debate how far the Working Party should be led in the way it conducts the study. In general, the more this is left to the Coordinator and his team the better.
The Steering Committee may choose to specify organizations with which the Working Party is expected to liaise.
There should be standardization of methodologies to be used by all working parties formed in this way to carry out sector planning studies. The more these can be standardized, the more readily are they integrated into the National Economic Development Plan, and the more meaningful does that plan become.
(7) Completion date
This should be specific and realistic in respect of the amount of work involved. It should be justified by an account of the use to which the findings will be put.
On average, an Aquaculture Development Plan will be completed within 8 months, although it may occupy up to 12 months in a large country with complex options to evaluate, or in a country totally new to aquaculture.
(8) Accommodation and facilities
Ideally, the Working Party will function as a group with accommodation to allow that. At the very least there will be a meeting place for regular contact. The opportunity to develop a group identity is important.
The Working Party should have its own secretarial resources or access to facilities as a right and not a favour. Frustration stemming from difficulty and delay in processing paperwork can have a disproportionate influence on the team's effectiveness. Facilities should include telephones for the team's exclusive use, and dedicated transport.
(9) Budget
The overall budget figure for the study is a statement of funds available, if that is the limiting factor, or of how much the commissioning body is prepared to spend. The usual sequence in drafting Terms of Reference is objectives first, then the budget, then other supporting materials.
Once decided, the budget will be analyzed in terms of study resources and expenditures on activities. This is not an estimate of what the study will cost, but a view of how a given sum of money should best be spent.
The team leader will usually decide, as the investigation proceeds, how the money will actually be expended. If costs in some areas exceed expectations, he must decide what compensating sacrifices to make elsewhere, or make a case to the Steering Committee for overspending if that is possible. A statement of expenditures to-date will be included in each interim report.
A typical budget analysis will provide for:
- fees and personal expenses of Working Party members,
- fees to consultants based on the expected duration of their engagement,
- allowance for accommodation and administration staff,
- travel,
- purchase or hire of equipment,
- orientation and training,
- reporting,
- contingencies.
(10) Reporting
The Terms of Reference will define the form in which the findings are to be communicated, to whom, and when.
There may be two reports, of which the first is a summary submitted without delay to the Steering Committee. This will consist primarily of conclusions and recommendations aimed at generating follow-up decisions quickly.
The second will be the full record of evidence and findings produced at greater leisure but still to a deadline. It is important to recognize that its main purpose is to influence those who have the power and means to carry through the proposals. Preparation of the final report is discussed in Section 3.
There should be a procedure for monitoring progress by the Steering Committee - the virtue of this has been touched upon earlier. The frequency and detail of interim reports must not make them a major diversion of the principal effort. It is helpful to concentrate on exception reporting, i.e., matters which are not progressing according to schedule and on which the Steering Committee's advice is desired.
2.2 Procedure
2.2.1 Overview
2.2.2 Review of objectives
2.2.3 Baseline review
2.2.4 Market research
2.2.5 Targeting scenarios
2.2.6 The investigation process
2.2.1 Overview
The study procedure is best determined by the Team Leader and his team at the outset. Sufficient to say here that there should be a written agreed schedule which identifies the member to lead each action and which establishes a timetable of activities. Regular meetings to monitor progress will probably be geared to the external reporting obligations.
The remainder of this document is addressed to the elements of the study itself. There is no uniquely right way to approach it, and no generalized treatment can cover every situation. The purpose is rather to outline a disciplined approach around which the particular study can be organized.
The study is rarely open-ended as to the depth in which project possibilities and support activities will be explored; is it desirable that it should be? The function of the study is to identify and justify what should be done, not how to do it. There is a temptation to take the investigation into detail which should be left until the decision has been taken to go ahead. The study deadline will impose a limit on what is undertaken. Another constraint is the study budget, as discussed earlier.
The core of any study is the collection and analysis of information. How and where to obtain data is a recurring theme through the following sections. In areas of bio-technology, particularly, FAO will be a primary source for developing countries. Other sources are institution libraries, private libraries, government departments and information services.
It is vital that the Working Party appreciates from the start that it is not enough to identify the technical opportunities and construct a development programme, important though this is. It must be sensitive to the fact that aquaculture, as a relative new industry, will be a net consumer of resources for a long time. The decision-takers, to whom aquaculture is a means to an end and not an end in itself, must be persuaded that the ultimate benefits warrant the sacrifice which aquaculture sector development means for other sectors denied those resources.
2.2.2 Review of objectives
The first task of the assembled Working Party is to review critically the objectives contained in the Terms of Reference. These will be directed at the welfare of the national economy as a whole, and references to aquaculture will rely on assumptions, of which some may be fundamental.
The Working Party must therefore decide whether to work to the objectives as stated, or propose to the Steering Committee an interpretation of them which will allow a sensible action plan.
2.2.3 Baseline review
A natural step in any investigation is to construct a picture of the present situation with regard to aquaculture, and the many political, social, economic and biological environments in which it co-exists with other activities. Interaction with other activities will generally appear as competition, but opportunities for cooperative development may also emerge.
The assembled technical data may simply clarify pre-formed views of what can, and should, be attempted. The real value of a systematic broadly-based examination will come with the realization that non-biotechnical factors are equally important. The team will become aware that the truly scarce resources may have little to do with water or fish.
Bearing in mind that the timetable for the entire implementation programme may occupy many years, this stage is equally concerned with establishing and extrapolating trends.
The information gathered may come under all or some of the following headings, depending on the needs to be satisfied and the opportunities which exist, and analysed within a framework as described in Annex I:
Demographic data
- population distribution
- wealth distribution
- employment
Market data
- domestic and export markets
- consumption of aquatic products
- consumption of alternative foods
- dietary attitudes and prejudices
Market competition
- other aquatic products and sources
- other animal protein foods and sources
Natural resources
- land and water
- climate
- environmental factors, pollution
- ownership and access
Investment
in aquaculture, existing and committed
- in other interacting sector activities
- in support industries, engineering
- ownership and finance
- track record
Biotechnology
- proven data, domestic
- proven data, international
- research data, commercially unproven
- biological information
- engineering information
Human skills
- general education
- aquaculture technology
- engineering installation and maintenance
- administration and management
Training facilities and research facilities
- universities, colleges
- industrial centres
- international centres
Government policy
- personal and company tax
- development grants and loans
- currency exchange controls
- import/export controls, quotas, tariffs
Legislation
- land/water/property ownership and use
- planning regulations and procedures
- health and safety
- employment
- investment protection
Transport
- roads, railways, etc.
- goods storage and movement
- distances involved
Most of this information will be quantitative. The scope for misinterpretation of numerical data is endless. It must be properly defined to avoid ambiguity.
2.2.4 Market research
The world is littered with investments of all kinds Co produce goods which cannot be profitably sold. The possible reasons are many but a common one, unfortunately, is ignorance of the market for which the investment was made.
The conventional wisdom is first to identify the need, or what the customer wants, and then to develop the means of satisfying that need economically. This applies to aquaculture as to anything else, and it must be done thoroughly.
In parallel with the baseline review, the Working Party must carry out, or commission, a market research investigation organized by the marketing representative on the Working Party.
Much marketing information can be gathered easily and inexpensively from published data. However, this is one area for which specialist help should be employed, particularly if the objective is export business.
Whether the survey is directed at a particular product or market (domestic or export), the information required will include:
- sought-after product properties,
- how the product is used,
- by whom it is bought and why,
- market price,
- the size of the market, historically and forecast, by weight and value,
- how well the market is supplied,
- information on alternative products and competitive suppliers,
- intelligence on the forward planning of competitors,
- special factors relating, perhaps, to packaging and presentation, and distribution.
Opportunity may come in the guise of a growing market in which demand is outstripping supply, or as a mature market of which a share can be secured through competitive advantage. The former is generally an easier selling target, but projections of a rapidly changing situation are inevitably subject to significant error. The data about an established market must be more reliable, but ways have to be found to displace established suppliers. The commonest marketing miscalculations are to under-estimate competitors, and then fail to anticipate how they will react when attacked.
Market price is not a single figure average, but a price range. The level in that range which a particular supplier commands will depend on tangible factors such as quality and reliability, and also on how successfully the product has been promoted.
The product of market research is a quantitative statement by weight and value of potential sales. The figures will vary according to how closely the market specification is matched. There can also be analyses to link different sales forecasts with the probability of achieving them, and to predict a time scale for sales development.
Fish are a perishable commodity and delivery to the market in good condition may not be a simple matter. The investigation should therefore include storage and distribution requirements.
2.2.5 Targeting scenarios
The Working Party should follow the baseline review with a paper exercise to construct one or more scenarios which would substantially fulfil the objectives if they came about.
These may be drawn up through brainstorming sessions which allow the participants to introduce imaginative schemes as well as those which are immediately feasible. The sessions need not be protracted, or the scenarios elaborate.
The process serves the valuable function of forming a group concept of the task ahead and prospects of success. It will also generate a list of possible investment projects and activities with a tentative ranking, based mainly on technical credibility and their relevance to the objectives.
The operational result for the Working Party should be a work schedule to which all the members are committed and their contribution roles defined.
2.2.6 The investigation process
2.2.6.1 The investment programme
2.2.6.2 The support programme
The Working Party now has the task of selecting the most promising development prospects and integrating them into an investment programme and a support programme, which together will constitute the Aquaculture Development Plan.
2.2.6.1 The investment programme
The projects arising from the targeting exercise are evaluated in sufficient depth to assess technical and economic feasibility, the desirable scale and scope of investment and realizable benefits. The evaluation will be structured around the same criteria used for the baseline review, but on a finer scale e.g., a particular tract of land or water, specific skills required. Some constraints will bear on a particular scheme, others will apply to aquaculture development as a whole. A credible proposal would be seen to have identified major obstacles and to suggest how they might be overcome.
The depth of study necessary to demonstrate that a project merits inclusion in the investment programme can be difficult to recognize. The temptation is to go beyond what is needed. The Coordinator needs to exercise close control. Frequent reference to the study objectives will help to preserve perspective. A useful method is for the entire Working Party to examine a typical scheme. This can be used as a benchmark thereafter when the main body of work is shared out among small groups.
It must be remembered that the investment programme Is a scenario of what could be achieved. It is the framework which the Working Party uses to bring out the opportunities for aquaculture, and what must be done Co create, within the country, an environment in which progress can be made. The actual course of investment may be very different.
The probability of success should be estimated in terms of those constraints which are specific to the project. The impact of other constraints can be judged only in the context of the sector development plan as a whole, and will be discussed later.
Benefits will arise directly from successful completion of a particular scheme but will also accumulate as the programme evolves. The Working Party should emphasize the latter effect.
Aquaculture methods range from simple extensive operations to sophisticated capital-intensive installations relying on artificial feed to generate high parallel yield. There is a predictable progression in the scale and complexity of investment, and technical and managerial expertise required to achieve profitable operation. The risk of failure is correspondingly high, a fact of which potential investors will be very aware.
The logical sequence, when assembling a convincing programme of investment opportunities, is to start with pathfinder schemes which are uncontroversial and based on well-tried technology. More ambitious schemes will follow as the experience and competence of those engaged in the industry matures.
The Completed investment programme will consist of a series of phases, each a single project or group of projects. There will be a timetable, not to be taken too seriously at this stage, and decision points which should be taken very seriously. In effect, the next phase will begin when defined performance standards have been met and other prerequisites relating to training, funding, market development, government policy, etc., are in place.
2.2.6.2 The support programme
The second element of the investigation is a schedule of support activities which are necessary for the plan as a whole rather than for any one project -the prerequisites mentioned above. It is these activities which will collectively provide the environment for a successful aquaculture industry. As such, this is a key element of the study.
The constraints which apply to aquaculture development as a whole will be obvious when those identified in the separate project evaluations are looked at together. Wholly predictable are the establishment and staffing of research and development centres, technical training facilities and training programmes. Others will involve government action in the areas previously mentioned.
Measures will be necessary to secure suitable qualified professional management. Engineering resources may be deficient. Sources of finance, as loans or as venture capital, must be located. Market development has to be carried out. These and others form a support programme to be pursued in parallel with the investment programme. The two programmes together constitute the Aquaculture Development Plan.
2.3 Justification
The final act by the Steering Committee and the Working Party is to justify the Aquaculture Development Plan by showing that the accumulated benefits fulfil the objectives set out in the Terms of Reference.
The plan should offer the prospect of robust and progressive growth in the aquaculture industry, measured by the extra production which it can sustain and sell, and the profitable income which the new capacity would generate.
The investment programme must be demonstrably achievable. Beyond that, the Working Party will concentrate on the most pressing needs, be they nutritional, financial, or social, and show how aquaculture can alleviate them.
These arguments are directed at the government and national institutions with the object of securing their understanding of what must be done to create the right conditions and their active support.
The Team should be mindful that sector capacity building offers the country more than the input of new wealth. The economy will be more broadly based and therefore more robust. New skills will be introduced, and new centres of learning and research. Markets will be opened up into which other products may be sold. Employment and prosperity may be brought to deprived areas of the country. These indirect benefits can add greatly to the overall persuasiveness of the case.
Another factor not to be missed is the potential for further developments in aquaculture building on the new foundation created. Most of the currently forecast growth in aquaculture is in countries where it is already well established.
The Working Party will also consider the arguments which will influence entrepreneurs and other potential private sector enterprises - the people who determine, in the end, what aquaculture development will actually take place.
Evidence that the physical conditions are favourable and that the product is marketable present the opportunity to invest. These people are unlikely to seize the opportunity, however, until the government itself is seen by its actions to be committed to aquaculture.
<section>4</section>
3. PREPARATION OF THE STUDY REPORT
3.1 Identity of the Target Audience
3.2 Style of the Report
3.3 Layout of the Report
The report will be prepared by the Working Party for submission to the Steering Committee. It is intended to inform, but its main purpose is to persuade. The first step, therefore, is to identify the people who exercise power and whom it is important to influence.
3.1 Identity of the Target Audience
The Steering Committee
The Steering Committee itself is an important audience since it must be confident of its ability to secure inclusion of the final plan in the National Economic Development Plan. It will probably choose to take on a professional editing role before accepting the report formally as the Aquaculture Development Plan.
The Central Planning Body
As managers of the country's scarce resources, any government economic planning ministry will be conscious of the competing claims of other sectors and exposed to conflicting pressures. The temptation may be to accept only the less controversial elements of the Aquaculture Development Plan. The report must stress the integrity of the plan and the essential interdependence of the component parts.
The Government
Members of the government will respond mainly to the economic and social arguments and the evidence that aquaculture will help solve their most-pressing problems. As politicians, they may be influenced by the prospect of work in deprived areas, or the injection into the economy of international finance, to act in matters of fiscal policy and legislation which only they can change.
Private Sector Investors
Entrepreneurs will be looking for opportunities to invest their funds profitably. They will look critically at the substance behind the benefits and claims of individual projects, and the associated risks. They will be equally interested in the steps taken to provide a supportive environment as evidence of the government's commitment to aquaculture.
International Sponsors
As well as the United Nations and the EEC, many individual countries have substantial aid programmes directed at developing countries. In general, this aid is not commercial in that a direct return on investment of money and expertise is not expected.
The objective of these sponsors is to bring about improvements which would not be achieved otherwise. Their involvement will be crucial in the early stages of the aquaculture development programme, particularly in the areas of research and development, and training, and in pilot projects.
They, too, will look for government commitment. They will be motivated by the concept of progressive capacity building which the Aquaculture Development Plan offers.
3.2 Style of the Report
The most important readers of the report will have little knowledge of or great interest in aquaculture.
The first requirement is that they read the report. This is more likely to happen if it is short and free of jargon, and in the reader's own language. The reader should be asked to digest no more information than is necessary to follow the argument. Graphs and other visual techniques are a useful way of making quantitative points painlessly.
The report is also a record of how the study was carried out and the evidence on which conclusions and recommendations were based. Inclusion of detail is quite legitimate. This will be attached in appendices to be studied selectively by those who have a particular interest. The language of appendices can be pitched at the level of the expert reader.
The authors should not be afraid to introduce cartoons and other pictorial devices. Most readers appreciate a little light relief.
3.3 Layout of the Report
Information should be presented in the following form, or something similar to it:
(1) Title
(2) Table of contents
In normal index layout and including appendices
(3) Introduction
A short section identifying the origins of the study. It will also state the purpose of the study and the outcome, without detail, and refer to the terms of reference as an appendix
(4) Acknowledgements
A brief recognition of sponsors and outside bodies who provided help, and individuals who contributed their time.
(5) Recommendations/Proposals
These will be in the form of a list, one or two sentences for each. There is no particular limit to the number, but they should be classified in some way, possibly the chronological order in which they would be implemented or major proposals first. They should be phrased to provoke a decisive "yes/no" response.
(6) Summary
This often precedes the recommendations.
(7) The body of the report
This should be broken down into sections in logical argument sequence and the sections sub-divided following the six sectoral components as described in Annex I. Long tracts of unbroken text should be avoided. Tables should be simple and contain few numbers. Graphs, histograms and piecharts should be used whenever possible. Decision trees may help to sharpen complex arguments.
(8) Conclusions
These should be in list form.
(9) Appendices
<section>5</section>
ANNEX I: The Sectoral Framework
The capacity of the aquaculture sector, like any other economic sector, is made up of several major components. Each component separates levels of general activities, and recognizes that each level has a number of similar dimensions and elements. A simple framework or matrix is then established which ensures that all the elements within the sector are identified and considered.
The sectoral framework serves many purposes. In this particular case it is being used for the framework of a national plan to develop the capacity of the aquaculture sector. It can also be used effectively by governments, development banks and others for
- country programming or regional planning,
- investment planning,
and subsequently
- sectoral analysis, either whole or in part.
It can also be used by governments, development banks and agencies, and others, including private enterprise, when concerned with projects for developing capacity in the sector; for example, for
- Project identification and baseline studies,
- Project targeting, recruiting, and work plans,
- Project reporting and project evaluation,
- Ongoing and post-project planning and review,
- Staff training, and expert/consultant briefing.
The framework divides a sector, in this case the aquaculture sector, into six sectoral levels. As the purpose of aquaculture is to produce food for human consumption, the primary beneficiaries are recognized as the first or highest level. The six levels are as follows:
(1) THE CONSUMER OR MARKET: This level includes formal and informal consumer groups, and the distribution organizations including storage. It also includes customer response to the producer.
(2) THE PRODUCER OR FARMER: This level includes the producers of the aquaculture products, and the facilities (farms and hatcheries) oriented to meet the demands of the market as they can best be determined on a continuing basis.
(3) LOCAL INFRASTRUCTURE: This level includes all the local supplies and services which support the primary beneficiaries - the producers and consumers. (i) For the consumers these are materials, energy, transportation, information, and consumer education, etc. (ii) For the producers these are seed from hatcheries or field stations, feed, fertilizers, materials and equipment, machinery, energy, transportation, local credit, and information through extension services, on-farm training, and trade publications, etc.
(4) NATIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE: This level includes higher level academic and non-academic (managerial and special) training, research and development, the central organization of credit and of all other supplies and services at the local level as described in Level (3) above.
(5) NATIONAL SECTOR MANAGEMENT: This level includes the central directorate or the government functions of the sector. These are planning, policy-making, legislation, resources mobilization, statistical information, and coordination with other national sectors, such as agriculture, energy and water resources, tourism, upper-management training, and information, etc. This level should be developed in response to the needs/demands from the higher levels, particularly Levels (1) and (2).
(6) GLOBAL AND INTER-REGIONAL MANAGEMENT: This level includes the typical international affairs of the sector, such as international research and training, and the exchange of decision-making information. It also supports capacity building at the national levels (such as providing information, guidelines, events, etc.). This level should also be developed in response to the needs/demands from the higher levels, particularly Level (5).
Each of the six sectoral levels can be analysed further according to its specific dimensions. The three dimensions identified for each level relate to the economics and socio-economics, the technology, and the management.
The Economic and Socio-Economic Dimension considers (in appropriate economic and socio-economic terms) the benefits which accrue in the aquaculture industry at each particular level, or which will accrue in the case of new development programmes or projects. It also considers the revenues (or potential revenues), the relevant economies of scale, and the existing (or required) capital investment and operational costs.
The Technical Dimension considers the many technical systems relevant to the aquaculture industry, and the resources which are available (or which are needed) to sustain them. For the most part, the relevant technical systems (or procedures, methods, approaches, etc.) have been described within Levels (1)-(6) above.
The Management Dimension considers the management systems relevant to the aquaculture industry. There are nine principal management systems which recur. These are, in brief:
- Information: required for the gathering, processing, storage and distribution of internal and external information, including computerization.
- Planning: required for policy-making, planning, feasibility studies, preparation, monitoring and evaluation, both long and short-term.
- Marketing: required for the correct determination of the end-user needs, and for promoting and selling the product.
- Feedback: required for gathering, processing, and reacting upon data based on performance.
- Financial: required for financial planning, budgeting, revenue, accounting, cost-accounting, and audit.
- Personnel: required for personnel planning, induction, training, motivation, and evaluation.
- Physical: required for the planning, procurement, inventory, operation, and maintenance of buildings, plant, and materials.
- Organization and Management: required for organizational structure, definition of function, legal personnel, allocation of roles, decision-making, implementation, and control.
- Linkage: required for external links to suppliers, environment, and end-users at other sectoral levels, and with the same level in other national sectors.
In summary, the framework acts as an Aide Memoire - although it should not be considered as a mere check list. It does ensure that no sectoral component is overlooked. This is important for the aquaculture sector which, in the past, has been predominantly biotechnically oriented to the neglect of some principal elements such as marketing, economics, social requirements, credit, management, etc. All systems and sub-systems are duly recognized, and all vertical and horizontal relationships are appropriately developed.
Depending on the required use of the framework (such as planning, sector analysis, or project identification, as described above) different emphases or necessary attention will result, or will be required.
For example, (1) if the framework is used for the development of a national plan, more emphasis will be required at the levels of national sector management and national infrastructure than at other levels - although those of the primary beneficiaries themselves merit more attention than the other two. (2) If the framework is used to make a sector analysis to identify the capital investment required by producers, then considerable emphasis will be required at the upper levels (consumers, producers and local infrastructure), with less at the lower levels (national infrastructure and sector management).
In summary, the framework is a useful tool for planning and analysis. It can be used at different depths or densities of both - in this case to structure a national plan for aquaculture development. Its great value at the present time for the aquaculture sector is to help redress the imbalances within the sector, due to the over-emphasis on biotechnology in the past. It is useful in identifying previous omissions, and subsequently in developing appropriate directions to rectify the problems and enable the capacity of the sector to be structured and advanced from a broad base.
<section>6</section>
ANNEX II: Further Useful Reading
Asian Development Bank, (1983). Indonesia Fisheries Sector Study. Asian Development Bank, 168 p.
Asian Development Bank, (1985). Thailand Fisheries Sector Study. Asian Development Bank, 232 p.
FAO (Rome), (1977). Planning of Aquaculture Development - an introductory guide, edited by T.V.R. Pillay. Farnham, Surrey, Fishing News Books Ltd., 71 p.
FAO (Rome), (1983). Etude du potential aquacole et propositions pour une politique de dveloppement de l'aquaculture en Tunisie. ADCP/MR/83/21, 244 p.
Ruiz Rios, L., (1981). Symposium sobre desarrollo de la acuicultura en el Peru. Lima, Univ. Nacional Agraria, 342 p.
Science Council of Canada, (1984). Aquaculture: A Development Plan for Canada. Ontario, 34 p.
State of Hawaii, (1977). Permits and Environmental Requirements for Aquaculture in Hawaii. Hawaii, Department of Planning and Economic Development, 69 p.
State of Hawaii, (1978). Aquaculture Development for Hawaii. Hawaii, Department of Planning and Economic Development, 222 p.
Tillapaugh D.L. and J.C. Edwards, (1980). A permit and licence guide for the prospective aquaculturist. British Columbia, Ministry of Environment (Marine Resources Branch), 23 p.
Trimble, G.M., (1972). Legal and administrative aspects of an aquaculture policy for Hawaii. Hawaii, Department of Planning and Economic Development, 61 p.
US Department of Commerce, (1977). NOAA Aquaculture Plan, edited by J.B. Glude. Washington, D.C., National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 41 p.
US Department of Interior, (1983). National Aquaculture Development Plan, Federal Coordinating Council on Science, Engineering and Technology, Joint Sub-Committee on Aquaculture. Washington, D.C., 41 p.
US National Academy of Sciences, (1967). Systems Analysis and Operations Research: a tool for policy and program planning for developing countries. Washington, D.C., 98 p.
Webber, H.H., (1979). Aquafarming: What you need to consider. Agribusiness Worldwide, September/October 1979. Westport, CT., Intercontinental Publications Inc., 7 p.
