<title>ADCP/REP/87/24 - Planning an Aquaculture Facility</title>
<section>1</section>
PREFACE
Modern aquaculture is an emerging technology, and each year scientists make technical advances in their disciplines which push husbandry and management of aquatic animals to new limits.
The continuous stream of new information requires flexibility in the engineering and operation of all facilities for the culture of aquatic animals to avoid immediate or future obsolescence. The planning and design of these facilities therefore require thoughtful integration of many technical skills in order to obtain the most economic return on capital investment.
This ADCP guideline document describes an INTEGRATED SYSTEMATIC APPROACH to the planning and design of aquaculture facilities. Among the list of typical facilities are fish and shellfish hatcheries, land-based farms, offshore farms and cage complexes, research laboratories, and training centres. Public aquariums, which are often associated with aquaculture facilities, can be included also. The integrated systematic approach simplifies and orders the planning and design process, and makes certain that the end-product is both technically and economically appropriate for the intended purpose.
The document is directed at Upper-level and Mid-level Management, specifically investors and managers of both public and private funds who often have little or no knowledge about aquaculture and the mechanics of designing and operating the special facilities which the aquaculture sector requires. This lack of information and guidance has had serious consequences in the past, and many poor investments have been made due to misplaced objectives, poorly designed buildings, non-functioning systems, construction delays, and cost over-runs. These have detracted from confidence in the industry.
The contents of the document are concerned particularly with the role of engineering and engineering services in the design and development process, as this role is not well-understood by non-professionals. The document is also sufficiently detailed to be useful to aquaculture biologists and technicians, who often try to fulfil this role themselves.
The document contains also Check Lists for assembling criteria about all aspects of the proposed facility, and some typical Terms of Reference for the engineer, architect, biologist and economist who nay be employed in the planning and design of aquaculture facilities.
<section>2</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
An INTEGRATED SYSTEMATIC APPROACH to the planning and design of aquaculture facilities establishes effective communication between the many professional and non-professional individuals who can be involved, such as:
(i) planners, administrators, and developers, who are concerned with investments which are economic and profitable in the use of all resources,
(ii) engineers and design specialists, who are concerned with the interpretation of biological and technical data into workable and reliable production systems, and
(iii) biologists and technicians, who are concerned with technological and environmental concepts and their constraints for the welfare of the captive aquatic animals and plants.
The systematic approach streamlines the planning and design process. It reduces the period of time between conceptualizing and commissioning of the completed facility, and invariably saves capital investment and effort. Often it makes the difference between economic success or failure of a project, irrespective of its purpose.
The systematic approach to project planning and design does not impose a set of rules which must be applied rigidly, regardless of relevance. Its purpose is to provide a framework within which:
(i) the important factors of the proposed project can be identified,
(ii) critical decisions can be identified and made, and
(iii) full account of the proposed operations can be agreed and communicated between participants.
The framework establishes an orderly progression of activities which will result in a clearly expressed and attainable objective, a functional design, and a well-managed and executed project.
At times the use of an organized systematic approach, with its associated costs in money and effort, may appear unnecessary and wasteful. - particularly if the facilities to be constructed are modest. However, the evidence is that the long-term benefits for any project are substantial, and are ultimately reflected in increased production, reduced operating costs, and overall efficiency. Well-documented and detailed planning and design guarantees that the original purpose of the project is:
(i) properly established and understood,
(ii) continuously carried out in the event of changes in the design or operating personnel, and
(iii) readily re-established even after a lengthy postponement.
The quality of the planning document desired, and the quantity and accuracy of the specified technical criteria, also benefit future projects. They provide continuity and set standards for the sector. Such aspects are of particular importance fox governments and organizations which finance aquaculture facilities in developing countries (such as the investment banks, multilateral and bilateral assistance agencies), as well as private investors.
One of the most difficult jobs in the planning and design process for an aquaculture facility is to quantify the biological criteria accurately. These data are necessary to convey to the design engineers the size, function, and integration of each individual component of the operation. Without all the necessary and accurate criteria (such as water quality requirements, flow rate, quantities of fish to be produced, feeding requirements, etc.), the tasks of identifying and evaluating potential design solutions are difficult.
At the present time, aquaculture development continues to be based on inexact science and technology. This has been one of the main reasons for many poorly designed facilities, and the high frequency of over-runs on project costs. However, there is considerable information about the behaviour and environmental requirements of captive aquatic animals and therefore ignorance of function cannot be part of the design process. This information has to be used to best advantage and will, in turn, identify uncertainties and risks. Given the availability of accurate data, appropriate planning and design range from simple mechanical solutions to sophisticated and complex technology, but, in the final analysis, it is function and economics which must dictate the choice.
All aquaculture projects originate with a concept, however imprecisely formed, and a set of simple objectives. For example, the concept may be the desire of an individual entrepreneur to invest in a hatchery and farm with an annual production of 500 tonnes of medium-size shrimp for export, or to develop 1000 hectares of low-lying land, or alternatively an international assistance agency may wish to finance a national aquaculture centre to accommodate 100 trainees. The planning and design process begins at this point and follows, step by step, well-established stages of development.
The process is based on:
(i) a clear statement of the concept and quantified objectives,
(ii) research of the biological criteria, and
(iii) a programme for carrying out exactly the operations required to achieve the objectives,
For most production facilities the main objective is a well-quantified production target of adults for market, or juveniles. Each biological-programme is therefore unique to each facility. While there may be common characteristics among a number of facilities, for example, in hatcheries for the production of post-larvae of many varieties of shrimp, every one is different in terms of its location, the species, the numbers to be produced, etc., as well as the individual manpower, company policies, and objectives governing its operation.
The planning and design process is divided into two principal phases. These consist of:
- Phase I. BIOPROGRAMMING,
- Phase II. DESIGN
A third phase, which occurs after the first two are complete and which is immediately necessary if the facility is to be constructed, is included for completeness but is not dealt with in this document in any detail.
- Phase III. IMPLEMENTATION.
The relationship of these three phases is illustrated in Figure 1, and they are described in detail on the following pages.
Figure 1 Aquaculture Facility Development
Phase I
Bioprogramming
Project Goals and Concepts
Biological Design Critera
Facility Programming
Site Studies
Schematic Design
Financial Analysis
Environmental Analysis
Phase II
Design
Preliminary Design
Final Design
Cost Re-evaluation or
Value Engineering
Construction Documents
Phase III
Implementation Services
Bid Assistance
Construction Services
Technical Assistance
BIOPROGRAMMING identifies and assembles the main technical and biological criteria which are used to define the physical design of the facility. The output of this phase is the Bioprogramme, a document which contains statements of the concept and objectives, the design criteria, a biological and operational plan, and relevant schedules. It can also contain illustrations which enhance or clarify statements.
DESIGN defines and develops all structures, based on established criteria. The output of the design phase may be in two parts, namely:
(i) Preliminary design drawings, which (as they infer) can be reviewed and changed as necessary, and
(ii) Final design drawings and Construction documents, which cannot be changed (without considerable added cost) and on which are based the subsequent construction contracts.
IMPLEMENTATION organizes the optional services required during construction of the facilities and commissioning. The outputs of this phase are many, but are not dealt with in this document. For example, typical engineering outputs include a series of time and work plans, an administrative schedule controlling the quantity and delivery of materials, payment for work, testing and acceptance of completed works, a programme for commissioning, operational manuals, etc. There is often the requirement for biological outputs, including technical assistance, staffing, staff training. Operational manuals, etc.
Although the stages comprising each phase are sequential, they are not carried out in isolation. If new information becomes available during the design process, earlier stages may have to be reviewed to reflect it properly in the final design- By systematic planning, it is relatively simple to make such adjustments.
One important advantage of the phased progression is the refinement of the cost of construction. Design and cost data are more accurate as planning progresses (see Table 1), and therefore economic viability can be estimated and decisions evaluated if necessary before construction contracts are awarded. However, the cost of the planning and design process itself, while small by comparison with construction costs, is highest at this point. It is therefore important that any major changes are made as early as possible in the process, and each phase is appraised fully before continuing to the next.
Table 1 Approximation of Accuracy of Costs with Design Level
Level of Definition
Sizes/Specification
Cost
Preliminary Design
· Outline design ('rules of thumb' approximations)
· Further definition (define layouts, major components)
· Clarifying design (target on critical areas)
Final Design (every aspect designed)
The planning and design team should be made up of individuals well-informed and familiar with the many aquatic systems which exist. For the most part these are experienced biologists, engineers, and architects. Ideally, the owners and principal operators are also involved. Although a professional understanding of all disciplines is not required of each participant, the detail of the planning will be dictated by the level of experience available. The presence of local and national specialists in the team is important. Their participation will encourage a design well suited to the local environment, building materials, and construction techniques, as well as operating characteristics.
The actual composition of a team, and the individual relationships and responsibilities with the project, vary according to circumstances. Some typical Terms of Reference for the engineer, architect, biologist, (and possibly an economist) who may be used in the team are described in Appendix I.
Figure 2 illustrates typical levels of involvement of the team members, depending on the type of project.
At the simplest level, the process may be carried out by the owner or developer directly, but more commonly a small group is assembled made up of individuals with the major background disciplines. In some projects the experienced 'generalist', with an appreciation of the overall issues and their inter-relationships, can be used as a coordinator and might even handle some small projects alone. Such coordination is not necessarily a full-time activity. However, major decisions regarding evaluation and continuation should not be made by the coordinator alone.
The relationships between the different individuals involved in project planning and design depend on the way the process is to be managed. Figure 2 illustrates diagrammatically typical relationships, and some projects may be managed by a combination of more than one style. The importance is to ensure that the lines of communication and responsibility are defined.
Figure 2 Typical Composition of a Planning Team for Types of Projects
Level
Type of Project
Technically advanced development project
National development or rural aquaculture project
Biologically complex or ecologically critical project
Public access eg. aquarium or visitors centre
Educational/research and training project
Primary
Owner/Developer
Secondary
Biologist and Engineer
Accountant/Financial advisor
Tertiary
engineering specialists
Planner, economist and development specialists
Biological and ecological specialists
Architect and engineering specialists
Architect, research and training specialists
It is difficult to provide a precise guide for the cost of the planning and design process as a percentage of construction cost. The developers should be prepared to pay from 5-15% of the capital cost of the facility for the services of planning and design. In general terms, the cost of planning and design will be in the upper range if:
- the project is technically complex,
- there are 'unknowns' in the criteria, which require compensation,
- the facility has several different functions,
- the project is unique and cannot use standard components and materials,
- there are administrative difficulties, and standards and codes to meet.
The proportionate cost can be increased beyond 15% by any number of implementation services, particularly construction supervision, and then technical supervision and training may be required which can be very costly.
<section>3</section>
2. PHASE I. BIOPROGRAMMING
2.1 Project goals and concepts
2.2 Biological design criteria
2.3 Facility characterization or programming
2.4 Siting
2.5 Schematic design
2.6 Financial analysis
2.7 Environmental analysis
2.8 Conclusion
The first phase of project development is bioprogramming. This involves basic project planning and assembly of the design criteria, and includes quantification of all project components which describe functions and operations. Bioprogramming can be simple or detailed, depending on the nature and purpose of the project. Although frequently overlooked, bioprogramming is the most vital phase. Thorough effort at this time makes all subsequent stages easier, and avoids future complications and disagreements.
The elements of bioprogramming include:
2.1 - Project goals and concepts,
2.2 - Biological design criteria,
2.3 - Facility characterization or programming,
2.4 - Siting,
2.5 - Schematic design,
2.6 - Financial analysis,
2.7 - Environmental analysis,
2.8 - Conclusion.
The conclusion, or end product, of the bioprogramming phase is a summary report or project notebook containing all project philosophy, background data, design criteria, site data, environmental data, and the operational programmes. It is the invaluable link between concept and reality. The bioprogramme report serves as the reference throughout the evolution and operation of the project, and will ensure continuity. It is therefore worthwhile to have the report properly assembled into a document, and reproduced with many copies.
2.1 Project goals and concepts
The first step in bioprogramming is developing a statement of project intent. The statement should be as clear and concise as possible, and serve as a record of both purpose and methodology. A list of components which are usually considered at this stage is provided in Appendix II.
2.2 Biological design criteria
Each species of aquatic animals and plants has basic environmental requirements which must be fulfilled in the design of any facility, together with those for the optimum conditions under which it can be cultured. The extent to which these criteria are identified and then satisfied by the design largely determines the success of the future operations. Therefore, careful research of facts and attention to detail are highly recommended. Typically, the biological design criteria should be developed on the basis of statistics from similar facilities, research experience, and trends in culture techniques.
A combination of literature reviews and first-hand observations should be included and used in compiling the data base. A number of resources exist which will help the background search and are included in the References (section 6).
The key biological design criteria which are considered at this stage are:
- Species description
- Behavioural characteristics
- Culture techniques
- Environmental requirements, density, water exchange, water quality
- Nutritional requirements
- Growth rates
- Mortality rate
- Diseases
Further description of the needs in each of these components is given in Appendix III.
2.3 Facility characterization or programming
2.3.1 Programming approach
2.3.2 Programming infrastructure
Facility characterization or programming is a dynamic process which integrates project goals, biological design criteria, and site (engineering) conditions into a functional physical and operational plan.
There may be a need for several reviews and evaluations during programming, depending upon the alternatives for site selection, the knowledge of site conditions, and financial constraints. However, by conforming to a systematic programming process, it is simple to modify both biological and facility programmes as more information becomes available. The ultimate goal is a physical and operational plan which meets project goals and is realistic in terms of biological, engineering, and financial constraints.
2.3.1 Programming approach
Programming is a valuable tool which can be used to calculate the physical requirements required to meet specific production objectives, or to determine the carrying capacity of an identified site (see Figure 3). For example, the first approach may be used by a government agency wishing to develop a regional, multi-species demonstration and training centre, the second may be used by a landowner trying to convert an existing area of agricultural land into fish production. With both approaches, the biological criteria particular to a species and culture system is the common denominator.
Figure 3 Approaches to Facility Programming
Based upon the production goals and biological criteria, a biological production schedule for the proposed facility can be developed. The production schedule outlines the inputs and outputs of the project with time. For most projects, the schedule should be developed for monthly intervals, as at most facilities significant changes can occur this frequently.
The information required by the production schedule includes (1) numerical populations of animals at all stages, (2) water requirements, and (3) space requirements.
Under Alternative I (Figure 3), the production schedule is developed by combining biological criteria and production goals. Figure 4 illustrates one useful format for presenting this information.
Figure 4 Typical Production Schedule Data Collection Sheet
In Production
At Harvest
Month
No.
Length (cm)
Weight (g)
Total Weight (kg)
No.
Length (cm)
Weight (g)
Total Weight (kg)
January
Lot 1
Lot 2
etc.
February
Lot 1
Lot 2
etc.
(continued March-December)
The schedule outlines the inputs and outputs of the project over an annual cycle, calculated at monthly intervals. If annual water temperatures are known for a site, they should be used as the basis of all calculations; if not known, then average temperatures within acceptable rearing ranges are used. For individual lots of fish to be produced (or received) at a facility, either different species or age groups, the numbers and dates should be projected; also the size (length and/or weight) of individuals at stocking. The total biomass can then be calculated. Changes in population, animal size, and biomass should be calculated monthly for each lot by applying the appropriate mortality and growth rate criteria. Once the desired size is reached, the population, in whole or in part, should be designated as harvested.
After making the production schedule, a facility programme is developed by using the relevant biocriteria again to determine the volumes of water and (container) space needed for each population each month. An example of a format for reporting this information is shown in Figure 5.
Figure 5 Typical Facility Schedule Data Collection Sheet
Facility
Rearing Volume Requirements (m^2)
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Fish, Lot 1
Lot 2
etc.
Total
Facility
Water Requirements (l/sec)
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Fish, Lot 1
Lot 2
etc.
Total
If these requirements exceed the capacities of the site, the process must be repeated until an appropriate balance is reached.
During facility programming it is important to note that it is often undesirable to handle the stock frequently. Thus additional space requirements are often required, especially during the early months of rearing. Similarly, water requirements should be calculated empirically as well as theoretically to accommodate the additional facilities.
In Alternative II (Figure 3), that is to make the programme fit a site, the procedure is performed in reverse order. The water and/or space data are entered first and the production potential calculated from them.
The procedure can be repeated for various combinations of fish populations, sites, and culture technique alternatives to provide an objective basis for evaluating the costs and benefits of each. The schedule may also have to be adjusted if information obtained during subsequent evaluations or design phases indicates an unsatisfactory financial analysis.
2.3.2 Programming infrastructure
The next step in the planning process is to develop programmes for infrastructure - including both the water system, and production and support spaces.
The volume of water required on a monthly basis should have been determined during the production scheduling process. It is now necessary to determine additional operating water requirements of the facility. At this stage, the system is not being engineered but rather characterized.
The factors which should be considered in preparing a written description of the water resources required are described in Appendix IV.
Depending upon the complexity of the proposed water system, it is often useful to prepare a process diagram to illustrate the complete system (see Figure 6).
Facility requirements for both production and support activities should be developed from the proposed production programme, and the operating criteria required. The criteria for the most significant infrastructure component, the production units themselves, must be specified by the system of culture to be used and the criteria which specify configuration and construction materials, etc. The remainder of the facilities are then developed from the operating goals and the availability of supporting infrastructure in the surrounding area.
Figure 7 is an example of a format for summarizing the major facility components, their specific functions, and their inter-relationships. As a supplement, individual format sheets should be prepared for building spaces requiring specialized facilities and unusual features. Figure 8 is an example of a useful Summary schedule.
Figure 6 Typical Water Process Diagram
Figure 7 Typical Facility Criteria Schedule
Component Use
No.
Size
Water
Light
Elect.
Etc.
fresh
salt
Units - Nursery
Production
Brood ponds
Spawn tanks
Quarantine tanks
Research - Laboratory
Office
Library
Admin. - Staff Offices
Clerical Offices
Conference Room
Storage - Dry
Freezer
Equipment
Workshops - Automobile
Machine
Figure 8 Typical Building Space Criteria Sheet
Room No___________________
Room Use______________
Number of Users_____________
Net Area________________
Relation to Other Rooms________________________________
Function_____________________________________________
Architectural Characteristics
Preferred location______________________________________
Finishes (floor)_____________(wall)_____________(ceiling)
Lighting____________________
Mechanical Services
Illumination__________________
Telephone_______________
Air Conditioning______________
Ventilation
Water Supply________________
Gas
Compressed Air______________
Sinks___________________
Additional services required
Built-in Furniture
Work Benches_______________
Bench Height_____________
Bench Surface_______________
Bench Storage____________
Other installed furniture required___________________________
2.4 Siting
Once the programme and the criteria are established for all the production facilities and the other related infrastructure, possible sites can be identified and evaluated.
In cases where the site has been predetermined (Alternative II), special attention must be given to assessing the economic viability of the project altogether, as there are obvious limits to production capacity and facilities imposed by site constraints.
In cases where no site has been predetermined, the need is to identify the location where most of the requirements (all the biological and physical factors) are optimized.
A list of field evaluations which should be considered for siting is given in Appendix V.
2.5 Schematic design
The schematic design is the first step in translating the criteria and site constraints into a workable design. Therefore it is often called the conceptual design stage. At this stage of the process, the objective is primarily to select concepts and identify and solve major design problems. It is basically a verification that there are no physical constraints which will prevent meeting the production goals and purposes of the project.
The schematic design stage identifies, assesses, and recommends design alternatives for meeting production goals. These alternatives should reflect the use of local construction techniques and materials where applicable.
The end products of the schematic design stage will be:
(i) a written report fully describing the facility design concept,
(ii) a site layout, showing location of all major components on the site, which reflects topography and operational relationships,
(iii) floor plans for all major support buildings,
(iv) a schematic diagram of the hydraulics of all the water requirements for each production unit and facility, with elevations, and
(v) a topographic survey.
Sketches, such as those shown in Figures 9 and 10, are often useful to include in the schematic design report to illustrate the recommended design concepts. The schematic design also requires a site topographical survey to ensure that locations and hydraulic systems are conceptually correct. The survey should be included with the report.
Finally, it is important to undertake and include in the schematic design report an estimate of the preliminary construction and operating costs, and the project construction schedule. However, it is accepted at this time that the construction cost estimates are only an order of accuracy (see Table 1).
Figure 9 Typical Sketch of Building Concept
Figure 10 Typical Sketch of Pond Concept
2.6 Financial analysis
Following preparation of the cost estimates, a preliminary financial analysis can be made to determine if there are financial constraints to proceeding with the project as it has been conceptualized.
The financial analysis must consider the objectives of the project, including cost/benefit requirements of the owner and financing organization.
If the project is commercial, then reference must be made back to the original market assessment and marketing strategy for the products. If a market assessment and marketing strategy have not been undertaken, then these must now be undertaken before further investment is made.
If the project is not commercial, for example, a government facility for production and research, then it is still necessary to refer to government goals and objectives, and the capital and operating budgets of the appropriate department committed to manage the project.
In developing a financially stable project, whether for the private or the public sector, it is usually prudent to consider developing the project in phases. This can reduce the initial investment risk, demonstrate feasibility of the project, and generate income to offset further capital investment and operating costs.
It is also useful at this time to consider development alternatives for raising investment capital or reducing risk. These may be 'turn-key' projects, designer equity participation, and other forms of joint venture. Financing alternatives may include capital debt, equity, government development grants, subsidized loans, international technical assistance, etc. Deferred interest loans are frequently available for the private sector for aquaculture projects.
In the event that phasing or financing does not result in a satisfactory financial analysis for the project, it is necessary to return to the programme and to modify production goals and requirements until the project is economically feasible. Alternatively, a decision can be made to proceed no further with the project.
However, if changes are made to the programme which prove to satisfy the financial analysis, and the project proceeds, then it is imperative that all the stages of Phase I - Bioprogramming are repeated, and that a new schematic design report is prepared which complies with the modified programme. This does not in fact take long as almost all of the basic work has been carried out. It is important, nonetheless, to do it in readiness for the architects and engineers to begin the design based on the modified programme, and not the original programme.
2.7 Environmental analysis
In the bioprogramming and conceptualizing of every project, consideration should be given to its relationship with the environment. This includes not only the influences of the environment on the project itself, but also positive and negative effects the project may have on the environment.
All aspects of environmental concern require thought and often particular investigation, and merit statements in the bioprogramming documentation. In some cases, the national laws and local regulations may require extensive research, particularly where a negative impact is possible. For example, projects which will be using non-native species or stocks, or alter large areas of wetland or coastal areas, are especially sensitive.
In order to minimize undesirable environmental impacts, or to comply with laws and regulations, it may be necessary to alter production goals, siting plans, or design concepts. If the programme has to be modified to comply with environmental requirements, then the process (as with the financial analysis indicated above) must be repeated.
2.8 Conclusion
At this point in project development it is advisable to secure financing for the site (if necessary) and construction. It is also important to obtain all necessary permits to ensure rapid construction and subsequent operations.
The project notebook, the result of all the bioprogramming and planning, becomes a useful document for securing financing. Presented to funding organizations, such as development banks and multilateral organizations, and to governmental agencies which have authority over development projects, the project notebook describes a properly evaluated and functional facility, with projections of costs, and construction and operations schedule. It enables an immediate decision to be made without further work on the part of the proposers of the project.
In addition, the project notebook is of considerable value as a true record of the project. It therefore becomes a guide for all subsequent phases of development in spite of what might occur through postponements, or changes in government administrations, or even design engineers.
<section>4</section>
3. PHASE II. DESIGN
3.1 Preliminary design
3.2 Final design
3.3 Cost re-evaluation or value engineering
3.4 Construction documents and bid specifications
The second phase of project development is design. Design itself can be sub-divided into as many steps as necessary to resolve all design problems and to Integrate the concepts into a functional facility plan. It is generally recommended that at least two stages are used. These are:
3.1 - Preliminary design, and
3.2 - Final design.
Both stages adhere to all the concepts developed during the planning phase. The remaining elements in the design process are:
3.3 - Cost re-evaluation or value engineering, (which is optional), and
3.4 - Construction documents and bid specifications.
The conclusions, or end products, of the design phase are written reports, architectural and engineering drawings, more accurate construction costs, projected operational costs, and schedules of construction. There are also engineering specifications for materials, machinery, and equipment for each step. The reports will record the evolution of the design process and all criteria and assumptions used.
3.1 Preliminary design
During the preliminary design stage, major emphasis is upon civil, mechanical, and architectural design. The design of all the mechanical processes (such as the water systems) will also be completed at this time to ensure that they are integrated properly into the structures. Architectural concepts (if required) are developed, and structural systems identified.
All the required site investigations, including the chemical analysis of water, soil analyses, and topography, are made before completing this step. Based upon these investigations, the criteria are developed by the engineers for soil compaction and pond berm or dike construction, and water treatment.
A sufficient number of drawings are then completed to communicate the design concepts. The number of drawings required is strictly dependent upon the size and complexity of the project.
A preliminary design report is prepared with the drawings which describes all the structural components and mechanical processes of the facility, and the ways in which they interrelate. The report should include an outline of materials and equipment specifications which are then used as a basis for revising earlier construction cost estimates. These will now be reduced from the plus or minus 25% accuracy of the Schematic Design (see section 2.5) to about 15% accuracy. Operating cost estimates and the construction schedule are also revised at this time.
Costs and scheduling revisions are again compared with the original financial objectives and constraints to ensure that the project remains financially feasible. If it is not (because, for example, the structures were to be built with reinforced concrete instead of pre-fabricated materials) then the facility design concept has to be altered as necessary.
In some cases, perhaps after substantial soil tests, it is discovered during the preliminary design phase that the project cannot be developed economically. It is then necessary to terminate the project, or to revert back to the planning phase and revise goals. However, if the planning has been thoroughly conducted the chances of significant conceptual or siting changes at this stage of development are remote.
3.2 Final design
During the final design stage the detailed architectural and engineering drawings (the blueprints) of all physical components of the project are produced. In some complex projects, such as multi-disciplinary research centres, it is necessary to prepare in addition a written final design report. This summarizes the facility as designed.
Virtually all design problems must have been resolved before the end of the final design stage. Sufficient detail must be provided by the drawings and the report to allow reasonably accurate estimates of construction and operating costs, as well as the construction scheduling. All revisions to construction materials, machinery, and equipment specifications are made. The updated schedule, cost estimates and specifications are contained in the final design report.
Once again, it is necessary to verify at the end of the final design stage that the project remains economically viable. If, by some chance it is not, then a decision must be made to revise design solutions or the original concepts, or perhaps terminate the project.
Although it is an apparent and obvious assumption, it must be pointed out that any changes at this stage are most costly. Final design is the most expensive of the planning processes. It is therefore important that complete and detailed attention is given throughout final design. If final design drawings have to be substantially changed or repeated, the costs are disproportionately high compared with the costs of the originals. Obviously if this occurs, then substantial errors have been made during the previous stages and planning phases.
One of the most frequently used ways of maintaining economic viability at this stage (as mentioned in section 2.6) is to develop and construct the project in phases and to ensure that each step of the construction programme is financially viable. However, even to do this, it is often cost effective to design and construct certain basic facilities (such as the main pump house and intake/discharge channels) during the first phase.
3.3 Cost re-evaluation or value engineering
This is an optional element in the design process. For large projects, and those which may be having difficulties with economic financial projections, it may be useful to include a value engineering stage.
The value engineering process re-evaluates all the major cost centres in the project to determine if the most cost effective design solutions have been used. For large aquaculture facilities the most problematic cost centre is often the water delivery system to the site. A small team is assembled, representing the major engineering disciplines, architecture, and biology. It is important that these individuals are familiar with aquaculture projects, but were not participants in the design. They are supplied with all records of the project from concept through design. The objective is to verify that the project meets operational criteria, and optimizes cost efficiency both in construction and system operation.
Value engineering is not a time-consuming or costly process. It can result in considerable cost savings to the project by discovering inconsistencies between operational requirements and design solutions.
Recommendations made by the value engineering team should be incorporated into the final design as necessary.
3.4 Construction documents and bid specifications
The last stage of the design phase is the preparation of construction documents and bid specifications.
Construction documents and bid specifications are similar throughout the construction industry for any building project, and therefore no detailed description or separate discussion is necessary for aquaculture facilities.
It is important that the detail provided in the construction documents and the bid specifications reflects the standards of the contractors who are expected to bid on the project. Furthermore, it should be borne in mind that many contractors have had no experience building aquaculture facilities, and will not understand the degree of accuracy required for some components. This is most vital for the construction of the hydraulic system and compaction of the pond berms or dikes to meet the specified performance criteria. These requirements have to be conveyed through detailed drawings and specifications. Similarly, machinery, equipment, and material specifications must clearly indicate where no substitutions are permissible.
<section>5</section>
4. PHASE III. IMPLEMENTATION SERVICES
4.1 Bid assistance
4.2 Construction services
4.3 Technical assistance
A third phase of the planning process occurs after the completion of the two principal phases. It is mentioned here for the sake of completeness if the facility is now to be constructed, but it is not dealt with in any depth.
This phase includes a number of services which may be implemented either during construction of the facility, during commissioning, or for start-up and management operations. These services are optional but can be very useful for large projects, particularly as aquaculture practices are new to many individuals and familiarization and training are often required. For example, separate options may include the following elements:
4.1 - Bid assistance,
4.2 - Construction services,
4.3 - Technical assistance.
4.1 Bid assistance
Bid assistance is associated with construction of the facility. The last stage in project design (Phase II) is the preparation of construction documents and bid specifications. After these have been prepared the work of the designers is complete. However, the first step in project implementation is to obtain bids from contractors and to select a contractor. It is therefore useful to contract the services of an engineer to assist in:
(i) advertising of the work to obtain suitable contractors,
(ii) evaluating the bids from the contractors,
(iii) selecting the contractor, and
(iv) conducting negotiations with the contractor.
Professional assistance for all these separate and important activities is often repaid in a well-constructed facility and well-managed contract.
These requirements do not differ from those of bid services on any construction job, with the exception that the professional assistance should be focused upon procuring construction services suitable for the specialized needs of an aquaculture facility.
At the same time, it is important to determine any professional requirements for continued assistance during the construction phase itself. Again, these can ensure a successful project. These will in part be determined by the experience of the contractor, the local conditions, and the complexity of the design.
4.2 Construction services
Services during construction can range from construction management, where the service is limited to ensuring proper construction and timeliness, to construction supervision, where direct daily supervision of the work staff is provided.
The recommended levels of construction services and professional assistance are determined again by a variety of factors, including any accelerated construction scheduling, use of complex sophisticated equipment on design features, experience of the contractor, and site conditions, etc. In instances where the design is incomplete and field engineering is required to provide design decisions during actual construction, the use of construction supervision services is advised.
Other construction services which may be of value include procurement of equipment and materials, system testing, and preparation of as-built drawings.
Because of the highly specialized nature of many components of aquaculture projects, participation in the construction and procurement process by experienced individuals is usually often a worthwhile investment. Their involvement provides greater assurance that the system will perform correctly, and can reduce delays which may have critical impact to projects which rely on seasonal conditions for fish spawning and growth.
4.3 Technical assistance
The use of outside specialists to assist in the management and technical operations of the project is helpful. Technical assistance may in fact be a condition of financial backers and equity partners to minimize their risk.
Outside specialists and/or technical trainers are often contracted before the completion of construction. There are a number of activities which merit their early participation in a project, among which are:
- Preparation of an operation manual
The operation manual describes in detail all the physical and operational aspects of all the process systems. There may be more than one manual for a facility.
The engineering section (or manual) includes the several hydraulic systems, and other electrical and mechanical systems. It provides information on the use of emergency systems and procedures, and maintenance schedules and procedures for all the mechanical equipment.
The biotechnical section (or manual) includes the biological programme for the facility. It provides technical information on aquaculture techniques specific to the project. Typically, it includes feeding schedules and nutritional information, spawning techniques, instructions on fish handling, basic disease control practices, and pond management procedures.
- Provisioning and supplies
Outside assistance is often useful to procure specialized equipment and supplies critical to the satisfactory operation of the facility. These may include the importation of such items as special diets, laboratory supplies, and even eggs or larvae which may require permits.
- Staffing and training
Instruction and training are the most common uses of technical assistance. Many individuals, private companies, and quasi-government organizations provide these services to aquaculture at the present time. Technical training provides a high level of assurance to investors and lenders that the project will be managed and operated satisfactorily.
<section>6</section>
5. SUMMARY
The planning and design process is always tailored towards the needs of the individual project. Just as no two projects are exactly alike, the variations in emphasis within the process differ considerably.
The phases and steps outlined in this document describe almost every aspect of project development and outline the needs of subsequent project implementation. There are often occasions when certain steps can be omitted. However, it is preferable to consider all phases and every step in every project, and then to change the level of emphasis given to every component according to the size of the individual project and its complexity. This prevents omitting any vital analytical process.
The time and money spent on the planning and design process (as illustrated in Tables 2a and 2b) depends on the size and complexity of the project.
For a simple and relatively inexpensive project (in the range of US$ 50 000-250 000) as much as 15% of the project budget and 65% of elapsed time should be allowed for the planning and design process.
For large and complex facilities (in the range of US$ 2-10 million), as much as 10-12% of the project budget and 40% of elapsed time may be required.
The effort given to bioprogramming (Phase I) should require 5-10% of commitment of the project budget. However, the effort must be carefully conducted and time provided for reviews and confirmations. As much as 33% of the total project development time may go into Phase I on simple, inexpensive projects.
These figures, for the allocation of project budget and time, are only given as guidelines. They are intended primarily to convey the attention and commitment which must be given to planning and design; attention and commitment which, in the past, have often been overlooked to the detriment of the investments which were being made. They also demonstrate the change in emphasis which is often required in project development.
In summary, money and time spent in careful project development of aquaculture facilities always pay dividends on the investment, regardless of the source of the funds. Well-documented project planning and design provides a solid foundation for any project, and also benefits all future projects by establishing and adopting standards for the sector.
Table 2a Typical Development Time Allocation (expressed as percentage of total)
Small Project (18 months)
Medium Project (30 months)
Large Project (48 months)
PHASE I: BIOPROGRAMMING
Goals/Concepts
Biocriteria
Facility Programming
Siting
Schematic Design
Financial Analysis
Environmental Analysis
Subtotal
PHASE II: DESIGN
Preliminary Design
Final Design
Value Engineering
Construction Documents
Subtotal
PHASE III: IMPLEMENTATION
Bid Assistance
Construction Services*
Subtotal
TOTAL
* varies according to level of services performed and construction time
Table 2b Typical Development Total Budget Allocation
Small Project (18 months)
Medium Project (30 months)
Large Project (48 months)
PHASE I: BIOPROGRAMMING
Goals/Concepts
Biocriteria
Facility Programming
Siting
Schematic Design
Financial Analysis
Environmental Analysis
Subtotal
PHASE II: DESIGN
Preliminary Design
Final Design
Value Engineering
Construction Documents
Subtotal
PHASE III: IMPLEMENTATION
Bid Assistance
Construction Services*
Subtotal
TOTAL
* Varies according to level of services performed and construction time
<section>7</section>
6. REFERENCES
The following references are a sample of the technical information available to assist in the planning and design of aquaculture systems. They have been selected because they are general in nature and are applicable to a variety of species, locations and production methodologies. More specific references should be consulted when planning an actual project.
L.J. Alien and E.C. Kinney, (eds), 1981. Proceedings of the Bio-engineering Symposium for fish culture. Bethesda, Maryland, Fish Culture Section of the American Fisheries Society and the Northeast Society of Conservation Engineers, FCS Publ. 1:307 p.
ADCP, 1984. Inland aquaculture engineering. Lectures presented at the ADCP Interregional Training Course in Inland Aquaculture Engineering, Budapest, 6 June-3 September 1983. Rome, FAO/UNDP, ADCP/REP/84/21:591 p.
E. Leitritz and R.C. Lewis, 1976. Trout and salmon culture (hatchery methods). Fish Bull. Calif. Dep. Fish Game, (164):197 p.
T.V.R. Pillay, 1977. Planning of aquaculture development - an introductory guide. Farnham, Surrey, Fishing News Books Ltd., for FAO, 72 p.
R.G. Piper et al., 1982. Fish hatchery management. Washington, D.C., U.S. Department of the Interior Fish and Wildlife Service, 517 p.
F.E. Wheaton, 1977. Aquacultural engineering. New York, Wiley Interscience, APPENDIX I
<section>8</section>
APPENDIX I - Typical terms of reference for planning and design team
PHASE I. BIOPROGRAMMING
Biologist:
· Identify and prepare written description of programme goals, constraints and concepts including species, production capacity,' production techniques, financial objectives, operation, location etc.
· Identify and summarize biological criteria for each Species to be produced including life history, production technology, requirements (nutritional, environments) under production.
· Identify, evaluate and select potential sites giving goals and biocriteria. Evaluation is to include land ownership, permits, physical and environmental conditions, and any other relevant data. Evaluation should include participation of engineers and architects as necessary.
· Identify any field testing on additional data required to verify validity of site selection.
· Summarize site data and conditions including water quality, water quantity, air temperature ranges, water temperature ranges, climatological conditions, soil conditions, etc.
· Develop production programme, specifying number and size of fish, water, temperature, space, feed, etc., and requirement at regular intervals (i.e. monthly) during annual production cycles. Programme is to indicate number, weight and target dates for stocking and harvesting.
· Identify availability and source of broodstock or fry.. Identify destination for harvested fish.
· Summarize biocriteria, production concepts, production programme and background data in a concise, yet detailed report.
· Assist engineers, architects and economists in facility and operation planning.
· Develop preliminary staffing schedule.
Engineer:
· Identify and develop concepts for all systems and processes including hydraulic, structural, electrical, mechanical, and hvac.
· Identify and supervise field tests as necessary to verify site conditions and validity of design concepts.
· Prepare written description of each concept including operational requirements, size, location, etc.
· Prepare hydraulic schematic for water system, including elevation source, destination, and quantity.
· Develop process flow diagrams illustrating all elements within the water system including pumps, filters, aeration, etc.
· Assist architect and biologist in evaluating and selecting sites.. Develop material and equipment check lists.
· Develop preliminary construction cost estimates (work with architect).
· Develop preliminary construction schedules (work with architect).. Develop preliminary operating budgets (work with biologist).
Architect:
· Identify and develop concepts for buildings and interior spaces.
· Identify architectural character and construction materials.
· Develop site layout illustrating, relationships of all physical components considering function and topography.
· Develop criteria for each building and interior space, including size, function, spatial relationships, etc.
· Develop schematic floor plans for each building.
· Summarize architectural concepts in a written building programme, including descriptions of building space criteria, construction materials, etc.
· Assist engineer and biologist in site selection.
· Develop preliminary construction cost estimates (work with engineer).
· Develop preliminary construction schedules (work with engineer).. Develop material and equipment check lists.
Economist:
· Identify economic criteria, including financial objectives and constraints.
· Evaluate financial viability of sites, and production and design concepts.
· Identify funding sources, and their requirements.
· Assess markets and develop marketing strategy, including evaluation of price and demand elasticities, product form, market locations, etc.
· Prepare preliminary operating budgets and cash flows.. Summarize analysis and recommendations in a brief, thorough report.
PHASE II. DESIGN
Biologist:
· Assist engineer and architect in developing preliminary and final design for all systems and facilities.
· Verify that all designs reflect operating requirements and meet operational, expansion, and flexibility goals.
· Review material selection to verify design does not include materials harmful or lethal to fish.
Engineer:
· Develop standards for design drawings.
· Refine concepts for all engineering systems and processes.. Prepare schedule of drawings.
· Make design calculations and insert all calculations, material and equipment descriptions, etc., in design notebook(s).
· Prepare preliminary and final to-scale drawings for all systems, including at a minimum, site piping plan, major earthworks, electrical diagram, hydraulic schematic, etc.
· Revise construction and operating cost estimates and schedules as necessary.
· Revise material and equipment check lists.
Architect:
· Develop standards for drawings.
· Refine architectural concepts.
· Prepare schedule of drawings.
· Prepare preliminary and final to-scale drawings for all buildings and interior spaces, including site plan, floor plans, and elevations.
· Prepare a design notebook which contains all calculations, with catalogue 'cuts' of selected materials and equipment.
· Revise construction and operating cost estimates, and reschedule as necessary.
· Revise material and equipment check lists.
Cost Engineer:
· Review all drawings, project reports, criteria, etc.
· Prepare list of major systems and components to be reviewed, based upon their operational and financial significance.
· Review design and criteria for each selected component.
· Make alternative design recommendations.
· Discuss findings with project team (biologist, engineer, architect, economist, etc.).
PHASE III. IMPLEMENTATION SERVICES
As these services vary in demand, no specific Terms of Reference are included.
<section>9</section>
APPENDIX II - Project goals and concepts
The following list describes components which should be included in consideration of goals and concepts to the extent they are relevant and identified:
- System concept
· major physical components, i.e. hatchery, laboratory, production ponds, cages
- Owner/operator
· privately operated
· publicly operated
- Purpose
· commercial enterprise
· demonstration purposes
· public education
· applied research and development
· training of technicians
- Financial objectives
· for profit/commercial
· self-sustaining costs of hatchery or farm
· foreign exchange earnings
· employment enhancement
· income distribution
- Funding source
· private capital
· public capital (government, international agencies)
· combination of public and private capital
· budgetary constraints
- Scale of operation
· pilot or demonstration scale
· commercial/large-scale for financial
· objectives
· phased for future expansion
- Location
· region/province
· state
· country
- Production programme
· species to be produced
· source of animals to be produced
· quantity of (each) species
· schedule of production
· size of animals to be stocked and harvested
· technology to be used
<section>a</section>
APPENDIX III - Biological design criteria
The following list describes the key criteria which should be specified for each species and summarized for the project notebook:
- Species description
Identify the species or stock to be cultured. Provide information on life history, experience under aquaculture conditions and marketability, if applicable. Broodstock sources should be identified; if non-native stock is selected, the reason for its use, assurance of availability and any potential restrictions governing importation should be noted. Use of native stocks will also require an assessment of availability and possible harvesting restrictions.
- Behavioural characteristics
Animal behaviour during all stages of its production should be described to the extent relevant to facility design and operation. Characteristics to be considered may include jumping, burrowing, cannibalism, competitive or symbiotic relationships with other species, behaviour which might facilitate harvesting, photo-sensitivity, etc. If controlled breeding is part of the production programme, unique behavioural characteristics of brood animals as well as larval and juvenile stages must also be addressed.
- Culture techniques
An appraisal should be made of state-of-the-art techniques in reproducing and growing the selected species. Consideration should be given to common practices as well as experimental programmes in order to select the most appropriate technology as well as indicate changes in techniques likely to occur over the life of the facility. The selection of production methodology should not only be based upon technical limitations, but also site conditions, financial constraints, project objectives and the experience of the operator. It is important to assess carefully and realistically the likelihood of modifications in techniques over time and determine the necessity of providing flexibility for the future. Such changes could necessitate increasing the initial capital investment in order to facilitate modifications at a later date. An overview of the history of culturing the selected species, similar culture projects and research programmes, both past and present, is often of value.
Indicate if any particular project or technology is to be used as a model for this project. Describe unique techniques or facilities to be used and provide a basis for recommending their use in the proposed programme.
- Environmental requirements
This section should contain quantifiable information to be used as the basis for assisting in site selection and designing infrastructure. The basis for determining all requirements should be well-documented. To the extent laboratory data are used, consideration must be given to possible changes in requirements and behaviour under a production environment.
Density: provide criteria on the number of animals or animal weight allowable in a given surface area or volume of water. If these requirements change based upon animal size during the rearing cycle, it should be noted. The basis for the criteria should be specified, as the use of static versus running water systems, grading and population thinning during the production cycle, and the supply of supplemental diets may all have a bearing on the criteria adopted.
Water exchange: the volume and rates of water exchange required will be based upon the quality of the supply as related to the animals' tolerance of a variety of chemical properties, the population density as it affects oxygen and nitrogen concentrations, temperature as it affects respiratory rates and oxygen saturation levels, and the reliance on natural as opposed to supplementary feed. In addition to these basic biological requirements are physical limitations based upon water availability, the cost of delivering and removing it from the production units, and evaporation rates.
When possible, criteria for the tolerance of water quality should be used as the basis for determining water exchange rates. They must always be used for determining requirements under intensive culture conditions. For semi-intensive and intensive systems, rates based upon percentage (%) exchange may be used.
Water quality: lethal and acceptable ranges for temperature, and the most critical chemical parameters should be determined. Ideally, the synergistic effects should be considered when determining criteria. The most important to any project are temperature, pH, salinity and dissolved gases (oxygen and nitrogen). When in doubt about the suitability of any particular water supply, a bioassay is recommended. Tolerance levels may change depending upon the size of the animal and level of stress as influenced by rearing density and habitat. Water quality criteria should be used to ensure the supply is well within the animals' range of tolerance as population intensification, inherent in any aquaculture system, results in both degradation of water conditions and a reduction in tolerance levels.
- Nutritional requirements
The dietary requirements and the form in which they will be supplied must be determined for every project. The selection will be based upon the acceptability, availability, and cost of commercially available diets compared with the cost and effectiveness of producing food within production units. The type of culture methodology used is directly related to feeding methods.
The criteria should indicate if there is a change in nutritional requirements and diet availability during the rearing cycle. Also they should address the amount of food to be fed, feeding frequency, method of supplying feed, and special infrastructure requirements for the production and storage of supplemental rations.
- Growth rates
Anticipated growth rates will be influenced by the species selected, ambient temperatures, population densities, and nutritional inputs. Normally rates are expressed on a straight-line basis as weight and/or length gain per unit of time. More sophisticated criteria may be expressed as a logarithmic growth equation. In either case, to apply the criteria it is necessary to know ambient water temperatures and expected seasonal variations as well as fish length/weight ratios for the target species.
- Mortality rate
Expected rate of mortality during the rearing cycle should be determined and conveniently expressed as a percentage of the population per time increment. This rate will assist in determining stocking rates and projecting harvest levels.
- Diseases
The most common types of diseases affecting the animals to be produced should be reported. The frequency of occurrence and virulence will affect the financial risk associated with the project as well as influence the need for environmental control features in the design, such as quarantine areas, water treatment, and water re-use. The availability and effectiveness of prophylactics and vaccines should also be addressed.
<section>b</section>
APPENDIX IV - Programming infrastructure - The water system
- type of supply
· salt water
(quantity, use)
· fresh water
· surface water
· ground water
- intake structure
· location (general or specific)
· type (multiples or single)
· depth
· screening
- distribution system
· pipes (materials to be used and/or avoided)
· open channels
· gravity flow
· pressurized by pumping
· method and location of supply and draining
· production units
- pre-treatment
· aeration
· filtration
· settling
· tempering (heating or cooling)
· irradiation
- re-use treatment
· bio-filtration
· zeolites
- security
· redundancy
· alarms
· emergency generators
- future expansion
· pumps
· water distribution
- wastewater treatment
· settling
· screening
· chlorination
· location of discharge relative to intake
- operating requirements
· quantity for filling ponds
· number and volume of units to be filled
· simultaneously
· number and volume of units to be drained
· simultaneously
- non-production water
· potable
needs
· research
· transportation
· special water treatment
· cleaning
<section>c</section>
APPENDIX V - Siting criteria
- land availability
- land ownership
- topography
- cost
- climate water availability
- water quality and temperature
- water rights
- potential for competitive water use
- soil (chemistry, permeability, compaction)
- predators
- adjacent land uses
- proximity to supporting infrastructure (towns, power, markets, etc.)
- access (roads, bridges)
- potential and severity of major climatic disturbances
- local political, social and economic factors
- leases and permits (required and status of)
- environmental constraints and impacts
M/S6665/E/2.88/1/1000
