<title>Horticultural marketing - a resource and training manual for extension officers</title>
<section>1</section>
Acknowledgments
Reprinted, 1991
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion what so ever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
M-62
ISBN 92-5-102710-2
All rights reserved. No pan of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying or otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner. Applications for such permission, with a statement of the purpose and extent of the reproduction, should be addressed to the Director, Publications Division, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Via delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
(c) FAO 1989
Foreword
If farmers are to increase production, more attention needs to be paid to the fact that their output must be marketed at a rewarding price. Commercialization of the small farm sector requires the development of market-orientated production, as opposed to the occasional sale of subsistence surpluses. Success in commercializing this sector thus depends on the orientation of production to meet market demand and on the removal, or reduction, of a broad range of marketing constraints.
In most countries marketing problems are currently regarded as beyond the scope of field-level agricultural extension workers who are the officers in direct contact with the farmers. Even when extension workers are able to identify marketing problems faced by farmers their lack of expertise in this field, or knowledge of appropriate sources of assistance, makes them unable to help.
This manual, which has been prepared by G. Dixie of High Value Horticulture plc, U.K. on behalf of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), aims to provide appropriate resource and training material on marketing for extension officers working with farmers who produce horticultural produce for both domestic and export markets. Although the manual is too detailed for everyday use by most extension workers, it is hoped that it will be used by agricultural colleges for their training courses in agricultural marketing and, indeed, may encourage such colleges to devote a greater part of their curricula to marketing. Further, it is also expected that this manual will be used by marketing officers working with ministries of agriculture in training field-level extension officers and that it will be a valuable reference work for marketing extension workers where resources permit such specialization. The manual should also prove of value to processing
organizations, traders' associations and others working in the area of horticultural marketing.
The author would like to thank J. Spector for the graphics, C. Penn for the cover photograph and E. Seidler and A. Shepherd of FAO for their comments on the draft. Many others have contributed ideas to this manual, albeit most unknowingly. Due acknowledgement is made to B. Blower, A. El-Beltaqq, E. Burton, L. Koyn, A. Dhriani, M. Mulandi, A. Paldi, O. Karsegard, C. Guichard, K. Martin, K. Thompson, S. New, S. Harris, R. Bond, H. Dhad, G. Hawtin, D. Phillips, R. Watkins, J. Green, H. Khan, Koranteng, G. West, A. Sargent, M. Sargent, J. Nishtar, J. Leggett, Prof. L. Hudson, Ikram Ullah Khan, and many other farmers, traders, officials and scientists whose names are forgotten, but whose wisdom and faces are vividly remembered.
Introduction
As agriculture and society develop, marketing becomes ever more important. In subsistence agriculture a farmer will mainly be feeding himself and his neighbours. The local community's taste and requirements are well understood. Transport and post-harvest losses are not serious problems. As the populations of the cities expand farmers have the added responsibility of feeding not only the rural market but the growing distant urban markets. The farmer therefore has to take on commercial and marketing skills. Marketing is the process by which the space between the producer and the consumer is bridged. The process obviously involves transport and techniques for minimizing crop losses. An effective distribution system will also require the establishment of rural businesses such as truck drivers and packaging manufacturers, contractors and wholesalers. The production/marketing chain is a twoway process. Produce flows from the rural areas into the cities and money and market
information should flow back. As tastes in the city market evolve the rural community can use this market information to target its production accordingly.
In horticultural farming, where prices are rarely regulated, financial viability depends as much upon business and marketing skills as on the farmer's technical expertise. It is high-value crops which are often a crucial component of viable small farms. This manual is a response to that growing farmer need for commercial and marketing knowledge and is an entirely practical handbook. The techniques and advice have been tested and proven in the field.
After an introduction to horticultural marketing in Chapter 1, Chapter 2 gives examples of successful horticultural marketing case studies. The book then covers the three stages in horticultural marketing projects. Research and analysis are discussed in Chapter 3 and decision making and agreeing on an action plan in Chapter 4. Chapter 5 discusses some of the many different actions, activities and functions which can help to resolve marketing problems. Chapter 6 concludes the manual by setting out some of the most common mistakes that have bedevilled marketing projects.
Chapter 1 - The marketing process
What is marketing?
The chairman of one of the world's largest retail groups once said:
Marketing involves finding out what your customers want and supplying it to them at a profit.
This description stresses the two crucial points that govern marketing:
Firstly, that the whole marketing process has to be customer oriented. Production must supply customers with what they want or need. This is the only reason people spend their money.
Secondly, that marketing is a commercial process and is only sustainable if it provides all the participants with a profit.
A more classical definition is:
The series of services involved in moving a product (or commodity) from the point of production to the point of consumption.
This definition emphasizes that agricultural marketing is achieved by a series of processes. In this we include harvesting techniques, the grading and sorting of crops and the packing, transport, storage, processing, distribution and selling of products. These are the mechanics of marketing.
A broader view of marketing is provided by the following definition:
The series of activities involved in making available services and information which influence the desired level of production relative to market requirements, and the movement of the product (or commodity) from the point of production to the point of consumption.
This definition covers the services which should be covered by the extension officer, such as providing information and advice. This role includes:
Finding out what the customer wants
Supplying him at a profit
* collection, evaluation and dissemination of market information;
* assistance in the planning and scheduling of production;
* securing the market for producers, e.g. through contracts with buyers;
* advice on the best practical post-harvest practices;
* coordination of inputs, transport, storage, credit and post-harvest facilities.
Although this definition is more comprehensive it still only describes the activities involved in marketing. The key activity of an extension officer, or any public servant concerned with improving agricultural marketing, is the commercialization of the rural economy. This involves: finding out what the customer wants and helping to set up the production/marketing system which supplies that demand and maximizes the income of rural areas.
Progress is achieved by concerted effort. Very often the marketing officer's role is to take an overview and coordinate the efforts of others.
Why is marketing important?
The importance of good marketing can be conveniently considered from the four different perspectives of the national economy, the farmer, the product and the consumer.
At the national level as societies and countries develop there is a movement of people from the countryside into the towns and cities.
Populations in developing countries are expanding, normally at around three percent a year. Urban populations, however, are expanding on average at about four percent a year. This means that the number of people needing to be fed by the rural communities will double in 16 years. In addition, since the amount of food eaten by each individual normally increases as people become wealthier, the supply of food for the towns and cities will need to double approximately every 10 to 14 years.
This change in population distribution will create new or improved opportunities for both farmers and rural employment, particularly if new roads and improved transport are provided.
Subsistence farming (that is, just providing enough food for the farmer and the immediate family) will become less important. Although proportionately there will be fewer farmers, their role will become ever more important because their task will be to feed the growing urban populations. To do so will require the farmer to become more specialized and more skilled so that more food can be produced. The extension officer's first role in marketing is to guide and assist farmers in the process of change from subsistence farming to commercial farming. There is a role for him or her at each stage in the development of agriculture, encouraging farmers to develop new skills needed to market and sell their produce. Even in highly developed societies where farmers are acknowledged as highly skilled producers they are very often weakest at marketing.
The second important role is to try to secure and maximize rural incomes. The reasons why people move from the countryside into the town vary from country to country and from case to case. Possibly the most important factor is the high relative incomes that can be earned in the towns and on regular employment. An important part of the extension officer's role should be to encourage and help the rural community to take control and develop the marketing of its food products. They should try to ensure that the maximum proportion of the retail price is circulated back to the rural areas.
At the farmer level the most disadvantaged farmers are those with small units of land. These farmers will find that they cannot generate sufficient funds from their small land area to support themselves and their families by growing only traditional crops, e.g. wheat and rice. They will find it difficult to compete with produce grown by large farms using mechanization.
In developed agriculture successful small farms can and do survive. We can learn lessons from their survival. Viable small farms tend to specialize in highoutput enterprises. These are crop or livestock systems which are capable of generating high incomes per unit of land. Typical examples in livestock are dairy and chickens, and in crops are fruit, vegetables and flowers. In the United Kingdom, for example, the average size of a cereal farm is around 120 hectares (300 acres), a dairy farm is 60 hectares (150 acres), a typical field vegetable farm would be about 30 hectares (75 acres), a fruit farm 25 hectares (63 acres) and a glasshouse holding 1.5 hectares (4 acres).
Importance of marketing for the country
The strengths and weaknesses of big and small farms are summarized in Table 1.
It is by understanding the strengths and weaknesses of both groups of farmers that it is possible to promote crops and cropping systems which favour the smaller farm. These growers need help in access to markets, by being provided with good production advice and market information to strengthen their ability to negotiate.
Horticultural products are mainly sold fresh; some are eaten raw while others are cooked. Some horticultural products have traditionally been processed when no other form of storage was available, e.g. dried fruit and jams. As society develops and becomes more affluent the market for processed and prepared horticultural products develops. A market also develops for horticultural products such as flowers and house and garden plants which are sold for purely aesthetic reasons. Increased wealth also brings with it an increased demand for product diversity in the form of new crops, off-season supplies and different flavours.
TABLE 1. Strengths and weaknesses of large and small farms
Small Farms
Strengths
Weaknesses
More labour available, especially family labour, therefore suitable for labour-intensive crops which cannot be mechanized, such as those requiring transplanting. Pruning, training and multiple hand harvesting The need to generate high incomes from small areas
Crops requiring skilled management and attention detail Education standards are often low, difficulty in obtaining, Information, capital and support
Growing for and servicing small specialized markets, e.g. direct sales of herbs, flowers and ornamental plants Weak in negotiation
Need income stability
Large Farms
Strengths
Weaknesses
Mechanized, large-scale agricultural production for major crops like wheat, sugar cane and maize High overhead cost
Crops which require a large capital investment Poor at mobilizing and controlling labour
Selling produce in large volumes to major buyers Low labour numbers per unit area necessitate avoiding time-consuming activities
Horticultural products are perhaps most easily defined as what they are not. They are not cereals or the major industrial crops. Generally, but not exclusively, they are not staple crops. Table 2 lists examples of some of the major horticultural products.
Important characteristics of horticultural crops are:
* that they are mainly eaten for their contribution to the flavour and interest of food and for the supply of minor but essential nutrients, especially vitamins;
* that they are not basic food commodities; people will put off buying if the price is too high;
* that consumption levels vary, depending on the selling price and the income of the buyer,
* that many of the crops are not traded in large volumes and there is a limited market;
* that the products are perishable, which means there is always a reduction in quality if they are not sold immediately, usually leading to a fall in value;
* that there is a wide range and variety of horticultural products (see Table 2). If one product is too highly priced the consumer will generally buy another;
* that the products are normally traded in a very free market where price is determined by supply and demand.
All these factors contribute to the crucial and reoccurring fact about horticultural crops: that prices, and especially the prices the farmers obtain, are variable and difficult to predict.
Take an extreme example, but one that occurs regularly:
A farmer who has high quality tomatoes to sell when few other crops are available may easily get a price equivalent to many times his growing cost. However, a farmer who is trying to sell tomatoes when the market is oversupplied and his fruit is two days old may not be able to sell his produce at all.
Wholesale prices may double or halve in the same day, depending on the skill of the salespeople and on consumer demand.
Horticultural crop prices can fluctuate widely:
* from year to year;
* from the start of the season to the main supply period;
* from day to day; and
* from market to market.
This extreme variance in price makes horticultural production potentially both very profitable and very risky. Often, success depends on marketing skills and on obtaining good prices rather than on production expertise. Table 3 gives an example of the effect that price differences can have on farmer profitability.
TABLE 2. Some major horticultural products
Tree fruit
Orange, lemon, lime, mandarin, grapefruit, apple, mango, banana, guava, soursop, lichee, peach, apricot, pear, plum, rambutan, fig, quince, persimmon, durian, chichu, pawpaw, pomegranate, mangosteen, loquat, carambola, cherimoya, cherry, date, mulberry.
Vine fruit
Grape, passion fruit, kiwi fruit (or Chinese gooseberry).
Other fruit
Strawberry, pineapple, Cape gooseberry, watermelon, sweet melon, raspberry, blackberry, blackcurrant, gooseberry, cranberry, blueberry, rhubarb, loganberry.
Tree nuts
Cashew, walnut, hazelnut, macadamia, pistachio, pecan, coconut, almond, Brazil.
Fruit that are normally considered as vegetables
Breadfruit, avocado, tomato, egg plant (brinjal or aubergines) hot pepper, sweet pepper, karella (or bitter gourd), squash, marrow, gourd, cucumber, luffa, pumpkin, plantain, christophine or choyote.
Vegetables derived from seeds and flowers
Broccoli, cauliflower, artichoke, pea, bean, lentil, chickpea, broad bean, okra, mangetout pea, asparagus pea, yardlong bean, sweetcorn.
Leaf and stem vegetables
Lettuce, cabbage, spinach, chard, brussels sprout, endive, watercress, celery, asparagus, celeriac, green onion, leek, amaranthus, bean sprout, bok choy, Chinese cabbage, Chinese celery, spinach, chicory, kohlrabi, fennel.
Root vegetables
Arrowhead, onion, potato, sweet potato, cassava, yam, taro, garlic, radish, carrot, turnip, parsnip,
beetroot, Jerusalem artichoke, dasheen, eddoe.
Herbs
Parsley, mint, coriander, dill, basil, rosemary, thyme, sage.
Spices
Black pepper, chili pepper, cardamon, ginger, clove, cinnamon, bay leaf, turmeric.
Cut flowers
Rose, chrysanthemum, carnation, gladiolus, tulip, narcissus, orchid.
Cut follage
Asparagus tern, leather feat fern, soft ruscus.
Tropical plants for house and garden
Dieffenbachia, coleus, yucca, cordyline, dracaena, monstera, fatshedera, ficus, maranta.
Temperate plants for garden
Roses, ornamental shrubs, herbaceous flowers, bedding plants, conifers, flowering bulbs.
TABLE 3. Effect of different prices farmer profit
Item 
Farmer A
Farmer B
Farmer C
Farmer D
Income 
Yield/Ha (Kg)
Price/Kg 
Sales 
Costs 
Production 
Marketing 
Gross profit 
Loss
NOTE: Marketing costs will include harvesting, packaging, grading, transport and market commissions.
As Table 3 demonstrates, farmer B made a profit because he was able to sell his produce at a 50 percent higher price than farmer A who just broke even. The example of farmer C shows that sometimes even higher profits can be obtained when lower yields are achieved, for example by off-season production. Sometimes, in situations of over-supply, prices fall so low that farmers are best advised to minimize their loss by not harvesting their crops. Farmer D would have made a lower loss if he had not bothered to harvest and market his produce.
This manual will look at some of the techniques which can be used to maximize farmer prices. These include:
* improving the quality and presentation of the produce;
* identifying the highest price buyer,
* negotiating from strength;
* scheduling production when there is limited competing supply.
Equally important is the extension offficer's role in helping farmers to minimize risks. Generally, risk and profit are related. In other words highly profitable crops are often very risky. We will further explain some of the techniques available to minimize risk, such as:
* selling a proportion of produce at firm contract prices;
* growing a crop range which includes a mix of high and low risk products;
* investing in technology which increases yield stability and therefore income stability.
The importance of good marketing for the consumer
In effect the extension officer has a role as the farmers' lousiness adviser. Very often farmers will already carry out some of these strategies but with discussion the techniques can be improved and new strategies introduced.
The consumer is particularly important. Finding out what the consumer wants and satisfying his demand is the key to successful marketing and, in itself, is a valuable service to society.
Fruit and vegetables are universally considered as vital elements in a healthy diet. Not only do they provide crucial vitamins and proteins, but an increasing weight of medical evidence is demonstrating broader health giving qualities. Some of these are set out below:
* The fibre content of horticultural products is believed to be valuable in preventing heart disease and bowel complaints.
* Vitamin C can help prevent stomach cancer and gum disease.
* Vitamin D, in the vegetable-derived carotene, may reduce the incidence of lung cancer.
* Lack of vitamin A causes children to go blind. Research in Indonesia showed that even well-nourished children who lack Vitamin A had greater risk of illness and even death than undernourished children with an adequate Vitamin A supply. Vitamin A is available from dark green leaf vegetables, tomatoes, carrots, pumpkins, papaya and sweet potatoes.
Generally the amount of fruit and vegetables eaten is relatively low in the developing world. The low consumption levels are normally blamed on high prices. An efficient marketing system which minimizes transport costs and particularly wastage will significantly lower retail prices. It is the challenging task of the extension officer to accelerate the introduction of more efficient marketing processes which will lead to the lowering of consumer prices. As a result of lower prices, consumption will increase, which will offer the potential for expanded production.
Summary
This chapter has explained how urban markets will inevitably become bigger and more important. In addition to improved agricultural skills, farmers in the future will have to take on greater commercial skills.
Profitable production, particularly of high value crops, depends on supplying the customers with what they want. With the increased distances between the area of production and the points of consumption, systems will have to be set up to:
* deliver produce regularly and reliably to the market;
* provide a feed-back of information between the market and the growers so that production can be constantly oriented towards consumer demand.
It is up to the extension officer to use both ingenuity and intelligence to ensure that the maximum proportion of the retail price of food is returned to the rural community. Efficient marketing will reduce the cost of fresh produce, bringing with it improvements in the nation's health as well as expanding the market for high-value crops, which are themselves a crucial component of viable small-farmer systems.
Chapter 2 - Successful case studies in horticultural marketing
Introduction
In this chapter are six examples of how market knowledge has been used to significantly improve farmers' incomes. These examples cover the range of development of market-oriented horticultural production. They begin with an example of farmers starting to sell their products for the first time. Three examples then show how farmers in the developing world have improved marketing and thereby increased their incomes. Finally, two horticultural export examples are cited, in the first where a country started horticultural exports and the second where improved quality control helped an exporting country to maintain its market share. These case studies are not necessarily to be copied but it is important to study the techniques and skills used and how the farmers adapted their production and distribution to meet the needs of their customers.
Case 1 - Starting marketing, Hunza, northern Pakistan
Perspective
The high altitude areas of Pakistan, such as Hunza, were brought into contact with the major markets in the Punjab Plain by the building of the Karakoram Highway. The major crops grown were apricots, which were mainly dried, and some other deciduous fruits. Apart from very small volumes sold in the local markets, farmers only grew crops for their own needs. They had no experience or expertise of marketing and were completely unaware of prices, transport costs and the packaging and grading required by the major markets in Rawalpindi and Lahore. In addition they had no knowledge of how fruit was marketed let alone the names of reputable traders and their typical terms of trade. Because of the arduous nature of their living conditions there was close cooperation between families and the extreme isolation of the villages served to build a strong sense of community.
Action
As part of a large rural development project the villages were asked to form committees and to elect individuals for specific responsibilities, including one for marketing. The village marketing agents were called together and given specialist training. The responsibilities of the job were explained to them. These were to collect, transport and sell the villages' produce in the city markets. The agents would return to the growers the prices received less apportioned costs and a percentage commission. They were taken on a study tour of the potential markets to observe quality, price and market mechanisms and to help identify potential trading partners.
Selected traders and commission agents were invited to Hunza to train the village marketing agents in how they wanted the produce picked, packed and presented. The village agents then had the responsibility of training the growers in their area.
Prior to harvest, packaging and transport were organized and the agents, as planned, sold the produce in the main markets of the northern Punjab plain.
Result
The villages sold commercial volumes of produce for the first time ever. This has not only provided a cash income but also encouraged further developments in both production and processing. It is interesting to note that some of Hunza's dried apricots have been exported to European health food shops. They are in demand because they have been grown without either chemical fertilizer or pesticide.
Important notes
1. The new road opened up marketing opportunities.
2. The isolated nature of the villages made the growers particularly suitable for group marketing as they already had the necessary level of mutual trust. They also understood that they would have to work together if they were to succeed.
3. As this was an entirely new enterprise it was relatively easy to introduce a new marketing system which was both cooperative and provided a profit incentive for the village marketing agent.
4. The traders and commission agents were encouraged to assist and provide training, which they were prepared to do as it was in their own best interests. They recognized that new sources of supply would benefit their businesses.
<section>2</section>
Case 2 - Loose cooperation to fully exploit market opportunities, Al Bayda, Yemen
Perspective
In the Yemen Arab Republic onions have traditionally been supplied from Al Mawsa on the Tihama Plain and from the mountain plateau. The supply pattern was seasonal, the yield relatively poor and the quality low. In an area northeast of Al Bayda, in the southeast corner of Yemen, a farmer had experimentally introduced onions in 1978. The crop had proved ideally suited to the area. As a result of ideal agronomic conditions incredible yields were achieved, about 120 tonnes per hectare. The quality was excellent and harvesting was possible throughout the year. All the growers in the area took up onion production and transported the onions in one-tonne trucks to the distant city markets.
Action
Clearly the growers had a comparative advantage in onion production over other farmers in this part of the Arabian peninsula. The challenge was to exploit this advantage fully. All the growers belonged to the same tribe and the tribal chief was encouraged to play a leading role in organizing them. Firstly, they agreed to coordinate their transport, so instead of sending small volumes of produce to the market in one-tonne pick-up trucks, which cost 0.5 Yemeni rials per kg, they decided to hire eight-tonne lorries. This reduced the transport cost to 0.2 Yemeni rials per kg. Instead of just growing the highyielding variety of onion (Texas Grano) the growers also grew an Indian red variety (Red Puna) which had significantly better keeping qualities. The growers coordinated their growing in order to achieve a smooth supply of onions throughout the year After harvest the produce was allowed to dry for three days and packed into 25-kg sacks to await collection at the side of the
road.
Result
The eight-tonne trucks were sent to market with both Red Puna and Texas Grano onions packed in separate sacks. The farmers never sent more than one lorry to each of the main markets at one time, thus ensuring that they did not oversupply the market. Instead of delivering their produce to wholesalers the truck driver and the grower representative would sell the onions by the bag off the back of the lorry direct to retailers. Normally the onions with the shorter shelf life were sold first, and the longer-storing varieties were stored at the back of the lorry for later sales. Table 4 demonstrates that this approach to marketing, i.e. collective transport and direct sales, improved grower returns by over 40 percent.
By making bulk shipments and having a product mix which ensured a relatively long shelf life the farmers could afford to carry out their own marketing. Because of their much lower costs of production the Al Bayda growers could undercut the other suppliers. They used this to attract custom away from the traditional wholesalers. By coordinating the supply to all the markets they ensured that the markets were never glutted and thus maintained good prices. Both the social pressure of being a member of the tribe and the improved prices prevented growers from attempting to market individually.
It is interesting to note that this farmer group had also registered itself as a cooperative in the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen, the border between these two countries being very indistinct. Whenever they heard by radio that the prices were higher there, they would redirect their transport accordingly.
TABLE 4. A comparison of farmer prices for onions from Al Bayda & Al Mausa, Yemen
At Bayda
Al Mawsa
Item 
Direct sale
Via wholesaler
Retail price 
Retail margin 
Wholesale price 
Wholesale margin
Transport costs 
Sack cost 
Farmer price 
Important notes
1. The tribal chief imposed the necessary collectivism and discipline on the growers in terms of varieties grown, programming production and trusting the farmer representative who undertook the selling on their behalf.
2. The growers had sufficient comparative advantage and market strength to sell direct and not through the normal wholesaler system. Initially they could afford to offer onions at lower prices than wholesalers which gave the retailer the chance of a higher profit margin.
3. The farmers kept themselves well informed on the market by an information network, which included radio, telephone messages to the nearest town and messengers so that further lorryloads were dispatched when market supplies were getting low.
Case 3 - Market-oriented production by an individual small farmer, Antigua
Perspective
This case study is taken from a small island in the Caribbean with a population of 70 000. The main industry is tourism. Most vegetable growers planted their crops at traditional times of the year. The supply pattern had become increasingly seasonal with major supplies arriving on the market from October through to December while during the period April to August domestic supplies of vegetable commodities were insignificant. Prices fluctuated greatly depending on whether the vegetables were in or out of season. There was a strong demand, particularly from the catering trade, for offseason vegetables.
Action
One taxi driver and part-dine farmer recognized the opportunities for high prices if he could provide off-season vegetables consistently. He was not in a position of m eke any investment in machinery. His only capital investment was a crop sprayer. Ploughing and soil cultivation was carried out by a neighbouring farmer on contract. He did have his own transport which provided opportunities to deliver produce direct and establish close contacts with buyers.
The farmer purposely planted his vegetable crops when the majority of growers were not growing. To save labour costs for weeding end to conserve moisture-and therefore extend production into the dry season-he developed a production technique using weedkiller. In the early crop stages he would cover the plants with large tins and spray the entire field. Later he would use a spray hood to ensure that there was no crop damage. The dead weeds acted as a mulch to conserve moisture as well as giving other benefits such as weed suppression, soil temperature moderation and protection against erosion.
Result
Off-season vegetable production was achieved with minimal investment in equipment or labour. High prices were obtained by direct sales to supermarkets, hotels and restaurants. Increasingly the farmer plans his crops to match the requirements of his buyers. The farmer has now invested in a pick-up truck and become a full-time farmer. He rents out his taxi cab to a driver at a profit.
Important notes
1. The farmer organized his production to meet the demands of the buyers.
2. He minimized his risk by keeping his production costs strictly under control. Investments were kept to a minimum. Money was spent on a sprayer and crop protection chemicals which would ensure him a harvest.
3. He has intelligently utilized his resources, land, transport and good contacts with the hotel trade.
4. This approach would only suit individual farmers or a small group of farmers. If too many farmers concentrate on this relatively small, high price, off-season market then prices will fall.
Case 4 - Large successful farmer exploiting new technology and a changing market, Egypt
Perspective
In Egypt there have been significant changes recently in the marketing of horticultural produce. Firstly, the major wholesale market in Cairo is so overcrowded that an increasing proportion of produce is by-passing the market and being sold direct. Although the bulk of the produce is still sold by street stalls there is a growing demand amongst the wealthy for higher quality produce. Specialist shops and supermarkets represent new and developing points of sale. Secondly, with regard to production there has been an expansion in the use of walk-in and low polythene tunnels. Tomatoes, cucumbers, peppers and sweet melons can now be supplied virtually all the year round. Growing under polythene tunnels has also improved the quality of produce. A new exchange rate policy has improved the viability of exporting produce. The transport links to external markets are constantly improving.
Action
One farmer had made a significant investment in walk-in tunnels. His financial viability depended on maximizing his income as his level of fixed costs, or overheads, was much above those of small farmers. In order to maintain his profit levels he pursued a policy with two major objectives.
Firstly, he aimed at maximizing his yields. He gave his staff specialist responsibilities with specific targets. For example, each group of six tunnels had an individual manager who was given a bonus if his tunnels could yield above a target.
Secondly, he completely changed his marketing policy. He recognized that his business had special advantages which could be exploited. He could supply crops over an extended season and he could produce high quality crops. He also recognized that he could reduce the risk from changes in market prices by selling his produce through a number of different outlets.
He established contact with supermarkets in Cairo and agreed to supply them with his top-quality produce. Depending on the requirements of the individual shops crops were sold either packed in reusable plastic boxes, or prepacked in one-kg nets. Supermarket sales accounted for 40 percent of his sales.
He also arranged with exporters to take another 15 percent of his produce. This was sold both to the European and Arabian markets. From the outset a firm policy was taken on prices to save management time and disputes. Supermarkets were charged 10 percent over the wholesale price and exporters 15 percent.
Finally, he arranged a contract with a supermarket in Kuwait to supply Iceberg lettuce for nine months. The contract guaranteed a minimum payment which would cover his growing costs, so the financial risk of growing this new crop was removed. This crop accounted for about 5 percent of his planned production.
The remaining 40 percent was sold to the traditional wholesale markets.
Result
Sales income increased so much that the business has paid off its capital investment in two years rather than the planned three. The success of the marketing venture has encouraged the company to establish its own marketing operation. The business has further diversified into supplying planting material to the surrounding small growers. The long-term aim will be to use the supply of elite planting material coupled with the services of the marketing company to be able to programme the production and centrally market the produce of the surrounding small farms to both the local market and the export markets of the Gulf.
Important notes
1. The prices of off-season fruit and vegetables normally go through three phases. In the very first season when the produce arrives at the market outside the normal period it is treated with suspicion and often disappointing prices are obtained. Once this suspicion has been overcome prices improve dramatically. Excellent profits can be made by those who have invested early in the technology. However, as more growers start growing off-season crops, prices will fall. Sometimes over-production can occur and prices can drop below the cost of production. In this example we have seen how one grower has responded to this third phase (over-production) in the development of off-season technology.
2. The grower managed to sell direct to supermarkets by using his three special advantages. He could produce a quality product over an extended season and had the transport to deliver direct. Although this was more expensive for supermarkets than buying from the wholesale market they were prepared to pay the extra money because of the convenience. Supply was guaranteed and the buyers only had to quote on the telephone what volume of crops they required.
3. Contract production for supermarkets is a highly advanced method of marketing and is particularly well developed in the USA. As this was a risky venture in the first year, the farmer negotiated a contract which would cover the production costs of lettuce, even if no produce was shipped. The risk was completely eliminated.
4. With his organized office, telephone and telex facilities he could successfully deal in these four different markets and thus spread his risk.
5. Large growers with a number of regular, wage-earning staff and a large investment in capital equipment carry high fixed costs or overheads (i.e. those costs which always have to be paid whatever crops are grown). In small farms most of the labour is carried out by members of the family. They generally have lower fixed costs and can therefore produce some crops cheaper than large farmers. The advantages are particularly noticeable in labour-intensive crops.
Case 5 - Starting a fresh fruit and vegetable export operation, Antigua
Perspective
Antigua is a small island in the West Indies. Three times a week a 747 jumbo jet lands enroute to London with spare cargo capacity. During the winter months, November to March, there was an oversupply of tomatoes and cucumbers owing to a government fixed-price buying scheme. These crops were being dumped at a high cost to the government. The country wanted to export the surplus production to the United Kingdom.
Action
A survey of the British market immediately revealed that Antiguan tomatoes and cucumbers could not compete in terms of either quality or price. However, the market research did indicate that there was a demand from the Asian and West Indian community for special tropical fruits and vegetables, many of which are grown in Antigua. Market opportunities were identified for green mangoes, okra, chill) peppers, scotch bonnet peppers (a specialist hot pepper) and even for a plant locally thought to be a weed, called bitter gourd or karella. A special airfreight rate was negotiated with the airline for regular shipments of over a tonne of horticultural produce. This was well below the normal cargo rate. Preliminary financial calculations suggested that these crops could be exported profitably. All the interested importers requested samples. Examples of suitable cardboard cartons were taken from the British market for copying by a Caribbean packaging company. In order to impress on
the farming community the quality of produce required by the export market, samples of competing products were airfreighted back to Antigua.
It was agreed that the next step was to carry out a test marketing programme. Independent advice was soughs to identify reputable importers amongst those which had expressed a keen interest in obtaining Antiguan produce. Sample consignments were sent to a panel of six importers:
* to give them an opportunity to provide advice and feedback on how product quality and presentation could be improved;
* to see what actual prices would be obtained; and
* to select which importer was most suitable to handle Antiguan exports.
At the end of the test marketing programme one wholesaler/importer was chosen because he specifically supplied the West Indian community and was well placed to market Antiguan horticultural produce. During negotiations he was persuaded to open an irrevocable letter of credit at a local bank for negotiated fixed prices. Although this price was less than the average wholesale price which might be resumed on a consignment basis it did guarantee a level of profit and thus minimized risk.
Working with the importer the requirements in terms of volume, quality and seasonality for the selected products were agreed on. This was translated into a production programme and each export farmer was provided with the correct seed, production notes and dates and areas for ploughing and planting. Contracts were signed with the farmers, setting out buying prices for stipulated quantities and qualities. Export cartons were manufactured and supplied in advance and a simple grading table made.
Result
During the first season about two tonnes a week, mainly of scotch bonnet peppers and okra, were exported. In the subsequent seasons exports continued with the bulk of sales being made direct to a retail chain. This has increased prices. As a result of the new markets the government reduced and finally stopped paying fixed prices for surplus vegetables. The high incomes of export farmers and the status they achieved by being seen to export successfully resulted in a number of young men resuming to farming. In the mid 1980s a refrigerated container shipping service bringing meat for the tourist trade from North America started to visit Antigua. The empty containers on the return voyage are now being used to export cucumbers. This is an even bigger export operation but it has been built on the experiences and successes of the airfreighted horticultural exports.
Important notes
1. Cheap transport links were available.
2. The export crops were identified according to the market demand.
3. The wholesaler/importer was carefully selected on the basis of both reputation and his performance in the test marketing programme.
4. The test marketing programme enabled farmers and staff to learn by experience how to undertake all the necessary production and post-harvest operations on a small scale. Test marketing also enabled confidence to be built based on actual prices obtained in the market before any major investments were made.
5. Once selected, the export operation was planned in partnership with the importer.
6. The initial season's fixed prices, although not the highest obtainable, did guarantee a small profit and therefore minimized the project's risk.
7. The farmers were given a contract which made a commitment on both sides. The exporter was committed to buying the produce while the grower was committed to planting according to the production programme. He was also given seed of the correct variety as well as agronomic advice.
8. The staff of the export operation were highly motivated and worked overtime to make sure shipments were prepared on time.
9. A financial recording system was designed to demonstrate exactly how the export operation was performing.
10. The export programme evolved from research through decision making into an action programme. This started on a trial basis and expanded into commercial production. The young project officer-acting as a marketing extension agentgained credibility early in the project by negotiating the significantly lower cargo rates for horticultural produce. As a result his advice and guidance on the major issues of the project were more readily accepted.
Case 6 - Improving horticultural exports, Kenya
Perspective
Kenya has been successfully exporting fruit and vegetables to Europe by air for over a decade. The volumes sold now exceed 40 000 tonnes. In 1983 the European importers commented that improvements were needed in the quality of produce, particularly in view of increased competition from other suppliers. The main crops sold are fine and extra fine french beans, a range of Asian vegetables, avocadoes, strawberries, passion fruit, extra large pineapples and cut flowers. Export production is carried out by small farmers, large farmers and cooperatives. Most exports are made by private Kenyan companies. The Horticultural Crops Development Agency (HCDA) is a government-backed organization which carries out some exports on its own account to fund its role as the representative of the private exporters. The HCDA decided to act on improving quality standards.
Action
Discussions with the government crop inspectors and importers in Europe showed that most of the grading problems occurred at the beginning of the season. A frequent complaint was that mixed sizes were being packed together. Field observation showed that:
* even very perishable crops like french beans were being left out in the sun;
* new field workers had difficulty grading correctly into fine and extra fine beans;
* tree and vine crops like avocadoes and passion fruit were picked into sacks and subsequently graded into export quality. Significant skin scuffing occurred.
Field trials were undertaken whereby pickers covered their beans with a damp cloth in the field and field storage was in a tent clad in dampened material. This enabled the latent heat of evaporation, i.e. the cooling effect of water evaporating, combined with the shade, to prevent heat build up in the produce. Slide photographs were taken after one, three and five days to show the differences between the various post-harvest handling systems (see colour insert).
Strict sizing specifications differentiate fine and extra fine beans. Extra fine beans must be longer than 100 mm but thinner than 6 mm while a fine bean must be thinner than 9 mm. In order to enable new graders to check these sizes at the start of the season a stick was made 100 mm long tapering from 9 mm width at one end to 6 mm. This could be made out of tin, wood or cardboard and was provided to new pickers to help them measure beans into the correct sizes.
A bean measuring stick for checking grades
For harvesting above the waist a picking bag was required. This could be made out of a kanga--a shawl universally available in Kenya. Two comers were tied over the neck and the other two corners were tied up to the shoulders to make a bag. Into the bag were placed two three-kg cardboard boxes. Pickers picked and graded as they worked. The skin damage to the harvested crop was reduced and high work rates were possible because the bag was comfortable to work with (see colour insert).
Result
Having established that there were some relatively simple and inexpensive steps that the export industry could take to improve its performance, the HCDA decided to communicate these findings and recommendations in the form of a conference before the start of the export season. The exporters passed on the improved post-harvest handling techniques to their growers. Importers in Europe reported a significant improvement in Kenyan export qualities.
Important notes
1. The general problems were known but the specific problems were only identified from field research, observation and discussions.
2. The recommendations were all simple and inexpensive and were of benefit to all in the industry.
3. The improved post-harvest methods were communicated to the exporters rather than directly to growers as growers were more prepared to accept advice from the buyers of their crop. 4. Improving the reputation of Kenyan produce was seen to be a benefit to all the individual exporters.
<section>3</section>
Chapter 3 - The basic preparatory work
Introduction
The marketing/asks of an extension officer can be conveniently divided into three stages.
The first stage is research and analysis. Put more simply this means finding out the problems and opportunities of horticultural growers in the area. It involves talking to growers and traders, finding out prices, understanding how the marketing system works and investigating how the farmers can increase their income by selling crops. This chapter covers the research which can be undertaken and the methods of analysing the situation.
The second stage is deciding what to do and, more importantly, getting agreement from those involved on the best course of action. Obviously, correct decisions are dependent on how thoroughly the first stage has been carried out. Deciding what to do is discussed in Chapter 4.
The third stage is converting the plan into action. This stage will involve not only providing marketing advice to farmers, but also to the businesses in the production/marketing chain. The different roles that the extension officer can take on are discussed in Chapter 5.
The research and analysis phase of the work can itself be easily divided into three steps.
The first involves carrying out an investigation of the area/region/country. The work will need to cover everything from crop production to transport links to the market. The extension officer should attempt to find comparative advantages in his area and identify problems which need to be overcome.
The second step is to find out from the market what product or products are wanted and in what form. The work involves market research and is concerned with finding out the customers' (both traders and consumers) requirements.
The third step covers understanding how the marketing system works, who is involved and how it wants to be serviced.
It is very important to take notes during the research phase. Questionnaires and checklists of questions will assist in carrying out the work systematically and reduce the chances of not asking a critical question.
Phase 1 - The audit of local resources and facilities
The objective is for the extension officer to thoroughly familiarise him or herself with both the problems (or constraints) as well as the opportunities (or main selling points) of the area. Set out below is a checklist of most of the important questions that should be answered.
It is very important to speak to farmers. In particular the extension officers should ensure they meet average and small farmers. Generally farmers have a good understanding of their problems and are delighted to have an opportunity to talk. The extension officer's role is to listen and learn. He or she should try to understand how farmers might react to new ideas and which farmers are likely to be most positive. The extension officer should find out where farmers meet to discuss matters and whose opinions they particularly respect.
At the end of this stage the extension officer should have a clear idea of the crops, the marketing system, the individuals and the problems of the area. He or she will also have some idea of some possible solutions which are worth investigating. The break-even price of delivering produce to the most likely markets should have been calculated.
<section>4</section>
Phase 2 - What the market wants in terms of product - now and in the future
Phase 2 involves finding out what the customer wants. By customer we refer to the individuals in the marketing chain who buy and sell the produce, as well as the final consumer. We need to know who currently supplies the market, at what times and at what prices? Also, what volumes are sold and how the produce is packed and presented. As the objective in most eases will be either to start or to increase the supply of produce the extension officer should try to understand what the effect of this will be on the market. It could, for example, result in oversupply which will force down prices or it may supply a previously unsatisfied demand, which of course is the ideal situation. The critical questions are: what volume can sold; during which periods is it best to supply the market; and how should the produce be graded and packed?
Building up answers to these questions is again a process of information gathering. The sources are varied and certainly no single source is satisfactory. The extension officer should seek opinions from knowledgeable individuals, particularly those who are commercially involved with trading. In addition there are often valuable statistics which should be collected such as price data or information on the volumes of produce delivered to the market. As the extension officer becomes more experienced his own observations are extremely valuable. It is very important to cross check information whenever possible. Even then views will be contradictory. This is because an individuals' views are often narrow and prejudiced. The extension officer should aim to become an expert in the market's requirements and become the eyes and ears in the market on behalf of the farmers he or she represents.
FINDING OUT GOOD POINTS & SAD POINTS BY TALKING TO:
CHECKLIST OF QUESTIONS IN THE PRODUCTION AREA
Product Information
What are the main horticultural crops grown and what varieties? When are they harvested? Where are the crops grown; are there specialist production zones?
When are they harvested?
Do these crops have any advantages over other areas' supplies in terms of yield, quality, price, seasonality?
What are typical yields per unit area and what prices are farmers currently receiving?
Is the produce graded; if so why and into what grades?
Is the produce packed into any packaging material; if so what type, size and cost?
What prices do farmers think are poor, break-even, average and good for the crop?
What are the costs of growing, harvesting and transporting the crop?
Are any new technologies or techniques being tried on these crops and are they successful?
What volumes are produced locally?
What are the main production problems?
Input supply
Are the correct seeds, fertilizers, sprays and boxes readily available for ail farmers?
Are these inputs of the correct quality? Do input suppliers provide advice to growers, and if so, how good Is the advice?
Can farmers readily obtain equipment such as soil cultivation machinery and sprayers, either to buy or to hire?
Do farmers have the money to pay for these inputs?
Is it possible for farmers to obtain shortterrn and long-term credit?
What are the sources of credit; what security Is required and how available is the finance e.g. banks, relatives, input suppliers or middle men?
Local marketing system
How is the crop marketed at present? Who buys and when?
Who are the most important middlemen or buyers?
Which buyers have the best reputation? What prices are paid?
Is there competition between buyers?
Is there a great difference between the prices that farmers receive and if so why?
Do buyers provide credit to farmers?
How is produce transported to the market?
What are the main markets where produce Is sold?
Who carries out the transportation? How much is carried?
What Is the unit price of to the different markets?
How long do the journeys take?
How frequently does transport leave the area?
How good are the transport links and are there any planned or recent Improvements to them?
How much contact do farmers have with the market?
What is their source of market information and how quickly do they obtain market news, particularly on prices but also on volumes required and quality requirements?
What complaints do farmers have about the middlemen?
What complaints do middlemen have about farmers?
Underutilized local resources
Are there any local resources/facilities which are not being fully utilized e.g. food processing, empty returning transport, storage/cool room facilities, box manufacture, local radio, central telephone links with markets?
The farming community
Who are the leaders of the farmeng community?
Who is being especially successful and why?
Do farmers think they need help in marketing and if so what type of help?
Product knowledge and market segmentation
At the outset it is important to understand the role of the crops in the diet and in the market, i.e. what the product is used for, how the product is normally sold and to whom?
The first question is how is the product used. Is it eaten fresh or is it cooked or processed (or prepared) before being sold? Typically, if a product is to be eaten fresh then the quality requirements, especially in appearance, are high. Sometimes a product which is going to be processed before being sold to the final consumer need not have such a high quality standard e.g. where the manufacture of pickles and fresh juices is involved. If, however, a hotel or restaurant is buying, it may demand the highest quality standards.
GAIN PRODUCT KNOWLEDGE FROM TALKING TO:
The role of the crop in the diet will affect its sales and marketing characteristics. Some crops are basic and major ingredients in the diet (e.g. yams, cassava, potatoes), others are normally purchased when they are perceived as good value. Some are used in small quantities for their flavour (e.g. garlic, chili peppers) while other products are luxury crops (e.g. asparagus, strawberries).
The sales of basic ingredients as a whole are not greatly affected by changes in price. They are termed "price inelastic".
The volumes of sales of herbs, spices or condiments are also largely unaffected by price. In practice this means that when supplies are short very high prices can be obtained. In situations of oversupply the prices drop dramatically because lower prices do not stimulate sales. As a result these crops are risky to grow.
The amounts of individual fruit and vegetables sold are affected by their price. In practice most consumers shop for what they consider value for money. If, for example, oranges cost less than apples then consumers will buy more oranges. This is called substitution buying. Although higher prices are an advantage to growers they will also mean that sales are limited. If produce can be delivered to the market at a price which is below that of other competing products and still be profitable, sales will generally be increased.
The market for high priced luxury items is limited, particularly in developing countries, unless there is a tourist trade. As a society develops and becomes wealthier, the demand for luxury items increases. These products are called "income elastic", which means that sales increase as incomes rise. These luxury items, linked to high incomes, include food items as well as garden and house plants and flowers. Normally sales of products such as fruit, for example, tend to increase as a society becomes wealthier. Sales of processed convenience foods, such as canned vegetable soups and snacks, also tend to increase as consumers want to save themselves preparation time.
Climate can effect sales. During hot weather vegetables which are cooked may not be demanded, while the sales of refreshing crops like juicy fruits or salad vegetables may increase. Festivals such as Ramadan or Christmas can significantly affect sales, particularly for fruits.
Prices
Price information is a critical part of market research. Prices can normally be used not only to show how much the farmer should receive for his produce but, in a free market (i.e. one in which prices are not regulated), also what worth customers put on the crop.
The problem is that prices of horticultural crops vary from day to day. Past prices are no guarantee of the prices which will be obtained in the future. Analysis of them will give guide prices for the future to be used in budgeting. Perhaps more importantly price analysis will also give an indication of the typical seasonality of prices and therefore show the best time to market crops.
There are normally two sources of price data, official price data and typical prices provided by the wholesalers. Official data is often recorded inaccurately and wholesalers must be considered an unreliable source of price data.
TABLE 5. Cauliflower prices - wholesale market, Lahore, Pakistan In rupees per 40 kg
Year 
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
Overall Average
Dec-Mar Average
Total 
Averages
Nevertheless, provided the extension offficer understands the weaknesses of price analysis in predicting future prices, the work needs to be done to give a broad idea of typical prices and seasonal price patterns.
Seasonal price patterns
Table 5 shows official wholesale price data collected in Pakistan. In this example the average monthly price for the last six years has been recorded for cauliflowers in the Lahore market. Because of the variation from year to year it is important to try to average out these differences by analysing the figures for a number of years. Six years is probably the maximum number of years worth examining. In practice data, if available, usually only covers two or three years.
In this example the monthly price data have been added and then divided by the number of observations, to give a monthly average. These have been set out on Graph 1 and show the classic price pattern of exceptionally high prices at the start of the season. This is a measure of the build up in demand during the off season. The earliest crops nearly always obtain the highest prices. As supplies build up, prices rapidly fall. In this example, during the peak supply period, December to March, the average prices are about 75 rupees per 40 kg. At the end of the season, as supplies diminish, the price rises again, but not to the same level as at the start. The same analysis has been carried out for two other markets (Hyderabad and Peshawar) and plotted on the "Mph. The results show that Lahore is the highest priced market and Peshawar the lowest. Hyderabad only has cauliflower available from October to February.
Accurate interpretation of the figures depends on a broad knowledge of the country, the different climates and the wealth of the consumers. Lahore has broadly the same climate as Peshawar but is a wealthier society. Consumers can afford to pay higher prices for vegetables but they are also more discriminating and demand a higher quality product. Therefore, provided the transport costs can be covered, Lahore would be a promising market for cauliflowers, particularly for the first quality. The lower grades could be sent to Peshawar. Hyderabad has a much hotter climate and local production is limited to the coldest winter months. Experimentally it may therefore be worth sending cauliflowers, particularly at the start and at the end of the season, to try and take advantage of high off-season prices. Because high prices are dependent on making sales to the wealthiest consumers, top quality, well-packaged crops should be sent.
Averaging prices
In Table 5 the overall average price for each year is set out. This is an unweighted average which means no account is made of the fact that proportionately very little produce is sold at the high prices-as a result this average price is above the normal farmer price. A weighted average canonry be calculated if you have both the price and the volume of sales figures for a period, e.g. monthly. Such data is rarely available. When weighted averages cannot be calculated the average price during the main supply season is generally used, i.e. November to March in Table 5. Here the average is 78 rupees as opposed to the overall average of 97. Sometimes annual crops show a pattern of one high-priced year followed by a low priced one. This is a common phenomenom caused by many farmers seeing that one crop has achieved high prices and deciding to grow it themselves in the following year. The result is oversupply in the next year. There is a saying amongst market gardeners in northern
Europe that you "should never follow a good market".
With longer term crops such as tree fruits growers will of fen respond by planting trees because existing prices are high. As this is so often a collective response, when the new trees start cropping prices tend to drop.
Price rises and inflation
In Table 5 it is noticeable that prices have in the main been increasing. There are two explanations for this:
Either there is increasing demand which has caused prices to rise (this may be due either to a reduction in production, which is generally an uncommon explanation or to consumers wanting to buy more cauliflowers);
Or because of inflation, which is a general trend of price increases.
Inflation is normally the major contributor to price increases. It is important to see whether prices have in general been increasing faster than inflation. If this has been happening it is probably owing to increasing demand and therefore indicates good opportunities for more supplies. If, however, prices have not increased as fast as inflation this would suggest that further supplies will reduce the prices in real terms.
To try to establish an average rate of increase, the average main season price for the first three seasons has been calculated as 66.66 rupees, while the main season average for the last three seasons is 90 rupees. This price increase has occurred, in effect, over three seasons. The average annual percentage price increase is calculated as follows:
Av. price (82-85) - Av. price (79-82) x 100
Av. price (79-82)
i.e. [(90-66.66) x 100]/66.66 = 35% over 3 years or 10.5% p.a
(figures taken from Table 5)
The question that needs to be asked is whether this annual price increase (10.5 percent) is above or below the inflation percentage.
Finally the extension officer will need to calculate the likely future price. This can most simply be done by drawing a graph with the two average prices marked. A straight line is drawn between the two points end projected into the future. The forecast future prices can be read off the graph.
Graph 1 - Comparison the average wholesale price of cauliflower 1979/80 to 1984/85 for three markets
In practice, although this method is useful as it gives a guide to what price might be achieved, it is much better to surprise than to disappoint. It is advisable to use a lower budget price for farmers.
Strengths and weaknesses of official and unofficial prices
By analysing price statistics it is possible to show price patterns and predict months when high prices can be achieved. Analysis shows whether prices are going up faster or slower than inflation and, using these figures, it is possible to predict likely future prices. As explained earlier, past prices do not necessarily reflect future prices. Horticultural marketing is like gambling: careful analysis helps improve the odds in favour of the grower However statistics are very often inaccurate.
Plotting a price trend
Some of the common reasons for inaccuracy are that:
* the official prices that are gathered are normally those at the peak of the market sales, rarefy do they reflect the much lower prices of sales made at the end of the day;
* the staff collecting the information are rarely trained and often have no appreciation of the potential uses of the information. Sometimes there are inconsistencies between the collectors. For example one person may collect the top prices for first-class produce while another gathers average prices;
* sometimes the prices quoted are what the official price should be not the price that the produce is actually sold at.
The extension officer should be aware that the prices collected are the prices obtained by the wholesaler or commission agent not what the farmer will get. Commissions, margins, market charges and marketing costs will have to be deducted.
Price data must be viewed with scepticism. Most confidence can be placed in the general price patterns but not necessarily the actual figures. With experience, when price patterns are drawn up on graphs, it is possible to learn a lot about the supply patterns to the market by remembering that in general high prices indicate low volumes and vice versa. This understanding can be helped by drawing graphs of the supply pattern. An example is set out in Graph 2.
Price data should also be collected from middlemen, be they orchard contractors, commission agents or wholesalers. This is essential in order to compare and check official price data. In the absence of official statistics, such people are the only source of price information.
For commercial reasons middlemen will often give distorted price information. For example, a middleman who sells on a commission basis will tend to exaggerate prices as it is in his best interests to encourage sales. Conversely a middleman who buys produce will often underestimate prices to discourage further supplies if he thinks this will provide competition.
Most middlemen make their money in spot trading, that is buying and selling produce at a profit on a daily basis. Although they will know the prices over the last few days they are usually unaware of how prices have changed over the last few years. They are normally very poor at identifying long-term market trends.
Supply and volume
Production statistics. The quality and detail of production statistics varies considerably from country to country. Regional or provincial statistics giving crop areas can help to identify the major producing areas and their relative importance. This is useful in identifying competing areas. Some statistics will also give tonnages of crops produced. These figures are notoriously unreliable as they have to be based on crop areas multiplied by an estimate of yield. Yield figures used are often little more than guesses.
Supply figures. Occasionally statistics are available on the monthly supply of individual product to the market. When plotted on a graph this can show times when market supplies are low. Graph 3 shows that mango imports are in short supply in the United Arab Emirates market from October to March.
Graph 2 - Monthly sales & wholesale prices for Imported grapes Kuwait, 1982
Graph 3 - Monthly Imports of mangoes Into the United Arab Emirates, 1985
Graph 4 - Comparison of the average wholesale prices of tomatoes 1979/80 to 1984/85 for three markets
Estimated supply patterns for tomatoes
Graph 5 - Diagramatic view of vegetables seasonality in Near East
It is possible to be able to 'read' from price data the typical supply patterns. Graph 4 sets out the price of tomatoes in three major markets in Pakistan with different climates. Hyderabad in the Sind is sufficiently hot in the winter for tomato production with peak sales in January and February. Some of the crop is transported to Lahore and Quetta, hence the falls in price during those months. The main tomato crop around Lahore in northern Punjab is planted after the winter frosts and harvests in May and June. Thereafter the summer temperatures are too high to allow fruit production. Quetta is a high altitude area in Baluchistan where tomato production is possible in the late summer, i.e. August through to September. The extremely high prices in all markets in November and December suggest an opportunity for growers with the right climate, location and technology to supply this market demand.
Drawing up diagramatic graphs of the typical supply patterns of the major producing areas is a useful exercise in that it highlights shortfalls in supply and therefore possible market opportunities. An example of this is set out in Graph 5.
In any market research exercise it is important to try to assess the effect of increased supplies on the market. Obviously if the likely increased volume of crops will only add a few percent to the supply to the total market there is likely to be little market reaction. Information on the amount supplied to the market can sometimes be obtained from the wholesale market itself. The market authority will often record the number of trucks or the weight of produce delivered in order to calculate charges. In addition the wholesalers themselves will often be able to indicate the number of trucks that arrive daily at the market and the approximate weight of produce delivered.
Quality requirements
Quality in terms of grading, packaging and presentation can significantly affect sales and prices but quality requirements vary considerably.
Two examples will demonstrate how different the market's reaction to presentation and grading can be.
In the Dubai market, which is the major distribution point for imported horticultural produce marketed in the southern Arabian Gulf, French Red Delicious apples were being sold for 55 Dinars a box. This market, along with many in the Near and Middle East, has a preference for red fruit. The fruit were size graded, polished, and packed in cardboard trays in a strong attractive cardboard box. At the same time Golden Delicious apples were available on the market from Iran. In taste there is no real difference but in terms of presentation the produce did not look nearly so appealing. The packaging material, although effective in protecting the fruit from damage, was not as appealing. As a result the Iranian apples only obtained 25 Dinars a box, less than half the price of the French produce (see colour insert). The Gulf market is an increasingly sophisticated and wealthy market where customers are prepared to pay for quality.
In contrast is the example of a tomato seller at a village weekly market in Ismalia, Egypt. He would buy twenty 18-kg boxes of ungraded tomatoes from the local wholesale market. He would then grade the tomatoes into three grades himself, according to quality but not ripeness. Housewives would then go through the tomatoes selecting individual fruits to match their needs. For example, some selected over-ripe fruit for cooking, others firm fruit for salads, others semi-ripe fruit for eating later in the week. Clearly this stallholder would not want to pay extra for graded fruit. The retailer made his profit and used his time valuably doing the grading himself. Even if the tomatoes were graded he would have to repeat the exercise because of damage in transport. His customers wanted to be able to buy fruits with a range of ripeness.
Product quality requirements
The stallholder here makes a margin on sales of 79.5 LE. This will have to cover rent, transport of produce and the salary of his assistant. The profit is, in effect, his salary and will pay for capital investments such as sacks and the cost of the stall itself.
Higher quality produce will normally obtain better prices than average produce and, in situations of oversupply, will be the only saleable produce. Quality is dependent on growing conditions. Grading does not improve quality, it separates qualities and is itself a costly exercise. The question that needs to be answered is whether or not the activity is required by the market and whether the extra prices obtained will cover the additional costs?.
Quality specifications
Occasionally export markets will have stipulated grading standards which have to be met by the exporter. In practice these are normally minimum standards and, because of the transport costs involved, only top quality produce is exported. It is very important to establish directly from the potential market what quality standards are required, how produce should be presented, what size and type of packaging is preferred and what price differences exist between the various grades? Generally this information is readily available from middlemen and wholesalers. Sometimes they will give actual size requirements and may specify particular varieties or appearance characteristics which they favour. From talking to the wholesale market the extension officer should attempt to draw up with them a crop quality specification.
TABLE 6. Economics of a tomato stall, village market, Egypt
20 boxes at 18 kg of fruit each, price 15 pound (LE)/box
Total buying price 300 LE
The 360 kg of fruit as graded into four categories 
LE
Top quality 10% (36 kg) sold at 1.75 LE/kg 
Medium quality 60% (216 kg) sold at 1.2 LE/kg 
Poor quality 20% (72 kg) sold at 0.8 LE/kg 
Wasted fruit 10% (36 kg), no sales 
Total income 
Margin on sales 
Horticultural quality is very difficult to communicate merely through words. It is a tremendous advantage to be able to show photographs of what is considered to be good, average and poor quality produce.
Very often there are differences between markets in their demand for quality produce. For example, it may be possible to supply the major cities with the highest quality produce while the medium quality produce is sold to nearby towns. The poorest quality is sold in the villages and outgrades are used as animal feed.
Packaging
The principal purpose of packaging is to reduce damage in transport. Another purpose is to keep the produce in a sensibly sized unit for handling and marketing purposes. In addition, good packaging can contribute to the attractiveness of the produce and help to promote sales. Packaging is, however, expensive. Indeed in field vegetable production in Europe the single most expensive production cost is very often the packaging material. In practice any recommendations on the introduction of new packaging material must carefully weigh the additional costs against the likely benefits.
While visiting wholesale markets it can be very instructive to examine the amount of damage caused in transport. Produce at the bottom of boxes should be looked at as well as the crops that have taken the full weight of the truck's load. Very often there is a conflict between the lorry driver's objective of transporting as much produce as possible and the problems of overloading and crushing the lower tiers of produce. Well-designed packaging needs to maximize the use of space so it is normally oblong or square. To prevent tiers of boxes crushing the lowest produce the strongest points need to be the four corners of the box. The floor of the box acts mainly as a shelf. A certain amount of air movement needs to take place through the stacks of produce to prevent the build-up of heat and gasses. Sometimes, however, if produce is to be transported in very dry dusty conditions, excessive air ventilation can become a problem.
The size of unit that the produce is packed in is very often determined by how the produce is to be sold. Major products are normally packed in larger containers. Smaller volume commodities have to be packed in small units because the retailer would be reluctant to buy more produce than he thinks he can sell. Recently there have been significant developments in packaging in consumer-sized units. In the Arabian Gulf market, for example, where large individual purchases of produce are common, the more progressive exporters have now started packaging a portion of their produce in retail units, e.g. grapes in three-kg boxes and five-kg nets of onions. In other markets there have been developments in pre-packaging tomatoes, cucumbers and sweet peppers into one-kg nylon nets.
CHECKLIST OF QUESTIONS ON PRODUCT REQUIREMENTS MARKET
Existing sources of supply
Current important suppliers?
Seasonality of supply, start of season, peak season and end of season?
Packing specifications, weight of produce per packaging unit, type of packaging?
Grading and quality standards?
Prices obtained and net resumed to farmer, average price, maximum and minimum prices, effect of different quality standards on price?
Problems with existing suppliers and produce?
Volumes sold daily, monthly, annually? Popularity trend?
Types of buyers and consumers? Use of crop?
Factors affecting sales, e.g. weather, special festivals, day of arrival in market?
Is the crop stored; If so where and by whom?
Recommendations for new suppliers, or increased supply
Best period of supply?
Type and size of packaging material?
Grading and quality standards:
* acceptable size ranges?
* whether different sized produce should be packed separately or Jumble-packed?
* state of ripeness and should produce of the same ripeness be packed together?
* acceptable level of blemishes?
* important appearance characteristics such as colour, variety, shape, presence of stalks, bunch size?
Budget gross and net prices?
Volumes required?
Frequency of shipment, best day and arrival time on market?
Transport arrangements, e.g. whose responsibility Is It to arrange transport?
Storage arrangements, It any?
Potential and techniques for developing sales?
<section>5</section>
Phase 3 - The marketing system
The previous section discussed what the customer wants in terms of product. This section deals with finding out what the customer wants in terms of service. In other words, finding out the best way to work within the existing marketing system. This involves building up an understanding of how produce is distributed and sold. The price relationships between the different sales points in the marketing chain have to be studied. Knowledge must be gained about which companies in the distribution chain have reputations for honesty and integrity. Finally it is important to understand how growers can be kept regularly updated with market information in terms of prices and volumes and quality required.
Middlemen are subject to a lot of hostility, much of it unwarranted. They are generally accused of making excess profits and of dishonesty. It is sometimes not realized that middlemen perform an essential function in carrying out the marketing of produce. They are, in effect, the channel through which produce is taken out of the rural areas and money returned. Experience shows that, provided a market opportunity is identified, which is normally the responsibility of the middleman, farmers will respond by producing the crops. Only rarely is a lack of technology the critical constraint.
Provided middlemen operate in an atmosphere of strong competition it is unlikely they will make excessive profits. Clearly if this were the case numerous other businesses would be attracted and the competition would force down profits. As in all businesses there are some middlemen who are dishonest. The challenge for the extension officer is to identify reputable middlemen and to ensure that the marketing system minimizes opportunities for dishonesty.
The produce distribution system
There are very many different systems of marketing fruit and vegetables. They differ from country to country and indeed sometimes from crop to crop and from farmer to farmer. The extension officer will need to fully understand the marketing system if he is going to be able to make it work for the benefit of farmers.
The most important stage to understand is the first link in the production/marketing chain, that between the farmer and the person to whom he sells. To help understand the system it is very useful to draw up a flow diagram showing different stages in the distribution chain.
Some likely business people who can form the links in the production/marketing chain are:
* contractors who buy crops in the field and undertake the harvesting;
* agents, collectors, hawkers or country wholesalers who buy the harvested crop at the farm;
* wholesalers who buy at rural assembly or village markets;
* commission agents or auctioneers who auction produce in a wholesale market on a commission basis;
* wholesalers who sell produce on a consignment or commission basis in the wholesale market;
* wholesalers who buy produce from farmers at firm prices and sell at the wholesale market for their own account;
* exporters and importers;
* secondary wholesalers who buy at the wholesale market and transport the produce either to sell to retailers or at another wholesale market where prices are higher;
* semi-wholesalers who are located near the wholesale market and sell produce by the box either to small retail businesses or directly to consumers.
* retailers who sell to the final consumer such as street hawkers, stall holders, retailers, greengrocers, supermarkets;
* catering establishments, food processors.
An example is set out in the diagram. This shows a typical distribution chain for tree fruits found in much of the Middle East and Asia. Here around 70 percent of the produce is sold as a standing crop to an orchard contractor. Normally a number of contractors will bid for an orchard. One third of the price is paid three months in advance and the other two payments are made during harvesting and at the end of the crop. The orchard contractor undertakes the harvesting, grading, packing and distribution of the crop and may hold the produce in cold storage. This system has a number of advantages:
* the farmer is partly paid in advance;
* the farmer need not worry about organizing labour for harvesting;
* the contractor's labourers are skilled in harvesting, grading and making up the wooden boxes on site;
* the contractor will normally undertake the harvesting on a number of small farms which will achieve economies of scale in terms of transport;
* the contractor is a specialist in marketing and understands the requirements of the commission agents and wholesalers.
Understanding how the market system works
In this system it is the contractor who is taking the most risk. Risk and profit are very closely linked.
About 30 percent of the produce, normally that of the larger growers, is marketed direct to the wholesale markets. These wealthier farmers are in a better position to absorb the risks involved with marketing the produce themselves.
In most marketing chains there is a dominant business force. In this example it is the commission agent. He may superficially appear to be only the auctioneer of produce in the wholesale market, working on a small commission. In practice he operates very much like a bank, providing credit, often apparently interest-free, to farmers, contractors and wholesalers. By providing credit he guarantees that produce will be marketed through himself.
Diagram 1 - Fruit crop marketing channels, Near East
The commission agent sells to wholesalers. The wholesalers normally purchase several consignments of fruit and ship it in bulk to distant markets for re-auctioning. Other wholesalers purchase produce in bulk at the auction, split it into smaller consignments and sell it immediately to stall holders and street hawkers, often on short-term credit.
Marketing margins
The proportion of the final retail price that is resumed to the grower arouses much emotion and discussion. Calculating the margins in the marketing chain can be a difficult exercise because they vary depending on the retail price of the product, its perishability and the marketing costs, particularly those for transport and packaging.
TABLE 7. Retail margins for tomatoes sold at a village market, Egypt
13-kg box of tomatoes purchased at 15 LE, (or 0.83 LE per kg) and sold at
1.75 LE for 10%, (1.8 kg) 3.15
1.2 LE for 60%, (10.8 kg) 12.96
0.8 LE for 20%, (3.6 kg) 2.88
1.8 kg not sold 
Retail sale price per box 18.99
Av. sale price per kg purchased 1.05
Av. sale price per kg sold (16.2 kg) 1.17
Margin per box 3 99
Margin per kg purchased 0.22
Apparent margin per kg sold 0.34
Actual percentage mark up 21%
Apparent percentage mark up 41%
An example of how to calculate margins in horticultural marketing is set out below based on the example of the tomato retailer discussed earlier. Normally the easiest price to obtain is the wholesale price, i.e. the selling price to retailers.
It is often mistakenly assumed that the difference between the retail price and the wholesale price is the retailer's profit. This is wrong because it fails to take into account the fact that produce is often sold at different prices and that some produce is downgraded or even wasted entirely. In Table 7 the average retail price is 1.05 LE/kg. When the mistake is made of not taking into account the 10percent wastage then the average retail price would appear to be 1.17 LE/kg. As a result the percentage mark-up would be incorrectly calculated as 41 percent. The actual mark-up is 21 percent.
It is also a mistake to assume that the margin or mark-up, which in this case is nearly 4 LE per box or 0.22 LE per kg, is purely profit. The margin has to cover transporting the tomatoes and any salaries, rents, taxes and investments in equipment as well as to allow the stall owner an income and an opportunity to put money aside to cover periods when losses are incurred.
It is of particular interest to work back from the wholesale price to the farm gate pace. To do this the extension officer will need to establish what margins are calculated in the wholesale markets. Information like this is highly sensitive and will need to be rechecked from different sources, including farmers, contractors, commission agents, wholesalers and retailers.
To do this properly the extension officer will need to retrace each step in the marketing chain and establish from each middleman his buying and selling pace. Typically, margins are greatest when the middleman pays a firm pace and actually takes ownership of the produce. This is because he is taking the Ask and Ask and profit are closely linked. When produce is auctioned or sold on a consignment basis, the middleman, be he a wholesaler, importer or commission agent will hold back a percentage commission, normally from the seller but sometimes also from the buyer.
Using the example of a tomato crop in Egypt again, the method of calculating the return to the grower is set out.
As has been shown, accurate calculation of margins is extremely difficult. All too often it is assumed that from a simple comparison of an individual retail price, wholesale pace and farmer pace it is possible to accuse middlemen of excessive profits.
Wholesalers and middlemen
An important part of the extension officer's work is to identify suitable and reputable middlemen as trading partners. This involves finding out which companies are best equipped and most prepared to trade in the produce from his area. Secondly, he should find out whether these companies have a reputation for integrity and honesty. Discovering this information involves not only having meetings with possible trading partners but also, in effect, taking references about their reputation from other traders.
There is often a shortage of simple company information on potential trading partners and yet it is crucial when growers are planning to supply a new market or start marketing. The top priority should be honesty, but it is also important to identify businesses which are appropriate to the type of commodities which are planned to market and the scale of production which you envisaged.
TABLE 8. Farmer prices calculated from the wholesale market
Farmer sends 100 18-kg tomato boxes to the wholesale market
Sale price LE
10 boxes sold @ 18 LE 
60 boxes sold @ 15 LE 
20 boxes sold @ 10 LE 
5 boxes sold @ 7 LE 
5 boxes unsold 
Gross sale Income 
Less commission at 5% 
market charges @ 0.25 LE/box 
Net income to farmer 
Average farmer price per box sent to market
Average farmer price per kg sent to market 
Less transport @ 2 LE/box to market 
Average farm-gate price 
Less price of packaging @ 3.5 LE/box 
Average price/box before packaging 
Average price/kg before packaging 
TABLE 9. Selection of suitable trading partners
Buyers
Honest
Right Product
Helpful
Prices
Recommendation
A
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
No
B
Yes
Yes
Good
No
C
Yes
Yes
Yes
Average
Yes
Information services
Growers have to plan over the long term as there can be months and sometimes years between planting and harvest. Much of this chapter has concentrated on trying to read long-term trends. However, it is also important to try to introduce flexibility in marketing in order to maximize profits and minimize risk. This can be achieved by ensuring that there is a system set up whereby the producer receives rapid feedback on the state of different markets. He or she requires information on prices and on the demand of the market in terms of quality and quantity. This information can be used to maximize sales when the market is short and quality demands are not as stringent. When prices are very low the response may be to send only top quality produce or in exceptional cases, not harvest the crop at all. Access to information on a number of different markets gives the producer the option to switch produce to the higher priced outlets.
It is absolutely vital that this market news information is accurate and rapid. In practice the most important method of communication is the telephone but few farmers in developing countries have access to phones. The telephone can be one of the best investments for a horticultural producer; the additional returns may outweigh his costs many times. In the absence of a telephone link a well-run radio market news service broadcasting price and state-of-supply information has a number of advantages. As almost all growers have transistor radios the information is available to all. Growers can respond to market opportunities by diverting produce from one market to another. Ultimately, price differences between markets are reduced, which provides benefits to the consumer in terms of price stability and better continuity of supply.
CHECKLIST OF QUESTIONS TO ASK POTENTIAL TRADING PARTNERS
1. Name of company
Address
Telephone
Telex
Contact name
Number of staff
Number of years of operation
Estimated turnover in the last three years
Locations of businesses
2. Brief description of company activities, i.e. importer/wholesaler/commission agent
Main products handled
Main suppliers
Typical terms of trade i.e. commission, letter of credit, firm buying, etc.
Main outlets serviced i.e. secondary wholesalers, street hawkers, shops, supermarkets, hotels, etc.
Percentage sold by different outlets and typical consumer serviced.
3. Normal procedure for doing business:
Is the grower advised when to dispatch produce?
Whose responsibility is it to arrange transport?
Does the wholesaler expect advance warning of a shipment?
How are buying price and selling price agreed on?
What deductions are made before money is returned to the grower?
How quickly is money returned to the grower?
How does the wholesaler keep the grower informed about market requirements in terms of quality and quantity and expected price?
4. Recommendations of other businesses dealing in horticultural produce which have gained a good reputation for reliability and honesty with good management and a progressive and professional approach.
Normally wholesalers and middlemen have an advantage in negotiation by being better informed on market prices. The growers' negotiating position is improved by having ready access to price information. This is particularly important when there is little competition between buyers, e.g. when an individual contractor bids for a fruit orchard on a farm. The extension officer needs to consider ways in which price information can be made more available. Some techniques used include publishing information in newspapers and chalking up typical prices in markets and village meeting places.
Extension officers should also ensure that the market information provided is relevant to the farmers' needs. Prices in distant markets which cannot be easily served by farmers are of less relevance than prices in nearby villages and town markets. These "local" prices are often not broadcast by radio stations. The extension officer should collect and disseminate these prices back to the farmers. This can be done by word of mouth or by placing notices on bulletin boards at locations regularly visited by farmers e.g. market places, chief's offices, input supply points, etc.
One danger which the extension officer should be aware of is growers not understanding the reason for the difference in price between the farmer, the wholesaler and the retailer. It needs to be explained that distribution and marketing involves costs and business risks and prices have to cover the salaries of those involved in the distribution chain. Unless these costs are covered the marketing system will collapse.
Summary and conclusions
The main emphasis of this chapter has been on the need for information gathering and how to go about it:
* The extension officer needs to learn for trim other self the problems and opportunities of horticultural production in his region.
* He must find out what the customer wants in terms of both product and service.
* Finally, he needs to have gathered sufficient information to assess whether products can be supplied profitably to the market.
Although some of the basic necessary information may be available in reports and statistics, most of the information gathering will depend on picking up the views and opinions of individuals. This is a skill in itself. Much of the information required, particularly price information, may be considered sensitive. Some respondents will be suspicious of the reasons for wanting this information. They may, for example, be concerned that the information will get back to the tax authorities or it will be used to demonstrate that they make unfair profits.
At the outset of any interview the extension officer explain who he is, what he is trying to achieve and how that may be of benefit to the individual he is are talking to. Respondents will be much more forthcoming if interviews are arranged at a convenient time. For example the best time to speak to wholesalers is often after the main trading period. During the early part of an interview a rapport should be established with the interviewee. Normally people enjoy explaining their business and how it developed and like to feel that their opinions are respected and that their advice is being sought. The more sensitive questions are best asked towards the end of the interview when the atmosphere should have changed from slight suspicion to that of interest and cooperation. People's opinions will be different but the extension officer should try to use all the information that has been gathered to build an overall view of the market and how it works.
Finally a word of warning
A trend means that somebody has identified a market opportunity and begun to exploit it. However, all marketing opportunities are limited in scope; the gap in the market gets filled, and then overfilled in the course of time. The people who make money out of those trends are those who start them, not those who follow them. Those who try to jump on a bandwagon when it is moving fairly fast are liable to fall off and get hurt.
L. Broadbent, 1985, Horticulturists Handbook, Duncan Publishing, London, U.K.
Starting a trend requires analysis, insight and, finally, courage.
<section>6</section>
Chapter 4 - Decision making and agreeing on an action plan
Introduction
Credibility can be a serious problem for extension officers. Farmers will often be skeptical of advice from someone they consider to be inexperienced in practical matters. Growers may be suspicious of the motives for providing free advice. They are understandably reluctant to accept untried advice, particularly when they will suffer financially if it proves to be wrong. Furthermore, it is often those who most need good advice who are the most difficult to contact. These are the small, poor farmers without transport who are usually the most conservative. Wealthy farmers will probably have the transport to visit extension officers and are often more appreciative of extension advice. They are, however, those that least need assistance.
The challenge to the extension officer with special responsibility for marketing is firstly to decide how the marketing problems of the area can be solved. Secondly, he or she needs to think through the best way to get advice or plans across to the maximum number of target farmers. Finally, the agreement and the commitment of those that will be involved in any coordinated production programme in the area must be obtained.
Identification of problems and opportunities
The ways in which problems can be solved and opportunities exploited will change from area to area. To help the extension officer take a clear overview of the area, he or she will need to identify what stage in horticultural development the region has reached. Normally the aim will be to try to introduce the next steps in horticultural progress. The cases in Chapter 2 are set out in order of typical horticultural development.
TABLE 10. Analysis of constraints and opportunities
Constraints
Opportunities
Problems
Advantages
No local market.
Poor transport services.
Capable of early crop production.
Solutions
Actions
Organize local farmers' market.
Encourage buyers with own transport.
Encourage growing early crops and develop production techniques for earlier crops.
To help clarify the extension officer's thinking in analysing constraints and opportunities it can help to use two pieces of paper, as set out in Table 10.
The best solutions to marketing problems are normally relatively simple and ought not to require any major changes in production or new technologies. Complex plans or highly innovative plans are much more likely to fail.
Three examples are given:
1. If the area produces but has not before sold horticultural crops then the extension officer should be looking for ways to establish a local market. This might involve, for instance, coordinating growers to assemble their produce on one particular day of the week at a convenient location. Middlemen would be invited to attend the market. The buyers would compete with one another to buy produce so that fair prices should be achieved. As produce is assembled in volume, cheaper bulk transport to the major markets is made possible.
2. If produce is only being sold into a local market there may be opportunities to start supplying more distant, major markets. The extension officer's research should have indicated what the produce requirements, prices and costs are likely to be and identified potential trading partners. He may then want to persuade growers to attempt a test marketing programme to new markets, initially of existing produce and then for new types of produce. If this proves successful then commercially sized shipments could be made. Another option would be for a local representative to take on the role of transporting and selling produce.
3. In an area which is already a major force in horticultural production and marketing the extension officer may concentrate on improving the existing system.. When individual growers already have good links with the market it will be difficult to form producer groups or cooperatives-unless there is some major problem or need. Extension advice is likely to cover generalized advice to groups of growers and specific advice for individual farmers. Potential improvements are likely to be identified at critical points along the production/marketing chain. These may involve anything from new crops and improved production practices to post-harvest techniques, better designed packaging, improved transport methods, better access to credit and production inputs and the establishment of improved market information services.
Finally, it is important to remember that there is always the danger of trying to make changes when they are not necessary. All systems are imperfect inevitably farmers will always complain that they receive too little money while consumers complain of too high prices. Proposals for change do need to be carefully thought through and any additional costs or disadvantages balanced against the advantages.
Extension techniques
The two chief functions of an extension officer are:
* to reduce the learning time for an individual farmer to accept a new idea or technique;
* to increase the number of farmers who understand the new ideas.
In some countries certain extension officers are given the responsibility of becoming subject matter specialists in marketing. It is then their task to train other extension officers and provide specialist marketing advice. By working through other extension officers their effectiveness is increased. Generally the marketing extension officer is based in the production area. He or she must make regular visits to the markets in order to maintain contacts and keep in touch with changes in price and demand. Sometimes, however, he is based away from the production areas. In this case he will have to return regularly to the production areas to maintain contact with growers' problems and to provide relevant marketing advice.
Experience has shown that one of the most effective ways of working is to work with groups of farmers.
An extension technique, very much under-exploited, is helping farmers indirectly by providing guidance and advice to private-sector companies. For example, companies who either supply inputs or, more importantly, assist in the marketing and distribution of produce can often use timely and reasoned advice to put into motion a process which brings benefits to large numbers of growers. For example:
* if shortages of the required input supplies (e.g. seeds or sprays) are restricting market-oriented production, shops selling agricultural equipment may be persuaded to buy in the necessary materials and even advise growers on their correct use;
* if middlemen or traders can be persuaded that there is a business potential in marketing produce, they can be very effective in establishing workable marketing systems. They can supply seeds and packaging material, give guidance on produce presentation and provide credit for farmers;
* advice and encouragement could be provided to a packaging manufacturer to improve design or use better materials;
* a local transport firm could be assisted to establish a produce collection service.
Leading local farmers strongly influence the decisions of other farmers, e.g. to coordinate their production and marketing (see Case 2, Chapter 2). They will generally need to be persuaded of the potential advantages to themselves of improved marketing practices. The extension officer should beware that unless the wealthy farmer is genuinely concerned for the community's welfare he may try to suppress the planned changes. He may do this because he does not want other farmers to become better off. Alternatively, he may see an advantage in carrying out the scheme on his own.
The extension officer may also find it valuable to work with public-sector organizations such as:
* agricultural banks, to improve their credit service to growers;
* farmer cooperatives wishing to undertake input supply and marketing activities;
* research institutes, to ensure they tackle farmers' market-oriented production and post-harvesting problems.
The scope of the work clearly extends far beyond advising farmers. This is because marketing is only as successful as the weakest link in the production/ marketing chain.
Agreeing on an action plan
In this chapter we have considered four potential activities of the extension officer.
The first involves giving advice to an individual farmer. This should be a low priority as it is an inefficient use of time and larger-scale farmers obtain the most benefits.
The second involves providing marketing advice to farmer groups, particularly through the methods of mass extension. This has the advantage of reaching a large number of growers and allows coordination of farmers' activities and cooperation in marketing.
The third technique involves providing advice or information to critical individuals, organizations or private-sector companies in the marketing chain whose actions can have a beneficial effect on marketing.
Finally, and perhaps most ambitiously, an extension officer may decide it is necessary to attempt a project approach to developing horticultural marketing. Marketing is normally achieved by a series of interlinking stages and coordination between the stages is essential. A project approach is one which involves coordinating the activities of a number of different intermediaries in a marketing chain. It may involve a group of farmers assembling their produce at one point so that it can be transported in bulk to the market.
More complex schemes could involve ensuring a supply of inputs, providing growers with production advice and negotiating contract terms with a buyer, be he a food processor or exporter.
As discussed at the start of this chapter, extension officers can have a credibility problem. One way of overcoming this is to achieve a good reputation by successfully resolving some smaller problems. In Chapter 2, Case 5, the horticultural marketing advisor achieved credibility by negotiating significantly cheaper air freight rates. A second way involves securing influential support for the scheme, particularly from farmer leaders or marketing companies. Sometimes them is a reluctance for people to implement someone else's ideas enthusiastically. A clever advisor sometimes overcomes this problem by not revealing his project plans to the individual he considers to be the most important in the scheme. Instead he provides him with the information on the problem and then in discussion leads the individual to come up with the same (or a similar) solution. The individual then thinks it is his own idea and has the enthusiasm and commitment to ensure the plan's implementation.
MARKETING EXTENSION TECHNIQUES
Farmer teaches farmers
A successful farmer explains to a group of farmers his production and marketing practices. The meeting is most effective on the farmer's own farm.
Demonstrations
Practical demonstrations of techniques such as harvesting, cleaning, grading and packing, preferably taking place on a farm. Prepared samples which demonstrate the differences overtime of different handling practices can be effective, as are samples of competing produce and photographs.
Talks and seminars
Possible topics include: market possibilities successful case studies, postharvest techniques, prigs assessment, market-oriented production techniques. Buyers and middlemen should be involved to talk.
Problem-solving techniques
The farmer group is encouraged to identity its own major problems. The problem solving can be tackled systematicaly, by calling In specialists individually to advise the group or by forming a panel to answer farmers' questions. Alternatively, the group might be encouraged to decide their own solutions which they then implement themselves collectively.
Study tours
Farmers are taken on a study tour to make their own contacts and to see the market for themselves, visit processing centres and observe how their produce withstands transportation. Farmers visit farmers in another area to exchange experiences and see new techniques. This experience alone can transform a grower's views on production and marketing.
Written information
Fact sheets are prepared and distributed. These can identity potential trading partners or provide technical information on production and post-harvest techniques.
Market news services
Establishing a market news service which provides regular, reliable, relevant and timely information. This may be in the form of a news sheet or a radio bulletin.
The project approach
The extension officer's role is then to support the individual, to coordinate the activities of the different parties involved and to chase up the progress of the project.
A planned project approach to horticultural marketing development will increase the chances of genuine improvements being made. It is important for the extension officer to have a clear mental image of the desired outcome and successfully communicate that objective. The project must be understood by all parties, if they are going to be able to work effectively together.
Business management experience has shown that targets, such as tonnages to be shipped or selling prices, are important too, as they provide challenges to the parties involved and can be used to monitor the progress of the project. This technique is called management by objectives.
However, no matter how good the preliminary work has been, when a plan is put into action the unexpected will happen. Allowances for the unexpected should be made. It is advisable to start the project with a pilot stage so that mistakes can be made on a small scale and reamed from. Furthermore the project must be flexible so that changes can be made in the light of these lessons. Inevitably the project's critics will try to emphasize any problems; most successful projects will have had to face problems, particularly in the early phases, and their success is often a measure of their ability to learn from and overcome difficulties.
Chapter 5 - Implementation of action plans
Introduction
The two previous chapters were mainly concerned with preparatory work. This chapter concentrates on how results can be achieved. At each stage in the production/marketing chain there are possibilities for improvement. The extension officer will have to identify the main problems and concentrate his efforts on those areas. This chapter considers some of the actions that can be taken to improve rural incomes and particularly the profitability of small horticultural farms. The suggestions are not comprehensive, each individual situation is different and the extension officer must work out for him or herself what is required.
Pre-production advice
Input supply. Both quantity and quality of crops produced are affected by difficulties in obtaining inputs.
The correct planting material is particularly important. Often consumers have strong preferences for particular varieties of vegetable. In much of the Middle and Near East, for example, there is a preference for plum-shaped tomatoes. Red-coloured fruits, such as red sweet apples, are sometimes much preferred to green and golden varieties. Growers'marketing margins can be improved by ensuring the supply of the correct planting material. The extension officer's role is to advise the nurserymen and seed suppliers on which varieties they should supply, and the farmers on which varieties to plant.
Pest and disease damage will seriously reduce a crop's price and its potential shelf life. Sometimes these problems can be solved by the correct crop protection practices. An example of this is the introduction of spray programmes to control scab disease on apples in Kashmir, India. A crucial step in the successful introduction of this programme was ensuring that agricultural chemical shops had the recommended materials available and could advise growers on their use.
The extension officer should be alert for opportunities where farmers themselves can become input suppliers. Farmers can also provide contract services, e.g. for soil cultivation or crop spraying.
Finance and credit. A critical production constraint is often shortage of funds. Broadly speaking the potential sources of funds can be divided into two-formal and informal.
Formal sources are mainly banks. In general, the interest terms are reasonable, but requirements for security and slow bureaucracy often limit loan effectiveness. The extension officer can help with the supply of production credit by providing the bank with cost-of-production data and likely returns. This will enable the bank to see how much money needs to be advanced. In Table 11 an example of a cost-of-production calculation is provided.
ZIMBABWE
Perspective
A women's cooperative was growing vegetables for sale In Harare. At the market they noticed that small quantities of vegetable seedlings were also being sold.
Action
In discussions with the extension officer the group agreed that as vegetable production was expanding rapidly prices would be likely to fall, but that the demand for vegetable seedlings would increase. They decided to start to grow and sell seedlings.
Result
The women took turns In taking the seedlings to market. Sales increased. Wholesalers started asking the women to grow seedlings, giving advances, telling them which varieties to grow and offering firm prices.
TABLE 11. Production costs, gross margin per acre and breakeven cost for cucumbers from Pakistan
Income 
Coat in Rupees (Rs)
(A) Marketed yield 6 000 kg 
(B) Net income at 2.475 its/kg 
Production costs 
Inputs 
Seed, 1.5 kg @ 220 its/kg 
Fertilizer, 2 x 50 kg Amn Sulphate @ 59 Rs/bag
Organic manure 15 tonnes @ 50 Rs/tonne 
Sprays 5 "per" approx. 110 Rs/acre 
Contract soil cultivation 400 its/acre 
Subtotal inputs 
Labour costs 
Land preparation 2 days @ 20 its/day 
Sowing 3 days @ 20 its/day 
Spraying 2 days @ 20 Rs/day 
Irrigation 10 days @ 20 Rs/day 
Hoeing 12 days @ 20 Rs/day 
Harvesting 90 days @ 20 Rs/day 
Subtotal labour 
Total production costs 
Marketing costs 
Transport @ 0.15 Rs/kg X 6 000 kg 
Packaging, 20-kg crates @ 10 Rs/crate 
Subtotal marketing 
(C) Total production and marketing costs 
Gross margin/net ruturn per acre (B - C) 
Break-even cost of production and marketing per kg
(C) 8 428 Rs divided by (A) 6 000 kgs 1.40 Rs/kg
Loan agencies have different rules as to what proportion of the production costs can be advanced. Some will only cover the cost of inputs, while others will include some or all of the labour costs. It is an advantage if the marketing cost of transport and packaging can also be covered. It is interesting to note that in this example harvesting and marketing costs amount to 67 percent of all costs and that packaging is the single largest item.
Formal sources of credit are also extremely valuable to cover long-term investments, such as planting and establishing fruit orchards and investment in production equipment.
Some banks offer marketing loans where money is provided to cover the harvesting, transport, packaging and even storage of crops. The amount advanced can be calculated on the basis of the harvesting and marketing costs, as set out above. Sometimes they cover a portion of the estimated wholesale value of production. The value of these loans is that they can free the grower from the marketing restrictions imposed when borrowing from a middleman. These normally commit the grower to selling all his produce via the one middleman.
Where growers are under contract to supply produce to an agribusiness, e.g. food processor or exporter, production loans based on the hypothetical value of the crop can be introduced. For example, if a farmer is growing one acre of tomatoes for a food processor and he would normally harvest five tonnes per acre with a contract price of $0. 25 per kg, his income is expected to be $1 250. Under a loan hypothecation scheme the bank or processor advances a proportion of the expected income as production credit, say 25 percent or in this case $312.5, without seeking any additional security. Loan recovery can be made from the agribusiness from the money it is returning to the grower.
Although informal credit sources include family members, friends and input suppliers, the most important source of credit is often the middleman or commission agent.
The role of a wholesaler as a banker is much misunderstood. Common criticisms are that very high interest rates are charged and that growers who have borrowed money are forced into selling their produce at low prices. In some cases this is true but it is not as common as is assumed.
Generally the produce is auctioned in an open market so the grower should receive a fair price. The loans are often made on the basis of close kinship links and are free of time-consuming bureaucracy. Loans are recovered simply by deducting the money advanced from the sales.
The main disadvantage of this system is that the grower has no marketing flexibility. In the case of poor prices he cannot switch to another commission agent or market.
In the absence of an effective and suitable formal credit agency, marketing middlemen can be a useful credit source, particularly if finance is a major constraint to starting production.
Production planning
Extension officers should be able to advise farmers on planning their crops. Although important criteria such as labour availability and crop rotations will have to be taken into account the key approach will need to be market oriented production. This means growing crops for which there is likely to be a demand and which will probably be profitable.
Individual crops selection. The extension officer should calculate potential or net returns of the major alternative horticultural crops in the region (see Table 11). This will establish which crops are likely to be the most profitable.
The market research that he or she will have undertaken should have shown whether any of the local crops have a comparative advantage. The produce may have advantages in terms of price, quality or seasonality over competing crops from other areas. Research should also have shown what varieties are favoured and the best time to supply the market. The extension officer will need to translate the market requirements into practical recommendations for farmers, covering areas such as:
* best varieties;
* sowing dates, e.g. whether to extend the period of supply or aim for a particularly high priced period; whether to avoid times of oversupply;
* other techniques to extend production into high priced periods, such as late or early varieties, transplanting techniques, polythene tunnels, irrigation;
* techniques to improve quality, such as optimum fertilization, crop protection, pruning, irrigation, weather protection.
TABLE 12. Selecting crops
Crops
A
B
C
Expected sales 
Costs 
Production 
Marketing 
Net return 
Recommendations
Yes
Yes
No
New crops or the introduction of new technologies or production techniques should always be undertaken, initially on a small-scale trial basis.
Selection of range of crops. In practice crops to be planted are chosen for a combination of reasons. The most important is that there is likely to be a good market demand and the crop can be grown profitably, as outlined in Table 12.
Generally it is advisable to grow a range of crops as this lessens the impact of an eventual crop or market price failure. If possible some crops could be grown under contract. Very often individual growers will have preferences for crops which they feel comfortable growing and/or which grow well on their land.
As agriculture develops farms typically become more specialized, concentrating on fewer crops. Growers become more skilled, although experience has shown that growers can rarely be experts in more than three or four crops.
As explained earlier, the most potentially profitable crops are often the most risky. It is useful to have a cropping system in which risky crops are balanced against more reliable income-earning crops.
Small farms generally have more labour available per acre. They can take advantage of this by concentrating on growing labour-intensive crops.
These are crops which cannot be harvested mechanically and may also require transplanting, pruning, hoeing and multiple-hand harvesting.
Investment advice
Business and investment advice can also be part of an extension officer's work. Often farmers are tempted to make investments which are expensive and do not improve the viability of their farm significantly. The priorities for investment decisions should be:
* investments that can assure a farmer of an income;
* investments that can increase incomes by improving prices;
* investments that can improve incomes by increasing yields;
* investments which reduce production costs;
* investments which can create additional income sources.
Investments which can improve yield stability arc:
* those which protect against pests and diseases, such as sprays and a sprayer,
* those in irrigation and technology which reduce the adverse effects of the weather, e.g. through protection of nursery plants.
Investments like these are particularly important in horticulture because in seasons when yields are low as a result of poor weather or pests, prices rise significantly. It is the growers whose yields arc least affected who make the most profit.
Investments which improve prices can be:
* those in technology which facilitate off-season production, such as polythene tunnels and improved transplant technology;
* those made directly in improving marketing such as grading facilities, on-farm storage, pick-up trucks to transport produce and even telephones to improve market communication.
<section>7</section>
Post-production advice
This manual does not attempt to cover the technical details of post-harvest handling of horticultural crops. These are covered in a number of other publications by FAO and others. The main emphasis here is on the commercial implications of different harvest and post-harvest practices.
Harvesting. The timing, technique and conditions at harvesting can significantly affect prices.
Harvesting prices. With some crops, harvesting can be undertaken early to take advantage of high-priced opportunities, e.g. cabbage harvested as spring greens, young carrots sold in bunches, green plums and new potatoes. Exploiting these short-term market opportunities requires a close link with the market.
Harvesting and crop maturity. Shelf life and long-term storage is affected by the maturity of the crop at harvest. The storage characteristics of root vegetables are generally improved by only harvesting fully mature crops. Examples are sweet potatoes, tannia, carrots, onions, garlic, potatoes and yams.
Harvesting of cassava tubers can start between seven to ten months after the planting of cuttings, depending on variety. Cassava does not store well and on small family farms the largest tubers are harvested first, without cutting the stems. The small tubers are allowed to grow on. The production of cassava roots is at its highest 18 to 20 months after planting.
Long-term storage of cabbages depends on the cultivar and growing conditions. Cabbages suitable for storage are normally slow growing, large types grown under cool conditions and harvested at the correct stage of maturity. Harvesting should take place after the head has formed tightly and before the outer leaves start to die or the head shows any sign of splitting. At the correct stage of maturity freshly harvested cabbage heads should squeak when rubbed together.
Melons are another example of a crop where the timing of harvest is crucial for quality-too early and the full sugar content is not developed, too late and they lose sugar and become soft. Cantaloupe melons should be harvested when the fruit separates easily from the plant. If only part of the stem pulls off then the fruit is not ripe and will never ripen to a full flavour. Honeydew melons and watermelons do not separate from the stem when mature. A honeydew melon is ready for harvest when the fruit is well filled out, there is just a hint of green and the surface is covered with fine hairs. Watermelons should be harvested when the ground spot is pale yellow and the fruit gives a hollow sound when hit with the knuckle.
Some fruit have to be harvested when they are not completely ripe in order to transport them to distant markets This is particularly true of fruits which are not suitable for long-term storage but need their shelf life maximized. Examples are bananas, pineapples, mangoes and avocados.
In the case of bananas the fruit is generally harvested when still green and only at between three-quarters full (80 days from shooting) to high three quarters (90 days from shooting). The longer the period of transport the thinner the fingers at the time of cutting. Maximum storage of two to three weeks is achieved by keeping the fruit at 12-14Cin 85 to 95 percent relative humidity. On arrival at the market bananas are ripened either in special ripening rooms or by allowing the ambient heat to trigger the release of the ripening gas, ethylene. For local marketing the fruit is harvested when fully mature but before ripening has started.
Avocados and mangoes will generally ripen during transport. Pineapples for local consumption or canning are normally harvested when the fruit has yellowed up by 25 to 50 percent. For distant markets harvesting should take place when the first hint of colour change has been observed at the basal end.
The optimum harvesting stage for most crops will depend not only on the climate and distance to the market but also on variety and growing conditions. In individual cases, when new distant markets are being explored, experiments should be carried out to find the best stage to harvest fruits, by sending samples at different degrees of ripeness and assessing which is most favoured.
For fruits which are suitable for long-term storage, such as apples, pears, citrus and grapes, there are significant differences between cultivars, growing region and sometimes season in the optimum harvesting time. For example, maturity indices of citrus are based on juice content by volume, total soluble solids in the juices and the solids: acid ratio, according to variety and market. In general, fruits should contain at least 40 percent by volume of juice and the total soluble solids should be in excess of eight percent. Specialist skills and techniques are necessary which are beyond the scope of this book. Apples for long-term storage should be picked when fully mature but not fully ripe. The extension officer should call in the necessary expert assistance if long-term crop storage could significantly improve farmer incomes.
Harvesting and quality. What is often not understood by growers is the effect of their harvesting and handling on the quality of the produce in the market. Once a fruit is plucked from a plant or a root or leaf vegetable is harvested, it is cut off from its source of food and, particularly, water. The effects of poor treatment normally show themselves some days later, when the produce is being presented for sale or is in storage. Poor treatment has two effects; firstly the price is reduced and secondly, in the long term, the reputation of the production area is diminished (again tending to result in lower prices).
An improved system of harvesting and handling produce will result in a product with better appearance and shelf life. In general, prices for the produce will be improved but sometimes the system has to be changed to ensure that the price rises are passed back to the grower.
Timing of harvesting during the day. Ideally harvesting should take place when the crop and the climate is coolest and the plant is most turgid, i.e. has the highest moisture content. This is in the early morning. In practice other criteria also have to be taken into account. For example, the dew should be dry on citrus end the latex flow of mangoes is at a minimum a/mid-morning. Harvesting also has to take into account labour availability and when collection will take place, to minimize the time produce is left standing in the field.
Harvesting techniques. On high trees fruit can be harvested with a hook and a catching bag on a pole or similar harvesting aid. This prevents fruit falling to the ground.
For other crops knives and clippers can improve harvesting practices because they can cut through fibrous tissue, stems and leaves can be trimmed and clean cuts reduce the likelihood of infection. Tools like this are used for harvesting lettuce, cabbage, sweet pepper, egg-plant, honeydew melons and banana. In the case of bananas a slight cut is made in the upper pseudostem to allow the bunch to ease down gently. Individual hands are cut off from the bottom hand upwards.
Leafy vegetables are harvested by cutting the plant with a sharp knife as close to the root as possible. Uprooting results in soil coming into contact with the produce.
Bulb crops such as garlic and onions are harvested by pulling the leaves at the neck and then cutting the leaves about 3 cm from the bulb.
Occasionally diseases can be transmitted from plant to plant. Tools should be cleaned often and, when virus diseases are a problem, knives should only be used for trimming not for cutting the fruit from the plant.
Many fruits are harvested by hand, e.g. apples, citrus, papaya, peppers, tomatoes. The fruit should beheld by the palm of the hand not by the fingers. Whenever possible the harvesting should be carried out by plucking the stem, e.g. with strawberries, fine beans, peas.
Tuber and root crops are normally harvested with forks or hoes. The digging should start some 15 cm (6 inches) away from the tease of the plant. In general, it is preferable to lever and pull the roots rather than attempt to dig the roots out. Harvesting is easiest when the soil is relatively dry as both damage and the need for washing is reduced.
Field containers. Picking bags or baskets attached to the waist of the picker enable both hands to remain free. The crop damage associated with moving sacks of produce through the field is reduced. With picking bags it is preferable to be able to release the bottom so that the produce can be let out gently, rather than upending the bag.
Baskets or boxes with sharp or rough edges should either be avoided or lined with paper or leaves. Damage is often caused by transferring produce from one container to another. If possible, produce should be harvested into the container in which it will be stored or transported.
Harvesting system. With highly perishable produce damp cloths can be used to give protection against the sun's heat. Field containers should be removed to a shaded area as soon as possible. Some leafy vegetables may be sprinkled with water at intervals to maintain leaf turgidity. Field assembly points, such as a shadehouse made out of natural materials or a canvas tent, should be used in order to keep the produce cool and allow ventilation.
In general, the quality of fruit and vegetables cannot be improved after harvest. However, the more careful the handling the slower is the deterioration in quality. Containers must be emptied carefully to minimize drop heights and fruit-to-fruit damage. Containers should be periodically cleaned.
Curing and drying. Bulb crops such as onions and garlic can be dried in the field by being spread one layer thick over about six dry days. Alternatively drying can take place in stacked shallow trays under cover. The aim is to harden the outer scales and remove moisture from the neck in order to extend storage and marketing life.
Most root crops (but not cassava) respond to warm moist conditions after harvest by thickening and hardening their skins. This provides protection against dehydration and infection. Wound healing occurs. This is called curing and it significantly improves storage life. Curing can be carried out in tropical areas at little cost by stacking the produce in conditions where temperature and humidity are allowed to rise to 25 to 35C with a relative humidity of 85 to I 00 percent for one to seven days, depending on crop and variety.
Trimming and sorting. Cabbages, cauliflower, chinese cabbage and lettuce will have their outer leaves trimmed, except for three or four wrapper leaves, to give some protection to the head. Long stalks attached to the fruit, as in citrus, should be cut as close to the fruit as possible to prevent damage to other fruit.
Provided the market wants graded produce and is prepared to pay for it then selection and grading are justified. The additional prices must cover the additional costs. Buyers may specify grading standards, particularly in the export market where international standards may be enforced. Produce for longterm storage should be disease and blemish free and therefore needs to be sorted. When transport is expensive it is often only justifiable to send top quality crops. Produce is generally separated according to quality criteria, it may also be graded according to ripeness or colour and size. The crop is then normally packed into different containers. This facilitates marketing into different markets.
Grading and packing is often carried out on the ground under the shade of a tree. This is both unhygienic and inefficient. Specialist grading areas or sheds are generally open-sided, with tin or preferably thatched roofs. Grading while standing or sitting at tables enables people to work faster Tables covered with polythene sheeting are easy to clean and the sheeting can be replaced cheaply. Lighting should be good. Tin roofs can be painted white to reflect heat while water trickled down the outside of a shed helps reduce the heat inside the building.
Packaging and presentation. The two main functions of packaging are to help prevent mechanical damage and to sort the produce into an acceptable size for the market and for handling. Good packaging can also enhance the attractiveness of the produce.
The four main types of mechanical damage are cuts, compressions, impacts and vibration rubbing.
Care in harvesting and handling will help eliminate cuts and wounds. Lining of packaging material with paper or leaves can also prevent damage.
Compression bruises can be restricted by using containers which are strong enough to withstand multiple stacking. The packaging materials need to be particularly strong at the vertical corners. The packaging should also be shallow enough to prevent the bottom layers of produce being damaged by the weight of produce above. Cartons must not be overfilled. Damage is caused by the full weight of the pile of produce pushing down on the top layer of fruit or vegetables, causing the weight to be transmitted to the lower layers.
Impact damage and bruising can be the result of shocks in transport or dropping. This may occur either because each package is small enough to be thrown or too big to be easily handled.
Vibration damage generally occurs during transport; vibration being transmitted through the produce. This kind of damage can be significantly reduced by achieving a balance between preventing the produce from moving within the packaging and forcing the produce together. Fruits are prevented from rubbing against one another by the use of cellular trays, individual wraps or cushioning pads. An example is paper and straw used to separate layers of apples. Alternatively, the box is gently shaken to settle the produce and then the space created is filled.
Reference was made earlier to the size criteria of packaging (see Chapter 3). The largest size should not exceed 50 kg as this is the maximum weight which can be easily handled. Below that the size specification will depend on the customers' requirements-be they the retailers or consumers.
As the calculation in Table 11 indicated, packaging can be the single most expensive cost, particularly with non-returnable containers made of wood or cardboard. The benefits must be shown to justify the investment. In the next example, where $3 000 is invested in packaging for 6 000 kg of cucumbers worth $14 850, the costs can be said to be worthwhile if:
* either, an average of over $0.5 per kg would be lost if the crop were not packaged,
* or, wastage would exceed 20 percent.
TABLE 13. Cost-benefit analysis of packaging
Net income with packaging for sales of 6 000 kg of produce 14850
Less cost of packaging (or $ 0.5/kg) 3000
Income to obtain the same return without packaging 11850
Therefore: Average sale price can tall to $1.975/kg, i.e. by $ 0.5/kg
Or: 1212 kgs can be wasted, a factor of 20 percent.
In practice the situation is usually more complex. Without packaging both wastage and damage levels will increase. The question is whether the cost of reducing losses results in a lower or greater profit for the grower.
Sometimes, instead of crates, a cheaper but possibly more cost-effective method for packaging and transporting may be tried. For example, for loose produce, e.g. melons, it may be possible to introduce a combination of sacks and straw cushioning in the truck together with shelving. This will again affect not only the quality and quantity of produce sold but also the transport costs.
When attempting to introduce new types of packaging, the extension officer's first task is to compare its cost with the existing system of packaging. Subsequently he should monitor trial shipments and then carry out a cost/benefit analysis using actual, rather than theoretical, figures. The key is to select costeffective packaging which is appropriate to the demands of the market.
Produce packaging materials can be conveniently divided into six classes.
Locally available natural materials, for example baskets woven from bamboo, willow or cartons made from thin strips of wood or rushes. Typical problems associated with these materials are:
* poor rigidity and design, which prevents multiple staking;
* sharp edges, which can cause bruising or pierce produce;
* inefficient usage of transport space, which increases costs.
There are, however, a number of advantages with using locally available materials. Material costs are low. Both jobs and incomes are created for local businesses who make the packaging. Local sources of packaging also make it easier to ensure its timely arrival.
The benefits are such that in the first instance the extension officer should try to develop and improve on the use of existing local packaging. This may be achieved by new designs or through improvements in the handling system.
Wooden boxes and trays are widely used throughout both the developing and developed world. They are strong, rigid and can be manufactured locally as well as recycled. They can also withstand refrigeration. However:
* wood is often not available or is very expensive;
* boxes are not designed properly, resulting in poor stacking and ventilation characteristics; or
* in an effort to save wood the boxes are too deep, resulting in damage to the bottom layers of produce.
Improved design is particularly likely to result in both savings in wood and reduced crop damage. The European produce tray has been successfully introduced in a number of countries. Critical design features of this tray include:
* standard box sizes, particularly length and width, to facilitate stacking;
* using thin strips of wood for the floor and part of the sides but especially strong wood at the vertical corners, as these have to support the weight of the stack;
* a gap between the sides of the tray and the floor of the next tray, allowing for ventilation;
* no lid but paper placed on top of the produce to reduce the effects of dust, evaporation and to minimize pilfering.
Shallow trays are used for easily bruised crops such as tomatoes, peaches, grapes and mangoes. Deeper boxes are used for apples and citrus. Larger but flimsier boxes are often used for cabbages and cauliflowers. In these developments the extension officer needs to work closely with the local box manufacturers. Again, pricing of packaging per kg of produce needs to be compared with that of existing packaging and should be tested before commercial introduction.
Fibre board or corrugated cardboard are increasingly being used, particularly in developed countries. There are a number of very cleverly designed boxes which can be copied. The boxes are light and easily printed and can be made to look very attractive. However:
* they are expensive and cannot be recycled;
* they need to be waxed if they are to withstand long-term cold storage;
* they need to be manufactured by large factories creating employment in the cities, often at the expense of rural jobs;
* the raw materials often have to be imported.
Recent design improvements include boxes that are made from a combination of wood, for structural strength, and cardboard. Plastic has also been incorporated in designs, particularly to increase strength at the corners.
Plastic containers are expensive and generally have to be imported. They are so expensive that they have to be recycled and are mainly used as field boxes or to supply a regular outlet such as a factory or supermarket. Some polystyrene packaging is now being used for non-recyclable containers.
Bags and nets are cheap but provide no protection from damage. They can be used to package suitable produce like onions and potatoes into convenient units for handling and marketing.
Plastic and paper is often used as lining or wrapping for produce.
Printing, packaging presentation and brand names can all add value to produce but only in markets where consumers are wealthy and appreciate aesthetics and image. For example, in the produce markets of the Arabian Gulf multi-coloured printing is common because it has been observed to increase returns. In contrast most of the African and Asian markets are insensitive to the quality of packaging material used, if indeed packaging is used at all.
Much emphasis has been given to improved handling, grading and packaging. Improved prices may be expected because the market will respond to the quality of the individual consignment. In the longer term, premium prices can be obtained by establishing an identity and a reputation as a consistent high quality supplier. An extension officer may help to achieve this by:
* drawing up minimum grading specifications for a top quality grade;
* training farmers in grading to this standard;
* agreeing on a name, symbol or 'brand' image which can be printed on to the packaging;
* asking farmers to sign an agreement that they will only send the correct quality produce under the brand name;
* getting each grower to mark branded packages with his own identification mark so that any produce which is below specification can be traced back to the grower.
This top quality produce would be sold into high-priced, quality-conscious markets. This is called creating a brand image. There are many examples of areas which always obtain premium prices because of their reputation for supplying good quality produce.
It should be remembered that it can take years to establish a good reputation but it can be quickly destroyed by one or two poor consignments.
Storage. Produce can be stored for both short-term and long-term purposes.
Short-term storage is used to provide flexibility in marketing, for example when awaiting transport or because buyers are not immediately available. Most horticultural crops are perishable end can only be stored for a few days. Only rarely is it worthwhile storing crops of this nature to await higher prices. Storage will reduce quality and shelf life. It is costly and, in most instances, when the produce is withdrawn from storage it has to compete in the market against freshly arrived produce,
A few crops are adapted for long-term storage (see Table 14). These can be held in stores well beyond the normal harvesting period. In turn, higher prices can normally be obtained and greater volumes of produce sold. Often in the case of cold storage the successful stores are located in urban areas because:
* produce can be released immediately on to the market in response to high prices;
* facilities can also be used for other crops, e.g. apples in the winter, citrus in the summer and other produce such as butter.
Refrigerated storage is much emphasized in the literature but extended shelf life can be achieved without investment in expensive equipment. In practice the quality of the produce and humid, shady conditions are higher priorities. (See Table 15.)
Ventilated stores in the right conditions with good management can be extremely cost-effective. Ideally they require cool night temperatures. The building should be protected from the sun's heat by such techniques as shady trees, painting the building white and double-skinned walls. The building should be positioned to intercept the prevailing night time winds. When the ambient air temperature falls below that of the produce, normally at night, the air is allowed to flow through the stored produce by the opening of louvres. This process can be automated and fans can be used to increase air flow rates.
Evaporative cooling from the incoming air assists in cooling and humidifying the store.
This kind of store can be used for holding potatoes through the winter (three to nine months) provided they have been cured and treated with sprout suppressant. Onions and garlic can also be stored using the same techniques but with lower humidities. Garlic in California can be held for three to four months. In onions there are great differences between varieties and production locations. Both crops will need to have been dried and cured in the field. Sweet potatoes need to be cured at 28 to 30C for a few days. Subsequently they can be stored for up to six months. Cabbages, carrots, pumpkins, apples, pears and lemons have all been successfully stored using this technique.
In Syria, unirrigated apples are stored in caves for nearly 10 months. Yam barns are common in West Africa where individual yams are tied to 2-m high vertical posts under a palm-thatch roof. In other parts of the world yams are stacked vertically on a raised platform under a straw roof. These structures are very effective, as the tubers receive adequate ventilation and are protected from both termite attack and flooding.
The extension officer can improve on-farm storage practices by training growers in correct techniques and by himself carrying out comparisons between the recommended practices and those that the farmers normally undertake. At an open day the difference between the two batches of crops can make a vivid demonstration of the validity of his recommendations. Photographs should be taken to be able to demonstrate the differences in future years.
TABLE 14. Storage life and recommended storage conditions of crops suitable for long term storage
Crop 
Degrees (Celsius)
Relative humidity (Percentage)
Storage life (Months)
Fruits 
Apples ** + 
0 to 4
90 to 95
2 to 6
Fresh date 
1 to 2
Coconut 
0 to 1
80 to 85
1 to 2
Grape ** + 
-1 to 0
90 to 95
1 to 4
Persimmon 
3 to 4
Kiwifruit + 
90 to 95
2 to 35
Orange ** + 
0 to 4
85 to 95
3 to 4
Pear ** + 
2 to 5
Lemon (coloured) + 
0 to 4 5
85 to 90
2 to 6
Mandarin 
4 to 6
85 to 90
1 to 1 5
Mangosteen 
4 to 5
85 to 90
1.5 to 2
Lemon (green) 
10 to 14
85 to 90
1 to 4
Casaba melon 
9 to 13
85 to 90
1 to 1 5
Honeydew melon 
9 to 13
85 to 90
Vegetables 
Cabbage ** 
1 to 3
Carrot (topped) ** +
5 to 6
Celery 
1 to 3
Garlic + 
65 to 70
6 to 7
Leek 
1 to 3
Onion (dry) ** + 
65 to 70
6 to 8
Parsnip 
90 to 95
2 to 6
Turnip 
90 to 95
4 to 5
Potato + 
4 to 6
90 to 95
4 to 8
Ginger + 
Pumpkin 
to 13 50 to 75
2 to 5
Sweet potatoes + 
to 16 85 to 90
4 to 7
Yam + 
16 85 to 90
3 to 5
** Dependent on cultivar and origin
+ Commonly held in long-term storage
TABLE 15. Generalized storage advice for fresh produce
Advice
Reason
Harvest produce at the proper maturity stage Immature produce has thinner skin resulting in faster evaporation
Keep produce in shade Water losses are tour times quicker in sunlight
Store only crops which are clean Diseased produce may infect sound crops. Damaged produce is easily infected and loses water. Dirt is a source of disease
Remove leaves attached to fruit and root crops Leaves lose water rapidly
Apply approved sprout suppressant to potatoes, onions, garlic and ginger Helps reduce sprouting during storage
Wash fruit in chlorinated water (200 ppm), benlate or baristan for about half a minute, rinse and dry Controls fungus disease
A thin coating of petroleum jelly will reduce shrivelling Water loss is reduced
Line baskets with paper or leaves, and containers with polythene film with some ventilation holes All act as barriers to high moisture loss
Store as soon as possible The quicker produce is cooled, the slower the water evaporates and microbial activity is reduced
Storage rooms and containers should be clean Reduces chance of infection from previous crop
Allow air circulation Removes heat and ethylene given oft by produce
Separate ripe from unripe fruit Ripening gives oft ethylene which hastens ripening of unripe fruit
Avoid mixing produce in the same storeroom Odours and gases given off can damage other crops
Store leafy vegetables at a high relative humidity Dry air rapidly draws moisture out of leaves
Cool moist conditions can be created by dripping water through burlap or jute sacks which serve as the wall covering of the cooler The latent heat of evaporation cools the air. The high humidities lessen water loss
Keep root crops in moist and slightly warm environment for 10 days before storage This is called curing and hastens the healing of wounds
Bulb crops should be dried or cured until the neck is tight and the outer scales rustle Diseases, particularly neck rot, are controlled, and moisture loss is reduced
Store roots and bulbs in drier atmosphere than other produce Root crops sprout easily under moist conditions
Store tropical produce at 10 C or above, and temperate crops at below 10 C Tropical crops suffer chilling injury at low temperatures
Use containers which can withstand stacking Optimizes volume of store without injuring produce
Maintain high humidities in cold stores by preventing entry of warm air through using plastic strip curtains, keeping doors closed and wetting floors High humidities for most crops reduce shrinkage and weight loss
Do not store onions in sacks piled to more than six high To minimize compression damage
Keep potatoes stored in the dark In sunlight they become green and poisonous
Small produce grown without irrigation tends to store best Small cell size and high solid matter content restrict water loss
Clean, moist sawdust can be used to store fruit like tomatoes, rambutans and mangoes High humidities are maintained. Sawdust should be dried before re-use
Transport. Most growers who do not sell to traders will transport produce to market in hired lorries or pick-ups. The grower will be given a fixed price for individual use of the transport or the lorry owner will charge by the canon. In both systems there are possibly two major inefficiencies.
Firstly, if the lorry is not fully loaded the unit costs are higher. Cost savings can be achieved by improving the process of assembling produce and encouraging the sharing of transport. The extension officer may, for example, encourage growers to assemble produce on a particular day of the week at specified collection points. Larger volumes of produce can bring cost savings through both economies of scale and by attracting a number of lorry owners to encourage price competition between them.
Secondly, when transport is costed by the canon, transporters will generally overload lorries in order to maximize their income. By assembling produce at one point so as to guarantee full loads, a fixed price for the lorry can be negotiated and the growers can themselves ensure that the transport is not overloaded.
Generally the larger the individual load, i.e. the larger the truck used, the cheaper the unit/cost of transport. In Pakistan, for example, an 8-tonne lorry travelling from northern Punjab to Karachi costs 4 000 rupees, i.e. 500 rupees per tonne of produce. The recently introduced 20-tonne articulated lorries cost 7 000 rupees for the same trip, i.e. 350 rupees per tonne. Longer wheel-based vehicles reduce vibration and consequently crop damage.
Farmers who make investments in transport mainly buy small trucks. The unit costs of transport are therefore generally higher than when hiring space in a larger lorry. Pick-ups do, however, offer farmers the advantages of:
* transporting produce immediately after harvest into the market;
* supplying transport services to neighbouring growers;
* taking produce for sale at farmers' markets;
* making direct sales to retailers and catering clients (see Case 3, Chapter 2).
In Table 16, some general advice to reduce damage in the transport of fresh produce is provided.
<section>8</section>
Markets and selling
Establishing collection centres and assembly markets. Collection centres enable produce to be assembled in volume which, in turn, attracts buyers and creates competition between buyers. Better prices are realized and economies can be achieved in transport.
In a situation where some ad hoc shipments of produce are being made into a distant market, the extension officer should consider the possibility of establishing a collection centre or assembly market. This would be achieved by:
* identifying a suitable market location, i.e. accessible to producers and roads;
* agreeing with local growers to synchronize harvesting and deliver their produce to the assembly points on a specific day of the week;
* informing buyers, agents, wholesalers and truckers of the time and location of the assembly market;
* encouraging growers not to undercut one another by agreeing on a minimum sale price.
Provided the assembly market is a success it will become self-sustaining, but at a later date it can be used as a springboard for group transport and marketing into the high-price, distant, urban markets.
TABLE 16. Recommended transport practices
Advice
Reason
Remove products from cold store during the cool part of the day In warm conditions produce attracts condensation. Water creates an environment for microbial attack
Transport produce during the coolest part of the day (dawn or night) Heat causes faster water loss and respiration
Supervise loading and unloading, Boxes should be lifted or carried, never thrown To prevent boxes being dropped
Loading can be made easy by the use of loading bays or with steps or planks. Trolleys, conveyors and fork-lift trucks reduce handling Produce can be carried on and off easily
For loading bulk-transported pineapples, cabbages and melons, the throw-catch system can be used but should involve at least five people This is acceptable because of the need for speed in unloading and the low value of the individual fruit
Provide space between crates for adequate ventilation To prevent accumulation of heat and gases
Containers should be packed to reduce movement and to distribute weight evenly. Only stack to a height which the lowest containers can withstand without crushing. Stow goods in reverse order to their unloading sequence Shifting loads and poor weight distribution damage produce and cause vehicle handling problems
Use white or white-painted convas to cover the produce The sun's heat will be reflected produce
Provide ventilation during transport by raising the canvas cover 20 cm with a plank Into a low tent shape To provide airflow for the removal of heat and gases
Vans should be double-skinned and allow ventilation To prevent the transmission of heat to the produce
Use horizontal dividers to separate layers of containers in the truck This system can also be used for bulk transport of such produce as melons, cabbages, citrus and pineapples Prevents compression damage to the produce being transported Can be used for containers that do not stack, as well as bulk shipments
Bulk shipments should be cushioned with a thick layer of straw or leaves on the bottom and sides of the lorry Water melons are transported this way in the United States of America to prevent damage
Jolting should be reduced by not driving too fast, particularly on poor roads Long wheel-bases reduce damage, as does air-ride suspension, which is preferable to leaf-spring suspension Jolting increases crop bruising and wastage, reducing sales income
Vehicles should be properly maintained Breakdowns result in time wastage and may result in high levels of produce damage
During loading, unloading and when parked the truck should be in the shade Gives protection from sun and rain
Farmers' markets and village markets. Farmers' markets in selected towns, where farmers or their associations can sell direct to retailers or individual consumers have been a Success in countries as different as Malaysia, North America and Pakistan.
In Egypt, highly successful village markets have been established which operate on a weekly basis. These enable farmers to sell directly either-to consumers or wholesaler agents from the city markets.
Establishing new markets is a valuable function for an extension officer because it provides new outlets for growers, increases the efficiency of middlemen and enables farmers to build Up an understanding of market orientated production.
Working with farmer groups. Working with farmer groups increases the effectiveness of an extension officer and provides opportunities for collective or cooperative action.
The success of both the above examples depended on the extension officer having formed a farmers' group through which he worked. The farmers had sufficient mutual trust to make the enterprises work.
Working with agribusiness. The presence of an effective extension officer can attract businesses to invest in an area or into attempting to start marketing produce. The extension officer can carry out a vital intermediary role between the farmers and the agribusiness. He can organize farmers to coordinate production, provide training and negotiate contracts on behalf of the growers.
JAVA
Perspective
In Java an extension officer encouraged a group of farmers to develop new enterprises.
Action
The group recognized that there was a market for bananas in the town but that small farmers in the high-aititude areas could not sell their fruit. The extension officer organized a loan to cover working capital. The group collected bananas from the farms. They cleaned, graded and packed the fruit in their village before selling 'd in the town.
Result
Some five years later the small growers in the high altitude areas, where the crop grows especially well, have expanded banana production because they now have a distribution system in place. The farmer group now has a regular marketing business in addition to the farmers' own agricultural activities.
PHILIPPINES
Perspective
Normally the growers sold their papaya and bananas to visiting traders. The farmer group was unhappy with the prices offered. The extension officer encouraged them to take responsibility for their own marketing.
Action
One farmer offered to take all the group's produce to market provided they all committed themselves. Therefore he was assured of sufficient volume. The produce was sold on a commission basis. Initially he used hired transport. Later he was able to afford his own transport.
Result
The farmer group now gets better prices. The marketing profits are made in the local area rather than by the city based trader. The group now has much closer links with the market and can adapt their production accordingly.
A horticultural exporter, for example, with help from the extension officer could introduce a modern system whereby selected farmers grow specifically for export and produce is graded for the export market in the production area. The extension officer could, for example, work with the agribusiness to: identify suitable export farmers and form them into an export growers group;
* assist in the introduction of improved production techniques and production programmes;
* train farmers in improved harvesting, handling, grading and packaging techniques;
* agree on firm prices for the export growers' group;
* help arrange outlets for outgraded produce;
* help coordinate the supply of packaging materials and transport;
The extension officer will need to make himself aware of the businesses which might be interested in developing ventures in his area.
PAKISTAN
Perspective
An agribusiness wanted 10 start mint oil (menthol) production, a process which Involves steam distillation of Mentha arvensis.
Action
The extension officer, who in this case was attached to the agricultural bank, selected suitable progressive farmers to undertake the initial field trials and multiply the planting material. He organized production credit and ensured that the growers carried out the correct production practices. The agribusiness established the steam distillation units.
Result
Field results demonstrated that high yields and excellent quality mint oil were possible. Farmer Incomes are well above those for traditional crops. Production is expanding and new buyers are coming on to the market as the country develops new uses for the essential oil.
Contracts. Contract farming is a feature of more developed agriculture. It has the advantage of reducing price fluctuations and therefore risk, both for the grower and for the buyer. Contracts generally operate between farmers and agribusinesses who need to be assured of supplies. Problems generally arise when there is a great difference between the contract price and the price in the open market. Growers are tempted to make a short-term profit but this is generally a short-sighted view because it discourages the agribusiness from working with the farmer again. Agribusiness, when oversupplied, will sometimes unfairly reject produce, normally on the basis of quality.
The extension officer can be extremely valuable in assisting negotiation of the contract, possibly on the basis of the break-even cost of production (see Table 11) plus a percentage profit. He should encourage both sides to stand by their contractual agreements and he can act as an arbitrator in the case of dispute.
Many farms in developed countries will grow a proportion of their crops under contract in order to reduce the risk of being fully exposed to the price fluctuations of the open market. Contract prices will generally be below the average wholesale price because of the lower risk element.
SOME EXAMPLES OF DIFFERENT TYPES OF CONTRACT
Firm Purchase
The price is agreed on in advance. Volumes are also agreed on.
Minimum Guarantee
A minimum price is agreed on and a bonus paid after the agribusiness has sold the produce, depending on the profit made.
Joint Account
The risks are jointly shared between the agribusiness and the grower. Profits or losses are equally divided between the two parties.
Commission
The agribusiness sells on behalf of the grower and deducts an agreed commission.
Cooperatives. In countries cooperatives have been formed to take on the marketing role on behalf of farmers. An effective cooperative will increase the chances of small farms remaining viable as the market becomes more developed and demanding. The manual has shown many examples of informal cooperation between growers. When considering the formation of a cooperative the extension officer should take into account:
* the importance of the producer retaining control. This is ensured through the cooperative's constitution. Either "one man one vote" or share capital linked to acreage is desirable;
* the need to employ efficient and well-motivated staff, particularly at senior management level. Many cooperatives have failed through employing the wrong staff and paying them according to government pay scales. Marketing requires a business mind. Successful cooperatives have often been established by linking the manager's salary to turnover and/or to the net sum paid to producer members;
* the value of a properly equipped cooperative. It must have the necessary facilities and equipment to carry out its objectives but without building up too high a level of overheads.
Cooperatives are born out of necessity, when growers recognize that their survival depends on the collective negotiating strength that a cooperative can provide.
Negotiating and selling. For the grower perhaps the most critical time in the production/marketing chain is the point when he negotiates a price with the buyer. The extension officer's role should be to improve the farmers' negotiating strength, training the grower in the art of selling and alerting him to dishonest practices.
Chapter 3 of this book has discussed the extension officer's role in identifying for farmers reputable and appropriate trading partners. He or she should become a bridge between traders and farmers and emphasize that mutual benefit is based on cooperation. Successful business relationships are always selfsustaining because they bring advantages to both sides.
Generally farmers are at a disadvantage in negotiation because of lack of price knowledge. Their strength in negotiation can be increased by:
* growing crops for which there is a strong demand;
* being aware of prevailing market prices and conditions and how these translate back into farmer prices;
* knowing the break-even cost of production and marketing (see Table 11).
The extension officer will be able to assist the farmer in these three areas with information as well as by negotiating on behalf of groups of growers and drawing up contracts.
Part of the technique of obtaining good prices for produce is good promotion and selling skills. The farmer in effect needs to be his own salesman. This will involve persuading people to buy. Advantages over other products need to be emphasized. Attractively presented and appetising produce is also effective in obtaining good prices.
Middlemen and traders can be dishonest. A bad dealer can cheat the farmer:
* on the weight of the crop;
* on the comparative quality of the produce;
* in calculating the selling price;
* by delaying payment.
The extension officer can reduce these kinds of problems by identifying honest traders in the first place. He or she can also test the accuracy of scales. (A subtle and effective method is to test if the scales measure the marketing advisor's own weight accurately.) Market news services and market knowledge will enable a farmer to be confident of how the quality of his produce compares with the competition. By encouraging the sharing of information about the reputation of traders, growers will rapidly learn which traders to trust.
A simple method for recording price information and reducing chances of cheating, when produce is sold on commission, is to have despatch notes printed with four copies, one to be retained by the producer, one for the haulier and two for the commission agent. All despatch notes are serially numbered. The producer checks with the commission agent daily by phone how the sales are progressing and will note on his copy of the despatch note the individual selling prices. When the whole consignment is sold the commission agent will return one copy of the despatch note with the selling prices recorded, along with the cheque.
Miscellaneous activities
Horticultural research is notoriously weak in both the area of post-harvest handling and developing market-oriented production techniques. The extension officer may have an important role in identifying research topics. For example, he may encourage researchers to develop off-season vegetable production techniques, or to consider an improved packaging design and to research into onfarm crop storage techniques.
The extension officer should also play a role in assisting the planning of national projects to expand horticultural production. In addition, his advisory functions may include assisting in the planning of national market development programmes, i.e. sites and designs of new markets, marketing systems and improved infrastructure.
Summary and conclusions
At the beginning of this manual the marketing task of an extension officer was defined as: finding out what the market wants and then setting up the system to supply that demand at a profit.
Put simply there are four ways to increase profitability:
* by lowering costs;
* reducing losses;
* obtaining higher prices;
* selling more produce.
It is useful for an extension officer to test his plans to see how they could lead to achieving one or more of these criteria.
Lowering costs and reducing wastage are high priorities because they provide the chance of cheaper produce. In all developed societies the cost of food has fallen in real terms. Cheaper food, in turn, means fruit and vegetables will be affordable by the poorer sectors of society. Not only will the market for horticultural produce increase but higher consumption levels can also lead to improvements in health and nutrition. Lower unit costs can be achieved by higher yields and lower transport, packaging and distribution costs. Lower wastage mainly depends on improved post-harvest handling but also on better production and harvesting techniques.
Higher prices can be obtained by producing the right crops, at the right times and the correct quality. They may also depend on negotiating skills and targeting high price buyers.
Increased sales may depend on lower costs but also on finding and developing new markets, new business ventures, new crops, new periods of supply.
Traditionally extension officers have provided technical production advice. Development brings with it the increased commercialization of agriculture. Farmers need assistance in this transition. Marketing and business advice is a new dimension for extension officers, which requires technical, financial, marketing and management skills. It is an exciting area with scope for innovation and the opportunity to significantly improve rural incomes.
<section>9</section>
Chapter 6 - Eight common mistakes in horticultural marketing
Important lessons can be learnt from failures, as well as the successes identified in Chapter 2. This chapter examines some of the most common misunderstandings of horticultural marketing and the mistakes made.
Fixed-price buying by governments
Fruit and vegetable production can be highly risky with market prices sometimes being too low to cover costs. As a result there is often an outcry, particularly from growers, for the government to buy horticultural produce at fixed prices.
Whenever schemes like this have been introduced growers have responded by expanding production. They do this because government prices guarantee profitable, risk-free production which bears no relation to demand. Large volumes of produce are wasted. These schemes are a great drain on government resources which could be spent better elsewhere, for example by stimulating local demand or developing new markets.
Food processing to utilize surpluses
When prices are forced down because of over-production, it is often recommended that a food-processing plant be established to utilize the surplus.
Successful, profitable and self-sustaining food-processing industries cannot be based on the occasional supply of raw material when the fresh market is glutted. Horticultural processing requires expensive investment in machinery. It is crucial to make optimum use of the equipment and minimize idle time. Successful plants have to have a guaranteed supply of raw material and must produce products for which there is a demand. Food processors enter into contracts with growers to ensure that supply is evenly extended over the longest possible supply season.
An integrated production/marketing chain
Mechanized grading
It is often felt that mechanized grading will improve the quality of produce.
Grading never improves quality, it merely separates qualities. High quality produce is mainly dependent on growing conditions, the production techniques used and post-harvest handling. Mechanized graders are very good at separating produce into different sizes. This is the least important aspect of grading. The most important is separating into different quality grades.
This can only be effectively done by the human eye. It is a common and recurring mistake that technology-particularly high technology-will in itself solve problems. Far greater advances can be made by improving management and adapting existing systems. Investment in expensive machinery may be a later requirement of an ongoing, successful, grading operation. If centralized grading is to work, then capital investment costs need to be minimized. Equipment such as grading tables can be made by local carpenters following a simple design. In the first instance the only mechanized equipment necessary is likely to be a conveyor which moves the produce past quality control staff. Expensive grading lines are normally only necessary if very large volumes of produce are being packed and graded for developed markets.
National grading standards for the domestic market
It is often recommended that horticultural marketing will be improved by the imposition of national grading standards.
Although national standards can probably be justified for export, when compulsory minimum standards are introduced for the home market it will put up prices to the consumer. This would be entirely detrimental because it would lower consumption and reduce the size of the local market. Ideally policy measures should reduce prices and thereby increase consumption.
Grading is generally introduced by the industry itself when the consumer is willing pay a higher average price for the sorted product. Very often informal and flexible grading standards are used, which respond to the market requirements and state of supply and demand. Any attempts to force sorting on to the horticultural industry before then will be almost impossible to police, will waste government resources and will fail.
Generally the first growers to sort produce will get a high premium for their Class 1 and a low discount for their Class 3. As more growers take up grading, the increased supply of Class I may force down the price to the point where it no longer pays to grade. The viability of grading depends on whether sufficient consumers are willing to pay the extra price involved.
In practice grading and sorting will take place throughout the marketing chain. Some grading, particularly of fruit, takes place in the field. Further grading often takes place at the wholesale and retail level so that damage caused by transport and delay can be dealt with. With re-grading, a balance has to be achieved between the higher price for more uniform quality and the increased damage from grading itself.
Storage of produce to exploit price rises
It is commonly thought that, in times of oversupply, produce can be held in storage and marketed when price rises occur.
Most horticultural crops are only suitable for short-term storage, maybe only a few days. Storage is expensive and detracts from freshness and quality. In most situations, when the produce is brought out of store it has to compete with freshly arrived produce. The result is reduced prices and the farmer has to pay for the storage costs as well.
Relatively few crops are suitable for long-term storage. These crops should be put into storage directly after harvesting. If prices are low at harvest growers will react en masse to put a higher proportion of produce in storage. As a result when these crops are marketed out of storage there is fierce price competition. Storage in production areas is often not successful because the storage facilities are under-utilized for most of the year and are therefore uneconomic.
Government-run trading operations
Middlemen and traders are often accused of making excessive profits. Government-run horticultural trading operations are thought to result in improved grower returns and lower consumer prices.
In practice most government-run enterprises marketing horticultural produce are failures and can only cover costs if they have some special monopoly, e.g. importing food products. Amongst the most common reasons for their failure are:
* excessive and unnecessary investments being made in equipment and buildings;
* management only working regular office hours and not having a profit incentive, unlike private-sector businesses;
* overstaffing and restrictive working practices;
* government trading operations not having sufficient flexibility to rapidly adjust prices. There is a technique to buying and selling perishable horticultural produce at a profit;
* lack of quality control and purchase of all produce offered by farmers;
* high wastage levels of produce.
Horticultural marketing is a highly competitive business requiring strong entrepreneurial and trading skills. Decisions have to be made rapidly and long hours worked, and civil services are not set up to operate in this way.
In export marketing, however, there are many examples of governments successfully establishing a single organization to oversee the development and promotion of horticultural exports. These organizations have the advantages of:
* preventing export prices being forced down by produce from the same country competing against itself;
* being able to afford highly skilled, modern managers capable of taking a strategic approach to marketing rather than a short-term, spot trading mentality typical of traders on local markets;
* being able to undertake centralized promotional and advertising campaigns;
* having large enough volumes of produce to negotiate favourable terms with shipping companies and with major buyers.
Generally the activities of support and control are allocated to the public sector, leaving the trading and business functions in the hands of the private sector.
Ultra-modern post-harvest techniques
Very often the level of post-harvest losses is claimed to be very high in developing countries. The introduction of post-harvest techniques used in highly developed societies, such as sophisticated packaging and cool chain techniques is expected to reduce crop wastage.
Most modern post-harvest techniques are also very expensive, requiring a high initial investment in imported equipment. They also require highly trained staff and managers and immediate access to spares and skilled technicians.
For example, cardboard cartons can only be used once. They require considerable investment in manufacturing facilities and the continued importation of raw materials. Cool chains require specialized refrigerated stores close to the production areas in order to remove the crops' field heat, as well as refrigerated vehicles. Refrigerated containers are very expensive and the produce stored in this way should then be held in refrigerated counters even in the retail shop. The system is only practical and viable when an integrated chain is established, which requires a substantial coordinated investment, often from different firms, and when large volumes of produce are handled.
These technologies are very often inappropriate for developing countries because the costs are greater than the savings. They work best in countries with a highly developed infrastructure, i.e. good roads, reliable and cheap electricity supply, a highly skilled workforce and easy access to spare parts. Most importantly, the consumer must be prepared to pay a higher price for the produce. High technology like this does not work well in isolation. Newly introduced technologies should not be significantly more advanced than the general level of technology in a society. They should also be carefully costed to ensure that they do not add to the costs of marketing and distribution.
Change for the sake of change
A marketing adviser or an extension officer with special responsibilities for marketing may feel obliged to make changes to the existing marketing system. What is not often fully appreciated is that most marketing systems have evolved and will continue to respond to changing market requirements. Generally there are very good reasons why they function as they do. Like all systems a marketing system will be imperfect. However, if the system functions reasonably well, if there is competition and if produce is well distributed around the country then any marketing adviser should be extremely wary of trying to impose unnecessary changes, which may destroy what he is trying to improve. When change is not necessary, it is necessary not to change.
<section>a</section>
Further reading
ABBOTT, J.C. 1986. Marketing improvement in the developing world. Economic and social development series 37. FAO, Rome. Manual on the FAO Marketing and Credit Group's experience over the last 20 years.
ASEAN-PHTRC. Village-level handling of fruit and vegetables; Prevention of moisture loss; Papaw and mango handling, Department of Horticulture, College of Agriculture, University of Philippines, Laguna, Philippines. Village-level, appropriate postharvest advice published in various bulletins.
DEBNEY, H.G. et al. Product manual, handling and storage practices for fresh fruit and vegetables. Australian United Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Association, Australian Department of Primary Industries, Queensland, Australia. A manual on postharvest practices, well illustrated with individual crop recommendations.
FAO, AGSM. 1984. Guide to establishing small packing stations for fruit and vegetables in rural areas. FAO, Rome. This guide draws attention to some of the problems that might arise in establishing small packing facilities.
FAO. 1977. The Modern Farm Business, and The Farm Business Survey. Better Farming Series, FAO, Rome. These booklets explain agricultural business advice in simple English and with line drawings.
HARRIS, S.R. 1986. Improvements of post-harvest fresh fruits and vegetables handling--a manual. FAO, and Association of food marketing agencies in Asia and Pacific (AFMA), Bangkok. An excellent manual. Not only good technical information but also the postharvest advice is seen in context of the wider issues of marketing and the marketing system.
ITC. 1988. (International Trade Centre, UNCTAD/GATT) Manual on the packaging of fresh fruits and vegetables, Geneva. A comprehensive review of packaging methods, with particular emphasis on export packaging.
KADER, A. et al. 1985. Post-harvest technology of horticultural crops. Cooperative extension, University of California. Special publication 3311. Good review of modern post-harvest technology.
SCHUBERT, Berndt. 1983. Market information services. FAO, Agricultural Services Bulletin 57. A review of FAO's experience in establishing Market Information Services.
