<title>ADCP/REP/88/30 - A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in Eleven Middle East Countries</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Aquaculture continues to grow in economic importance. The main reason for this is the quantifiable contribution aquaculture is making in many countries to fill the growing gap between supply and demand for fisheries products. This gap continues to widen because of increasing human populations and the static growth rates of capture fisheries brought about by declines in stocks and the increasing cost of obtaining fish through conventional methods. Although this gap can (and in some cases is already) being met by alternatives, such as inexpensive poultry and white meats, aquaculture particularly provides consumers with a choice of fresh products.
Aquaculture is also evident in earning foreign exchange for many countries through the export of high-value products. It also creates employment, particularly in economically depressed coastal and remote regions, and contributes to the household economy of rural farmers.
The regional survey prepared by the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) covers the existing aquaculture sector in a group of eleven Middle East countries, namely Bahrain, Iraq, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Jordan, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, the Yemen Arab Republic, and the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen. Each country has been selected as part of the survey because (i) it is active in the aquaculture sector, and (ii) it shares common aquaculture systems and practices with other countries in the group because of geography and environment.
Other Member Nations of the Near East Region of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), namely Afghanistan, Algeria, Cyprus, Djibouti, Egypt, Lebanon, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, Pakistan, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, and Turkey, either have no aquaculture activities at the present time, or they are linked better for aquaculture purposes to other regions and included in other surveys. For example, Algeria, Cyprus, Egypt, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Syria, Turkey and Tunisia are included in the survey for the Mediterranean region. Pakistan is included in the West Asia survey, and Djibouti, Mauritania, Somalia, and Sudan in the Africa survey.
This present survey is not exhaustive. It has been prepared by Patrick G. White in a relatively brief desk study. For many countries detailed information is still difficult to obtain. The ADCP apologizes for any omissions and errors which may exist in the survey, and hopes that these can be corrected in an up-dated survey. New information and notification of changes and errors should be indicated to the ADCP in the Fisheries Department, FAO, Rome. The detailed Table of Contents illustrates the range of information which, hopefully, will be assembled in due course for all regions.
The survey is directed toward administrators, executives, and managers who require broad overviews, rather than for scientists and technologists who require detailed information about species and practices. It is the first of a series of regional surveys. To this end, the ADCP hopes that the reader will find the information described here useful.
Colin E. Nash
Craig B. Kensler
Rome, 1988
<section>2</section>
INTRODUCTION
This report covers a Middle East region which includes eleven countries bordering the Red Sea and the Gulf, but excluding those countries which border the Mediterranean and the African continent. The countries described by the survey are:
Bahrain
Iraq
Islamic Republic of Iran
Jordan
Kuwait
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
United Arab Emirates (UAE)
Yemen Arab Republic (YAR)
Yemen, People's Democratic Republic (PDRY)
Eight of the countries are grouped together on the Peninsula (Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, UAE, YAR, and PDRY), and three on the Asian continent (Jordan, Iran, and Iraq).
Some countries are linked as members of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) - Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and UAE, and some as members of The Organization for Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) - Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and UAE.
The World Bank classifies Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the UAE in the group of high-income oil exporting countries; Iran and Iraq as middle-income oil exporters; and Jordan, YAR, and PDRY as middle-income oil importers.
<section>3</section>
1. CONSUMPTION OF FISH AND SHELLFISH AND THE REGIONAL MARKETS
1.1 Benefits of fish and shellfish to the consumer
1.2 Characteristics of consumption in the region
1.3 Annual consumption of fish and shellfish
1.4 Gross market data
1.5 Specific market data
1.6 Information for the trade
1.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
1.1 Benefits of fish and shellfish to the consumer
One prime reason for aquaculture is to supply and offer a choice of low-cost animal protein to meet consumer demand. Within the Middle East region as described there is no real shortage of protein, with all countries having a combined feed supply of fish and meat of over 20 kg per caput/annum. Iraq and Iran with the largest populations in the area have the most pressing need to provide additional low cost protein.
A diet containing sufficient protein to maintain health is of primary importance. However, an increased per caput consumption of fish and shellfish in any region will benefit health. Aquatic animals contain a high level of protein (17-20%), with an amino-acid profile similar to that of meat from land animals. The flesh of fish is therefore readily digestible and immediately utilizable by the human body. Compared with land animals (with some exceptions, such as shellfish), aquatic animals have a far higher percentage of edible flesh, and there is little wastage.
The flesh of aquatic animals is a source of minerals, such as calcium, iron and phosphorus, as well as trace elements and vitamins. Marine species are particularly rich in iodine. The fatty-acid content is high in polyunsaturates, and particularly those which are attributed to reduce blood cholesterol.
1.2 Characteristics of consumption in the region
Fish consumption in the region has some distinct characteristics. These are mainly due to the fishery resource and demography of the countries. The region can be defined as follows:
- coastal countries where fish is comparatively abundant and populations are mainly coastal (Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar, UAE, and PDRY) but whose populations are relatively small;
- countries with relatively large coastal and inland populations (Iran and Saudi Arabia);
- countries with larger inland populations and comparatively small fish resources (Iraq, Jordan, and YAR).
The supply of food products from livestock and fish is generally sufficient for the whole region. According to FAO Food Balance Sheets for 1985, the total annual food supply of meat and fish for human consumption per caput is:
- below 30 kg in 2 countries (Iran and YAR),
- over 30 kg and below 60 kg in 3 countries (Iran, Jordan, and PDRY),
- over 60 kg in 3 countries (Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and UAE),
- data are insufficient for Bahrain, Oman, and Qatar.
The countries of Oman and PDRY have rich coastal marine fisheries resources and have populations living predominantly along the coast; on the other hand the countries of Jordan, Iraq, and Iran have the majority of their populations living inland and with relatively well developed agriculture.
Only in PDRY does consumption of fish exceed consumption of meat. In all other countries the consumption of fish is between 4 and 30% of the total food supply of meat and fish.
1.3 Annual consumption of fish and shellfish
Although the total fisheries catch for the region during 1982 to 1984 (average 444 333 t) was sufficient to cover the fish consumption (424 682 t), 28% of the fisheries catch was not utilized for human consumption and the majority was sun-dried for animal feed or fertilizer, or converted into fish meal. During the same period 138 240 t of fishery products were imported and only 33 513 t exported.
The annual consumption of fish and shellfish for the region averages 5.11 kg per caput per annum, which is less than half the average figure of 12.1 kg for world consumption.
The demographic characteristics of the countries are reflected in the annual fish consumption figures which vary considerably within the region. The data on the yearly supply of fish for human consumption per caput (from the FAO Provisional Food Balance Sheet of Fish and Fishery Products) during the years 1982-1984 are summarized in Table 1.
Fish consumption patterns changed significantly between 1980 and 1983 with an overall increase in annual fish consumption per caput and with over 3 kg increase registered in Oman, UAE, and PDRY. However, a decrease in consumption was registered in Bahrain, Iran, Kuwait, and YAR.
1.4 Gross market data
The total population of the region described was 83 184 000 in 1985. The individual populations of the countries range from Iran with over 40 million to Qatar with only 275 000. The UAE is a union of small independent states. The populations of the various countries are given in Table 1.
Due to the oil resources of the region some of the countries are comparatively rich. This wealth increased rapidly throughout the 1950s and 1960s as the price of oil and quantity of oil pumped increased; however, oil prices dropped during the 1970s which reduced GNPs. Since then many oil-producing countries have diversified into industrial production (Saudi Arabia) and investment (Kuwait).
The cumulated Gross National Product of the region in 1985 amounted to approximately US$ 281.31 billion (see Table 2).
Due to the comparatively low population of these countries they include some of the wealthiest in the world in terms of GNP per caput (see Table 2). In world ranking the UAE is the richest, with Kuwait fourth, Saudi Arabia sixteenth and Oman twenty-second among the wealthiest populations.
The relative wealth of some countries, together with a national commitment to build infrastructure (roads, airports, etc.) within the country and to diversify out of oil-based industries, has led to the immigration of large populations of temporary expatriate workers. This has influenced the statistics for population growth within the region, giving UAE, Saudi Arabia and Oman, for example, the highest population growth rates in the world.
The population growth rates for the countries during the years 1973 to 1985 are also given in Table 2.
The expatriate population of certain countries is quite substantial, particularly within the GCC countries, and is estimated to be between 15 and 20% of the total population of these six countries. Increased industrialization has resulted in the immigration of large numbers of non-Arab expatriate workers from India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Philippines, and Arab expatriate workers from the Yemen, Egypt, and Lebanon. This has increased fish consumption figures and influenced consumer demand for non-indigenous fish species, such as tilapia, and introduced new fish preparation methods and new eating habits.
National and individual wealth has also influenced fish and shellfish consumption. In some countries it has increased the purchasing power for imported fish and fishery products, including luxury processed products.
The preference throughout these countries is generally for fresh fish. However, in recent years chilled and frozen fish have become widely accepted and are now sold through retail shops and supermarkets. Cured fish are also popular but mainly in remote areas. In Iraq smoked carp (masgoof) is popular and commands a high price, and generally freshwater fish are preferred and fetch higher prices than marine species. In Iran, a brackishwater cyprinid, kutum, commands the highest price, but salmon, trout, carp (common and Chinese), and sturgeon are also popular.
Fish species preference is to some extent based on traditional availability. In the countries bordering the Red Sea, rabbitfish, groupers, mullet, snappers, emperors, and shrimps are popular, whereas in countries bordering the Gulf, rabbitfish, pomfret, groupers, shrimp, and lobsters are popular, and command high prices (see Table 3).
1.5 Specific market data
In most of these eleven Middle East countries, with free markets and flexible price policies, fish are normally auctioned at the landing site at a wholesale or retail market. The price of fish is generally market driven depending on supply and demand.
In general, government participation in marketing operations is limited to the provision of markets, market facilities, and other related services, and the authorities rarely intervene in the daily pricing processes. There are exceptions, such as PDRY, where the Government controls most of the production, marketing, and pricing of fish. In Iraq the Government enforces fixed price arrangements in an effort to keep fish prices to the consumer as low as possible.
Traditionally most fish markets were sited near the fish landing areas but recently fish markets have been modernized or constructed next to other central markets in the larger inland cities. General economic development and urbanization has resulted in the construction of improved infrastructure facilities, including ice plants, cold stores, communication networks, refrigerated trucks and good roads to allow quick transportation of fish from landing areas to inland populations. Distribution of fish is also improving between neighbouring countries in the region with improved road links and comprehensive air freighting networks by airline companies.
Recently the respective government agencies responsible for fisheries (sometimes in joint venture with private investors) have set up fish marketing and retail companies, such as Bahrain Fishing Project, Saudi Fisheries Company, Oman National Fisheries Company, United Fisheries of Kuwait, Qatar National Fishing Company, and Iran Shilat Fish Marketing.
The Middle East region as described is a net importer of fish and fishery products (see Table 4). Data on interregional trade between countries are not reliable as records are not always kept. A large proportion of fish imported into member countries of the GCC is from Oman, while Kuwait re-exports a significant quantity.
Fish and fishery products imported into the region are fresh, chilled, and frozen. Among the many imports are a variety of shrimp, fish (such as pomfrets and mackerels), canned, cured, dried, or smoked fish (such as sardines, tuna, and mackerels), prepared and preserved Crustacea and molluscs, and other fishery delicacies, particularly caviar.
A major share of imports is from developing countries in South and Southeast Asia, South America, and Africa. Imports of frozen fish come from Korea, Thailand, Philippines, India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Argentina, and from Arab countries, such as Morocco, Somalia, YAR, Egypt, PDRY, and Sudan.
The region also exports fish and fishery products, with shrimp, lobster, cuttlefish, squid, abalone, and caviar being some of the important items. The largest market for Arab fishery products is Japan, with exports of frozen shrimp from Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, frozen lobster from Oman, frozen cuttlefish from PDRY, Oman, and UAE, frozen sea-bream and other fish from Oman, and dried or salted fish from PDRY. These exports alone are valued at over US$ 12.5 million. In addition Iran exports approximately 150 t/annum of caviar with a current value of US$ 20 million.
1.6 Information for the trade
The principal marketing information service in the region is INFOSAMAK, although it does not differentiate aquaculture products as yet. INFOSAMAK assists the fishing industry and governments in the region by establishing contacts between buyers and sellers of fish products, and providing technical information and advice on post-harvest aspects of fisheries, such as handling, processing, equipment selection, and quality assurance. INFOSAMAK is based in Bahrain, and its working languages are English, Arabic, and French.
INFOSAMAK is one of four regional services (in Africa, Asia/Pacific, Latin America, in addition). This network of services produces a fortnightly news bulletin, called Trade News, in English, French, Spanish and Arabic. This deals with prices, cold storage holdings, short-term market trends, and business opportunities. The network also publishes a two-monthly magazine called INFOFISH International (incorporating Marketing Digest) in English, which contains articles of market analysis, new products, processing, packaging, equipment, and other aspects of fisheries including aquaculture with summaries in the other three languages. Again, as yet, little information is relevant to aquaculture in the region.
A fifth member of the service is the FAO computerized system of fish marketing called GLOBEFISH. This database stores original information collected by INFOSAMAK and the other regional services on such things as production and trade statistics, price series, the supply and demand situation, information on aquaculture, investment, joint ventures, and general economic data relevant to fisheries. Specific searches are made on request. FAO also produces Globefish Highlights, which is a quarterly analysis of medium trends. It is based on the information in the databank and is distributed as a supplement to the Trade News (above) in four languages.
Annual fishery statistics are also stored on an FAO database called FISHDAB. As yet aquaculture statistics are not separated.
The Arab Federation of Fish Producers is based in Baghdad, Iraq, and was established to encourage fish production, development, and trade between Arab countries. It publishes a regular journal and some studies and reports. The United Fisheries of Kuwait and the Saudi Fisheries Company also publish promotional material such as posters and books of commercial fish species, recipes, etc.
The Kuwait Institute for Scientific Research produces technical reports on aquaculture and fisheries, some of which deal with fish consumption and marketing in Kuwait. A number of other marketing studies have been conducted for cultured species as part of feasibility studies for aquaculture ventures in Jordan and Saudi Arabia.
Eurofish Report is a fortnightly review (published in the United Kingdom) of European fisheries and world fishing news. In addition to items of current news in the industry, including aquaculture, it contains data of supplies and prices of commodities, including aquaculture products.
Many of the international markets relevant to the interests of the region are covered by Seafood Business (USA), Seafood International (UK), Seafood Leader (USA), and II Pesce (Italy). All these commercial publications are available through subscription and, in addition to prices and market trends, etc., often have relevant articles about aquaculture production worldwide.
1.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
The main project in the region supporting fish trade, identifying markets, etc., is INFOSAMAK. INFOSAMAK was established by UNDP/FAO to help 21 Arab countries. It has 13 active members of which six are in this region as described, namely, Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar, Oman, PDRY, and YAR.
INFOSAMAK was established in 1986 as a regional project and part of a worldwide fish marketing and promotion network (see 1.6), and provides guidance for such investments and production decisions, and identifies important opportunities in export-oriented fisheries and aquaculture. INFOSAMAK can, on request, provide specific advice with regard to handling and marketing of fish and aquaculture products.
Two other UNDP/FAO regional projects have covered the region but recently ended. A project on fisheries development in the Gulf involved Bahrain, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and UAE produced studies on stock assessment, fish marketing, and prospects for market development in the Gulf area. Nothing was directly specific to aquaculture products. The other project, for the Development of Fisheries in Areas of the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden covered the bordering countries including Jordan, Saudi Arabia, YAR, and PDRY from the region; Djibouti, Egypt, and Sudan were the other participating members. This project conducted socio-economic and research related studies for Jordan, YAR, and PDRY, and included aquaculture components.
<section>4</section>
2. AQUACULTURE PRODUCTION OF FISH AND SHELLFISH IN THE REGION
2.1 Characteristics of production in the region
2.2 Regional production data
2.3 Production systems and practices in the region
2.4 Producers in the region
2.5 Organizations of producers
2.6 Financial investment by public and private enterprises
2.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
2.8 Capital assistance projects in the sub-sector
2.1 Characteristics of production in the region
In the region there is historical evidence of traditional small-scale aquaculture activity based mainly on freshwater pond culture. Old earth fish ponds have been located in Jordan, Iraq, Iran, and PDRY, but in most cases the practices were limited to holding fish or ongrowing wild-caught fry.
In 1965 the Fisheries Departments in Jordan and Iraq started pilot-scale fish farms to test culture systems and suitable species. In 1972 the Government of Iran established a fish hatchery based on technology from USSR and started a sturgeon restocking programme. Small-scale trials on shrimp culture were started in Bahrain with assistance from the Overseas Development Administration (UK) in 1973, in Kuwait in 1975 at KISR with the assistance of Japanese technology and technicians, and in PDRY in 1978 with assistance from Nichiro Gyogyo, Japan. Small-scale trials on tilapia culture were conducted in Saudi Arabia in 1979, and on rabbitfish and mullet in UAE in 1981. However, it was not until the late 1970s and early 1980s that large-scale aquaculture development took place in the region.
The rate of development has, to some extent, been constrained by the geography of the area which is not particularly suitable for aquaculture. In countries such as Iran and Iraq, where there are comparatively large freshwater resources, large-scale freshwater fish culture has developed; both these countries also carry out large-scale restocking programmes for their lakes, rivers, reservoirs, and open waters. In Jordan and Saudi Arabia, where freshwater resources are limited, development has been slower.
Development has also been constrained by technical ability and resources. Good associated research programmes exist in Bahrain, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and UAE with experimental and pilot production of fish and shrimp in intensive systems. Some aquaculture capabilities exist in Qatar and PDRY but there is no known aquaculture research taking place in YAR.
Development of aquaculture is also dependent on the suitability of the coastal areas and length of coastline. Countries with over 500 km of coastline bordering the Red Sea or Gulf (Iran, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and UAE) are particularly suited for marine development. In both the Red Sea and Gulf there are shallow lagoons protected by coral reefs which are appropriate for cage and pen/enclosure culture. Low lying coastal areas are also suitable for pond and tank culture and in the oil-producing countries, where electricity, energy and oil are relatively cheap, allowing pumped water systems to be profitable.
A summary of the typical geographic resources of the countries in the region for types of aquaculture may be summarized as follows:
Length of coastline
(km)
Land area
(km^2)
Inland waters
(km^2)
Bahrain
negligible
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
N. A.
Kuwait
negligible
Oman
negligible
Qatar
negligible
Saudi Arabia
UAE
negligible
YAR
negligible
PDRY
negligible
N. A. Figures not available
* Dams and rivers
** Rivers, lakes, reservoirs and deep marshes
In addition, the waters of both the Red Sea and Gulf are hypersaline (35-40 ppt), which is an additional constraint as this limits the number of species available for culture.
2.2 Regional production data
The FAO Fishery Statistics Unit has only received aquaculture production data from two countries in the region, Iran (in 1984, 1985, and 1986) and Saudi Arabia (in 1986). Other data have been collected from official government sources (Iraq), from reports of visiting consultants (Jordan, UAE, PDRY), published articles (Bahrain, Iran, Oman, Kuwait); there is no known aquaculture activity in Qatar and YAR.
The best estimate of annual aquaculture production in the region is approximately 14 989 t during the period 1986/7 (see Table 5). The largest proportion of this came from Iran with approximately 10 000 t, and Iraq with 4 564 t. Small quantities were cultured in Jordan with an estimated 70 t, Saudi Arabia with 36 t, and UAE with 14 t. A detailed breakdown of the species presently cultured commercially, produced on a pilot-scale or experimental production, or under research is given in Table 6. Common carp is cultured in the largest quantities with an estimated 13 584 t in 1986, followed by trout with 1 000 t, and tilapia with 83 t. A number of other species are cultured but in lesser quantities.
Iran and Iraq produce large numbers of fish fingerlings for restocking which contribute greatly to the inland fisheries catch, but the exact proportion of catch attributable to hatchery seed is difficult to assess. The 1986 FAO fisheries statistics quote the inland fisheries finfish production for Iran to be 30 294 t, and for Iraq to be 15 564 t.
In Iran the estimated present annual production of freshwater fish from aquaculture is 10 000 t, consisting mainly of common carp, but also some Chinese carps (bighead, silver and grass), and approximately 1 000 t of trout. Large numbers of kutum (Rutilus frisii kutum), Chinese carps (Cyprinid spp.), sturgeon (five Acipenser spp.) and Caspian salmon (Salmo trutta caspius) are released annually into rivers, lakes, reservoirs, and open waters and contribute to the inland fisheries catch. This is also the case for sturgeon; over 2 million fingerlings are released annually and contribute to the average sturgeon catch of 1 774 t (1980-85). This fishery produces approximately 250 t of caviar annually, of which about 150 t is exported with a value of US$ 20 million.
In Iraq there has been a gradual increase in aquaculture production from an estimated 3800 t in 1983, 4000 t in 1984, 4 476 t in 1985, rising to 4 564 t in 1986. This production is predominantly common carp. Recent changes in government policy toward aquaculture are encouraging the rapid development of fish farming. A large number of fingerlings are produced by hatcheries for restocking. These consist mainly of silver and grass carps (Hypophthalmichthys molitrix and Ctenopharyngodon idella); the grass carps are stocked in irrigation and drainage ditches. There is also a small number of indigenous fish cultured to restore the inland fishery in certain areas. This contributes to an estimated 16 000 t inland fisheries catch in 1985.
For Jordan there are no official statistics but estimates indicate that approximately 20 t of carp (Cyprinus carpio) and 50 t of tilapia (the hybridized red strain) were produced in 1987.
In Saudi Arabia statistics show a national production of 36 t for 1986, comprising 34 t of Cilapia (Oreochromis niloticus and O. spiluris), 1.6 t of rabbitfish (Siganus rivulatus) and 100 kg of penaeid shrimp (Penaeus monodon). This production rapidly increased during 1987 due to the establishment of many new commercial farms for tilapia, and the estimated production in 1987 was 330 t.
In Oman the only existing commercial aquaculture farm was established at Sur in 1984. The first production of shrimp (P. monodon) was approximately 100 kg in 1986, but the future of the farm is uncertain.
2.3 Production systems and practices in the region
A summary of production systems and practices of the major farmed species is given in Table 6.
The majority of fish cultured within the region are farmed semi-intensively in earthen ponds and concrete raceways. In Saudi Arabia and Oman ponds are lined with impervious material to prevent seepage. Average annual harvest rate from earth-pond culture in the region is 2.2 t/ha.
In Iran there are estimated to be 4 000 ha of carp fish ponds in operation with annual production rates of 2 to 3 t/ha, and 60 ha of trout ponds and raceways producing 1 000 t/year. In addition to this Shilat, (the National Fisheries and Fish Culture Section of the Department of Fisheries), is stocking 300 000 ha of rivers, lakes, and reservoirs with hatchery reared fish. The aim of the Government is to increase the productivity of the fish ponds as well as increase the total pond area to 35 000 ha within the next 10 years, giving a projected annual harvest of 100 000 t/year.
In Iraq there are 2 625 ha of fish ponds with an approximate annual production of 2 t/ha, giving 4 564 t of carp production in 1986. In 1985 a production of 33 t was recorded from cages moored in a freshwater reservoir. Both the State Board of Fisheries, part of the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation, and the Iskandaria Agricultural Company, a private company, are promoting the development of small-scale fish farming in Iraq, particularly among individual farmers.
In Jordan carp culture primarily takes place in earthen ponds and tilapia culture in concrete tanks. In Saudi Arabia the majority of the tilapia production is integrated with agriculture. Fresh water is pumped from ground water, by deep borehole pumps, into ponds in which tilapia is cultured. The fertilized effluent water from these ponds is then used to irrigate crops of wheat, barley, or alfalfa. There is also intensive pilot-scale production of tilapia and rabbitfish in saltwater in cages, pens (enclosures), and fibreglass tanks.
There are small quantities of shrimp cultured in saltwater ponds in Oman and Saudi Arabia.
In the GCC countries many different aquaculture technologies have been brought in, either by private companies employing foreign consultants or developed by national research stations. These include water recirculation systems (from UK and Germany), hatchery production of marine fish and shrimp (from Europe, Japan, and Taiwan), open-sea cage systems (from Japan), pen culture systems (from the Philippines and Ivory Coast), etc. A more detailed list is given in Table 7.
2.4 Producers in the region
There are estimated to be approximately 1 300 fish farms in the region. These range from small owner-operated subsistence farms in Iraq to farms such as Sefid Rud in Iran which has appoximately 1 000 ha of ponds.
In Iran 459 licences for fish farms had been granted by 1987 of which 86 farms were operational, 57 were under construction, and 316 planned with licences granted. The average production of the farms is about 116 t each year. The majority of production comes from farms in the north within the Caspian Sea Basin (Glan and Mazandaran Provinces), with smaller additional production from the south (Khuzestan Province).
In Iraq the Fisheries Department of the Ministry of Agriculture has granted 1 173 licences to set up fish farms in the country. The average size of the farms is comparatively small (about 1-3 ha). These farms are all located within the Tigris and Euphrates river basins.
There are a number of commercial fish farms in Jordan and Saudi Arabia which are of a relatively large size. In Saudi Arabia the farms have planned production capacity of around 200 t per annum or more, with many new farms being initiated.
In UAE and Oman there is at present only one fish farm in each country. In UAE pilot-scale production of tilapia takes place in both marine cages and tanks and freshwater ponds; there is a commercial farm culturing marine shrimp in plastic lined ponds.
2.5 Organizations of producers
There is the Arab Federation of Fish Producers based in Baghdad, Iraq, but this organization is primarily involved in fish production by fisheries. It has produced a number of reports in Arabic dealing with subjects such as storage and refrigeration, marketing of fish and fisheries products, and the manufacture of nets.
2.6 Financial investment by public and private enterprises
In Iran and Iraq there is strong governmental support for the development of fish farming with governmental investment in hatcheries for supplying fry for farmers and for restocking purposes, and also in governmental fish farms for production and demonstration.
In Iran there are two main organizations directing the development of aquaculture. The Shilat, which operates fish hatcheries, fish farms and research stations, and Jehad Sazandegy which operates a large fish hatchery. The remainder of the fish farms are mainly privately owned. One of the largest farms in the country is integrated into a farm which is also involved with agriculture, specifically dairy and poultry production. The Fisheries Department is encouraging fish farm development by making land and water resources available through leases, supplying fingerlings, and extending credit.
In Iraq small-scale fish farms are operated by individual farmers in rural areas. The state-owned Fisheries Commission owns two fish farms with an annual capacity of over 2 000 t. One farm and hatchery is in the Babylon province, the other in Suwaira Wasit. New areas for farming are being leased by the government, and more licences will be issued.
In Saudi Arabia investments in large farming businesses are combining aquaculture together with livestock. In the GCC countries in general investment in aquaculture is primarily made by medium to large-sized businesses, and individual entrepreneurs.
2.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
There is presently only one technical assistance project which deals with production in the region. This project is the Fish Farming Centre in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, which is funded through a trust fund agreement by the Saudi Arabian Government with FAO. This project demonstrates production practices for aquaculture in the Red Sea, together with appropriate applied research. At present the project is assessing suitable fish and shrimp species for production with development of culture systems suited to the local environment. It is producing mullets (Mugil spp.), tilapia (Tilapia spirulis), milkfish (Chanos chanos) and rabbitfish (Siganid spp.), and demonstrating marine culture practices in fish pens and floating cages in the sea, and in shore-based tanks. Phase II of the project, which includes capital construction, will add a marine fish and shrimp hatchery, and intensive tilapia culture units in lined earthen ponds. Information from this Centre is available to existing
producers as well as prospective fish farmers in the area.
Short-term consultancies related to improving production are made by FAO staff as part of the FAO TCP/TCDC programmes; for example, a visit of an aquaculture engineer to Bahrain and Kuwait in 1988, and another from Hungary to Iraq.
The Middle East Foundation and the Jordan Cooperative organized a workshop for farmers and others on fish production in 1987.
2.8 Capital assistance projects in the sub-sector
In Iran and Saudi Arabia capital assistance for fish farmers is available through the National Fisheries Departments or National Agricultural Banks. Capital assistance may also take place in some countries on the basis of joint venture enterprises where foreign capital and technology is combined with local finance and land resources.
The Fish Farming Centre in Jeddah in Saudi Arabia (see section 2.7) is operated under a trust fund agreement between the Government of Saudi Arabia and FAO. Funds have been allocated in Phase II (1987-1989) for the construction of new facilities, including a hatchery, production ponds, and research laboratories.
The Arab Fisheries Company was set up by 13 Arab States of which 10 are from the region as described. The initial land capital was US$ 20 million and the organization actively participates in the development of aquaculture projects. Presently two fish farm projects are planned in joint venture with a company from Germany to culture tilapia using recirculated water; one project is based in Jordan, and the other between Mecca and Jeddah in Saudi Arabia.
<section>5</section>
3. LOCAL INFRASTRUCTURE
3.1 Extension services in the region
3.2 Training of extension agents
3.3 Seed production facilities in the region
3.4 Manufacturers of feed and fertilizers in the region
3.5 Manufacturers of equipment for the industry
3.6 Other services for the industry
3.7 Local credit programmes
3.8 Trade publications for producers
3.9 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
3.1 Extension services in the region
There are only limited extension services for fish farmers in the region at the present time. The services which exist are operated by government and semi-governmental organizations.
In Iran the extension services are based in the Fisheries Research Stations operated by Shilat. In Iraq the state-owned fisheries commission extends technical assistance and provides advice to farmers together with the Iskandaria Agricultural Company. National aquaculture research stations in Kuwait, Bahrain, Iran, Iraq, and UAE offer technical assistance on aquaculture when requested.
The Fish Farming Centre in Saudi Arabia has published a number of extension materials for farmers in the form of guidelines and operational manuals for the practices which are being encouraged. These are presently being translated into Arabic.
3.2 Training of extension agents
At the present time most of the few aquaculture extension agents employed in the region, or qualified individuals giving advice, are trained in the biological sciences, marine sciences, and possibly fisheries, at a graduate level. Most are graduates from universities in the region (see 4.1); those who specialize in fisheries have qualifications from abroad, particularly from universities in Egypt, India, UK, USA, and the USSR.
There are as yet no vocational colleges in the region training extension agents for aquaculture, either exclusively or as part of extension training in fisheries or agriculture. However, some of the national universities now have aquaculture courses within their programmes (see 4.1).
Specialized training in aquaculture sub-disciplines is predominantly obtained from a number of training opportunities which may occur, but not often within the region and on an irregular basis. One regular course in specialist training is organized by Kelordasht Fish Farm and Training Centre in Iran for farm technicians in cold-water culture techniques. Training courses are also scheduled at the Fish Farming Centre in Saudi Arabia for fish disease diagnosis and treatment.
There are no known training courses specifically for extension agents within the region. The Arab League and the Government of Iraq constructed a training centre at Zaafarania, but it is as yet unused.
Most technical and specialized training takes place abroad. Iran, for example, has sent 18 fisheries staff to the Freshwater Fish Culture Centre in Wuxi, China for a 16-week course on integrated fish farming and carp production. This is part of a bilateral agreement between the two countries.
A database for fisheries and aquaculture training opportunities has been established by ICLARM/FAO at the ICLARM offices in the Philippines. Currently the database lists 316 long- and short-term courses in fisheries and aquaculture world-wide. There are no training centres listed in the region.
3.3 Seed production facilities in the region
In 1986 over 200 million freshwater fry and fingerlings were produced from hatcheries in the region as described to supply fish farms and for restocking. The majority of these fingerlings were produced by large state-run hatcheries or large private hatcheries.
The largest producer is Iran with approximately 140 million fry produced in 1986 and an estimated 175 million fry in 1987. Iraq produced approximately 56 million fry in 1986. Smaller quantities of freshwater fry were also produced in Jordan and Saudi Arabia.
The largest proportion of hatchery reared fingerlings was for Chinese carps (102.5 million), rutilus (51 million), common carps (39.5 million), trout and salmon (3 million), sturgeon (1.2 million), and other indigenous fish (8.5 million). A large proportion of these fingerlings went for release into lakes, rivers, reservoirs, and open waters as part of national restocking programmes, with fry supplied from state hatcheries.
In Iran there are five large freshwater hatcheries operated by Shilat, one large hatchery operated by Jihad Sazondegy, and a number of large and small hatcheries operated by the private sector. The Shilat hatcheries are producing common and Chinese carps, kutum, salmon, and trout. The Jihad hatchery and private hatcheries produce only common and Chinese carps. Shilat is presently constructing a further five large hatcheries.
In Iraq there is one main central fish hatchery based in Suwaira and operated by the State Board of Fisheries Development, and another in Babylon. The main hatchery produces common carp, grass and silver carp, and a number of indigenous fish species. There are also a number of smaller hatcheries in the private sector.
In other countries of the region the majority of fry for aquaculture is produced by private hatcheries, or imported from hatcheries abroad, or caught locally from the wild. For example, small quantities of marine fish fry (groupers, mullets, milkfish, rabbitfish) are produced for research and demonstration purposes or caught as wild fry from coastal areas by research stations in Bahrain, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and UAE.
Experimental production of marine shrimp post-larvae (P. monodon) takes place in Oman and Saudi Arabia, but shrimp broodstock is presently available only in the south of Saudi Arabia and YAR, and the broodstock requirement for Oman is imported from Singapore and Thailand.
In Iran the government fixes the prices of carp and rainbow trout fingerlings. The price of fingerlings depends on size; for example, the current prices for rainbow trout are:
Weight (g)
Age (days)
Price (trials)
There are no known organizations of seed producers other than the government-operated hatcheries of Shilat in Iran, and State Board of Fisheries in Iraq.
There is a certain amount of trade in fingerlings but this is less intra-regional than inter-regional. Tilapia fry have been imported into Saudi Arabia from Taiwan (Province of China), China, Philippines, and Kenya; all-male red tilapia have been introduced from Taiwan (Province of China), and shrimp post-larvae imported into Oman from Malaysia and Sri Lanka.
In Saudi Arabia the freshwater hatchery of the National Research Centre, City for Science and Technology, regularly distributes small numbers of carp and tilapia fry to private fish farms at no cost.
3.4 Manufacturers of feed and fertilizers in the region
The region is becoming more self-sufficient in agricultural production of cereals and livestock. This has resulted in the importation of plant for production of fertilizers, and for feed mills to produce animal and poultry feeds. As yet there are no feed manufacturers specifically producing fish feed. Those which try generally produce a poor quality feed which is not ground sufficiently and is too large in pellet size (3.5 mm minimum) for the range of requirements by farmers.
There are animal feed mills in Bahrain, Oman, and Saudi Arabia, and there are research stations with a limited capacity to produce moist fish feed in Bahrain, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and UAE. Some of the ingredients for fish feed are available locally (such as cereals) but others must be imported (such as herring meal, fish oil, vitamins and minerals). Fish meal is produced in comparatively large quantities in Iran, Iraq, Oman, PDRY, and UAE. There are also small-scale fish meal plants in Kuwait and Saudi Arabia.
Saudi Arabia has the largest capacity for animal feed production which supports its large intensive livestock production industry. The Ministry of Commerce operates a number of feed mills through the Grain Silos and Feed Mill Organization which has two formulations for fish feed (30 and 40% protein) for fry and grow-out fish. Radwa Feed Mills in Jeddah has been producing a tilapia fish feed since 1984, using mainly locally produced ingredients, and selling to the major tilapia farms in the country. There are also a number of other private feed mills in the country some of which have produced trial batches of fish feed.
Most of the specialized fish feeds are imported into the region; for example, prawn diets are imported from Taiwan (Province of China), and high quality fish diets from France, Italy, and the UK. There is no fry feed manufacturing equipment in the region and fry feeds must be regularly imported from Denmark, France, and the UK.
There is a subsidy on fish feed prices in Saudi Arabia, as the price of barley is subsidized. Present prices of locally produced fish feed are US$ 360/t.
Large resources of brine shrimp (Artemia salina) have been identified in Iran. This is a live food used widely in fish and shrimp hatcheries which is conveniently canned and stored when in the cyst stage.
Fertilizer manufacture capabilities exist in Jordan, Kuwait, and Iran. In other countries with well-developed agriculture, and where there is the demand, fertilizers are imported and distributed through good networks. Countries with large livestock industries, particularly poultry production, have quantities of organic manure which are available for fertilizing fish ponds.
3.5 Manufacturers of equipment for the industry
There is little manufacture of specialized equipment for fish farming in the region and the majority must be imported from abroad. In almost all countries in the region there are fibreglass fabricators for the production of small domestic water tanks. The same techniques have been applied to the fabrication of fibreglass raceways and fish tanks. Many companies in Bahrain, Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia, for example, have moulds for the fabrication of fish tanks.
The recent industrialization of the richer countries in the region has resulted in the development of industries which can, in some cases, manufacture products or equipment used by the aquaculture industry. For instance, in Saudi Arabia there is a joint venture project with a pump manufacturer to assemble water pumps; there is a joint venture with a company from Norway to produce paints, some of which are anti-foulants for marine equipment and nets; and many joint venture businesses for local production of PVC pipe, PVC fittings, etc., which are widely required by hatcheries.
Certain aquaculture equipment can be manufactured locally, such as fish-cage flotation collars; these are assembled locally from imported softwood, locally produced galvanized steel, and polystyrene blocks or floats.
In Iran there is a net manufacturing plant located in Bushehr which is making nets primarily for the fishing industry but which are also suitable for use in cage culture.
3.6 Other services for the industry
There are two main centres for fish disease diagnostic work in the region. In Kuwait the Kuwait Institute for Scientific Research has a fish pathology laboratory capable of making histological analysis and identification of bacteria and parasites. The laboratory also has a series of fish tanks in which disease trials can be undertaken.
The State Fisheries Department Research Station in Iraq carries out research in diseases of freshwater fish and is capable of undertaking diagnostic work.
Other research stations in Bahrain, Saudi Arabia, and UAE have limited laboratory facilities for disease diagnosis but carry out basic disease analysis and give recommendations on treatment.
Farms and research centres in the region take advantage of their proximity to services in Europe and Scandinavian countries. For example, tissue samples for disease diagnostics are sent abroad for analysis at specialist centres such as the Institute of Aquaculture at Stirling, UK.
Water quality analyses when required are usually carried out in all countries by public analyst laboratories or local private companies. Testing of water samples for the most basic parameters is also undertaken by research stations in Bahrain, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Oman, Saudi Arabia, and UAE. Detailed water analyses are carried out by the Kuwait Institute for Scientific Research in Kuwait. The State Fisheries Department in Iraq regularly visits fish farms to check pollution loads in the effluent water of the farm.
Basic nutritional analysis of fish feeds can be undertaken at the Kuwait Institute for Scientific Research in Kuwait.
A number of European and North American consulting companies are active in the region, either individually or in partnership with local firms. Many are involved in conducting biological and economic feasibility studies, engineering designs and farm specifications, and in some cases undertaking farm management. Some national research stations in the region have capabilities in consulting advice on technology, design, economics, and management, etc., such as KISR in Kuwait.
3.7 Local credit programmes
There are no known local credit programmes in the region as all credit programmes are managed at a national level (see 4.4). However, there is a significant amount of credit through government subsidies. In Iraq the state-owned Fisheries Commission supplies farmers with fishing nets, water pumps, and other materials, as well as leasing land for the farmers at little cost. In Saudi Arabia equipment such as fishing nets for the fishing industry and water pumps for the agriculture industry are subsidized, and fish farmers try to obtain similar benefits.
3.8 Trade publications for producers
There are no trade publications specifically for producers published within the region. Technical information is periodically available in INFOSAMAK Marketing Digest published six times yearly, which has articles on' aquaculture practices both within and outside the region (see 1.6).
There are many foreign trade publications which include an international section which are accessible to and useful for producers (and others) in the region. These include Fish Farming International (UK), Fish Farmer (UK), Aquaculture Magazine (USA), Aquaculture Digest (USA), Progressive Fish Culturist (USA), Water Farming Journal (USA). These are obtainable through subscription.
A number of other publications often contain relevant information to producers as well as professionals. These include the Quarterly Newsletter of the European Aquaculture Society (Belgium), which is obtainable through membership of the Society (see 4.6), as well as the publications of the World Aquaculture Society (USA) and the American Fisheries Society (USA).
There are two Trade Directories of aquaculture products (Buyers Guides) which are published at regular intervals. One is available through subscription to Aquaculture Magazine (USA), and the other through the European Aquaculture Society (Belgium).
3.9 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
The Fish Farming Centre, an FAO Trust Fund project, located north of Jeddah in Saudi Arabia, includes in its programme services for producers, the development of locally produced fish feeds, basic diagnosis of fish diseases, and water quality testing of farm effluents (see 2.7).
In the past there has been technical assistance for fry production of carp in Iraq, and trout and salmon in Iran. The Central Fish Hatchery of the State Board for Fisheries in Iraq was opened in 1985, received technical assistance from Hungary, and now uses Hungarian fry production technology.
The Bahoner trout propagation farm in Kelardasht, Iran, was established in 1972 with technical assistance from USSR to produce rainbow trout and Caspian salmon fingerlings.
The Arab Fisheries Company is presently constructing a fish farm between Jeddah and Mecca in Saudi Arabia, in conjunction with a company from Germany, as a joint venture with technical and capital assistance from the German company. The farm will culture tilapia and mullet in recirculated freshwater.
In 1986 a technical team from Japan carried out preliminary investigations for fish farming in Qatar. This was followed by another study in 1988. The project is funded under a joint fisheries cooperation programme between the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and the Qatar Department of Fisheries.
<section>6</section>
4. NATIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE
4.1 Manpower training in aquaculture technologies
4.2 Manpower training in management
4.3 Aquaculture research in the region
4.4 Management of credit
4.5 Associations of professionals in the region
4.6 Information for professionals
4.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
4.8 Capital assistance projects in the sub-sector
4.1 Manpower training in aquaculture technologies
Every country in the region has its own national university. There are 48 universities in the region, of which 28 have courses in science. Only eight have courses in marine science, zoology or fisheries. These are:
Country
University
Course
Bahrain
Arabian Gulf University
Applied Sciences
Iran
Shehidra Rajiai
Marine Science
Iraq
University of Basrah
Marine Science
Jordan
University of Jordan
Marine Science
Kuwait
University of Kuwait
Zoology
Oman
Sultan Qaboos University
Fisheries
Qatar
University of Qatar
Marine Science
Saudi Arabia
King Abdul Aziz University
Marine Science
Aquaculture is part of the course curriculum in the universities in Iraq, Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia, and there are possibilities of post-graduate studies on aquaculture projects in these three countries.
Most of the national scientists working in the aquaculture sector in the region have graduate B.Sc. or M.Sc. level education from universities in Iraq, Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia; and some with Ph.D. degrees from foreign universities in Egypt, India, UK, USA, or USSR.
4.2 Manpower training in management
There is general training in management and business administration available from most national universities in the region but there is no specific training related to aquaculture. In some cases foreign management teams are brought in by governments to instruct in business administration in the fisheries sector including some such as a team from the UK to Saudi Arabia, or as individual consultants. In other cases, technicians or researchers are promoted to positions of management on merit.
4.3 Aquaculture research in the region
There is strong governmental emphasis on aquaculture research in Bahrain, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and UAE. The majority of research is directed towards developing culture techniques for high value marine fish and shrimp species.
The Ras Hayan Aquaculture Research Centre in Bahrain, established in 1984, is located on a coastal area adjacent to a small lagoon. The facility has a small freshwater and marine fish hatchery, ponds, tanks, and cages. Research is presently underway on the development of culture techniques for rabbitfish (Siganus cramin), tilapia (Oreochromis aurea), and mullet (Velamugil seheli).
In Iran the Shilat Organization, directed by the Fisheries Department of the Ministry of Agriculture, operates four aquaculture research stations. Two of these specialize in coldwater culture of trout and salmon, and two in warmwater culture of carps, rutilus, and sturgeon. Bandar Anzali Research Centre has 85 staff, of which 30-35 are scientists. They conduct research on fish breeding, fish pathology, parasitology, and fish nutrition. The station has laboratories, and an experimental hatchery and farm. In addition, freshwater fisheries, fish biology, water quality, and fish-cum-rice culture are being investigated.
The Sad-e-Sangar Fish Farm and Research Station has 150 staff, of whom 60-70 are specialists. This station concentrates its research efforts on fish breeding and produces approximately five million fry per annum, consisting primarily of sturgeon, rutilus, and the common and Chinese carps.
The Bandar Abbas Research Laboratory specializes in warmwater fisheries and is conducting research on fisheries biology. It is also interested in conducting research in shrimp culture. Bushehr Research Centre is a smaller Centre with only eight scientists and four technicians. The Shilat Organization is presently constructing two new research centres, one in Torkaman and the other near Ahvaz.
In Iraq the State Fisheries Department is carrying out research and field studies on aquaculture. It has carried out research on fish feeds and fish diseases, and undertaken feasibility studies for fish farms based on non-indigenous fish.
The largest research station in the region for marine species is the Mariculture and Fisheries Department of the Kuwait Institute for Scientific Research. The staff consists of approximately 25 international and national scientists, and 15 laboratory assistants. The Mariculture Section is concentrating its research efforts on the culture of grouper (Epinephalus tauvina) and bream (Acanthopagrus latos). The Department has good laboratory facilities for fish pathology, fish nutrition, and water quality analysis. The Department has pilot-scale production facilities for cages (sheltered and open sea type), fish tanks, tidal fish ponds, and a marine fry hatchery with livefood production. Construction of further facilities is presently underway.
The Fish Farming Centre based in Jeddah in Saudi Arabia was established in 1982 and is presently undertaking coastal fry surveys, training, extension, and research programmes. The present facilities consist of a freshwater hatchery, marine fish tanks, fish pens and enclosures, and cages. The species presently cultured are tilapia (Oreochromis spilurus), rabbitfish (Siganus rivulatus). mullet (Velamugil and Liza spp.), and milkfish (Chanos chanos). Construction of a marine fish hatchery, fish ponds, and a tilapia culture system is presently underway.
The Faculty of Marine Science at King Abdul Aziz University in Jeddah has an aquaculture research facility. The Faculty is presently conducting research on marine tilapia production in tanks and is proposing to conduct trials on the production of shrimp (P. monodon) in plastic lined earth ponds. The Faculty also operates a large aquarium with local reef fish for display purposes.
Saudi Aquaculture and Fish Farming Company, a subsidiary of Saudi Fisheries Company, is operating a small research farm at Al-Lith near Jizan for the culture of shrimp in ponds. Presently marine shrimps (P. monodon, P. semisulcatus, and P. indicus) are being produced at pilot-scale levels.
The Umm Al-Quwain Mariculture Centre in the UAE was established in 1983 using technology from Japan for research into marine fish and shrimp rearing, and culture. Research presently underway is concentrating on the rearing of grouper (E. tauvina), rabbitfish (Siganus oramin), and shrimp (Penaeus semisulcatus). National and Japanese researchers are presently conducting research trials in the marine fish and shrimp hatchery, fish tanks, and fish ponds.
There is interest at the Marine Fisheries Research Station in PDRY to carry out research on marine shrimp culture, and in general aquaculture technology at the government marine science centre in Aqaba in Jordan.
4.4 Management of credit
The management of credit for aquaculture is primarily organized through the respective national fisheries departments or through national agricultural development banks.
In Iran the Fisheries Department is encouraging the development of aquaculture by extending credit to farmers for capital expenditure and making available land and water resources, and supplying fingerlings.
In Iraq provision is made by the Fisheries Commission to reserve and lease tracts of land to fish farmers at little cost.
In Saudi Arabia the Agricultural Bank will make short-term loans for up to 50% of the capital cost of the investment at no interest. The applicant must prepare a feasibility study which is first cleared technically by the Ministry of Agriculture and Water, and then analysed by the Agricultural Bank before funds are made available. Although theoretically this credit facility is available to all new fish farm developments, limits are being set on the amount of credit available.
4.5 Associations of professionals in the region
There are no specific aquaculture associations for professionals which cover the whole region. In Iraq there is the Federation of Arabic Scientific Research which was set up by Arab Governments to promote interests in all fields of scientific research, and to promote and plan joint research programmes. All countries in the region are members of this Federation except Oman and YAR. This Organization meets on a yearly basis and publishes the Journal of Arab Scientific Research. The Arab League Education, Science and Cultural Organization (ALESCO) has organized the training and education of Jordanian students in Marine Science.
Many professionals in the region are members of the World Aquaculture Society. This society is based in the USA and disseminates scientific research information and arranges annual conferences. An affiliate of WAS is the European Aquaculture Society, based in Belgium; this society has members from the region and also arranges conferences in which the development of aquaculture in the Middle East is often discussed, for example in Amsterdam in 1987. Membership is individual or commercial, and materials can also be obtained through library membership.
Some professionals have joined the recently-formed Asian Fisheries Society, which is based in the Philippines.
4.6 Information for professionals
A few scientific publications which include aquaculture research are produced by research centres in the region. One is produced by KISR in Kuwait called the Kuwait Bulletin of Marine Science which contains many scientific papers on aquaculture relevant to the region. KISR also publishes a number of technical reports on aquaculture topics. In Saudi Arabia there is the Bulletin of the Marine Research Centre in Jeddah.
There are no known interregional publications except for the INFOFISH International (Marketing Digest), a two-monthly magazine published in association with INFOSAMAK (see 1.6) which occasionally contains articles of interest to the professionals.
There are libraries which specialize in fisheries and aquaculture subjects in the region. The largest facility is based at KISR in Kuwait, with smaller libraries based at the national research stations in Bahrain, Iran, Saudi Arabia, and UAE, and at the Technical Information Centre at INFOSAMAK in Bahrain.
Professionals have access to a considerable volume of information about aquaculture because of their proximity to the Mediterranean and European regions, and also to Asia and North America. This is usually through library membership, individual membership, or personal subscription.
The European Aquaculture Society (EAS) based in Belgium publishes a regular Newsletter for members which also contains the contents of some abstracts of the more important aquaculture journals. It also publishes special volumes on aquaculture technology available at reduced rates to members. The EAS is an affiliate of the World Aquaculture Society (WAS) which is based in the USA, and members have reciprocal benefits. The WAS produces the Journal of the World Aquaculture Society which is free to members.
The other specialist journals on aquaculture are obtained on subscription. These are Aquaculture (Netherlands), Aquaculture and Fisheries Management (UK), Aquaculture Engineering (UK), Bamidgeh/Journal of Aquaculture (Israel), Bulletin Franais de la Pche et de la Pisciculture (France), Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences (Canada), Diseases of Aquatic Organisms (FRG), Journal of Fish Biology (UK), Journal of Fish Diseases (UK), Progressive Fish Culturist (USA), Transactions of the American Fisheries Society (USA), etc.
The largest resource of information for scientists and technical professionals in the sector is FAO in Rome, Italy. FAO produces a series of publications many of which are specific to aquaculture. These are FAO Fisheries Reports, FAO Fisheries Technical papers, and FAO Fisheries Synopses. Many FAO-executed projects, such as ADCP, produce their own technical and non-technical documents. All titles are categorized and lists are regularly produced. Some documents are free and others are sold at cost.
FAO maintains a database in which aquaculture information can be found. ASFA is an international bibliographic database providing comprehensive coverage of publications on the science, technology, and management of marine and freshwater environments. The database can be searched via terminals and personal computers to retrieval systems in Europe and North America; the database is also available on compact disc. Aquaculture Abstracts from ASFA are available in printed form through subscription.
The FAO Fisheries Departmental Library is probably the largest repository of books on fisheries and related topics dealing with the region, many of which are on aquaculture subjects. It also maintains a large serial collection on all subjects related to fish and fisheries received from fisheries institutes, government departments, and commercial publishers throughout the world. It also has special collections of documents on a country basis, and subject files.
4.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
There are a number of technical assistance projects which are (or have been) directed towards research and high-level training. Most of the FAO-executed regional projects for fisheries development have given some indirect technical assistance to aquaculture, for example, for improvement and development of fish markets, etc., but there have been few technical assistance projects specifically for the improvement of national infrastructure in aquaculture (see Table 8).
In most cases technical assistance is now being given under bilateral agreements between the governments in the region and the development agencies of foreign governments. In some cases this assistance is free and in other cases it is charged. Technical assistance projects have been arranged between both Hungary and USSR and Iran for fish fry propagation; between both UK and Taiwan (Province of China), and Saudi Arabia for fish fry propagation and fry surveys, and between Japan and UAE for inland fish and shrimp propagation.
In Iran, through the Technical Cooperation Programme of FAO, there has been a project for the training of technicians in cold-water fish production which was held from December 1987 to March 1988. Also, 18 aquaculture staff from the Fisheries Department in Iran are being trained in integrated farming and carp production in Wuxi, China, through a bilateral agreement between the two countries.
In Saudi Arabia technical assistance is being provided through an FAO-executed Trust Fund project for research and development in tilapia culture trials and fry resource surveys. The Governments of Saudi Arabia and Taiwan (Province of China) have a bilateral agreement for scientific cooperation between the two countries and two Taiwanese technicians are working at the freshwater hatchery of the National Centre of Science and Technology near Riyadh, and a shrimp culture specialist at the Fish Farming Centre near Jeddah.
In UAE the Government has an agreement with the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and technical assistance has been given for the design and operation of the Umm Al-Quwain Mariculture Centre. Presently two Japanese specialists are working at the Centre and other activities are planned.
In Iraq there is a specialist from Hungary working on aquaculture research and project formulation under a short-term TCDC arrangement through FAO. In Bahrain, through the TCP programme of FAO, technical assistance is being provided for the design of additional facilities and improvements to the Ras Hayan Aquaculture Research Station.
In PDRY research on shrimp production instigated by Japan through the private sector continues at the small experimental station which was constructed on Labor Island, Aden. Trials were conducted on the culture of marine shrimp.
Funds remaining from the project "Sub-regional Fisheries Training Centre" for Kuwait, which ended in 1983, have been available for conducting fellowships and training. Each member country was allocated 36 man-months of fellowships. Students under this programme have been trained in fish biology, fish toxicology, fish production, fish disease, aquaculture, etc.
Aquaculture research programmes at KISR, Kuwait, are presently being sponsored by Bubian, a private commercial company interested in starting an aquaculture venture in the country. Contract research is being carried out on grouper and bream.
4.8 Capital assistance projects in the sub-sector
Most projects dealing with capital construction of research facilities are funded nationally or through interregional funding. There are a number of interregional development organizations which finance projects in the region and which, in some cases, are contributing to fisheries and aquaculture projects.
The Islamic Development Bank in Saudi Arabia (Jeddah) provides interest-free loans for equity participation in small- to medium-sized agro-industrial projects in the region, including technical assistance. The IDB encourages development and social progress of member countries in accordance with Islamic Sharia Law. 18% of the fund is used for financing agriculture and fisheries projects.
The Arab Fisheries Company (AFC), headquartered in Saudi Arabia, and funded by Arab countries, is expected to be involved in providing capital to aquaculture projects in the Arab countries. The AFC will participate in the development of two tilapia farms, one in Saudi Arabia and one in Jordan.
The Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development (AFESD) based in Kuwait provides capital and technical assistance to projects in Arab countries, or in joint Arab projects, for the development of infrastructure for inter-country projects and particularly training programmes. The Fund finances economic projects of an investment type to governments, public, or private organizations. 52% of its total funding budget is used in the agriculture, fisheries, and aquaculture sectors; for example, in Jordan over US$ 5 million have been loaned for a river basin development project.
The Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development is an agency which assists Arab countries in the implementation of development programmes by arranging grants and loans, capital participation, and providing technical assistance. This Fund is considering assistance to small-scale fisheries projects and may assist aquaculture ventures.
The Arab League and the Government of Iraq funded the construction of a training centre in Zaafarania, but as yet it has not been used.
<section>7</section>
5. NATIONAL SECTOR MANAGEMENT
5.1 Government policy in the region
5.2 Government organization in the region
5.3 Aquaculture legislation
5.4 Trade and business associations
5.5 Information resources for management
5.6 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
5.1 Government policy in the region
In most countries of the region there is an awareness of the potential of aquaculture to provide additional fish supplies and, in some cases, to reduce imports from abroad. However, in some countries, such as Iran, Iraq, and Kuwait, there is active government encouragement for the development of aquaculture; in other countries, such as Oman, there is only little interest from the Government.
In Iran the Fisheries Department of the Ministry of Agriculture is actively encouraging the development of aquaculture through the Shilat organization, and is providing technical and financial aid as well as making land and water resources available. The Government has stated its plan to try and produce 100 000 t per year of cultured fish in 10 years' time (1997). This would require an estimated 35 000 ha, and the Government is trying to provide sufficient land for the private sector.
In Iraq the State Board of Fisheries of the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation is providing assistance to the aquaculture sector. The Government has recently initiated policies to encourage the private sector to enter into productive activities like agriculture, etc., and this has led to a surge in freshwater fish farming which is one of the most viable ventures.
In Jordan the Government has stated in its new five year plan the aim of increasing local fish production to 1 250 t per annum.
In Kuwait, Bahrain, Saudi Arabia, and UAE, the Governments are giving encouragement to the development of aquaculture through support of their national aquaculture research stations.
5.2 Government organization in the region
In most countries responsibility for the aquaculture sector is under the Department of Fisheries which is usually within the Ministry of Agriculture. The fisheries staff therefore administrate all aquaculture issues. A list of the respective departments which deal with aquaculture is as follows:
Bahrain:
Directorate of Fisheries, Ministry of Commerce and Agriculture
Iran:
Fisheries Department, Ministry of Agriculture Shilat (Iran Fisheries and Fish Culture Section)
Iraq:
State Fisheries Establishment, Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation
Jordan:
Department of Production and Animal Health, Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Supply
Kuwait:
Fisheries Division, Agriculture Department, Ministry of Public Works
Oman:
Fisheries Directorate, Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
Qatar:
Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Industry and Agriculture
Saudi Arabia:
Department of Fisheries, Directorate of Agricultural Research, Ministry of Agriculture and Water
UAE:
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
YAR:
Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Agriculture and Fish
PDRY:
Ministry of Fish Wealth.
In Iraq and Iran there are staff with full time responsibility for aquaculture within the respective departments.
5.3 Aquaculture legislation
In most countries new legislation for the development of aquaculture has had to be introduced, or old legislation for agriculture or fisheries adapted to requirements for aquaculture. Each country has produced its own particular legislation for granting licences and permits to farmers, and imposing regulations on certain activities.
A licence to start an aquaculture venture is required in most countries and is a means of regulating the development of the industry.
In GCC countries there are few if any taxes on agriculture and fishing equipment imported into the country. In Jordan taxes on imported equipment for aquaculture have been lifted.
In the GCC countries taxes on profits from agricultural investments are comparatively low, if any, and there are no favourable tax advantages for aquaculture compared with the fisheries or agriculture sectors.
Most countries in the region are aware of the potential problems of pollution from farm effluent water. In Iraq the State Fisheries Department makes regular visits to private fish farms to test water quality of the farm effluent and monitor pollution. In Saudi Arabia legislation is presently being passed which will require an environmental impact study with the feasibility study to secure a licence for farming.
In most countries there are regulations for the importation of live animals and fish which require certain documentation prior to customs clearance at the border. The regulations usually require a Certificate of Origin of the species and a Certificate of Health. In most cases the Certificate of Health must state that the fish or eggs are free of any infectious disease or infestation of parasites. In most countries there are no regulations or facilities for the quarantine of fish at introduction, or in the subsequent outbreak of any disease. Saudi Arabia imposes quarantine restrictions to ensure disease-free importations.
There is concern for the genetic conservation of indigenous fish in Iraq where the Central Fish Hatchery is regularly restocking Inland waterways with seven million fry of indigenous fish annually. In Iran there are significant efforts to increase the inland fisheries of kutum with over 50 million fry released for stocking in 1986. However, stocks of common carp (from foreign strains) have been introduced in the region as well as foreign strains of marine shrimp species.
5.4 Trade and business associations
There are no trade and business associations specifically for aquaculture in the region at the present time, primarily because most aquaculture production is for the national markets and little, if any, is exported. Each country has the national Chambers of Commerce which encourage bilateral trade and assist with import documentation. Most of the national overseas embassies help the industry by sourcing equipment and advising on import regulations through their Commercial Attaches for international trade.
5.5 Information resources for management
There are no publications in the region produced for management. Any general information about the sector is usually in association with publications for producers (see 3.8) or for the professionals (see 4.6).
Through the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) in FAO a number of documents are produced which deal with planning and management of the sector; and ADCP produces a Newsletter, called Aquaculture Minutes, for administrators and managers.
5.6 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
There are no technical assistance projects in the region concerned with aquaculture at the level of national sector management. There are a number in the field of fisheries but none of these has an aquaculture component.
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (Unesco) assisted in the development of a new Marine Science Research Centre for fisheries in Oman. The project supplied technical assistance through international experts to help with the management of the sector, collection of statistics, and to quantify fishery resources in the offshore waters.
The international staff of the FAO-executed Trust Fund project in Saudi Arabia assists the government in aquaculture development by being on the Technical Committee for Fisheries in Saudi Arabia; this committee helps coordinate the development of aquaculture and fisheries and assists in the preparation of new legislation for aquaculture.
Iraq has requested technical assistance from FAO to strengthen the capabilities of the State Board of Fisheries, to conduct specialized research in fish breeding, and to provide extension services to owners of the fish farms.
FAO through the ADCP provides interregional assistance indirectly by the publication of planning materials for governments.
<section>8</section>
6. REGIONAL SECTOR MANAGEMENT
6.1 United Nations organizations in the region
6.2 Other organizations in the region
6.3 Economic communities in the region
6.4 Regional and global aquaculture development projects
6.1 United Nations organizations in the region
The eleven countries of this region are active in a number of regional organizations in which aquaculture has been recognized as a sector, either individually or as a component of a larger sector such as fisheries or agriculture, and which has received support in some form. The principal regional organizations are those of the United Nations (UN) in which all the countries actively participate (see Table 9).
Most of these same countries participate in the individual organizations of the UN system which are actively represented in the region. These include the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD, World Bank). All these organizations have substantial records of providing technical and capital assistance to aquaculture development world-wide, and some in the region.
Other UN organizations represented in the region and active in the development of aquaculture (but predominantly outside the region) are the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and the World Health Organization (WHO). Some specialized agencies of the UN which also work in the field are the UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (Unesco), the UN Children's Fund (UNICEF), and the UN Environment Programme (UNEP). Not all these organizations or agencies have yet worked specifically in the region in aquaculture.
In cooperation with several Middle East countries, UNDP and other donors, mostly through FAO, have promoted aquaculture and inland capture fisheries in the region through many diverse activities (see Table 8). This cooperation has extended from the funding of a variety of national fisheries and aquaculture development projects to the development of strategies and regional programmes, and to the provision of international experts, study tours, training, and supplying equipment.
In 1984 the FAO World Conference on Fisheries Management and Development, held in Rome, adopted aquaculture development as one of five major Programmes of Action. These Programmes seek partnership with international and bilateral donors in assisting governments, primarily through regional mechanisms, to improve the productivity of their fisheries and aquaculture and the standard of living of those working in the sector.
Training of national personnel in aquaculture has been undertaken through the FAO Technical Cooperation Programme and Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries, and through UNDP fellowships; and Unesco has sponsored the training of marine scientists in PDRY as well as development of a database and library in Oman.
There are other related international agencies affiliated to the World Bank. These agencies support fisheries and aquaculture development in. a number of regions but none has active projects on aquaculture or with an aquaculture component at the present time. The World Bank itself (the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development) provides technical assistance and extension of credit to capital infrastructure projects in agriculture and fisheries. Projects in Iran, Iraq, Jordan, and Oman have received funding or technical assistance. The International Development Association (IDA) advances capital to the poorer developing member countries on more flexible terms than the World Bank; 32% of its total funding goes into agriculture, fisheries, and rural development projects. Projects in Jordan, YAR, and PDRY have received funding. The International Finance Corporation (IFC) encourages the growth of productive private enterprises, especially agriculture and
agro-industry, in its member countries. One agriculture project in YAR has received funding.
6.2 Other organizations in the region
There are two regional organizations to which all the countries, except Iran, are members. These are more actively involved with supporting fisheries and aquaculture projects in the region. These organizations are the Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development (AFESD) and the Islamic Development Bank (see 4.8).
There are two statutory bodies in which countries of the region participate (see Table 8) although mostly on the periphery. These organizations were established to promote full and proper utilization of living aquatic resources through the development and management of fishery and culture operations, as well as through the related processing and marketing activities. One is the Indian Ocean Fishery Commission (IOFC) and in particular its subsidiary body the Committee for Development and Management of the Fishery Resources of the Gulfs. Recently this organization has shown an increased interest in aquaculture following the first Arab Symposium on Culture of Fish and Shellfish held in Kuwait in 1983. During the meeting of the Committee in 1984 an FAO review on the status and prospects for aquaculture development in the Gulf States was presented and discussed.
The Indo-Pacific Fishery Commission (IPFC), the other statutory body, has restricted presence in the region. The IPFC has been most active in following and encouraging aquaculture in the Indo-Pacific region.
6.3 Economic communities in the region
There are three regional economic organizations in the region (see Table 9). The main economic community is the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (GCC). This Council is supported by the Governments of Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and UAE. The aim of the council is to promote coordination, integration, and cooperation between the member states. In 1985 the Ministers of Agriculture approved proposals for harmonizing legislation relating to water conservation and fisheries. The Council has also funded studies investigating quarantine procedures and the setting up of two regional veterinary laboratories.
The Council of Arab Economic Unity is supported by the Governments of Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, UAE, YAR, and PDRY. This Council promotes the coordination between Near East countries of development plans of individual Arabic countries. It encourages the setting up of joint ventures and has supported the formation of the Arab Federation of Fish Producers in Baghdad, Iraq.
The third organization is the League of Arab States which is supported by all the countries in the region except Iran. It has set up the Arab Organization for Agricultural Development, based in Khartoum, which promotes training studies in agriculture.
6.4 Regional and global aquaculture development projects
No regional aquaculture projects are listed in the ADCP Aquaculture Aid Profiles (1988). Only one fisheries project in the region includes components of aquaculture and that is the UNDP/FAO project for marketing and trade in fisheries products, namely INFOSAMAK. There are 21 Arab member countries in the project of which 13 are active members, and 6 are in the region as described. These are: Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar, Oman, PDRY, and YAR. This project was initiated in 1986 and continues.
The UNDP created the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) in support of global initiatives in aquaculture. Its activities have extended into Africa, Asia, Latin America, and the Mediterranean regions. Advisory and guideline publications deal with both administration of the sector, such as technical assistance, economic development, planning, engineering and marketing, and in technology.
As part of this Programme, and with further support at regional and global level, the ADCP has prepared the regional Sector Surveys on Aquaculture and is preparing an integrated approach to PLANNING FOR AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT.
<section>9</section>
ANNEXES
ANNEX I: Supporting data
ANNEX II: Bibliography
ANNEX III: Abbreviations
ANNEX IV: List of ADCP Reports
ANNEX I: Supporting data
Table 1: Fish and Fishery Products, Provisional Food Balance Sheet, Average 1982-84 (in metric tonnes live weight)
Catch
Non-food uses
Imports
Exports
Food supply
Population '000s
Per caput supply kg/year
Bahrain
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Kuwait
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
United Arab Emirates
Yemen Arab Republic
People's Dem. Rep. of Yemen
Total
Source: FAO Yearbook of Fishery Statistics, Vol. 63
Table 2: Gross National Product Statistics and Population Data for the Region
GNP (US$ 000 000s)
GNP Growth rate (%)
Population (000s)
Population growth rate (%)
GNP per caput (US$)
GNP Growth rate (%)
Bahrain
Iran
N.A.
N.A.
N.A.
Iraq
N.A.
N.A.
Jordan
Kuwait
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
United Arab Emirates
Yemen Arab Republic
People's Dem. Rep. of Yemen
Source: The World Bank Atlas, 1987, 20th Edition
Note: * = Data for 1980
N.A. = Data not available
Table 3: Popular Species in the Region with Market Prices
Common Name
Latin name
Red Sea US$
Wholesale (W) Retail (R)
Gulf US$
Wholesale (W) Retail (R)
Country
Rabbitfish
Siganus oramin
W
Bahrain
S. rivulatus
R
Saudi Arabia
Grouper
Epinephalus tauvina
R
W
Saudi Arabia
E. maculatus
R
Saudi Arabia
Pomfret
Pampus argenteus
W
United Arab Emirates
Mullet
Velamugil seheli
R
W
Saudi Arabia, Bahrain
Emperor
Lethrinus spp.
R
W
Saudi Arabia, Bahrain
Shrimp
Penaeus semisulcatus
R
Saudi Arabia, Bahrain
Source: INFOSAMAK Trade News, 1988
Saudi Fisheries Retail Shop, Jeddah, 1988
Table 4: Fisheries Catch and Trade in the Region, 1985
Country
Catch
(t)
Quantity
(t)
Value
(US$ 000s)
Quantity
(t)
Value
(US$ 000s)
Bahrain
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Kuwait
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
UAE
YAR
PDRY
Total
Source: Fishery Statistics Bulletin for the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia Marine Fisheries Research and Development Centre, MAW, 1987
Table 5: Aquaculture Production by Country and by Type (Metric Tonnes)
Year
Finfishes
Crustaceans
Molluscs
Total
Bahrain
Iran
neg.
Iraq
Jordan
Kuwait
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
UAE
YAR
PDRY
neg.
negligible
Note: Estimated figures in parenthesis
Neg. = production but at experimental level
Table 6: Major Farmed Aquatic Species in the Region Annual Production 1986/7 (Metric Tonnes)
Bahrain
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Kuwait
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
UAE
YAR
PDRY
Freshwater Species
Common carp
P
Bighead carp
H
Silver carp
H
H
Grass carp
H
H
Tilapia
X
E
Trout
Catfish
X
E
E
Sturgeon
H
Others
H
Diadromous species
Rutilus
H
Mullet
P
P
P
Salmon
H
Brackish/marine species
Grouper
E
P
Rabbitfish
P
E
Milkfish
E
Tilapia
P
P
Bream
P
Shrimp
E
E
P
E
E
Note: Production in metric tonnes; estimated values in parenthesis
P = Pilot-scale production
E = Experimental
H = Hatchery production
X = Production but quantity unknown
Table 7: Aquaculture Technologies existing in the Region 1987
Bahrain
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Kuwait
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
UAE
YAR
PDRY
Freshwater Culture
Tanks
E
C
C
P
C
Cages
C
Pens/enclosures
Ponds
C
C
C
C
P
Brackishwater/Marine Culture
Tanks
P
P
C
P
Cages (sheltered)
P
P
P
P
Pens/enclosures
E
P
Ponds
P
P
C
P
P
Hatcheries
Freshwater fish
E
C
C
E
C
P
Marine fish
E
P
E
P
Marine shrimp
E
E
P
P
O
E
Other Technologies
Recirculation
E
C
E
C
Open sea cages
P
Disease diagnosis
X
X
X
E
Pollution control
X
E
Feed production
E
P
X
P
C
P
Fish nutrition
X
X
E
Live food production
E
X
P
E
P
Note: C = at commercial scale
P = at pilot scale
E = at experimental or research scale
X = technology present
Table 8: FAO's Aquaculture Activities in the Region
Country
Statutory Bodies
Training Activities
Technical Assistance
IOFC
DMFRG
TCP
TCDC
GCP
AG Fund Hungary
Project
UTF
Pipeline Project
Bahrain
X
X
X
Iran
X
X
X
X
Iraq
X
X
X
X
Jordan
X
X
X
Kuwait
X
X
X
Oman
X
X
X
Qatar
X
X
X
Saudi Arabia
X
X
X
X
United Arab Emirates
X
X
X
Yemen Arab Republic
People's Dem.
Rep. of Yemen
Note: IOFC = Indian Ocean Fishery Commission
DMFRG = Development and Management of the Fishery Resources of the Gulfs
TCP = Technical Cooperation Programme (FAO)
UTF = Unilateral Trust Fund
TCDC = Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries
GCP = Government Cooperative Programme
Table 9: Funding Agencies and Economic Communities in the Region
Country
Funding Agencies
Regional Economic Communities
IBRD
IDA
IFC
IFAD
IMF
AFESD
IDB
GCC
AEU
LAS
Bahrain
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Iran
X
X
X
X
X
Iraq
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Jordan
XX
X
X
X
X
XX
X
X
X
Kuwait
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Oman
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Qatar
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Saudi Arabia
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
United Arab Emirates
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Yemen Arab Republic
X
XX
XX
XX
X
XX
X
X
X
People's Dem. Rep. Of Yemen
X
X
X
X
X
XX
X
X
X
Note: X = Member country
XX = Active funding in water resources, agriculture or fisheries
IBRD = International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
IDA = International Development Association
IFC = International Finance Corporation
IFAD = International Fund for Agricultural Development
AFESD = Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development
IDB = Islamic Development Bank
GCC = Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf
AEU = Council of Arab Economic Unity
LAS = League of Arab States
ANNEX II: Bibliography
This section lists the sources used in the preparation of this study, giving principal author only.
Afzal, M., 1977. A study of fish consumption habits in Kuwait. KISR/P-G-RP-7701, Kuwait.
Allen, J., 1984. Engineering for Ras Haiyan Feasibility Project. Report prepared for the feasibility study of Mariculture Development Project. FI:DP/BAH/82/002, FAO, Rome.
Al-Nather, A., 1987. Feasibility study. Fish farming plant biological/recycled intensive system. Confidential Report.
Appleyard, W.P., 1986. A successful integrated fisheries enterprise. INFOFISH Marketing Digest 2/86.
Al-Yahyai, H.H.S., 1986. Developing fisheries in the Sultanate of Oman. INFOFISH Marketing Digest 2/86.
Al-Zarka, S. and A.G. Coche, 1985. Prospects of aquaculture in the Arabian World. Fisheries Department, FAO, Rome. Kuwait Bulletin of Marine Science, (6):15-29 (In Arabic), Kuwait.
Anonymous, Commercial fisheries and fishery products available for export (PDRY), People's Democratic Republic of Yemen.
Anonymous, 1981. Fish culture project of the Saudi Arabian National Centre for Science and Technology (SANCST), Saudi Arabia.
Anonymous, 1984. Study on mariculture environment of Umm Al-Quwain Lagoon and the experimental rearing of shrimp, rabbitfish and mullet, Saudi Arabia.
Anonymous, 1987. A summary information on Inland Fisheries of the Islamic Republic of Iran, 6 pp.
Anonymous, 1987. Development of Reservoir and Lake Fisheries in Iran, 3 pp.
Barrania, A., 1979. Technical Report: Socio-economic aspects of the Red Sea Fisheries in the Yemen Arab Republic. Suez. RAB/77/008/3, FAO, Rome, 43 p.
Barrania, A., 1979a. Socio-economic aspects of the Red Sea Fisheries in the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen. Suez. RAB/77/008/4, FAO, Rome, 81 p.
Barrania, A., 1979b. Report on the Socio-economic Survey of the Gulf of Aqaba, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. (Arabic and English). Suez. RAB/77/008/5, FAO, Rome, 17 p.
Caddy, J.F., 1984. Observations on prospects and constraints of development of Iranian Fisheries. FI:TCP/IRA/2301 (ms), FAO, Rome.
Carleton, C., 1980. Fish marketing and the prospects for market development in the Gulf area. FI:DP/RAB/71/278/13, FAO, Rome.
Chakraborty, D., 1987. Fishery Statistics Bulletin for the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Volume 1.
Clay, C.H., 1977. Report on a mission to Iran to investigate the potential for fish production from man-made lakes, FAO, Rome.
Coche, A., et al., 1979. Mariculture development in Bahrain. Report of a feasibility mission. FI:DP/RAB/71/278/6, FAO, Rome.
Durve, V.S., 1986. Fish trade and marketing in Bahrain. INFOFISH Marketing Digest, 4/86.
Eapen, P.K., 1982. Fisheries of Saudi Arabia. FAO, 1985. Food Balance Sheets, 1982-1984, FAO, Rome.
FAO/UNDP, 1967. Report to the Government of Jordan on the inland fisheries development and fish culture. Based on the work of K.M. Apostolski. Rep.FAO/UNDP(TA), FAO, Rome, (2448):19 p.
FAO/UNDP, 1969. Report to the Government of Iran on a programme for the development of the inland fisheries of Iran. Based on the work of E.W. Surber. Rep.FAO/UNDP(TA), FAO, Rome, (2723).
FAO/UNDP, 1973. Report to the Government of Jordan on inland fisheries development and fish culture. Based on the work of K.H. Alikunhi. Rep.FAO/UNDP(TA), FAO, Rome, (3186).
FAO/UNDP, 1975. Fishery Development, Jordan. Project findings and recommendations. FI:DP/JOR/68/511, FAO, Rome.
FAO/UNDP, 1980. Feasibility study for establishing a small aquaculture laboratory in United Arab Emirates. FI:DP/RAB/71/278/7, FAO, Rome.
FAO/UNDP, 1980. Fish marketing and the prospects for market development in the Gulf area. FI:DP/RAB/71/278/13, FAO, Rome.
FAO/UNDP, 1984. Fishery statistics in the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen - An expanded plan of development. RAB/81/002/19, FAO, Rome.
FAO/UNDP, Report on a survey of some sites in and around Hodeidah, Yemen Arab Republic, with a view to assessing their suitability for aquaculture development, RAB/81/002/INT/12, FAO, Rome.
FAO/UNDP, Marine aquaculture in Jordan. Study on the development of aquaculture facilities at the Marine Science Station, Aqaba. RAB/81/002/INT, FAO, Rome.
Farmer, A.S.D., 1981. Historical review of the Kuwait shrimp culture project. Kuwait Bulletin of Marine Science (2):3-9, Kuwait.
Gopalakrishnan, V., 1974. A survey of the Gulf of Aqaba for coastal aquaculture. FI:DP/JOR/68/511/1, FAO, Rome.
Grantham, G., 1980. The prospects for by-catch utilization in the Gulf Area. FI:DP/RAB/71/278/14, FAO, Rome.
Job, T.J., 1967. Travel report on a visit to Iraq from 1 to 5 October 1967. FAO, Rome.
Kedidi, S.M. Fisheries of Saudi Arabia. A summary review. MAW/FAO - UTFN/SAU/002/SAU/Fisheries, FAO, Rome.
Kelvin Hughes Aquaculture Services, 1978. Freshwater fish farming in Jordan. Confidential Report.
KISR, 1987. Mariculture and Fisheries Department Research Activities, 1986.
Kneale, D., 1984. Construction of two plastic lined earthen ponds. FI:DP/BAH/82/002, FAO, Rome.
Krasznai, Z., 1987. Report of mission to Iran to assess the needs in cold-water fish culture. TCP/IRA/6755(T), FAO, Rome.
Lintern, D.A., 1983. Fishery institutions and development in the Yemen Arab Republic. RAB/81/002/INT/14, FAO, Rome.
Montero, G.A., 1986. Production and marketing of cultured fish in Bahrain. INFOFISH Marketing Digest, 5/86.
Montero, G.A., Travel report on mission to People's Democratic Republic of Yemen, FAO, Rome.
Mundt, J.C., 1980. Legal and institutional aspects of fisheries management in Oman. FAO/UTFN/OMA/002/OMA, FAO, Rome.
Nambiar, K.P.P., 1988. Travel report to People's Democratic Republic of Yemen, 8-12 December 1987, FAO, Rome.
Nasser, M.H., 1987. Land and water resources in Iraq - an updated assessment. Journal of Arid Environments, 12, 191-8.
Petr, T., 1987. Observations on prospects for further inland fisheries development in Iran. TCP/IRA/6675, FAO, Rome.
Querellou, J., 1980. Mariculture development in the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen. FI:DP/PDY/77/003, FAO, Rome.
Rawson, G.C., 1986. Fisheries training needs in Southern Iran. FI:DP/IRA/83/013, FAO, Rome.
Schusker, W.H., 1952. Report on the Inland Fisheries of Jordan. FAO/55/12/8923, FAO, Rome.
Simpson, C.J.H., 1962. Fish culture - Jordan.
Sivasubramaniam, K., 1984. Fisheries in Qatar. Past, present, and future development possibilities.
State of Bahrain, Fisheries Statistics Technical Circulars.
Welcomme, R.L., 1978. Report of travel to Bangkok, Kuala Lumpur and Baghdad, Iraq. 13 January-17 February 1978, FAO, Rome.
White, P.G., 1987. A guide for prospective fish farmers in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. UTFN/SAU/010/SAU, FAO, Rome.
White, P.G., 1988. Report on a visit to Marine Research Stations in Kuwait, Bahrain, UAE and Oman. UTFN/SAU/010/SAU, FAO, Rome.
World Bank, 1986. World Development Report.
World Bank, 1987. The World Bank Atlas.
Woynarovich, E., 1985. Consultancy of fisheries development, Iran. FAO, Rome.
ANNEX III: Abbreviations
Organizations
ADCP
Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (UNDP/FAO)
AEU
Council of Arab Economic Unity
AFC
Arab Fisheries Company
AFESD
Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development
ALESCO
Arab League Education, Science and Cultural Organization
EAS
European Aquaculture Society
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
GCC
Gulf Cooperation Council
IBRD
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
ICLARM
International Centre for Living Aquatic Resources Management
IDA
International Development Association
IDB
Islamic Development Bank
IFAD
International Fund for Agricultural Development
IFC
International Finance Corporation
IOFC
Indian Ocean Fisheries Commission
IPFC
Indo-Pacific Fisheries Commission
JICA
Japan International Cooperation Agency
KISR
Kuwait Institute for Scientific Research
LAS
League of Arab States
MAW
Ministry of Agriculture and Water (Saudi Arabia)
NGO
Non-governmental Organization
OPEC
Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries
UN
United Nations
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
UNEP
United Nations Environment Programme
Unesco
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNICEF
United Nations Children's Fund
WAS
World Aquaculture Society
WHO
World Health Organization
Project Terminology
DMPRG
Development and Management of the Fishery Resources of the Gulfs
GCP
Government Cooperative Programme (FAO)
TCDC
Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries (UN)
TCP
Technical Cooperation Programme (FAO)
UTF
Unilateral Trust Fund (FAO)
Others
GNP
Gross National Product
PVC
Polyvinyl chloride
ANNEX IV: List of ADCP Reports
ADCP/REP/75/1 (E/F)
Aquaculture Planning in Africa
ADCP/REP/76/2
Aquaculture Planning in Asia
ADCP/REP/76/3 (E/S)
Aquaculture Planning in Latin America
ADCP/REP/76/3A FI/R188 (E/F/S)
Kyoto Conference
ADCP/REP/78/4
Aid for Aquaculture Development
ADCP/REP/78/5 (E/S)
Outline of an Applied Research and Experimental Development Programme for the Latin American Regional Centre for Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/78/6 (E/S)
Curriculum for the Training of Aquaculturists in the Latin American Regional Centre for Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/79/7
(E/F)
Curriculum for the Training of Aquaculturists in the African Regional Centre for Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/79/8
Training in Fish Feed Technology. Report of the FAO/UNDP Training Course in Fish Feed Technology held in the University of Washington, Seattle, 9 October-15 December 197
ADCP/REP/79/9
Aquaculture Information - Report of the Meeting of an Aquaculture Information Group held in Rome, 25-28 April 1979
ADCP/REP/79/10
Aquaculture Development in China - Report of a FAO/UNDP Aquaculture Study Tour to the People's Republic of China, 2 May-1 June 1978
ADCP/REP/80/11
Fish Feed Technology - Lectures presented at the FAO/UNDP Training Course in Fish Feed Technology, held at the College of Fisheries, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 9 October-15 December 1978
ADCP/REP/80/12
Outline Research Programme for the African Regional Aquaculture Centre, Port Harcourt, Rivers State, Nigeria. Report of a Task Force sponsored by the FAO/UNDP Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme, 3-19 February 1980
ADCP/REP/80/13
Curriculum for the Training of Aquaculturists in the Asian Aquaculture Network
ADCP/REP/80/14
Outline Research Programmes for the Regional Aquaculture Lead Centres in Asia - Parts I and II
ADCP/REP/80/15
Outline Research Programmes for the Regional Aquaculture Lead Centres in Asia - Part III
ADCP/REP/81/16
(out of print)
Reproductive Physiology of Teleost Fishes - A Review of Present Knowledge and Needs for Future Research
ADCP/REP/82/17
Aid for Aquaculture Development in the Third World - Report of the FAO/NORAD Round Table on Aid for Aquaculture Development in the Third World. Svanty, Norway, 2-6 August 1982
ADCP/REP/83/18
Fish Feeds and Feeding in Developing Countries - An Interim Report on the ADCP Feed Development Programme
ADCP/REP/83/19
Rev. 1
AQUIS Aquaculture Information System - Users' Manual
ADCP/REP/83/20
Planification del Desarrollo de la Acuicultura - Guia Preliminar (An Introductory Guide to Aquaculture Development)
ADCP/REP/84/21
Inland Aquaculture Engineering - Lectures presented at the ADCP Interregional Training Course in Inland Aquaculture Engineering, Budapest
ADCP/REP/85/22
Nutritional Fish Pathology - Morphological Signs of Nutrient Deficiency and Toxicity in Farmed Fish
ADCP/REP/86/23
Observations on International Technical Assistance to Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/86/24
Planning an Aquaculture Facility - Guidelines for Bioprogramming and Design
ADCP/REP/87/25
Future Economic Outlook for Aquaculture and Related Assistance Needs
ADCP/REP/87/26
Feed and Feeding of Fish and Shrimp - A Manual on the Preparation and Presentation of Compound Feeds for Shrimp and Fish in Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/87/27
Aquaculture Sector Development - A Guideline for the Preparation of a National Plan
ADCP/REP/87/28
Women in Aquaculture - Proceedings of the ADCP/NORAD Workshop on Women in Aquaculture. Rome, FAO, 13-16 April 1987
ADCP/REP/87/29
The Markets for the Prime Mediterranean Species - Sea Bass, Sea Bream, Mullets and Eel - and their links with investment
ADCP/REP/88/30
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in Eleven Middle East Countries
