<title>ADCP/REP/88/31 - A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in East Asia</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Aquaculture continues to grow in economic importance. The main reason for this is the quantifiable contribution aquaculture is making in many countries to fill the growing gap between supply and demand for fisheries products. This gap continues to widen because of increasing human populations and the static growth rates of capture fisheries brought about by declines in stocks and the increasing cost of obtaining fish through conventional methods. Although this gap can (and in some cases is already) being met by alternatives, such as inexpensive poultry and white meats, aquaculture particularly provides consumers with a choice of fresh products.
Aquaculture is also evident in earning foreign exchange for many countries through the export of high-value products. It also creates employment, particularly in economically depressed coastal and remote regions, and contributes to the household economy of rural farmers.
This second regional survey prepared by the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) covers the existing aquaculture sector in the countries of East Asia, namely Brunei Darussalam, China, Hong Kong, Japan, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Republic of Korea, Laos, Macau, Mongolia, Philippines, Taiwan Province of China, and Viet Nam. A regional survey of the countries of West Asia is the subject of another ADCP document which will be published in due course. The division of the countries in East and West Asia is based on the division established by the Asian Development Bank (ADB).
This present survey is not exhaustive. It has been prepared by Elvira Baluyut in a relatively brief desk study. For some countries of this highly active aquaculture region detailed information is still difficult to obtain. The ADCP apologizes for any omissions and errors which may exist in the survey, and hopes that these can be corrected in an up-dated survey. New information and notification of changes and errors should be indicated to the ADCP in the Fisheries Department, FAO, Rome. The detailed Table of Contents illustrates the range of information which, hopefully, will be assembled in due course for all regions.
The survey is directed toward administrators, executives, and managers who require broad overviews, rather than for scientists and technologists who require detailed information about species and practices. It is the second of a series of regional surveys. To this end, the ADCP hopes that the reader will find the information described here useful.
Colin E. Nash
Craig B. Kensler
Rome, 1988
<section>2</section>
INTRODUCTION
East Asia is easily the most important region in the world as far as aquaculture is concerned - and for a number of reasons.
Firstly it is the cradle of aquaculture. China is the country where aquaculture began about four thousand years ago, and several countries such as Japan, the Philippines, and Viet Nam have long traditions of aquaculture dating back some 300 or 400 years.
Secondly it is the region which has consistently given the greatest production from aquaculture over the past decade. China, Japan, and the two Koreas lead in output and, between them, contribute about 5.58 million metric tonnes (t) of fish and fishery products, equivalent to 86% of the production of the region in 1985.
Thirdly it is the region where there is the largest market for aquaculture products; for example, Japan imported more than 250 000 t of high-value shrimps in 1986. Finally it is in East Asia where development of the aquaculture industry could best be described as phenomenal: for example, Taiwan PC (Province of China), China, and the Philippines are recording annual growth rates of shrimp production of 1 022%, 918% and 270% respectively from 1975 to 1985. However, while a number of countries in the region have emerged leaders in global aquaculture, countries like Brunei, Laos, Macau, and Mongolia have little or no aquaculture to speak of.
The East Asia region, for purposes of this report, includes the following twelve countries: Brunei Darussalam, China, Hong Kong, Japan, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Republic of Korea, Laos, Macau, Mongolia, Philippines, Taiwan PC and Viet Nam.
Diversity is a striking feature of these countries, especially with regard to land area, population size and density, and the abundance of natural resources. Population size, for example, ranges from a low of 1.9 million in Mongolia to a high of 1.08 billion in China, excluding the Province of Taiwan, Hong Kong and Macau (1987). There are also wide disparities among them with respect to their general economic structure; the importance of agriculture and fisheries to the local economy; the degree of industrialization achieved; the development of infrastructure facilities such as power, transport, and communications; domestic markets and monetary/financial institutions; and general administrative capabilities.
Despite these differences, however, the countries of the region, with the exception of Japan (a developed country), Brunei (a small oil-rich country with the highest per caput income in the world), and Republic of Korea (classified among the "newly industrialized countries"), are categorized as "developing Third World" countries. As such they are generally characterized by high population growth rates, low incomes, low levels of education, health, and personal consumption, and low levels of infrastructure development and industrialization.
<section>3</section>
1. CONSUMPTION OF FISH AND SHELLFISH IN THE REGION
1.1 Nutritional benefits of fish and shellfish
1.2 Characteristics of consumption in the region
1.3 Annual consumption of fish and shellfish
1.4 Gross market data
1.5 Specific market data
1.6 Information for the trade
1.7 Technical assistance in the sub-sector
1.1 Nutritional benefits of fish and shellfish
Fish is of particular importance in East Asia where it contributes significantly to human food needs, particularly to those at risk of under- or malnutrition.
The nutritional quality of fish is similar to but somewhat higher than that in meat and milk, and less than that in eggs. The protein content of most fish species varies between 15 and 20%; fat content varies more widely than protein, water, or mineral content.
Fish provides a good combination of amino-acids well suited to human nutritional requirements. It is particularly high in lysine (in which cereal proteins are relatively low) and sulphur amino-acids; this makes it extremely efficient in supplementing the low protein, high carbohydrate diets of most countries in the region. A relatively small amount of fish protein in combination with cereal-based diet therefore enhances the nutritional quality of the cereal protein and improves the overall quality of the diet. In addition, fish provides most of the vitamins (particularly A, D, and B) and a good selection of minerals (especially phosphorus, calcium, and iron), trace elements, and iodine (in marine species). The high content of poly-unsaturated fatty acids also contributes significantly to essential fatty acid requirements important in some cases in lowering blood cholesterol levels.
1.2 Characteristics of consumption in the region
In East Asia fish is regarded as the best kind of food. In China, for example, it is highly valued by every family, and from time immemorial a person gave someone fish if he wanted to please him. In most other countries fish is served at all festivals, social functions, family celebrations, and religious ceremonies as almost everyone, religious restrictions notwithstanding, can eat fish.
Fish is also central to the diets of most countries in the region and provides a large percentage of the animal protein requirements of the people. In 1974, the contribution of fish to the daily animal protein intake of the population varied from approximately 30% in Hong Kong to 54% in the Philippines, and 67.2% in Viet Nam.
From 1980 to 1982 the average calorie contribution of fish and fishery products to the per caput animal protein intake ranged from a low 6.41% in China, to a high 30.93 and 37.91% in the Philippines and Japan, respectively.
Throughout the region most of the fish production is meant for human consumption, with a small portion going to non-food or industrial uses, such as fish meal (for livestock, poultry, and fish feeds), fertilizer, and fish oil. In most countries fish accounts for a large percentage of the animal protein supply, in some cases providing as much as 50% of the animal protein in the diet. This is true not only in the developing countries but also in Japan, a developed country, which has in fact the highest per caput fish consumption in the region, and possibly in the world.
While consumer preference in the region is largely for fresh fish, except in the DPR Korea where people prefer frozen to fresh fish, consumption patterns in the different countries exhibit some variations. For example, freshwater fish is more preferred to marine finfish by the Chinese in Hong Kong, Taiwan PC, and China. The Japanese and the Koreans also show a preference for freshwater fish; but whereas the Chinese consume mostly the Chinese carps, the Japanese and the Koreans prefer rainbow trout, "ayu" (a salmonid) and eel. Filipinos generally prefer brackishwater or marine finfish to freshwater fish, especially carps, which thus have a limited market.
Consumption patterns also vary within the same country as a result of different local eating habits and the supply of fresh fish. In Japan the general trend in recent years is that processed products such as dried and salted fish and shellfish are popular in cities, and unprocessed products seem to be preferred in rural districts. Also less fish and shellfish is consumed in large cities than in rural communities, probably on account of the relatively lower level of price increases of meats compared with fish.
1.3 Annual consumption of fish and shellfish
In 1984 the total fish supply in the region (fish catch plus imports less exports) was equal to 19.2 million tons, representing 33.8% of the total world fish supply in that year. Based on a total population of 1.3 billion in 1984, the average per caput fish supply in the region was 30.1 kg/yr, which was 2.5 times higher than the world average of 12.1 kg/yr. Annual fish consumption values per person ranged for an extremely low 1 kg/yr in Mongolia, to low 4.9 and 5.1 kg/yr in China and Laos, respectively, to moderate 35.7, 39.,3 and 45 kg/yr in the Philippines, DPR Korea, and Hong Kong, respectively, to a high 74.5 kg/yr in Japan (see Annex I, Table 1).
Five countries in East Asia (viz. Brunei, Hong Kong, Macau, Mongolia, and Japan) are net importers of fish and fishery products, with deficits ranging from a low 957 t in Macau to a high 942 700 t in Japan. Laos is neither a fish exporter nor an importer, and the rest of the countries are net exporters of fish and fishery products, with the Republic of Korea, China, the Philippines, DPR Korea, and Taiwan PC being large exporters. These countries have shifted from net importers to net exporters in the past decade, mainly as a result of their highly successful aquaculture activities.
The trade deficits in fishery commodities for those net importing countries have grown even larger in 1986, with Japan's balance soaring from -942 700 t in 1984 to -5.7 million t in 1986. On the other hand those net exporting countries have increased their exports making their positive balances even higher (see Annex I, Table 2). China exported 180 000 t of fishery products valued at US$ 600 million in 1986, and 227 000 t valued at US$ 720 million in 1987.
Japan is the largest fish importer in the world. In 1982 it imported some US$4 billion worth of fish products. In 1987 imports of fishery products had, for the first time, exceeded 2 million tons; this is over a quarter of fishery product supplies in the country and represents over 30% of total global fishery product imports. Shrimp was the major import item accounting for some 30% in terms of value.
Hong Kong is another large fish importer, mainly of freshwater fish (of which it buys more than 80% of what it consumes domestically), crustaceans, and molluscs, from Southeast Asia, and even carp fry from China.
Brunei imports about 63% of its domestic fish consumption mainly in the form of fresh marine finfishes, shrimps, and prawns. In 1984 about 55% of the shrimps and prawns consumed in the country were imported fresh from Sarawak and Sabah in East Malaysia. Of this volume more than 88% were marine species and the rest freshwater prawns.
1.4 Gross market data
About 28% of the world's people live in East Asia. In 1984 the population of the region was estimated to be 1.3 billion, with roughly 78% of this total being inhabitants of China, the world's most populous country with 1.02 billion people.
The other countries in the region are not as populated. In fact, there is a wide diversity of population in East Asia. Brunei has only 212 000 inhabitants; Macau 304 000; Mongolia 1.8 million; Laos 3.9 million; and Hong Kong 5.3 million. At the other end, DPR Korea has 19.4 million inhabitants; Taiwan PC 18.7 million; the Philippines 55 million; Republic of Korea 40 million; and Viet Nam 57 million. Japan has a large population of 119 million.
Most of these countries have developing economies with the exception of Japan, the Republic of Korea, and Brunei, whose gross national products (GNPs) were US$ 1.04 trillion, US$ 86.2 billion and US$ 4.4 billion, respectively. Brunei's GNP is not high until it is correlated with the country's population size of 221 000 which then makes the per caput GNP equivalent to US$ 22 150 -perhaps the highest in the world.
The gross national products of the other countries in the region vary from US$ 975 million in Macau, US$ 1.6 billion in Mongolia, US$ 3.2 billion in the Philippines, and US$ 9 billion in Viet Nam to US$ 18.1 billion in the DPR Korea, US$ 37.41 billion in Hong Kong, and US$ 270 billion in China.
Upon correlation with the corresponding population estimates for each country, these GNPs translate into per caput GNPs ranging from extremely low values of US$ 150 in Viet Nam, US$ 252 in China, and US$ 537 in the Philippines, to US$ 968 in DPR Korea. US$ 1 000 in Mongolia, US$ 2 092 in the Republic of Korea, US$ 2 750 in Macau, and US$ 2 917 in Taiwan PC. to high values of US$ 6 765 in Hong Kong and US$ 8 836 in Japan. GNP growth rates are generally positive and range from 3.5% in Japan to 8.5% in Viet Nam and 9% in China (see Appendix, Table 3). The Philippines was an exceptional case, with a negative growth rate of -2.2% due to the severe socio-political and economic crises of the country which began in the early 1980s; in the past year the economic outlook has been better, with a 7% growth rate forecast in 1988.
1.5 Specific market data
In general a large percentage of the fish produced locally is marketed fresh in the wholesale and retail markets of the region. Consumer preference is largely for fresh fish, with Chinese in Hong Kong and mainland China actually willing to pay a price premium for fish marketed live. It is only in DPR Korea that frozen fish is preferred to fresh fish especially in the urban and rural centres; fresh fish is consumed only in the coastal areas and a small percentage inland.
While most fish produced locally are landed and initially disposed at wholesale fish markets, the marketing systems and distribution channels vary from one country to another. Fish marketing is very well organized in Hong Kong and Japan, and moderately in Taiwan PC, where wholesale marketing is handled by distinct entities such as the Fish Marketing Organization (FMO) in Hong Kong and the various local fishermen's associations or fisheries cooperatives in Taiwan PC and Japan, respectively. In these three countries fish are sorted and sold by auction to wholesalers, retailers, processors, and large consumer institutions.
In Hong Kong a new market-permit scheme has been adopted in 1988 which requires the distribution of entry permits to fish buyers or brokers, without which they cannot participate in the bidding or auction. The greater part of all marine fish at first-hand sale pass through the FMO and is sold at one of seven wholesale markets operated by FMO throughout the country. No such controls exist over the wholesale marketing of freshwater fish, however, and marketing is left to the private sector with Government providing only essential facilities and services required to contain marketing costs, and provide for orderly and hygienic marketing.
In Japan fish landed at local fishermen's markets are handled by fish cooperatives in the locality. The landed fish are then transacted between the production district wholesalers, and marketing dealers, and the processors at the wholesale markets under auction or open tender. At the consumer district wholesale markets transactions are between wholesalers and middle-wholesalers by auction or bidding; the fish are then sold by wholesalers to retailers who in turn sell them to the consumers. The Tokyo Central Wholesale Market handles about 800 000 t of fish products per year, as a result of which wholesale prices determined at the Central Market become the price index of fish products for the whole country.
In Taiwan PC all sales of fish must be made through wholesale markets of the locality where fish is landed, or to which it is transported. The fish market in the production centre is run by local fishermen's associations, and in the consuming centres by a joint central committee organized by local fishermen's associations and local city or township. The auction at fish markets is only attended by retailers, large consumers, and registered wholesalers. A large portion of fish is sold directly to wholesalers, or processing plants in landing or harvest sites.
The other countries of the region are not as well organized in their marketing of fish and fishery products. In Brunei carrier boats operated by wholesalers collect fish from fish traps or from villages and bring them to the centres. Otherwise fishermen themselves deliver their fish either to wholesalers or directly to retail markets in major population centres or to small village markets.
The Philippine traditional system of fish marketing is unique in that trading is done by whisper bidding ("bulungan") which results in the secrecy of bids. Prospective buyers whisper their bids to the broker or middleman who selects his buyer not necessarily on the basis of the highest price offered but also on other factors such as credit-worthiness and goodwill. The Philippine marketing chain is also unique in its decisive use of middlemen in a wide variety of capacities and at various stages of the marketing and distribution network for fishery products.
In China there is no complex marketing system. Marketing and supply cooperatives are the main distribution channels for fish products. Market outlets for fish products are either the large and modern state-owned markets which handle more than 90% of the total amount of fish distributed, or small and not very well maintained free markets or rural trade fairs with poor facilities and which sell negligible amounts of fish.
Marketing and distribution of fish products in China are not regulated by supply and demand forces but are administered through the State Plan. In the small, recently established free markets, however, fish may be sold at prices determined by supply and demand, with premium prices given to producers if fish arrive live at the market, or if they are delivered before five o'clock in the morning.
From the fish landing sites and/or wholesale or retail fish markets, the fish are generally transported by land to the various population/consuming centres. Transport and distribution facilities vary from highly modern to crude or inefficient. In Japan, Taiwan PC, Korea, and Hong Kong, for example, fish distribution makes use of refrigerated vans or trucks which haul the produce through long stretches of well-paved roads. In Japan fish are distributed also by boats or freight trains to all areas, packed in cartons, and frozen or chilled in ice.
In Taiwan PC efficient cold storage equipment and transport administration enable the delivery of fish fresh from the production centres to the consumption centres. The same is true for Republic of Korea where the major fish producing centres are provided with modern cold storage facilities, and frozen fish are supplied to all places by refrigerated vans.
In contrast, port facilities, ice plants, and cold storage facilities in the Philippines are inadequate as there is much to be desired in the handling and distribution of fish for domestic consumption. This is also true in Laos and Viet Nam where transport methods are primitive, marketing facilities are few, and icing is insufficient for long distance transport.
A large percentage of the fish sold in the regional markets is sold fresh, chilled, and ungutted, and the rest processed in a variety of forms. The fishery commodities range from finfishes (marine and freshwater) to crustaceans (shrimps and prawns), molluscs (clams, oysters, abalone, mussels, scallops), and seaweeds (brown, red, and green).
Among the finfishes, the carps (bighead, silver, grass, rohu, common, black and crucian), mullet, red sea bream, sea bass, and groupers are popular in Hong Kong, China, DPR Korea, Laos, and Taiwan PC. In Japan, the most popular cultured finfishes are yellowtail, eel, red sea bream, carp, and "ayu" (a salmonid). Milkfish and tilapia are widely preferred in the Philippines and Taiwan PC, as they are in Viet Nam.
Crustaceans sold in the regional markets are either marine or brackishwater shrimps, mainly penaeids belonging to various species of the genus Penaeus (the most common being monodon, orientalis, penicillatus, merguiensis) and the species Metapenaeus ensis, or are freshwater prawns of the genus Macrobrachium. Consumer preference for penaeid shrimps is wider than for freshwater prawns, with the latter having good markets only in Brunei, Taiwan, and Viet Nam.
Among the molluscs, oysters are perhaps the most popular in the region, with practically all the countries consuming the bulk of their own local production. In RO Korea oysters are canned and exported mainly to the United States; scallops are highly popular in China and Japan, and mussels are widely consumed in China, the Philippines, Korea, and Viet Nam.
A large volume of seaweeds is marketed and consumed fresh or dried in Japan, the most popular being "nori" (laver or Porphyra), "konbu" (kelp or Laminaria), and "wakame" (sea mustard or Undaria). These same species are widely eaten in Korea and China. In the Philippines the most popular seaweed species are Eucheuma cottonii and E. spinosum. Minor species consumed in the Philippines are Sargassum and Gracilaria, the latter also being popular in Viet Nam.
Fish not sold fresh are processed into a wide range of products in the region. The most common methods of processing include salting and drying, canning, pickling or fermentation, and preparation of traditional pastes and sauces (as Viet Nam's "muoc mam" and the Philippines' "bagoong" and "patis").
Smoked milkfish, sometimes deboned before smoking, is a delicacy in the Philippines and is exported to Filipino communities in the United States and the Middle East. Other convenience-food items sold in Philippine markets include fishballs and fish sausages. The latter are also popular in China and Hong Kong.
In Japan there are traditional ways of processing fish which are so integrated into the food life of the people that they are inseparable from the diet. These include "kamaboko", a kneaded fish product; "katsuobushi", dried skipjack; and "shishara", dried sardine and salted fish. Japan is also the world's largest squid/cuttlefish producing and consuming nation. The pattern of utilization of squid in Japan is varied, with squid consumed raw (as "sashimi"), smoked, salted, dried ("surume"), canned, and prepared as "chimi". The Japanese also process seaweed in a variety of forms - powder, flakes, shreds, sticks, or bricks.
In Taiwan PC fish and fishery products are processed using modern equipment and processing methods, such as vacuum-packing under low temperatures and drying. Particular emphasis is now given to canning, and the Taiwan Fisheries Canning Bureau has been established to promote high quality canned fish.
With the exception of Laos and Mongolia, which did not register any export statistics in 1986, all other countries in the region export fish products. While this is so, however, only six countries (China, DPR Korea, Republic of Korea, Philippines, Taiwan PC, and Viet Nam) are net exporters with positive fish commodity trade balances. The rest (Brunei, Hong Kong, Japan, Macau, and Mongolia) are net fish importers (see Annex I, Table 4).
In the net fish exporting countries the volume of fish and fish products exported constitutes a small percentage of fish compared with their total fish supply. For example, while China's export volume of 180 000 t in 1986 is a high figure it is only about 2% of the country's total fish production. The Philippines' total exports of 200 099 t is only 10.4% of its total fish supply in 1986.
The situation in Hong Kong is unique. While its total catch in 1986 was 213 557 t it exported 396 868 t the same year. At the same time it imported 624 726 t, most of which it re-exported to other countries in the region, notably China and Japan. In 1983, chilled and frozen marine fish and prawns were Hong Kong's most important export items, making up about 53% of total exports and re-exports by weight, and 71% by value.
China is the largest fish exporter in East Asia mainly of fresh/frozen fish (mostly Chinese carps and wuchang fish), penaeid shrimps (mainly Penaeus orientalis, P. penicillatus, and P. merguiensis), and shellfish (clams and ark shell) to Japan, Hong Kong, Macau, Southeast Asia, and even the USA. Recently it has been exporting about 50% of its shrimp production, primarily to Japan and secondarily to the USA and Canada.
The Republic of Korea exports a large volume of seaweeds, mainly dried brown and red seaweeds, to Japan. Seaweeds comprise about 8.1% of the total Korean export value of marine products. It has a monopoly of supplying salted sea mustard (Undaria) or "wakame" to Japan, of which it exported 23 000 t valued at US$ 30 million in 1982. It also exports Hizikia fusiforme, a tender edible brown seaweed to Japan. In 1982, RO Korea exported 2 344 t of this seaweed valued at US$ 13 million. RO Korea likewise exports oysters, mostly canned and mainly to the USA, Canada, Australia, the Netherlands, and Sweden. Canned oysters are the leading marine export product of RO Korea, bringing in US$ 27.5 million in 1982 and comprising about 54% of its canned marine products.
Philippine aquaculture exports include mainly jumbo tiger shrimps (Penaeus monodon) and seaweeds. These, together with frozen tuna, squid/cuttlefish, shellcraft, and minor sea products (e.g. jellyfish and shark fin) comprised 101 453 t valued at approximately US$ 243 million. Of this volume, shrimps constituted some 11 350 t valued at about US$ 105 million, or roughly 43% of total export earnings from fish and fishery products. About 86% of the Philippines' total shrimp export is shipped to Japan, and the rest to the USA, Australia, Hong Kong, Singapore, and Europe. About 96% of the shrimps are exported frozen/chilled, and the balance prepared or preserved.
Cultured milkfish in the Philippines is slowly gaining export markets abroad. The quantity exported has tripled since 1980 and reached 1 863 t valued at about US$ 4.4 million in 1986. Exports include mainly fresh-frozen/ chilled milkfish, and small quantites in preserved form (dried, salted, cooked in brine, smoked, and cooked sardine-style). Over 80% is exported to the USA, and the rest to Filipino communities in the Middle East and Canada.
Seaweeds are another major export item of the Philippines. About 70 to 80% of the total seaweed production is exported in a dried form, and 20 to 30% is processed into semi-refined products. Major importers of Philippine seaweed (mainly of the genus Eucheuma) are Denmark, France, Spain, USA, RO Korea. Japan, Argentina, Taiwan PC. and China. In 1986 raw Eucheuma material exports were about 21 186 t with an estimated value of US$ 8.8 million.
Taiwan PC is the largest exporter of shrimp to Japan, supplying some 50 000 t or 20% of the Japanese shrimp imports in 1987. It is also a large supplier of eels to the Japanese market, providing more than one-third of the Japanese consumption of this commodity. In addition to its shrimp exports Taiwan PC is exporting increasing volumes of formulated shrimp feeds to the different shrimp-producing countries of the region, notably the Philippines, Indonesia, Thailand, and Malaysia. Its commercial fish feeds have successfully penetrated and gained a large share of the local feed markets in these countries. Taiwan PC also exports farm equipment and supplies to its Asian neighbours, such as paddlewheels and other aerators, pumps, technical instruments (e.g. refractometers, DO/pH meters), and feed mills, among others.
In the large exporting countries the governments provide investment incentives to export producers to encourage production. In the Philippines, for example, export producers enjoy the following privileges: tax credit equivalent on sales, reduced income tax, exemption from sales tax, additional deduction of 1% from taxable income for using new brand names, tax and duty-free importation of capital equipment, deduction of 10% that a registered export trader may pass on to a registered export producer.
1.6 Information for the trade
The principal marketing information service in Asia (and the Pacific) is INFOFISH, although it does not differentiate aquaculture products as yet. INFOFISH assists the fishing industry and governments in the region by establishing contacts between buyers and sellers of fish products, and providing technical information and advice on post-harvest aspects of fisheries, such as handling, processing, equipment selection, and quality assurance. INFOFISH is based in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia and its working language is English.
INFOFISH is one of four regional services (in Africa, Arab Countries, Latin America, in addition). This network of services produces a fortnightly news bulletin, called "Trade News", in four languages. This deals with prices, cold storage holdings, short-term market trends, and business opportunities. The network also publishes a two monthly magazine called "INFOFISH International" (incorporating Marketing Digest) in English, which contains articles of market analysis, new products, processing, packaging, equipment, and other aspects of fisheries, including aquaculture, with summaries in all four languages. Again, as yet, little information is relevant to aquaculture in the region.
A fifth member of the service is the FAO computerized system of fish marketing called "GLOBEFISH". This database stores original information collected by INFOFISH and the other regional services on such things as production and trade statistics, price series, the supply and demand situation, information on aquaculture, investment, joint ventures, and general economic data relevant to fisheries. Specific searches are made on request. FAO also produces "Globefish Highlights", which is a quarterly analysis of medium trends. It is based on the information in the databank and is distributed as a supplement to the "Trade News" (above) in four languages.
Annual fishery statistics are also stored on an FAO database called FISHDAB. As yet aquaculture statistics are not separated.
The Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center, which is based in Thailand, produces a Newsletter. This often carries feature articles on marketing of aquaculture products, and processing and post-harvest technology. It also produces articles for the consumer on fish and fisheries products.
Japan has a highly efficient network of information collection and dissemination not like any other in the region. The Japanese External Trade Organization (JETRO), for example, has all essential trade data stored in its computer database and linked to the Ministry of Finance and other sources of market/trade information. JETRO publishes market reports which are disseminated to its offices outside Japan. This trade information only becomes available in other countries after several weeks. The Japan Marine Products Importer Association produces a monthly leaflet with import data by country and by product.
In the Philippines there are local publications which provide information on fish marketing in particular (such as the "Marketing Review" published by the Philippine Fisheries Development Authority, PFDA), and on aquaculture and fisheries in general; an example of the latter is "Aquaculture Watch", a monthly newsletter which caters specifically to the aquaculture sector and gives up-to-date information on local and international developments in aquaculture. It includes monthly reviews of fish and shrimp prices in major Philippine markets condensed from the Agriculture Marketing News Service of the Philippine Bureau of Agricultural Statistics. In addition there are local magazines for agriculture in general but which feature articles on trade and marketing, and processing and post-harvest handling of aquaculture commodities; examples are "Mr. and Ms. Agribusiness Weekly", which has a wide national readership, and "Greenfields", a magazine which caters to the food production
sector.
Technical articles on fish marketing are published in regional journals or excerpted in annual reports of government agencies; for example, in the annual reports of PFDA, the national agency tasked with the supervision and coordination of all fisheries marketing activities, and the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (BFAR). The Bureau of Export Trade Promotion has a documentation centre which contains publications relevant to trade in aquaculture and information for exporters.
1.7 Technical assistance in the sub-sector
The most important technical assistance project in the sub-sector in the region is INFOFISH - a marketing information and advisory service specializing in Asian and Pacific fisheries. INFOFISH is part of a network of marketing services established by FAO in four regions (see 1.6). It was financed at its inception by the Government of Norway for a three year period. It is now partly financed by the Government of Norway, by income from its services and publications, and by contributions from its member countries. Malaysia, the host country, provides office facilities and support staff. Although aquaculture information is not separated as yet INFOFISH serves the sector directly, and its publications contain many useful articles on marketing aquaculture products.
Other externally-funded regional projects which indirectly serve the aquaculture sub-sector include the Regional Fish Market Studies conducted jointly by the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the FAO/UNDP South China Sea Programme on important fishery commodities like shrimp and tuna, and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Post-Harvest Technology Project assisted by the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA).
Other projects have been implemented on a national level with external funding and with emphasis on fish post-harvest handling, processing and preservation, and cold storage. For example, the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) provided funds for the formulation of a master plan for the establishment of a nationwide ice plant and cold storage network in the Philippines, and for research and development on processing technology for marine products in China. The International Development Research Centre (IDRC) of Canada provided assistance for testing improved processing for drying, handling, packaging, and storage of dried fish in the Philippines. The Australian Development Bank (ADAB) and ASEAN funded a fish handling project in the Philippines, and BFAR received grants from the UN International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for two small fish preservation projects in 1979 and 1980.
The UN Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) sponsored study tours on post-harvest handling, marketing, and consumption of aquaculture products in China for senior fisheries officials from Bangladesh, Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand, in collaboration with Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Centre (SEAFDEC), Agence pour la Coopération Technique, Industrialle et Economique (ACTIM), and Institut Français de Recherche pour l'Exploitation de la Mer (IFREMER); and of UK fish-product development for senior fisheries officials from China. The Danish International Development Agency (DANIDA) provided a technical assistance grant to Viet Nam for the provision of services and procurement of equipment for fish processing plants and cold storage facilities; and the German Agency for Technical Cooperation (GTZ) supported research and development work on fish processing and preservation methods at the University of the Philippines in the Visayas (UPV),
College of Fisheries.
<section>4</section>
2. PRODUCTION OF FISH AND SHELLFISH IN THE REGION
2.1 Characteristics of production in the region
2.2 Regional production data
2.3 Production systems and practices in the region
2.4 Producers in the region
2.5 Organization of producers
2.6 Financial investment by public and private enterprises
2.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
2.8 Capital assistance projects in the sub-sector
2.1 Characteristics of production in the region
Aquaculture production in the East Asia region (which describes Brunei Darussalem, China, Hong Kong, Japan, Laos, DPR Korea, RO Korea, Macau, Mongolia, the Philippines, Taiwan PC, and Viet Nam) is steeped in tradition and skill. Modern technologies are rapidly adapted to overcome any apparent constraints for development. Although there have been characteristics of production in historical perspective, these do not influence development in the future for most of the countries. China, and to a lesser extent Laos and Viet Nam, are cases in point. For centuries these countries have developed freshwater fish culture practices, well suited to the geography of each, with large rivers and flood plains and a predominantly rural population. As urban development progresses, particularly in China, intensive systems and integrated practices have been developed close to communities to meet large demands for fresh live fish. Only in the last two decades has interest spread to more
high-value marine species, particularly crustaceans and molluscs, but these countries have resources of brackishwater estuaries and flat coastal areas for marine culture in addition to opportunities for culture-based fisheries.
Japan, the Philippines, and Taiwan PC, on the other hand, have traditions in marine and brackishwater culture. These have been compelled, for the most part, by their insular geography and size, and urban and industrial concentrations of population. Any traditional interest in freshwater species has been by the Japanese in the production of salmonids. In the last two decades intensive culture systems in freshwater have proved to be opportunities for growth, and these have been taken, particularly in the Philippines with developments in net pens and cages in inland lakes, and in Taiwan PC for eels.
The two Koreas have more similarities with Japan than China in their backgrounds with marine species, but on a much smaller scale. Their coastal waters are colder and without much protection. Resources for freshwater culture are poor; the rivers are small with short runs, and the indigenous species are few. On the other hand Hong Kong, in spite of its size and high population density, has inherited the traditions of fish culture from the Chinese and much has been made of the limited resources. It has the advantage of a tropical climate (as does Macau) which suits intensive freshwater production systems. In spite of the competition for coastal space Hong Kong has reserved a number of protected areas for marine culture among its islands.
As described in the introduction to this survey, East Asia has a long tradition in aquaculture; China has been practising culture for about 4 000 years in harmony with a traditional rural-agrarian economy, and countries like the Philippines and Japan have a tradition of some 300 or 400 years.
It is speculated that the techniques for keeping fish in ponds originated in China with fishermen who kept their surplus catch alive temporarily in baskets submerged in rivers or small bodies of water created by damming one side of a river bed. Another possibility is that aquaculture developed from ancient practices for trapping fish; these simple operations steadily improved from trapping-holding to trapping-holding-growing, and finally into complete husbandry practices. Chinese who emigrated to other Southeast Asian countries probably carried the knowledge with them and inspired the local people to take up fish farming.
From such beginnings aquaculture has developed in many countries in the region into a high-technology industry, employing modern techniques and methods, and making use of a variety of production inputs to produce high-value commodities. However, even in those countries where aquaculture is now practised using a high level of technology, traditional and low technology culture are still used.
Aquaculture systems and practices in the region range from the traditional/extensive, no-input system to low-, medium-, and high-input systems. Production units include fish ponds, both freshwater and brackishwater/marine; fish pens and fish cages; and mariculture units like rafts, lines, and stakes for mollusc and seaweed culture. (Information on aquaculture production in the region is summarized in Annex I, Table 5)
2.2 Regional production data
East Asia occupies a prominent position in world aquaculture, producing some 6.5 million t equivalent to 63% of total global aquaculture production in 1985, and accounting for about 26% of total fish production in the region. Of this total China contributes some 2.78 million t representing 24.8%. Other large producers are Japan with 1.2 million t, DPR Korea with 809 000 t, Republic of Korea with 790 200 t, and the Philippines with 495 000 t. The combined production of these five countries is equivalent to 93.5% of the region's production from aquaculture in 1985 (see Annex I, Table 6).
Aquaculture production in East Asia has grown from 2.6 million t in 1975 (or 13.3% of total fish production) to 6.5 million t (26%) in 1985. This represents an increase of 60% over a 10-year period. All of the countries in the region registered significant increases in production from 1975 to 1985, with growth rates ranging from 30% in Japan to 78% in the Philippines.
Of the large total regional production from aquaculture, freshwater finfish comprise the largest percentage. Seaweeds, molluscs, and crustaceans comprise the other major commodity groups. In some countries, shrimp aquaculture showed the fastest growth, with that of Taiwan PC growing at a phenomenal 1 023% per year from 1975 to 1985.
In the Philippines aquaculture out-performed both commercial and municipal capture fisheries in terms of growth rate from 1977 to 1986. At 12.5%, the rate of growth of the aquaculture sub-sector was substantially higher than those of commercial (0.6%) and municipal capture (inland 9.6%; marine 1.4%) fisheries. Worldwide the Philippines ranks fifth in overall aquaculture production, with almost 500 000 t of fishery products valued at US$ 4.4 billion in 1986.
Aquaculture in marine waters showed the highest production growth rate (10.2%) while brackishwater culture grew by 3.5%; freshwater farming registered a negative growth due mainly to the reduction of fish pen hectarage in Laguna Lake. In terms of value however, brackishwater farming outperformed marine culture, as shrimps command higher prices than most marine species.
In China the total production from aquaculture in 1987 was 4.58 million t, of which 3.48 million t came from freshwater aquaculture and 1.10 million t from marine and brackishwater aquaculture. Of the total freshwater production, some 2.617 million t were obtained from pond culture, 207 000 t from lakes, 378 000 t from reservoirs; 219 000 t from rivers and small waterways; 106 000 t from paddy fields; and 53 000 t from other sources. The production from marine culture consisted mainly of seaweeds, which accounted for about 23.7% of the marine harvest; shrimps; molluscs (including scallops, mussels, and oysters); and finfish.
Aquaculture production in the Republic of Korea comes mostly from marine culture. In 1985 seaweeds gave the highest production at 397 000 t (of which sea mustard or Undaria was the most important at 256 900 t or 65% of total seaweed production). This was followed by mollusc production at 369 000 t, the bulk of which comprised oysters (at 242 000 t or 66% of total). Marine finfish (mainly yellowtail or Seriola quinqueradiata) yielded 1 413 t, and peneid shrimps about 90 t.
Japan produced about 1.2 million t of aquaculture products in 1985, roughly 10% of total Japanese fish production and 21% by value. Marine culture is the most important sub-sector, with the production from seven major commodities (oyster, Porphyra, yellowtail, red sea bream, Undaria, Laminaria, and scallop) altogether contributing about 77% of the entire income from marine products in 1984.
Freshwater culture, while exhibiting a slower development compared with marine culture, produced some US$ 786 million worth of products in 1984. About 90% of these earnings are contributed by four main species: rainbow trout, "ayu", common carp, and eel.
In Taiwan PC, the dramatic growth of the shrimp culture industry has pushed production from the brackishwater sub-sector ahead of freshwater aquaculture, which dominated production some years ago. In 1986 Taiwan PC produced some 45 000 t of shrimps, compared with a low 1 390 t in 1977.
Freshwater aquaculture in Taiwan PC is also important, contributing about 27.2% to total fish production in 1978. This consists mainly of Chinese carps, tilpias, and eel. In the same year marine culture in Taiwan PC accounted for about 26.3% of total aquaculture production, consisting mainly of oysters and clams.
In comparison to the foregoing countries with large aquaculture production volumes, Hong Kong and Viet Nam gave relatively small yields of 213 600 and 204 500 t respectively in 1985. Hong Kong produces mostly Chinese carps, tilapia, and grey mullet from its freshwater polyculture, and marine finfish, molluscs, and shrimps from marine culture. In 1983, marine culture earned for Hong Kong US$ 64 million from 960 t of fish and fishery products. In Viet Nam freshwater culture is the more dominant sub-sector, producing mainly Chinese carps, tilapias, catfish, and Macrobrachium. Brackishwater shrimp culture is rapidly developing, with the 1984 production of farmed penaeid shrimps estimated at 10 000 to 20 000 t.
In Brunei the contribution of aquaculture to national fish production is insignificant. Although aquaculture has been tried as early as 1965 little progress has been made; aquaculture at present is still best described as being in the experimental or pilot-stage of development. Freshwater fish ponds were constructed by the Government in 1966 but these have failed to stimulate private interest. Experimental fish cage culture of sea bass and grouper, as well as the culture of mussels, have been initiated with positive prospects.
In Laos fish pond culture started in the mid-60s and production has grown by an average of 30% per year, the highest in Asia from 1975 to 1985. Production is mainly from polyculture of carps in small home lots.
Hardly any information is available on the fisheries (more so, aquaculture) of Macau and Mongolia.
The species of fish, shellfish, and seaweeds occurring throughout the region are more or less the same, but each country has developed the culture of fish most familiar within its borders.
In landlocked Laos the principal species culture are the Chinese carps (bighead, Aristichthys nobilis; silver, Hypophthalmichthys molitrix; grass, Ctenopharyngodon idella; common, Cyprinus carpio); Indian carps (roho, Labeo rohita; mrigal, Cirrhina mrigal; catla, Catla catla); and the tilapias (Oreochromis mossambicus and O. niloticus). Production from carp polyculture in fish ponds has been shown to reach 5 t/ha/yr, with large inputs.
In Viet Nam the main culture species include the Chinese carps (grass, silver, bighead), rohu, tilapia, catfish (Pangasius sutchi), snakeheads (Ophicephalus spp. and Channa spp.), gouramis (Helostoma temmincki and Osphronemus gouramy), barbs (Barbus and Leptobarbus) and the freshwater prawn Macrobrachium rosenbergii. In polyculture production from these species ranges from 3-15 t/ha/yr, while monoculture of catfish yields 10-30 t/ha/yr. In cages "production ranges from 20-150 kg/m^3.
Major brackishwater species include the finfish, milkfish (Chanos chanos) and mullet (Mugil spp.); the crustaceans Penaeus monodon, P. merguiensis, and Metapenaeus ensis; the molluscs Mytilus smaragdinus (mussel), Ostrea rivularia (oyster), and Andara granosa (cockle); and seaweeds belonging to the genus Gracilaria. In riceland areas of the Mekong Delta typical yields of 200-250 kg/ha are obtained from the trapping-holding-growing system of culture, and about 150 kg/ha of fish and crustaceans and 3 t rice/ha from the rice-fish/shrimp rotation method.
Hong Kong farms mainly Chinese carps and grey mullet in fresh water; oysters of the genus Crassostrea; shrimps (mainly P. japonicus); and various finfish - groupers of the genus Epinephelus, sea bream (Rhabdosargus sarga), red pargo (Chrysophrys major), snapper (Lutjanus spp.) and sea bass (Lates calcarifer) - in sea water. Average yields from freshwater fish ponds are 4.2 t/ha/yr, and from marine culture 39 t/raft area/yr.
Taiwan PC is a large producer of milkfish (Chanos chanos) and has the highest yields per hectare, although it farms only small areas and must contend with three winter months during which the milkfish cannot grow. Taiwan PC is also credited with pioneering work on the induced spawning and production of fry and fingerlings of grey mullet and milkfish, and the completion of the life history and production of post-larvae of several important cultured penaeid shrimps.
Taiwan PC is also famous for extensive oyster farming and well developed polyculture systems, including the integration of fish with poultry and/or other animal husbandry. Eel culture has also been successfully developed within a short period of less than 20 years. Carp polyculture yields 3-6 t/ha/yr on average and integrated fish farming gives yields of 6 t/ha/yr with manuring, and 10 t/ha/yr with supplemental feeding. Intensive eel culture produces 10 t/ha/yr, and the culture of Macrobrachium gives yields of more than 2 t/ha/crop of six months.
Like Taiwan PC the Philippines farms milkfish, penaeid shrimps (mainly P. monodon and secondarily P. merguiensis and P. indicus) and tilapia (O. niloticus and O. mossambicus/O. niloticus hybrids). The Philippines also cultures seaweeds (mainly of the genus Eucheuma) and oysters and green mussels (Perna viridis). Carp culture is still in its infancy and development is constrained by poor market acceptability. In 1986 the national average brackishwater fish pond production was 1 t/ha/yr. High yields of 3-8 t of penaeid shrimps per hectare per crop are obtained from intensive culture in certain areas of the country, notably Panay Island in the Visayas. Yields from freshwater fish ponds are, on the average, similar to those from brackishwater ponds at 1.16 t/ha/yr. By comparison the average yield from freshwater fish pens and cages is 2-3 t/ha/yr, two or three times that from freshwater fish ponds in the country.
In China ten freshwater species predominate. These include the Chinese carps (grass, silver, and bighead), wuchang fish (Megalobrama amblyocephala), black carp (Mylopharyngodon piceus), mud carp (Cirrhina molitorella), common carp (Cyprinus carpio), and tilapia (O. mossambicus, O. niloticus, and O. aureus). When reared in polyculture these species give production volumes ranging from 1.3 to 7.5 t/ha/yr in intensive systems. Other culture species include grouper, sea bass, sea bream, grey mullet, and Mugil soiuy, with the latter and sea bream successfully propagated using artificial methods.
Farmed tropical shrimp in China belong to the following species: P. orientalis, P. penicillatus, P. japonicus, and P. monodon. Major seaweed species are the kelp (Laminaria) and laver (Porphyra). In 1987 China farmed 87 000 t of shrimps. In 1986 some 230 000 t of scallops were harvested as well as 100 000 t of mussels.
In Japan the following seven species comprise the most important for marine culture purposes: the Japanese oyster (C. gigas); "nori" or laver, a red alga (Porphyra); yellowtail (Seriola quinqueradiata); red sea bream (Pagrus major); "wakame" or sea mustard (Undaria); "konbu" or kelp, a brown alga (Laminaria); and scallop (Patinopecten yessoensis). Altogether they contributed 77% of the entire income from Japanese marine products in 1984.
On the other hand the following four major freshwater species contributed about 90% of the US$ 786 million earned from freshwater culture in 1984; rainbow trout (Salmo gairdneri); "ayu", a salmonid (Pleoglossus altivelis); common carp (Cyprinus carpio); and eel (Anguilla spp.).
In Republic of Korea the seaweeds (laver, sea mustard, kelp, and some minor species like Chondrus, Gigartina, and Gelidium), and molluscs (mainly oysters, cockles, mussels, and short-necked clams of the genus Venerupis japonicus) are cultured in marine waters, as are some penaeids (P. japonicus, P. orientalis) and marine fish (yellowtail and sea bream). Freshwater species farmed are mainly the common carp, the rainbow trout, and the eel.
2.3 Production systems and practices in the region
Aquaculture, or the controlled rearing of selected animals or plants in aquatic environments, involves the manipulation of certain components of the environment to enhance production and produce harvests in greater quantities than are produced naturally.
Production technologies are determined by the interaction of five factors: the physical environment, culture facilities, available nutrient inputs, species feasible for culture, and the ability of the producers to balance all the factors in a profitable package. While the physical environment is essentially fixed, it can be modified or somehow manipulated to make it suit the biological requirements of the culture organism. The degree of manipulation of the environment, together with the level of inputs introduced into the system, are the principal determinants of the level of technology employed in aquaculture. On this basis aquaculture is usually classified as traditional or extensive, semi-intensive, or intensive.
The level of management (e.g. aeration, feeding, water change) and the quantity of inputs (e.g. fingerlings, feeds, fertilizers, pesticides) increase from the traditional/extensive to semi-intensive and intensive culture. The degree of sophistication of the culture facilities also increases as the technology intensifies.
Different levels of management exist in most of the countries but practised in varying proportions from country to country according to the technology and skill available. For example, in Taiwan PC aquaculture is mostly intensive, both in freshwater and brackishwater/marine environments, using above-ground concrete tanks and aerators, pumps, and automatic feeding machines, and producing high yields of fish and shrimps. In contrast, brackishwater fish pond culture in Viet Nam typically uses the trapping-holding-growing practice in large and extensive tidal ponds, which yield about 200-500 kg/ha of finfish and shrimp in almost equal proportions.
The change from extensive to intensive systems developed gradually with the development of technology relative to artificial seed production and feed formulation, without which intensive culture is difficult to sustain. In Taiwan PC the shift from extensive to intensive culture was spurred by the breakthrough in the artificial propagation of shrimps. Before this P. monodon juveniles were collected and stocked together with milkfish fry in extensive coastal ponds, as in the Philippines and Indonesia. The ponds were relatively large (1-3 ha) and shallow (30-40 cm) and entirely dependent on tidal interchange. Shrimp was a by-product with yields fluctuating between 10-100 kg/ha, depending on the stocking rate of collected juveniles.
With the success of artificial propagation of shrimp post larvae and the commercialization of shrimp hatchery technology, the extensive ponds are now sub-divided into small, 0.25-0.5 ha units and provided with pumps and aeration to improve management. The feed was first only trash fish, then mussel meat and small Acetes shrimps, and now with formulated feeds which took five years to develop. By 1985 production of market sized shrimps reached 31 000 t, and in 1987 Taiwan PC exported some 50 000 t to Japan.
The same pattern of development is evident in the other countries in the region which now practise intensive farming. In the Philippines increasingly large areas of existing traditionally/extensively operated milkfish ponds are being converted into more productive shrimp monoculture ponds using hatchery-bred shrimp post-larvae and commercially available shrimp feeds, and using paddlewheels and pumps for more efficient water management. Yields from these ponds have consequently increased from a low of 200-400 kg/ha about a decade ago to as high as 8 t/ha/crop from highly intensive ponds at present.
In Japan innovation has likewise been the key to increased harvests and incomes. Technology on the artificial propagation of red sea bream in 1975 resulted in rapid increases in yield; the development of pen culture in 1965 markedly increased yields of yellowtail; and hanging methods of oyster culture have made it one of the most successful aquaculture methods. In China rapid progress in marine culture has been made after the successful breeding of major farmed species, including Mugil soiuy and sea bream, and the introduction of culture techniques.
On the other hand the level of technology used in other countries of the region either remains low, as in Laos and Vietnam, or is still in an experimental stage, as in Brunei, or is non-existent, as in Macau and Mongolia.
Aquaculture in the region is practised in fresh, brackish, and marine waters using a variety of production facilities and methods. Freshwater culture is carried out in fish ponds and in fish cages and pens in lakes and reservoirs, as well as in paddy fields, and either in monoculture or polyculture, and integrated with animal husbandry and crop farming. Marine and brackishwater culture for finfish and shrimps is practised in floating cages in bays or coves in coastal areas; and mollusc and seaweed culture in bays using various techniques (e.g. hanging, bottom, stake methods, or cage culture).
In China and Hong Kong Chinese carps and tilapias are grown in polyculture in fish ponds, and usually integrated with animal husbandry and crop farming. About 75% of China's freshwater aquaculture production is obtained from pond culture, 90% of which is linked with crops and animals and giving yields exceeding 13 t/ha/yr using up to nine species of fish in a single pond at one time. In Hong Kong 85% of total freshwater pond production uses polyculture, with about 80% of the farms integrated with duck farming, which is popular because of its greater productivity of 9 t/ha compared with 2.3 t geese and 2.6 t pigs per ha.
In China about 25% of the freshwater fish production is obtained from pens and cages in lakes, reservoirs, rivers, and paddy fields. In lakes and reservoirs, fish are produced by either cove culture, wherein fry are first released into netted-off areas of coves and then released into the reservoir when they reach 15 cm, or by cage culture using floating cages without supplemental feeding.
Viet Nam also practises polyculture of Chinese carps in fish ponds integrated with pig, duck, and crop farming. Yields of 3-15 t/ha/yr from polyculture have been reported. In Laos freshwater finfish are produced mostly from polyculture in small fish ponds using traditional methods. In some cases high yields of up to 5 t/ha/yr have been shown possible with the use of large inputs.
Cage culture is also common in Viet Nam with catfish, snakehead, and grass and common carps. In rice fields and reservoirs, especially in the Mekong Delta, fish and shrimps are grown; they enter when the fields are flooded and are normally harvested with the rice. In many areas the fields have an adjoining pond which collects the fish as the water level drops. Yields are low at 10 kg/ha/yr.
In the Philippines, Japan, and Republic of Korea, on the other hand, freshwater culture is mostly practised in monoculture and hardly, if ever, integrated with crops or animals.
In the Philippines the greater volume of freshwater fish production is obtained from cage and pen culture of tilapia and milkfish in Laguna de Bay, the country's largest freshwater lake, and only minimally from freshwater fish ponds. Tilapia and milkfish reared in pens and cages utilize the natural food available in the lake and are seldom given any supplemental feeding.
The culture of marine and brackishwater organisms is carried out in coastal fish ponds or in bays using a variety of methods depending on the species being cultured.
Pond culture is usually practised for marine finfish like milkfish, either alone or in polyculture with shrimps, or with other species like tilapia, as in the Philippines and Taiwan PC, and mullets in Taiwan PC and Viet Nam. It is also the principal practice of rearing penaeid shrimps using different levels of management described earlier.
Marine finfish are also cultured in floating cages, as in Hong Kong for groupers, sea bass, sea bream, and other marine species, and Republic of Korea for yellowtail and black sea bream.
Mollusc culture is carried out in a variety of practices. In Japan scallops and oysters have established settling areas for spat, or are artificially seeded in natural fishing grounds. In Hong Kong oysters are cultured using the traditional bottom method, and in the Philippines using hanging, raft, or stake methods.
Seaweeds are mostly farmed using the net method, as for laver, and a longline hanging method for kelp and sea mustard in Republic of Korea. Kelp is also cultured on floating rafts, as in China.
Information on the total hectarage under aquaculture production in the different countries of the region is by no means complete. Available data indicate however that the present area now being utilized for aquaculture is, in most instances, a small portion of the total resource with potential for further development. Also, the proportion of freshwater to marine culture area varies with the different countries covered. China, for example, utilizes a total of more than 3.94 million ha of freshwater area for aquaculture, including 1.39 million ha of fish ponds; 646 000 ha of lakes; 1.43 million ha of reservoirs; 324 667 ha of small waterways; 80 000 ha of paddy fields; and 64 000 ha of other areas. By comparison, only 368 666 ha of coastal areas are used for marine culture. It is estimated that a total of 70 000 ha of marine shrimp farms are operational in China with an annual production of about 60 000-90 000 t. A large number of these shrimp farms are found in the Bohai Gulf
area. Hainan Island as well as Guangdong and Fujian provinces are likewise actively developing large-scale semi-intensive culture of P. monodon and P. orientalis. In southern China, shrimp farming is done mostly in semi-intensive earthen ponds.
Japan on the other hand uses 1.92 million ha of coastal area for marine culture and only about 500 ha for freshwater culture. Japan has 100 shrimp farms, of which 40% are semi-intensive, 50% intensive, and 10% super-intensive, mostly located around Kagoshima and on the Sete Island Sea, the Amakusa Island, and the Rynkyn Island.
In the Philippines brackishwater fish ponds occupy some 210 320 ha, and freshwater fish ponds only about 13 400 ha. Shrimp farms number approximately 2 000 with a total operational area of about 16 500 ha and an annual tails-on production of 30 000 t. Of these farms 51% are extensive, 45% semi-intensive, and 4% intensive. 40% are located in Luzon, 35% in the Visayas, and 25% in Mindanao.
Taiwan PC has 5 000 shrimp farms and 10 000 ha in production. Five per cent of the farms are extensive, 10% semi-intensive, 70% intensive, and 15% super-intensive (with production levels exceeding 12 t/ha/y).
2.4 Producers in the region
With the exception of China, DPR Korea, and Viet Nam, where large numbers of fish farms are operated by the State, in the region the bulk of aquaculture activities is in the hands of the private sector. Aquaculture offers many opportunities for employment - either directly in fish farming (as fish pond/fish pen/cage operators, caretakers, construction workers, pump tenders, machine operators, harvesters) or indirectly as employees in related or ancillary industries (as net manufacturers, boat-makers, fry gatherers, bamboo suppliers, etc.)
The number of people directly involved in aquaculture production in the region is, however, difficult to estimate for lack of statistical information from most of the countries. The following examples give an indication of the number of producers in East Asia. China has about 22 000 township and village-operated fish farms with a total of 340 000 people and 1 200 state-operated fish farms (1 000 freshwater and 200 marine) with a total of 10 000 personnel. In Japan the 1.92 million ha of marine culture area are run by 62 497 establishments employing 95 612 persons, and the 500 hectares of freshwater area are operated by some 4 800 establishments engaging about 26 000 people. In the Philippines it is estimated that each hectare of fish pond needs the services of one person. Thus, the total aquaculture area of about 250 000 ha employs an equivalent number of people.
2.5 Organization of producers
Most of the producers in the region organize themselves into private fish farmer associations or cooperatives for availing themselves of certain benefits which are not accessible to individual farmers; for example, financial assistance from governments is often available to cooperatives but not to individuals. This is particularly true for government development projects which aim at socio-economic advancement of small-scale fish farmers in depressed rural communities. It is also more convenient for post-harvest and export marketing services if producers are organized into cooperatives because minimum quantities are usually required, especially for export shipments.
Fish farmers' cooperatives usually promote the interest of their members, maintain liaison with government agencies concerned, provide technical assistance and guidance in various production and marketing aspects, and in some cases provide financial or credit assistance to its members. In Taiwan PC the producers' associations also set up warehouses, cold storages, and ice plants for use of their members.
In Japan there are some 4 000 fisheries cooperatives, most of which are multipurpose organizations engaged in marketing, credit, supply, and other service activities. These cooperatives form federations at the prefectural level, which in turn organize into a national apex federation, the National Federation of Fisheries Cooperative Associations, which actively represents the interests of the producers. In addition there is the Japan Fisheries Association, a private, non-profit, corporate entity which represents the entire fisheries industry, with members from Japanese major fisheries companies, fisheries associations, and fisheries-related industries such as marketing, processing, and net manufacture.
In the Philippines a number of interest groups exist within the private sector, among which are the communities of artisanal fishermen, the commercial fishermen, the aquaculturists, and people in the ancillary industries (fish traders, retail distributors, processors, equipment suppliers, and operators of ice plants, refrigerated storages, and transport facilities). As in Japan Filipino fish farmers in various production centres usually organize into small cooperatives and/or associations, which in turn group themselves into a larger organization at the provincial or regional level. The various provincial and regional associations then group themselves into a national federation whose officers serve to liaise with National Government officials and other private sector organizations. The federations promote the interests of the private sector and participate in fisheries programme planning, management, and conservation. They also serve as lobby groups working for specific
goals beneficial to their members. At present, for example, the aquaculture federations are actively supporting the establishment of a new Department of Fisheries which they think will bring more benefits to their sub-sector.
In China fish production is now organized under the contract system. Since 1983, the State neither puts forward a fixed price nor a fixed quota for the producers, and the production units, including individuals, can sell their fish freely, according to the market price.
2.6 Financial investment by public and private enterprises
It is difficult to make an estimate of the level of investment in aquaculture production, both by public and private entities, in the region, but it is evident from the number and scale of existing and proposed projects that there has been an upsurge of investment in this sector since a decade ago. In general most of the production facilities in the various countries in the region have been constructed with private capital, or through loans to private individuals and/or corporations from commercial banks or government financial institutions.
Investment by the public sector has involved mainly the construction and operation of selected production centres or facilities which have served to stimulate interest of the private sector in similar ventures. For example, governments in the region have invested in demonstration farms for both finfish or shrimps. In most cases, however, public investment in aquaculture production comes mainly in the form of financial assistance to the private sector in capital investment. Financial assistance is largely by way of providing loan/credit facilities to fish farmers for the development and operation of fish ponds, fish pens and cages, and related support facilities.
In some instances governments, through a corporation, directly undertake production either individually or in joint venture with a private party. The Japan Fish Farming Association, for example, is a semi-governmental organization responsible for the shrimp post-larvae production and the operation of twelve fish farming centres. Prefectural governments operate 37 other fish farming centres.
In China the National Fisheries Corporation (CNFC) is the largest State-owned combination enterprise engaged in aquatic production. It has formed 104 joint ventures in 18 provinces, autonomous regions, and municipalities throughout China, forming a complete system of production, management, and marketing, starting from propagation, breeding and seeding, and rearing of freshwater fish to market size. CNFC also operates jointly with provincial aquaculture companies in coastal provinces, autonomous regions, and municipalities, and 42 other county companies, the establishment of a number of prawn farms, juvenile fish farms, fish feed factories, and processing plants. Their aquaculture products are marketed not only locally but are also exported. CNFC has interests in three fisheries companies which have their own processing factories in charge of post-harvest processing of the aquaculture products of these joint ventures, as well as those from other sources. Moreover, CNFC
operates seven aquaculture product trading companies, and supply and market stores dealing in marine and freshwater products, processed aqua-products, and other commodities.
In the Republic of Korea the Agriculture and Fisheries Development Corporation founded in 1967 operates autonomously with an equity position in all its subsidiaries, and provides services in financing, marketing, and research. One of its two components is the Korea Aquaculture Company Limited with a capitalization of Won 100 million, which is engaged in the production and marketing of cultured shrimps, laver, and hard clams.
More often than not governments of the region do not compete with the private sector in commercial production. The burden is therefore borne by the private sector. In most countries aquaculture has developed to its high level mainly through private interest and initiative, and sometimes despite the lack of government support. The scale of private investment varies with the scope and magnitude of each project, the level of technology employed, and the type of entity (individual or corporate, national or multinational) involved, among others.
It is now increasingly common to find aquaculture projects owned or operated by private joint ventures involving local and foreign partners, with the foreign investors usually providing part of the development and operating costs and the local partner providing the land/site and part of the operating cost as equity. This is true not only in such capitalistic societies as the Philippines and Taiwan PC, but also in the centralized economy countries, like China, which now has existing joint ventures with foreign investors from New Zealand, Japan, Hong Kong, Canada, France and the United States.
In the Philippines large private Filipino and multinational companies have invested hundreds of millions of pesos and dollars in the establishment of shrimp farms in various areas. For example, the San Miguel Corporation, one of the leading Filipino corporations, was among the first to invest in intensive shrimp farming in the country, thus triggering the rapid development of the industry in recent years. A number of large private companies have followed suit, many with development funds from their parent companies in the USA, Japan, and Europe. For example, Dole Packaged Foods Company, a subsidiary of Castle and Cooke, USA, is developing over 150 ha of shrimp ponds in South Cotabato in the island of Mindanao, southern Philippines. Mitsui Norin Marine Products Ltd. of Japan has invested in a 500 ha integrated shrimp culture project of the House of Investments, a large Filipino conglomerate, in Zamboanga del Sur, also in Mindanao. Pure Foods Corporation, a Filipino meat
processing company, has put up a shrimp farm partially funded by USA-based Geo. Hormel and Company.
A number of other such projects are started or are in the pipeline, and cover various production processes and different culture organisms, including those which support the culture of the principal marketable species. For example, Aqua Industrial Center, Inc., a joint project of Taiwan PC, Japan, and USA investors, is to culture zooplankton (Brachionus plicatilis) and water fleas (Daphnia pulex) for export to Japan, Taiwan PC and USA for freshwater fish hatcheries.
2.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
The development of the aquaculture industry in the region has been greatly aided by the provision of technical assistance at the level of producers by major multilateral and bilateral institutions operating in East Asia. Funding organizations include ADB, CIDA, IDRC, JICA, UNDP, the British Overseas Development Administration (ODA), the US Agency for International Development (USAID), and the World Bank (WB), among others. Many of these projects have been executed by FAO, or by the International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management (ICLARM).
Technical assistance, as distinguished from capital assistance which refers to the provision of funds for capital infrastructure, refers to the provision of funds for the conduct of investment studies for production, demonstration projects, or production-support activities. There are a number of technical assistance projects in the production sub-sector.
UNDP is providing assistance for three projects in China (for the development of coastal aquaculture, marine fish culture, and the demonstration of prawn culture in Xincun); and four projects in Viet Nam (on the development of Artemia culture, catfish reproduction, Chaetoceros culture, and brackishwater aquaculture development in Nghia Binh). These projects are executed by FAO.
ADB funds technical assistance projects dealing mainly with a review of the aquaculture sector in a number of countries. At present there is an ongoing ADB-funded Fisheries Sector Study in the Philippines reviewing the aquaculture industry and updating the findings of a 1986 aquaculture sector review.
In Laos the Netherlands Government, through the Mekong Committee, is providing funding for three technical assistance projects involving fish breeding and production in Tha Ngone in Vientiane Province.
2.8 Capital assistance projects in the sub-sector
Funding for the construction of production facilities in the region has been provided largely by multilateral organizations like ADB, WB, the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), and the World Food Programme (WFP). Most of the projects provide credit facilities to either the respective government, or to the private sector through government banks and lending institutions. In most cases credit assistance is also accompanied by components of training and extension and institutional strengthening, which ensures chat the loans are ultimately repaid by the sub-borrowers.
A number of such capital assistance projects exist in the region at the present time. Among the East Asian countries China has the most projects and the largest capital assistance from multilateral funding. These include a US$ 40 billion WB loan coupled with a US$ 60 million concessionary credit facility from the International Development Association (IDA) for the conversion of lowland and shoals for culture of shrimps, seaweeds, and other items; a US$ 60 million WB loan for 11 100 ha of new fish ponds and the improvement of 6 100 ha of existing ponds; a US$ 6 million IFAD loan for the construction of 4 666 ha of fish ponds; SDR of US$ 10.15 million from IFAD for the development of 2 000 ha for intensive carp farming; and a total of US$ 91 million from the WFP for six projects for the construction of 8 000 ha of fish ponds and associated infrastructure.
In the Philippines ADB is providing credit assistance to the Philippine Government for the First Aquaculture Development Project to improve 1 100 ha of brackishwater fish ponds and the provision of support services; Laguna de Bay Fishpen Development Project for 1 680 ha of fish pens and the provision of support facilities and services; and a Second Aquaculture Development Project which is being finalized with the Philippine Government.
The WB is providing three major loans to the Philippine fisheries sector. These include a Fisheries Credit Project which provides credit Co individuals and corporations to finance marine and inland fisheries development; a Second Fisheries Credit Project which provides long-term credit to the private sector for the rehabilitation, expansion, and construction of milkfish ponds, and ice plants and cold storage facilities, among other infrastructure; and the Third Livestock and Fisheries Credit Project, the fisheries component of which provides loans for the rehabilitation and expansion of inland fish ponds and creation of fish pond estates.
In July 1987, the Laguna Lake Development Authority (LLDA) inaugurated what could be the largest and most modern freshwater fish hatchery/nursery complex in Asia today. It was built with joint funding from the ADB and the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) Fund for International Development, and has a production capacity of 100 million tilapia fingerlings and about the same number of milkfish fingerlings per year. In addition, it has a feedmill, laboratories, and grow-out ponds for tilapia culture. The LLDA hatchery/nursery complex was put up in support of the Laguna de Bay Fishpen Development Project, with participation of about 1 000 small-scale fish farmers in the Laguna de Bay area.
The Overseas Economic Support Fund of Japan, through its Agro-Industrial Technology Transfer Programme is providing loan funds to private investors for a number of agriculture projects in the Philippines, including fisheries and aquaculture. Projects funded through this Programme have export potentials to Japanese markets and are intended to have significant socio-economic impacts on the area. Among projects in this Programme are a semi-refined carrageenan processing plant, and several shrimp hatchery, culture, and processing projects in various parts of the country.
In Laos UNDP is providing funds for the expansion and improvement of fish farms in five provinces, executed by FAO.
In Viet Nam funding is provided by UNDP for a shrimp culture and production project improving the pond facilities of the Shrimp Culture Research Institute, and for the construction of a penaeid shrimp hatchery in the central part of the country. The UNDP also co-financed with UN Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) the construction of a freshwater prawn hatchery in the Delta area.
<section>5</section>
3. LOCAL INFRASTRUCTURE
3.1 Extension services in the region
3.2 Training of extension agents
3.3 Seed production facilities in the region
3.4 Manufacture of feed and fertilizers
3.5 Manufacturers of equipment for the industry
3.6 Other services for the industry
3.7 Local credit programmes
3.8 Trade publications for producers
3.9 Technical assistance in the sub-sector
3.1 Extension services in the region
Fisheries extension is an important activity of most governments in the region and its importance is recognized in the development of the industry. While this is the case, however, there is a general inadequacy of extension workers not only in terms of numbers of field personnel and equipment for the job, but also in terms of their qualifications and preparation for the work. In some countries there is a serious lack of technically trained personnel and no extension service is available at all (e.g., Viet Nam); instead provincial fisheries officers serve as the link between the Directorate of Fisheries and the fishermen. In others, as in the Philippines and China, the existing extension services need to be strengthened and the number of staff increased by the recruitment of more personnel and by the training of existing workers.
In those countries with formal extension services, aquaculture extension is mostly carried out by fisheries extension workers of the respective fisheries departments or bureaux which often have distinct divisions or units with extension as their main task or responsibility. Some countries like Japan and the Philippines have government or private agencies rendering extension services to the private sector in support of their primary functions, or as needed in specific projects.
In Japan, for example, extension work is usually available at the prefectural level through extension agents within the fisheries district offices. In addition, fisheries cooperatives, research laboratories, and academic institutions also transfer improved technology to the fish farmers. In the Philippines fisheries extension is one of the main tasks of the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (BFAR), for which purpose it has developed and implemented a fishery extension programme in aquaculture aimed at increasing yields of existing fish ponds, pens and cages, and at the same time developing new production farms especially for marine culture of high-value species.
In the Philippines the aquaculture extension programme is executed by BFAR through its 12 regional offices, and provincial and municipal fishery offices. Some 300 aquaculture extension officers, representing about 50% of the total number of BFAR extension staff, are involved in this programme, with each assigned to cover an area of about 120 ha. In support of its extension services BFAR has 31 freshwater farms, 32 brackishwater farms, and 11 seafarms for seed production, field testing, and demonstration of aquaculture technologies. It also has a Freshwater Fish Hatchery and Extension Training Center in Nueva Ecija, Central Luzon which was established with USAID assistance. Four brackishwater aquaculture demonstration and training centres have likewise been established at Paombong, Bulacan; Pagbilao, Quezon; Calape, Bohol; and Lala, Lanao del Norte, with UNDP assistance. Other government agencies render extension work in the Philippines; for example, the Laguna Lake
Development Authority (LLDA) has about 60 field staff to assist the fishermen sub-borrowers of the LLDA Laguna de Bay Fishpen Development Project in the construction, development, and operation of their fish pens and fish cages built with ADB funding. LLDA has constructed a large freshwater hatchery/nursery complex as a support facility (see Section 3.3).
In addition, some private enterprises in aquaculture provide assistance to private farmers in the design, construction, and operation of their farms. San Miguel Corporation (SMC), for example, has technicians who conduct site evaluation, assist in pond design and layout, and give technical assistance during the operation of shrimp farms participating in their contract growing programme. This free assistance is intended to benefit SMC by ensuring good yields for buying back and eventual export. At the same time, the participating farmers are benefited by the free transfer of technology provided by SMC.
This approach has been adopted by China in its extension work. The creation of private corporations to provide technical services to fish farming communities is being encouraged. Many private fish farming corporations have been formed to undertake production contracts, thus allowing the transfer of fish farming technology to areas where aquaculture has not yet been developed. The incentives provided in such a system have been cited as the driving force in the rapid growth of fish farming in China. A formal extension service is, however, the principal vehicle for technology transfer in the country. The National Bureau of Aquatic Products under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry, and Fisheries (now renamed the Ministry of Agriculture) administers the extension service through its provincial, city, county, and district levels. In 1987 a total of 961 fisheries extension stations were established in 18 provinces, three autonomous territories, and three cities in an
efficient network with a total extension staff of 9 400, about 60% of which are technical/scientific personnel and about 1 204 are women.
Unlike the Philippines, where extension workers are among the most poorly paid government workers, the Government of China provides economic incentives and raises the political status of extension officers by upgrading their technical capabilities and equipping them better for the job.
In most of the countries in the region the extension agents extend technical assistance to fish farmers in various aspects of aquaculture production, from hatchery to rearing, harvesting, and even marketing of the produce. They monitor the progress of fish culture activities in their areas of operation, assist in planning and development work, and even help ensure funds for project operations. They also monitor the use of loans made available to the farmers, and help to ensure that financial obligations are repaid. Most extension services in the region are inadequately equipped. Pew, if any, have modern extension equipment (like audio-visual aids and field kits) and there is little transportation, particularly in the remote areas. Extension workers are often poorly motivated and render below-average performances in the field as a result.
3.2 Training of extension agents
Because of the long tradition of aquaculture in the region and its present advanced level, the majority of extension workers are trained in vocational schools rather than graduate schools. The education level for the extension worker is invariably the same as that which allows him or her to be employed by the government. Most government extension workers are then given special training on extension methods on joining the service. In addition they are sometimes sent to special training courses offered by other government agencies and research institutes on specialized areas of aquaculture production; in the Philippines, for example, BFAR has its own in-house training courses for field staff; in Wuxi, China, the Fisheries Research Centre has trained over 800 nationals in short-term courses in integrated farming.
A number of regional organizations provide opportunities in specialized aquaculture practices. The SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department (SEAFDEC-AQD) at Tigbauan in the Philippines trains national and international extension agents in various production methods and techniques, such as shrimp hatchery and culture operations and freshwater fish farming, among others. SEAFDEC-AQD also offers trainers' training courses for extension workers, and there are some private non-stock, non-profit corporations, some with foreign funding, which provide extension training services. Since 1974 SEAFDEC-AQD has trained some 6 776 participants in various national (5 471), international (1 074) non-degree programmes, and international (231) degree programmes. The ASEAN/FAO/UNDP Small-Scale Coastal Fisheries Development Project organizes training activities for fisheries extension workers. In 1988, for example, the project sponsored training courses on fisheries extension methodology in Indonesia and
Malaysia,
The Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia (NACA) provides short-term international training for aquaculture extension workers. On return to their respective countries, these trainees are expected to transfer the technologies through in-country programmes to other extension workers who, in turn, conduct on-site sessions for the fish farmers.
Transfer of aquaculture technology and training of field workers in their own countries, is also effected under the NACA programme of inter-country exchange of expertise. National experts assist other lead centres as well as other countries by visiting and training technicians and field workers on site. Since 1981 NACA has organized some 15 international training courses for specialized aquaculture practices with over 350 participants. Although the majority of participants have been from countries in Asia (19) and the Pacific (7), many have come from countries in Africa (12) and Latin America (7), and from Europe (1).
A database for fisheries and aquaculture training opportunities has been established by ICLARM/FAO at the ICLARM offices in the Philippines. Currently the data base lists 316 long and short-term courses in fisheries and aquaculture worldwide. More than half (54%) of the 110 institutions listed under Asia offer formal institutionalized programmes in aquaculture, of these 76% grant degrees. Short courses, mostly on aquaculture, are offered by 49 institutions; these are in Brunei (1), China (6), Hong Kong (1), Japan (1), Republic of Korea (2), Philippines (8), and Taiwan PC (2).
3.3 Seed production facilities in the region
The success of artificial fish propagation techniques for a number of valuable species on a commercial scale is often cited as the most significant contribution to the rapid development of aquaculture in East Asia. Consequently, there is now a very substantial number of fish seed production facilities in the region, both for marine and freshwater species. These are owned and operated by both government and private entities.
As of 1986 China had a total of 1 204 State-operated marine and freshwater fish hatcheries and nurseries with a total staff of 30 139, and over 3 000 collective and privately operated hatcheries and nurseries. Altogether these seed production units produced 138.5 billion freshwater fish fry; 30.8 billion freshwater fish fingerlings; and 32.3 billion shrimp post-larvae (size PL7-10).
In Taiwan PC there are about 1 600 to 1 800 small-scale shrimp hatcheries which specialize in just one phase of hatchery production, and many large-scale industrial hatcheries which maintain captive broodstock and concentrate on all phases of hatchery production, from maturation through juvenile production. These hatcheries produce 4.5 billion post-larvae per year.
In Japan the national government and 20 coastal prefectural governments have all established fish farming centres to produce seeds and fry of fish and shellfish (e.g., sea bream, prawn, flounder, abalone) for distribution to fish cooperatives and other organizations. Similar fish farming centres are under construction in more than 12 prefectures. In addition the Japan Fish Farming Association operates 13 national fish farming centres throughout the country. More than 2.5 billion seedstock are produced annually in Japan for use in culture-based fisheries, i.e., for restocking the open waters with Kuruma prawn, red sea bream, salmon, and scallops. Of this total, approximately 500 million are composed of shrimp fry.
In Viet Nam the Government has established an experimental shrimp hatchery in Haiphong, a penaeid shrimp hatchery in the central part of the country, and a freshwater prawn hatchery in the Mekong Delta area, all with external assistance.
In Laos four fish hatcheries were rehabilitated in 1966 with external funding assistance from USAID in Vientiane, Nong Tang, Luang Prabang, and Lakse. These sold more than 1 million fingerlings to private farmers in 1969. Since then FAO/UNDP has had projects rehabilitating a number of seed farms in the country, but recent data have been difficult to obtain.
The Philippines has almost 300 shrimp hatcheries of varying capacities. These are concentrated in major shrimp-producing centres in Panay Island, Zambales, Quezon, Batangas, and Mindanao. While most of these hatcheries are privately owned there are some Government-owned and operated shrimp hatcheries of which the most successful is that constructed by the Southern Philippines Development Authority in Naawan, Misamis Oriental in the island of Mindanao.
There are more than 200 freshwater fish hatcheries, mostly small-scale facilities for tilapia and recently for carp, located predominantly in Luzon along the shores of Laguna de Bay or in Laguna de Bay itself where freshwater fish pen and cage culture practices are centred. The number of hatcheries is increasing in other parts of the country with the new interests in cage farming in other lakes, and in freshwater pond farming in inland areas.
In addition the Government operates freshwater fish seed production facilities in the country. The Freshwater Aquaculture Center of the Central Luzon State University (CLSU) was among the earliest facilities which produced and sold tilapia fingerlings to the private sector, and at the same time rendered extension service to fish farmers in the area. BFAR has also established its Freshwater Fish Hatchery and Extension Center close to the CLSU facility with funding from USAID.
3.4 Manufacture of feed and fertilizers
Japan and Taiwan PC are the largest manufacturers of fish feed and fertilizers in the region. Japan processes about 30% of its total fish supply for industrial uses, mainly as fish meal for the production of fish and animal feeds. Taiwan PC has more than 40 companies producing fish and shrimp feeds, a substantial number of which export to other markets in the region. President Feeds is the leading brand.
Some of these feed companies have linked to national corporations for the production of shrimp feeds in the Philippines under new name-brands, but with royalties paid to the foreign firm; for example, B-Meg Feeds marketed by San Miguel Corporation are produced using a Taiwanese formula, and Fuji-Triumph Feeds uses a Japanese formulation. B-Meg feeds are the most expensive among four major locally produced feeds. The feed quality is consistently good and conversion efficient; average feed conversion ratios (FCRs) are 1.2-1.6:1 (or 1.2-1.6 kg of feed per kg of shrimp). Some commercial feeds produced in the region have inconsistent quality and give FCRs of 2 and above. B-Meg feeds used to be available only to shrimp farmers who participated in the contract growing scheme of San Miguel Corporation (SMC),
i.e., SMC supplies the farmer with the feeds and shrimp fry (produced in their hatchery in Negros Occidental) and bought back the shrimp products. SMC also provided the contract-growers with technical assistance starting from design to operation. Upon request SMC also provides feeds of credit to shrimp farmers with proven credit worthiness.
3.5 Manufacturers of equipment for the industry
China, Japan, and Taiwan PC are the leading manufacturers and suppliers of fish farming equipment in the region, exporting various types of machinery to the aquaculture producers in Asia.
The China National Fisheries Corporation (CNFC), the largest State-owned combination enterprise engaged in aquatic production, operates 3 medium-sized enterprises specializing in the production of fishery machinery such as diesel engines, culture machines, generators, power blocks, feed pelletizers, feed inflators, and cooling and refrigerating machines. Apart from the enterprises supervised by CNFC, there are also many factories specializing in the production of fishery machinery. There is even a Fishery Machinery and Instrument Research Institute in Shanghai which is supervised by the Ministry of Agriculture.
Taiwan PC is perhaps the largest manufacturer of aquaculture equipment, supplies, and materials. It exports a great deal, mostly to the Philippines, mainly on account of the lower prices of their products compared with similar products from Japan. The most popular products include paddlewheel aerators, pumps, generators, feed milling equipment, and various field equipment and supplies such as pH and DO meters, test kits and weighing scales.
With the rapid growth of the shrimp culture industry in the Philippines more national companies are manufacturing aquaculture equipment using local materials. With the abundance of cheap local labour equipment made in the Philippines is competitive with imported equipment. Locally fabricated paddlewheels and pumps are now preferred to imported ones. Service and supply of spare parts are also assured by the local manufacturers.
American and European equipment is also available in the region but prices are not competitive. An American-made refractometer, for example, costs five times as much as a Japanese brand.
Aquaculture trade fairs are common in the region. For example, China plans a fair for fish farming equipment in Shanghai in 1988, and Hong Kong an exhibition of processing equipment.
International scientific and technical conferences are almost always accompanied by such exhibitions. In the Philippines there is an annual agro-industrial trade fair where aquaculture equipment manufacturers and suppliers occupy a prominent place. In addition the yearly conventions of the various aquaculture producers and other private fishermen's federations invariably feature exhibits of such products.
3.6 Other services for the industry
Aquaculture consulting services are established and active in the region. Asia, with its many foreign-funded aquaculture development projects, has been a prime market for the services of a number of international consulting companies. ADB and World Bank-financed projects in the region usually provide for experts to assist governments in the execution of the projects. Consultants are also engaged by the development banks to assist in aquaculture sector studies and formulation of projects for possible bank financing.
Many international companies have established offices in the region; these include several firms from the USA, two from France, one each from Federal Republic of Germany, the Netherlands, Denmark, and United Kingdom. A growing number of Asian consultancy companies, notably in the Philippines, Thailand, and Taiwan PC have penetrated the market, and an increasing number of foreign-funded projects now hire Asian experts who have better familiarity with the region, particularly its people, culture, and general environment.
A number of private enterprises in the region hire the services of local and foreign consultants in project planning, development, and operation. Taiwan PC and the Philippines provide most experts and skilled technicians for projects in other parts of Asia. In Indonesia, for example, the three internationally-funded brackishwater aquaculture projects all feature Filipino experts in prominent roles. Japan also provides many services at a substantially higher cost. This is a deterrent to the smaller private companies whose resources are limited.
Other services available to the industry in the region include laboratories which perform water and soil quality analysis, feed proximate analysis, and disease diagnosis. Most of these facilities are government-owned or are linked with research and academic institutions. Recently, however, private fish farmers have also covered this area due to the lack of government-provided facilities. In Central Visayas in the Philippines, for instance, where most of the intensive shrimp farms are located, a disease laboratory has been established by the local cooperative in response to the possibility of shrimp diseases.
Local architect and design engineer firms serve the industry. Their involvements range from the conduct of simple topographic and hydrographic surveys, facility and engineering design, and construction supervision. Engineering contractors who undertake construction work are usually available in the locality of the project. Local labour for construction and operation of projects is abundant in the region at a low cost.
3.7 Local credit programmes
In most countries in the region credit facilities are made available by the respective governments to the private sector for use in aquaculture development. Credit is distributed through local commercial or agricultural banks, or through fishermen's associations or cooperatives which lend money to their members.
The Hong Kong Department of Fisheries provides low interest loans and supervised credit facilities to producers for capital and recurrent costs for construction and maintenance of their ponds. In a ten year period the Hong Kong Government provided HK$ 2 million for such purposes. In 1983, 80 loans worth HK$ 651 000 were issued and 88 loans worth HK$ 490 000 were recovered. There is also an Emergency Relief Fund made available by the Government to producers whose fish ponds are damaged by natural calamities and who need rehabilation assistance.
The Japan Fisheries Agency provides low interest loans to fisheries cooperatives engaged in shrimp culture at an interest rate of 6.5% per annum payable over 20 years. The Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries Finance Corporation offers similar loans to private farmers.
In China all townships and village operated farms are expected to rely largely on their own financial resources for all development activities, whenever possible. State assistance can be sought and obtained if the magnitude of investment is in excess of the production unit's means, or when required to compensate after natural disasters. The People's Bank of China is also a credit source as it is closely linked to local credit cooperatives. It accepts deposits, grants loans, and helps production units set up new enterprises. Loans given by the Bank are payable in one year if used for working capital purposes, and up to five years for equipment purchase. Interest rates vary with the type of loan. Other sources of credit include the Bank of Agriculture, the Bank of Construction, and the Bank of Industry and Commerce.
In the Philippines credit for aquaculture development used to be in abundance, with credit funds coming from either external funding or from government funds. Before 1987 12 fisheries credit programmes were implemented by some 9 government agencies, of which 4 were foreign-funded (WB; ADB; ADB-OPEC; and the Japanese Overseas Cooperation Fund) and 3 were locally funded. As there was no single government coordinating authority over these programmes there were problems including poor repayment scheduling. The economic crises in the country subsequently led to the closure of agricultural credit at a number of major banks, including the Development Bank of the Philippines (DBP). DBP was an important credit source for private fish pond owners as it was the only bank which accepted fish pond lease agreements as loan collateral; as most fish ponds in the Philippines (as elsewhere) are public lands which can not be titled to the private sector, it was the most accessible bank for
development loans.
Financing for fish pond development remains a problem in the region, in view of the high cost of pond development and the lack of credit sources. In the Philippines the Department of Agriculture has created the Comprehensive Agricultural Loan Fund which pools resources from some 39 separate loan funds for various commodity programmes, including fisheries, previously implemented by the Department. It encourages lending by private banks to agricultural projects by assuming, through guarantees, a maximum of 86% of the risks which lead to default. Accredited private commercial banks must first allocate their own funds for lending to small farmers and fishermen before they can apply for Fund guarantee coverage.
3.8 Trade publications for producers
Several types of publications - technical journals, newsletters, trade magazines and papers, and manuals - are available to producers in the region. These include publications produced within the region itself and those published by American and European publishers.
Among the regional publications useful to producers are newsletters regularly published by SEAFDEC (particularly those by SEAFDEC-AQD in the Philippines); by the International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management (ICLARM); and by NACA from Thailand. Technical information is periodically available in INFOFISH International published six times yearly which has articles on aquaculture practices both within and outside the region (see 1.6).
International trade papers and magazines obtainable by subscription are AUSTASIA Aquaculture Magazine (Australia), Aquaculture Magazine (USA), Aquaculture Digest (USA), Fish Farming International (UK), and Fish Farmer (UK). The Quarterly Newsletter of the European Aquaculture Society (EAS) in Belgium contains relevant information for producers at times and is obtainable through membership of the Society (see 4.6).
There are three Trade Directories of aquaculture products which are published at regular intervals. One is available through subscription to Aquaculture Magazine (USA), another through the EAS (Belgium), and the third available from AUSTASIA Aquaculture Magazine.
There are many technical manuals published by FAO and, on occasion, by the ADB. These are available to producers on subscription or request basis.
Within the countries there is an abundance of published information which is useful to aquaculture producers. In the Philippines, for example, a special publication entitled "Aquaculture Buyers' Guide" is available in the local market. It is actually a directory of suppliers of goods and services to the aquaculture industry. There are also magazines and newspapers which feature articles on agriculture in general, including fisheries (e.g., "Agribusiness Weekly"), or focus on aquaculture (e.g. "Aquaculture Watch").
Many national technical and semi-technical manuals directed to the layman or the practising aquaculturist are circulated within the region; for example, manuals published by the Philippine Council for Agricultural Resources Research and Development, such as the "Philippines Recommends" series, include works on farming tilapia, milkfish, and also mussels. The Council has also published a series called "Technoguides" which are extension manuals dealing with specific commodities, and are written in local dialects.
3.9 Technical assistance in the sub-sector
External funding for development of local infrastructure within the different countries of the region has been provided primarily by UNDP for projects executed by FAO. In certain cases, ADB and World Bank projects provide for training grants and/or fellowships for local extension workers in aspects of aquaculture pertinent or related to particular aquaculture development project loans.
At the present time there are 81 active assistance projects in Asia. In this particular regional division these are in China (6), RO Korea (1), Laos (1), Philippines (13), and Viet Nam (3), but not all at the level of local infrastructure. There are also 4 regional projects.
The Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia (NACA) is a UNDP/FAO regional project which provides assistance in training of fisheries technicians and field workers from 12 member countries in the region. The four lead centres established under this project (in China, India, Philippines, and Thailand) conduct regular degree programmes and short-term training courses for fisheries personnel and extension agents. Bilateral agencies and organizations such as IDRC (Canada) finance many participants of the courses. As an adjunct to this project UNDP is financing a number of marine farming demonstration centres.
The ASEAN/FAO/UNDP Small-Scale Coastal Fisheries Development Project, jointly funded by ASEAN and UNDP and executed by FAO, is also a regional project which includes among its components the provision of training courses for fisheries extension personnel from the different member countries.
Through SEAFDEC-AQD various multilateral and bilateral agencies provide assistance for training fisheries and aquaculture extension workers from various countries in the region. SEAFDEC itself sponsors study tours for extension agents to different countries to observe various aquaculture methods and extension techniques.
In China FAO through its Technical Cooperation Programme has recently supported a workshop on the production of commercial seaweeds, and the development of a pilot demonstration plant for compounding fish meal. UNDP is financing the development of coastal aquaculture.
In Laos the UNDP through FAO is supporting the rehabilitation of a fish seed production farm and fish culture development.
In the Philippines CIDA is supporting the production technology for mass propagating milkfish fry. The Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund of Japan is supporting a pilot production project for freshwater prawns and providing credit arrangements for farmers. The ADB is providing credit for the farming of milkfish and marine shrimp.
In Viet Nam FAO through its Technical Cooperation Programme is funding the operation of a hatchery for Artemia production as a complement to another project funded by UNDP and executed by FAO on prawn seed production and brackishwater aquaculture development in Nghia Binh.
<section>6</section>
4. NATIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE
4.1 Manpower training in aquaculture technologies
4.2 Manpower training in management
4.3 Aquaculture research in the region
4.4 Management of credit
4.5 Associations of professionals in the region
4.6 Information for professionals
4.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
4.8 Capital assistance projects in the sub-sector
4.1 Manpower training in aquaculture technologies
In 1987 it was estimated that more than 15 600 scientific personnel were working in various fisheries institutions in the whole of Asia. It is assumed (for lack of information) that these individuals are dispersed throughout aquaculture research, training, and development work in the industry.
The Directory of Fishery Scientists and Technologists in Southeast Asia, published by SEAFDEC/IDRC, registers 21 from Hong Kong, 73 from the Philippines, and a number from adjacent areas. Most work in the sub-disciplines of aquaculture. About 600 names are recorded.
In China a total of 462 629 State staff and personnel are involved in fishery activities at present. The 1983 statistics show that 33 have M.Sc. degrees, 6 074 graduated from universities, 6 360 from colleges, 16 003 from technical secondary schools, and 3 262 are experienced personnel with no educational background in fisheries.
Japan and the Philippines have large manpower pools of academically-prepared personnel with undergraduate diplomas (in fisheries, zoology, biology, and allied fields), or at the least certificates from two-year fisheries courses. A growing number of professionals have graduate degrees obtained either in national institutes of higher learning or in academic institutes in the region, or overseas, particularly from USA, Canada, and Europe. A large number of fisheries personnel are likewise trained locally or abroad in various fields of specialization under non-degree programmes which run from one to several months.
Aquaculture as a specialization in an undergraduate degree programme in fisheries has been a recent development in fisheries education in the region. Many fisheries colleges and universities offer aquaculture as a major subject.
The 1986 ICLARM/FAO database lists 26 academic institutions (1 in Hong Kong, 1 in Japan, 8 in China, 11 in the Philippines, 1 in Republic of Korea, and 4 in Taiwan PC) with bachelor's degree programmes in fisheries, almost all of which offer aquaculture as a field of specialization. Of this total 16 also offer graduate programmes leading to a master's or a doctoral degree in fisheries and aquaculture. In addition, 3 other universities (1 in Japan and 2 in China) give only graduate degees in fisheries and aquaculture.
The more prominent among these educational institutions are the following: Kagoshima University in Japan; Academia Sinica, Dalian Fisheries College, and Zhongshan (Sun Yatsen) University in China; the University of the Philippines in the Visayas (UPV) College of Fisheries, Central Luzon State University (CLSU), and Mindanao State University in the Philippines; and the National Taiwan University Institute of Fishery Sciences in Taiwan PC.
Education and training facilities in these colleges and universities are, in general, more adequate than others within the same country. The teaching staff are more qualified and a number have graduate and post-graduate degrees in aquaculture themselves.
In Japan there are at least 15 national universities and 3 private universities with bachelor's degree programmes in fisheries and which also offer graduate programmes leading to a master's or a doctoral degree in fisheries. In China the prominent fishery educational institutes are supervised by the Ministry of Agriculture and include Shanghai Fisheries University, Xiamen Fisheries College, Zhanjiang Fisheries College, and Dalian Fisheries College. Other universities which have fisheries departments are supervised by the Ministry of Education.
Since 1981 the UPV College of Fisheries has been awarding senior aquaculturists participating in the FAO/NACA one year training programme with Master of Aquaculture degrees. Faculty are drawn from more than 20 agencies in the region and there are about 150 lecturers and resource persons involved. These include faculty members of UPV, researchers from SEAFDEC-AQD, BFAR, and other agencies in the Philippines. Scientists and fishery technologists of Kasetsart University and the Department of Fisheries in Thailand, and institutions in China and India also take part. The programme has awarded 231 degrees beween 1981 and 1986, of which 121 were international participants from NACA.
The Asian Institute of Technology (AIT) in Thailand has operated an aquaculture training programme since the 1970s. Recently Stirling University of UK seconded one staff member to AIT for this programme. AIT offers a post-graduate programme in tropical freshwater aquaculture. About 20 students are currently enrolled in the programme, and about one-third are specializing in aquaculture.
There is a variety of short term non-degree training courses offered at present in the different countries of the region - a number of which are open to international participants. The majority of short-term training programmes, however, cater to local technicians, field personnel, and private fish farmers. NACA and SEAFDEC-AQD have contributed much towards the training of professional personnel in the region, especially SEAFDEC-AQD in the 1970s when it was practically the only regional institution with capabilities in training.
The regional training course on integrated fish farming offered by China in the 1970s at the Pearl River Fisheries Research Institute, and later at the Freshwater Fisheries Research Centre for Integrated Fish Farming at Wuxi in 1980s has also contributed to the development of integrated fish farming in many developing nations in Asia. Since the founding of the Wuxi Centre in 1978, more than 200 trainees from 16 countries have been trained at the Centre.
The short-term training courses given by various institutes in the region under the umbrella of FAO/UNDP, such as those offered in conjunction with the South China Sea Fisheries Coordinating and Development Programme and the FAO/ASEAN Small-scale Coastal Fisheries Development Programme, have likewise benefited many countries in the region. Together these regional training programmes have produced large manpower pools of better trained technical personnel who are now at the forefront of aquaculture development in their respective countries. NACA alone has so far (1988) trained 426 technicians including 286 who participated in different short-term courses and the rest (about 140) graduates of the senior aquaculturists' programme.
The SEAFDEC-AQD in the Philippines, in over a decade of existence, has provided training for more than 6 000 technicians, many from outside the region. The training programmes cover a wide range of topics, from techniques and methods, practical culture, to harvest and post-harvest handling. The approach also varies depending on the target group (aquaculture managers, senior aquaculturists, technicians, field workers, or fish farmers). Course duration likewise differs from two weeks to six months.
4.2 Manpower training in management
There are few opportunities for manpower training in aquaculture management in the region. Most of the training programmes focus on aquaculture production rather than the administration and management of aquaculture operations.
Some universities in the Philippines offer graduate courses in agribusiness management, and graduate students with technical fisheries/ aquaculture backgrounds frequently select topics on the business of aquaculture for their research theses; the University of the Philippines at Los Banos is one example of such an academic institution, and it also accepts students from other countries. There are private universities which offer programmes leading to post-graduate degrees in business administration and management, with possibilities for theses in aquaculture-related topics. Two universities in this category are Ateneo de Manila University and De La Salle University.
The Asian Institute of Management (AIM) is a regional academic institute based in Manila which offers only graduate programmes in business. AIM has degree programmes leading to a Master in Business Administration, which is a two-year course, and to a Master in Management, a one-year course. Only middle-level managers with several years of work experience are accepted in the courses. AIM also offers short-term training courses in various aspects of business management, including planning, development, and management for Government managers. Some of the project managers of Government agencies with foreign-funded projects, including those involving fisheries and aquaculture, are given training at AIM.
The ADB runs short workshops on project management for managers of ADB projects, including fisheries and aquaculture. Such workshops focus on ADB procedures but also touch on fund management/disbursement and related subjects.
SEAFDEC-AQD has collaborated with the Southeast Asian Regional Center for Agriculture to organize an Aquaculture Project Development and Management training course. This was designed specifically for aquaculture investors and entrepreneurs, and focused on management aspects with technical information given only for familiarization purposes.
In the Philippines there are a number of private corporations and foundations which offer short courses on aquaculture business management for feasibility study preparation and evaluation (for bankers and individuals involved in credit and lending). The Center for Research and Communications and the Economic Development Foundation are two examples.
4.3 Aquaculture research in the region
Most countries of the region have their own research facilities and aquaculture research programmes. These institutes are fisheries colleges, or universities, or research agencies established by the national governments specifically for the purpose of undertaking fisheries research.
The greatest research strength is in Japan. Japan has seven regional fisheries research laboratories, six of which (plus an additional two institutes) coordinate research on coastal aquaculture, and 100 prefectural fisheries research stations and branch laboratories. The most important among these is the National Research Institute of Aquaculture established in 1979 with six divisions and with excellent research facilities. Japan has individual laboratories for aquaculture disciplines, particularly fish pathology, which provide services to the industry.
In China there are at present 9 fisheries research institutes supervised by the Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences. Of these, 3 are marine institutes (i.e. the Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute, the East China Sea Fisheries Research Institute, and the South China Sea Fisheries Research Institute); four are freshwater institutes (i.e. the Heilongjiang Fisheries Research Institute, the Changjiang Fisheries Research Institute, the Pearl River Fisheries Research Institute, and the Wuxi Freshwater Fisheries Research Centre); one is the Fishery Machinery and Instrument Research Institute, and one is the Fishery Engineering Research Institute. Coordination of fisheries research in the country is carried out through the Scientific and Technology Department of the Bureau of Aquatic Products, Ministry of Agriculture.
In addition to these nine fishery research institutes supervised by the Ministry of Agriculture, there are three research institutes supervised by the Chinese Academy of Science; these are the Zoology Research Institute in Beijing which deals with the classification of fish and biology: the Hydrobiology Research Institute in Wuihan which deals with basic research on taxonomy of aquatic animals, limnology and fish diseases; and the Oceanography Research Institute in Qingdao which conducts basic research on seaweeds and marine biology.
Major provinces and cities in China also have fisheries research institutes which conduct applied research in fisheries, and are supervised by the provincial or city bureau of aquatic products. For example, in Quingdao (Shandong Province) there is the Institute of Oceanology working on marine culture of algae, marine shrimp, flatfish, and sea bream. It is also working on the production of mussels and scallops. Although working mostly on culture and production it is interested in enhancement. The Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute is also working on marine culture with many of the same species with the exception of studies on fish. It concentrates on marine algae, marine shrimps, and molluscs, including clams and abalone. It also has a unit dealing with processing of aquaculture products.
In Shanghai Autonomous Region there is the East China Sea Fisheries Research Institute. The Institute works on marine culture of algae spp. and clams, as well as abalone and scallops. In addition to marine shrimps it also works on crab. A number of studies are also being carried out on mullet and tilapia spp.
In Fuzhou (Fujian Province) there is the Freshwater Aquaculture Research Institute working on the freshwater prawn and a number of fish species, Including tilapias, carps, and catfish introduced from Egypt. In addition it carries out research in the disciplines of fish diseases and nutrition. In Zhangzhou there are a number of farms where applied research is carried out, such as the Aquatic Development Centre at Zhang Pu. Here the staff work closely with farmers on their problems, such as water management, broodstock management, spawning, propagation, feeding, etc. The Centre also provides loans to farmers, and there are close associations with farms producing freshwater eels, prawns, and scallops on the coast.
In Donghan (Fujian Province) there is the Marine Hot Springs Aquaculture Development Centre where marine shrimps are maintained in the geothermal waters under both experimental and production conditions. There is also an experimental Pacific oyster farm on Dongshan Island. The Dongshan Aquaculture Development Centre is involved in applied research and experimental culture of pearl oysters, marine shrimps, abalones, and scallops.
In Xiamen the Fujian Fisheries Institute has a number of departments of which the largest is for aquaculture. Work concentrates on marine shrimps, molluscs, and algae. The Department of Oceanography at the University of Xiamen works on the general biology of marine shrimps and clams, and behaviour of aquatic animals in cultured conditions. At the Fujian Institute of Oceanology the interests are marine shrimps, scallops, and algae at the Xiamen Experimental Station, and marine sites for aquaculture at the Gulangun Island Laboratory where there is scientific interest in planktonic organisms. At the Xiamen Fisheries College marine and freshwater aquaculture is one of four departments, and research is centred on management operations for marine shrimp production, and the culture of crabs and brackishwater fish.
In the Philippines both basic and applied research are carried out at the universities, most important among which are the UPV College of Fisheries Brackishwater Aquaculture Center, the UPV Institute of Fisheries Development and Research, the University of the Philippines Marine Science Center; the CLSU Freshwater Aquaculture Center, and Mindanao State University. Other fisheries colleges and universities in the country conduct their own aquaculture researches but on a much smaller scale, as do some other Government agencies which conduct specialized work in aquaculture. All research in fisheries and aquaculture is coordinated by the newly organized Philippine Council for Marine and Aquatic Resources Research and Development.
In Taiwan PC the Taiwan Fisheries Research Institute under the Provincial Government is responsible for all phases of fisheries research, including fish culture and fish processing. It has four field stations, each concentrating on specific areas of culture, namely Chupei for freshwater fish culture; Lukang for mullet, eel, and oyster culture and tilapia breeding; Tainan for milkfish, shrimp, and Gracilaria culture; and Kaoshiung for fisheries technology. In addition the Tungkang Marine Laboratory operated by the Institute (originally established and maintained by a Rockefeller Foundation Grant through the Taiwan Joint Commission on Rural Reconstruction) works on shrimp propagation and the culture and induced spawning of grey mullet.
Aquaculture research in Hong Kong is conducted by the Territorial Fisheries Division under four units: aquaculture, fisheries environment, fish culture, and fisheries regulation. The Freshwater Fish Culture Research Unit works on fish production of carps, tilapia, and freshwater prawn, and the Marine Fish Culture Research Unit on red groupers and marine shrimp. The Marine Science Laboratory of the Chinese University of Hong Kong undertakes marine culture research on seven species including penaeids, mussels, abalone, grouper, red bream, and tilapia. The Department of Agriculture and Fisheries research station at Kat O Chan works on induced spawning of green and red grouper, and black sea bream.
In Viet Nam the Institute of Shrimp Culture Research in Haiphong, established in 1974, does some research on shrimp culture. The Institut Pasteur and the Fisheries Research Laboratory of the Directorate of Fisheries carry out research on fish quality.
A number of regional and international research organizations operate in East Asia, the most notable of which are SEAFDEC-AQD, ICLARM, and NACA.
SEAFDEC-AQD conducts research mostly in brackishwater and freshwater aquaculture but recently announced greater emphasis on marine culture research. Its main research station is in Tigbauan, Iloilo, where it has been conducting research and development work on the jumbo tiger shrimp, Penaeus monodon, milkfish, and molluscs, mainly green mussels. Its freshwater research station is in Binangonan, Rizal (in the middle of Laguna Lake) for aquaculture and supportive limno-ecological research. SEAFDEC-AQD has made valuable contributions to the development of shrimp hatchery technology as well as in the development and refinement of technology of fish pen and cage culture. SEAFDEC-AQD has a staff of about 700 professional and support personnel, and a budget of about US$ 3 million per year.
ICLARM conducts research on specific aquaculture problems through collaboration with other research and/or academic institutions in the region. It has no research facilities of its own other than resource information. Through multilateral and bilateral agencies it obtains grants and contracts for collaborative research and provides senior specialists for joint research teams. ICLARM now has a Coastal Aquaculture Centre in the Solomon Islands and is planning to develop a Genetics Unit in the Philippines and an Integrated Farming Unit in Thailand. ICLARM's tilapia genetics research has been with CLSU and the Marine Science Institute of the University of the Philippines at Diliman. ICLARM is linked with SEAFDEC for the Asian Fisheries Social Science Research Network, of which SEAFDEC is a member. ICLARM, like SEAFDEC-AQD, publishes research results and findings in newsletters for circulation throughout the region, and in reports and books. Newest among these is the Asian
Fisheries Society's Journal "Asian Fisheries Science" which includes aquaculture.
NACA is also involved in research and development through its network of four regional lead centres. These form the framework for research on a number of specific technologies; for example, the Freshwater Fisheries Research Centre for Chinese carps and integrated fish farming in China; the Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute in India for Indian carps; the SEAFDEC-AQD for shrimp and milkfish; and the National Inland Fisheries Institute in Thailand for freshwater prawns, catfish, and other species endemic to Southeast Asia.
NACA has organized a regional research programme on fish disease in which 18 scientists from 11 countries in the Asia-Pacific region are coordinating their work to find a solution to a regional epidemic in cultured fish. NACA has also developed a programme for the secondment of junior scientists to research centres. The secondment programme is designed to build up research capabilities of NACA-member countries by providing them with in-service training in research methodologies in which the host centre has expertise.
The AIT Aquaculture Programme has several grants and contracts for research projects with emphasis on low-cost, low-energy systems. Priority is given to fish low on the food chain with low production costs which make them appropriate for small-scale farming.
4.4 Management of credit
The organization and management of credit and the provision of financial services to the fisheries sector, including aquaculture, is a major concern of most governments in the region. A number of countries (e.g., Japan, Hong Kong, China, the Philippines and Taiwan PC) have Government-supervised credit facilities and various lending programmes in support of the production sub-sector. Private commercial financing institutions (mainly banks and some investment houses) also provide credit for aquaculture development.
Credit in Japan is administered by the Japan Fisheries Agency and the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries Finance Corporation for Government loans. These are more advantageous to fish farmers than commercial banks. The Government also guarantees loans issued by commercial banks to small-scale fish farmers with poor credit ratings (no collateral) and who would otherwise, without Government guarantees, be ineligible. Loans are also available from other sources, such as the Overseas Fishery Cooperation Foundation which is a non-profit organization for the promotion and support of fisheries development. It supports private sector cooperation projects in fisheries. Foundation loans are provided to Japanese firms or organizations with projects overseas in which they are involved as partners of joint ventures. Loans are either interest-free loans for procurement of facilities and equipment to be transferred to foreign governments, or low-interest loans to be used for
capital investment in overseas joint venture projects.
In China the State provides financial assistance to production in the form of loans or credit based on its priority in the national or regional economic development plan and socio-economic and ecological benefits. Over 30% of the funds required in development are usually self-accumulated, with the balance supplemented by loans or credit from a bank. Credit is channelled through the cooperatives in the various localities, which are linked to the China Agricultural Bank, the main banking system involved in fisheries credit.
Hong Kong has the Kadoorie Agricultural Aid Loan Fund from which low-interest loans are provided to producer farms for capital and operating costs. These loans are supervised loans, i.e. Government fisheries extension personnel visit the farmers regularly to find out how the loan funds are being utilized, monitor their progress of construction and operation, and in general, ensure that the loans are properly used and repaid in due time.
In the Philippines the various Government fisheries credit programmes have traditionally been supervised by Government banks, mainly the DBP, the Central Bank of the Philippines, the Philippine National Bank, and the Land Bank of the Philippines jointly with the fisheries executing agency, usually BFAR. DBP has the most extensive involvement in aquaculture credit disbursement and supervision. It has a national network of provincial offices and a complement of fisheries field workers.
4.5 Associations of professionals in the region
Professionals in the region have access to membership in professional organizations (regional, national, and local) in their respective countries.
The Asian Fisheries Society which was organized in 1987 is based at the ICLARM offices in Manila. It is open to all fisheries professionals in Asia. The Society had its first large scientific meeting in Manila in 1987 which was attended by fisheries professionals, including a significant number of aquaculturists.
Within each country there are national or local associations or societies which are open to membership for aquaculture specialists; for example, there is the Fisheries Research Society of the Philippines. Like others it holds an annual convention which serves as a forum for exchange of experiences in aquaculture, and sponsors small workshops on special topics of interest to aquaculture on a regular basis.
Many professionals in Asia are members of the World Aquaculture Society (WAS). This society is based in the USA and disseminates scientific research information and arranges annual conferences. An affiliate of WAS is the EAS, based in Belgium; this society also has members from the region and arranges conferences in which the development of aquaculture in Asia is often discussed. Membership is individual or commercial, and materials can also be obtained through library membership. Many of these professionals obtained their postgraduate education or training abroad and joined the aquaculture societies in the regions where they studied.
4.6 Information for professionals
Aquaculture professionals in the region have access to a rich variety of information sources in the form of published material of all kinds (technical/scientific, semi-technical journals, newsletters, magazines, agency annual and progress reports, hand-outs, brochures, among others); audio-visual aids (e.g., slides, film strips); data bases (e.g. ASFIS); and even workshops, seminars, and various conferences.
Most of the technical and scientific journals published within the region by SEAFDEC-AQD, ICLARM, IDRC, FAO/UNDP, and ESCAP, to name a few, are available in the main libraries within each country. These libraries also have the international journals like "Aquaculture" on their shelves and professionals can have their own copies through subscription.
SEAFDEC publications include those produced by the Secretariat in Thailand and those published by the three different departments. The former include a quarterly newsletter; Fishery Statistical Bulletins for the South China Sea Area (which include statistics on aquaculture production volumes and values); and a Directory of Scientists and Technologists in the fields of fisheries research, development, and management in the Southeast Asian region. The SEAFDEC-AQD in the Philippines produces research papers, technical reports, extension manuals, a newsletter, and "Aqua Farm News". The SEAFDEC-AQD library maintains a good collection of scientific literature as well as other published materials in the fields of aquaculture. The library maintains over 250 subscriptions to journals in fisheries and aquaculture, and has over 8 000 volumes. It also has audio-visual materials (film strips) on various aquaculture production methods and systems.
ICLARM has a well-developed Information Programme comprising a special library, publications unit, and research projects. ICLARM has 7 technical publications series:
(i) Studies and Reviews,
(ii) Conference Proceedings,
(iii) Technical Reports,
(iv) Bibliographies,
(v) Translations,
(vi) Education,
(vii) Software,
as well as six Newsletters, and the quarterly magazine NAGA. A Selective Fisheries Information Service provides in-depth answers to enquiries from researchers. The ICLARM library maintains an up-to-date collection of material relating to fisheries and aquaculture in tropical countries. Its book and monograph holdings exceed 8 000 volumes; there are 650 serial titles and 3 400 reprints. A microfiche reader/printer is available. Databases from other organizations such as FAO, US National Agricultural Library, and Commonwealth Agricultural Bureau, can be searched online by the library's modern link, Two electronic mail services are used to facilitate overseas retrieval. The CD-ROM version of the major aquaculture database, FAO's ASFA, is also available.
IDRC in Singapore publishes scientific monographs and technical reports as well as more general materials on aquaculture and aquaculture research. There are also printed and audio-visual materials, including films and slides, relating to IDRC projects in developing countries.
There are a number of smaller libraries in the Asia region to which professionals have access. For example, the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, and the NACA office, both in Thailand, as well as the Southeast Asian Regional Center for Tropical Biology (BIOTROP) library in Bogor, Indonesia all provide fisheries scientists with information. The National Inland Fisheries Institute in Thailand has a collection of papers on aquaculture but many are written in Thai with abstracts in English.
The libraries in the important fisheries academies and research institutes in Japan and China are rich sources of information on aquaculture but much is in Japanese and Chinese.
Professionals have access to a considerable volume of information about aquaculture because of their access to the Mediterranean and European regions, and also to North America. These are usually through library membership, individual membership, or personal subscription.
The EAS based in Belgium publishes a regular Newsletter for members which also contains the contents of some abstracts of the more important aquaculture journals. It also publishes special volumes on aquaculture technology available at reduced rates to members. The EAS is an affiliate of the WAS which is based in the USA, and members have reciprocal benefits. The WAS produces the Journal of the World Aquaculture Society which is free to members.
The other specialist journals on aquaculture are obtained on subscription. These are Aquaculture (the Netherlands), Aquaculture and Fisheries Management (UK), Aquaculture Engineering (UK), Bamidgeh/Journal of Aquaculture (Israel), Bulletin Français de la Pêche et de la Pisciculture (France), Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences (Canada), Diseases of Aquatic Organisms (Federal Republic of Germany), Journal of Fish Biology (UK), Journal of Fish Diseases (UK), Progressive Fish Culturist (USA), Transactions of the American Fisheries Society (USA), etc.
The largest resource of information for scientists and technical professionals in the sector is FAO in Rome, Italy. FAO produces a series of publications many of which are specific to aquaculture. These are FAO Fisheries Reports, FAO Fisheries Technical Papers, and FAO Fisheries Synopses. All titles are categorized and lists are regularly produced. Some documents are free and others are sold at cost. It also maintains a large serial collection on all subjects related to fish and fisheries received from fisheries institutes, government departments, and commercial publishers throughout the world. It also maintains a special collection of documents on a country basis, and subject files.
FAO maintains a database in which aquaculture information can be found. ASFA is an international bibliographic database providing comprehensive coverage of publications on the science, technology, and management of marine and freshwater environments. The database can be searched via terminals and personal computers to retrieval systems in Europe and North America; the database is also available on compact disc. Aquaculture Abstracts from ASFA are available in printed form through subscription.
ICLARM and SEAFDEC-AQD maintain ASFA-I (Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries Abstracts), BRAIS (Brackishwater Aquaculture Information System), and SEAFIS (Southeast-Asian Fisheries Information Service).
At ICLARM the DIALOG system of over 120 databases can be searched interactively through a teletype facility. The SEAFDEC Secretariat in Thailand has established a Fisheries Information Service which is a clearing house for extension materials for small-scale fishermen and fish farmers in Southeast Asia.
4.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
External funding for aquaculture research and training continues to be abundant in the region on account of the presence of the regional research organizations which receive numerous research grants from various donors. The Government of Japan has directly supported the work of SEAFDEC-AQD for almost twenty years. Although now funded mostly by the Philippine Government SEAFDEC-AQD is the beneficiary of funding assistance from JICA, and it receives technical assistance from IDRC, DANIDA, the FAO/UNDP, and USAID through the Oceanic Institute of Hawaii, among others. Many donors support collaborative research work through SEAFDEC and other organizations, such as ICLARM.
The ADB is active in providing technical assistance in the conduct of research on aquaculture and related fields. ADB has provided funds for the Environmental Reassessment Study of Laguna de Bay to validate and update the findings of an earlier FAO/UNDP/UNEP study on the water quality of the Lake, in support of the fisheries development programme of the Laguna Lake Development Authority.
ADB has approved a technical assistance grant on tilapia genetics research to be executed by ICLARM in collaboration with three Philippine-based agencies, including SEAFDEC and CLSU. A technical assistance grant for integrated rice-fish farming has also been approved by the Bank for implementation also by ICLARM and CLSU, and the International Rice Research Institute.
IDRC provides funds for a six-country fish genetics network in Canada, India, China, Thailand, Indonesia, and the Philippines. Canada also contributes aquaculture personnel and facilities at the Dalhousie University in Halifax, Nova Scotia.
Many donors, now numbering 21 in all, support the collaborative research of ICLARM. The Centre's aquaculture research programme, one of three programme areas of ICLARM, focuses on coastal aquaculture (specifically bivalve molluscs), genetics (specifically of tilapias and carps), and integrated farming systems. While ICLARM's aquaculture programme has been centred in Southeast Asia, with particularly strong links with institutions in the Philippines and Thailand, it has now expanded to the South Pacific and to southern Africa. ICLARM also coordinates two aquaculture-related networks -the Asian Fisheries Social Science Research Network and the Network of Tropical Aquaculture Scientists.
The Government of France contributes to the SEAFIS database and provides funds for on-the-job training for documentation specialists at the Asian Institute of Technology.
UNDP technical assistance in the sub-sector is mainly through support for the activities of NACA at its regional Lead Centres, of which SEAFDEC-AQD is one, and the Freshwater Fisheries Research Centre at Wuxi, China is another.
The International Foundation for Science (Sweden) supports a number of researchers in the region. In China it provides two scholarships for work on fish reproduction and genetics, and hybridization of shrimp. In the Philippines it is awarding eight scholarships for many aspects of aquaculture from fish nutrition, seaweed culture, and farming systems with animal husbandry. In Viet Nam it has two scholarships for artificial reproduction of catfish and nutrition of crustaceans.
In Korea the Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund (Japan) has provided research equipment to the Fisheries Research Development Agency; and Japan provides a considerable amount of research equipment to SEAFDEC-AQD in the Philippines.
The Overseas Development Administration (UK) supports complementary research activities in the UK and in the region, and has a joint project in the Philippines on tilapia genetics at the University College of Swansea (UK).
4.8 Capital assistance projects in the sub-sector
Capital funds have been provided by multilateral and bilateral agencies for the construction and equipping of a number of research facilities in the region.
The facilities of the SEAFDEC-AQD were constructed primarily with funds from the Government of Japan, but also some other donors. The Tungkang Marine Laboratory in Taiwan PC was constructed through a Rockefeller Foundation grant to the Taiwan Joint Commission on Rural Reconstruction.
The NACA Regional Lead Centre in China was equipped by UNDP and IDRC.
The CLSU Freshwater Aquaculture Centre in the Philippines was an Inland Fisheries Project of the Philippines with USAID capital support. The research facilities were constructed by USAID with additional equipment provided by JICA and IDRC.
BFAR's National Freshwater Fisheries Center was also constructed as a joint project of the Philippine Government and USAID.
<section>7</section>
5. NATIONAL SECTOR MANAGEMENT
5.1 Government policy in the region
5.2 Government organization in the region
5.3 Aquaculture legislation
5.4 Trade and business associations
5.5 Information resources for management
5.6 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
5.1 Government policy in the region
Governments in the region share the same primary appreciation of the value and contribution of aquaculture to their respective economies, its importance as a source of fish (and therefore animal protein) for the human populations, and its role in generating livelihood and employment opportunities particularly for the rural communities. Most have issued formal policy statements regarding the fisheries sector in general, and the aquaculture sub-sector in particular, and have prepared short-, medium-, or long-term plans for fisheries development
In most national plans the main objectives of fisheries development are (i) increase fish production as a cheap protein source for the people; (ii) earn foreign exchange through the export of high-value species of fish and fishery products; (iii) improve socio-economic conditions of small-scale fishermen; (iv) increase the livelihood and employment opportunities for rural populations. It is clear from these objectives that most of the countries in East Asia have gradually shifted emphasis from the traditional marine capture fisheries to inland fisheries and aquaculture. This has been dictated by over-fishing and resource depletion in most major fishing grounds on the one hand, and the high cost of fuel on the other.
In Japan the new strategy for increased fish production involves the enhancement of diminishing fish stocks of commercially valuable species by restocking large quantities of seed in open waters through artificial propagation, intermediary nursing, expansion of natural nursery grounds by seaweed plantation, and the construction of fish reefs, among others. This strategy for increasing "culture-based fisheries" relies on aquaculture methods and techniques for the production of seed for stocking coastal and marine waters, and their harvest by coastal fishermen.
The Government of Viet Nam is giving importance to fish and shrimp farming as an integral part of agriculture. The Government is particularly interested in the introduction of modern technology to its traditional fish culture and for production to earn foreign exchange.
In 1979 China's National Conference on Fisheries stated a policy for rational utilization and management of water and land resources. It focused on aquaculture development and included the effective utilization of all water resources including lakes, dams, and reservoirs for fish production. The Government of China regards the importation of techniques, engineering expertise and equipment for the exploitation and utilization of its fishery resources as important components of its modernization plan. Since 1979 various policies have been formulated redirecting emphasis towards the development of marine and freshwater aquaculture and providing considerable financial, material, and technical support to ensure the attainment of production targets. So far these policies, plans, and programmes have apparently been so well formulated and efficiently implemented that the country has attained production targets three years ahead of schedule. In 1987 total production attained was 9.55
million t, or an increase of 0.55 million t compared with the projected 9 million t by 1990. This is double the 1980 production of 4.507 million t. China's projected target is 18 million t by the end of the century.
In the Philippines the Government policies in fisheries have called for full utilization of the country's fisheries resources, with the intention of maintaining self-sufficiency in fish supply, improving handling and distribution, strengthening small-scale fisheries, and increasing earnings of foreign exchange from exports. These policies have encouraged private sector investments in the area of commercial fishing and aquaculture, and have promoted essentially production-oriented fisheries development strategies. It is anticipated that the findings and recommendations of the National Conference on Fisheries Policy and Planning in 1987 will be taken up at Cabinet-level soon. Institutional reforms and policy changes may thus be forthcoming.
5.2 Government organization in the region
Each of the countries in the region has a national organization which is responsible for the fisheries sector and its overall development and management. The type and structure of the national fisheries organizations vary, however, from one country to the other. In a number of countries (e.g. Brunei, Hong Kong, and Viet Nam), there is a Department of Fisheries which oversees fisheries administration, including aquaculture. In Japan it is the Japan Fisheries Agency which supervises aquaculture development on a national level under two divisions. In Taiwan PC, the Republic of Korea, and the Philippines, overall fisheries administration is provided by national bureaux, or offices of fisheries.
Hong Kong's Agriculture and Fisheries Department has a Fisheries Branch headed by a Director for Agriculture and Fisheries. The Fisheries Branch is divided into three divisions (Fisheries Development, Fisheries Research, and Economics and Marketing Division) which are all staffed with qualified professionals supported by technical staff. In 1984 the Fisheries Research and Fisheries Development Divisions were reorganized into three new divisions: Offshore Fisheries, Territorial Fisheries, and Fisheries Services and Management, as a result of which interrelated research and development activities were grouped together to facilitate provision of services to the respective sectors.
In Viet Nam the Department of Fisheries was established in 1957 with four divisions: Marine, Inland, Marketing and Socio-economics, and Research and Processing. It is headed by a Director of Fisheries and each division is headed by a Chief. Provincial fisheries services are headed by Fisheries Officers.
Brunei's Department of Fisheries was established in 1966 with seven sections including Aquaculture, Extension, and Enforcement. In 1985 the Department had a total staff complement of 109, of whom only eleven were professional/technical personnel. The Department has engaged the services of some expatriate technical experts to assist in the management of specific projects. A Malaysian expert manages their Marine Biology and Aquaculture Research Station at Muara; an Indonesian manages the freshwater aquaculture demonstration farms; and Filipino and Sri Lankan experts are on contract with the Department as part of their institutional strengthening efforts.
In Japan the Japan Fisheries Agency exercised administrative control over aquaculture activities through its two divisions: the Coastal Fisheries Division and the Fisheries Development Division, which provide guidance on marine and inland water aquaculture.
In China fishery administration is carried out by the National Bureau of Aquatic Products under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry, and Fisheries. The name of this Ministry has now been changed to the Ministry of Agriculture. Government research is organized under the Chinese Academy of Fisheries Sciences. In addition, most provinces and municipalities have their own fishery administrative bodies, including Provincial Science and Technology Commissions.
In Taiwan PC fisheries is under the administration and supervision of the Taiwan Fisheries Bureau of the Taiwan Provincial Government, which is under the Provincial Department of Agriculture and Forestry. There is also a Fisheries Section in each municipal government.
The Office of Fisheries is the central government agency concerned with the fisheries industry of the Republic of Korea. It executes its various functions through a bureau, the Fisheries Research and Development Agency which has six primary areas of activity, including aquaculture.
The Philippines is perhaps one of the countries with the oldest fisheries administration. The present Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (BFAR) started as a Fishery Section of the Bureau of Government Laboratories in 1907. Recently it has been reduced from a national line agency into a staff bureau of the Department of Agriculture. Prior to this reorganization BFAR had fourteen divisions, each headed by a Division Chief, including a Fisheries Extension Division. As the Bureau was a national agency it had regional offices headed by Regional Directors which carried out the various services at the regional level and supervised the operations of the provincial and municipal fisheries offices.
At present the BFAR regional offices have been merged with those of the Department of Agriculture, and with responsibilities not only for fisheries but also for crops, livestock, and other agricultural commodities.
These organizational changes have weakened the national fisheries institution, and the Philippine Congress is considering the creation of the Department of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources to integrate all agencies involved in fishing and fishery development and management into a unified organization.
5.3 Aquaculture legislation
A number of legislative acts, ordinances, decrees, and similar regulations for aquaculture have been enacted or issued by countries in the region. Likewise, permits, licenses, and lease agreements are common to the different countries in East Asia. These usually cover the use of public domain for aquaculture purposes, as fish pond lease agreements or leasehold rights, fish pen operation permits, export and import permits, and licenses to operate concessions in fry collecting grounds, among others.
In most cases, however, existing legislation has broad application, i.e. laws and similar regulations have been enacted to cover fisheries in general and not just aquaculture in particular. Hong Kong is one of the few cases where an ordinance - the Marine Fish Culture Ordinance - was enacted to provide a statute meant specifically for the regulation and protection of the aquaculture industry. This Ordinance, enacted in 1980, designated 26 marine culture zones within which all marine culture activities could be undertaken. Since 1983 some 50 offshore farms have been relocated into these 26 zones. Hong Kong also has a Marine Fish (Marketing) Ordinance which controls and regulates by permit the landing, movement, wholesale marketing, and import/export of marine fish.
In China the Fishery Law was adopted by the 14th Session of the Sixth NPC Standing Committee in January 1986, and put into force in July of the same year, with a special chapter dealing with aquaculture. Detailed rules and regulations for the implementation of the Fishery Law were ratified by the State Council in October 1987 and issued by the Ministry of Agriculture in the same month.
In Japan the Coastal Fishing Grounds Rehabilitation and Development Law, enacted in 1974, provides for the establishment of fish shelters to attract fishes and create new fishing grounds and release of fry into coastal waters for culture-based fisheries. A fishing rights system authorizes local cooperatives to manage the fisheries in coastal waters, and a special license is required to collect and sell fry of yellowtail to prevent its over-fishing.
In the Philippines the Constitution itself contains provisions pertaining to fisheries. The Philippine Constitution of 1935 provided for the conservation and development of the country's natural resources, fisheries included, reserving the same exclusively to Filipino citizens or to entities 60% of the capital stock of which should be owned by Filipino citizens. Fisheries, among the natural resources, cannot be alienated but may be granted only through licensing, lease, or concession.
The Constitution of 1983 repeated its treatment of natural resources, including fisheries, and provided that entities may enter into service contracts for financial, technical, management, or other forms of assistance with foreign persons or entities for the exploration, development, exploitation, or utilization of any of the natural resources.
Presidential Decree (PD-704), otherwise known as the Fisheries Decree of 1975, includes banning milkfish fry exportation and providing for the identification and setting aside by BFAR of public lands to be sub-divided into family-size fish ponds to be leased in accordance with guidelines established by the Fishery Industry Development Council.
In addition to these basic laws, there are regulations pertaining to land and water use rights (such as those covering fish pond and fish pen leases) and the zoning of mangrove and lake areas for fish pond and fish pen development, respectively. It is also anticipated that fish pond areas would eventually be included in the new Government's comprehensive agrarian reform programme, in which case, large land holdings will have to be sub-divided or parcelled out into smaller areas for distribution to the small-scale fishermen. It is speculated that the maximum size of fish pond which a farmer may own may be from seven to ten hectares.
There are also permits and licenses for fry and fingerling concessions in coastal areas, for export of fishery products, and even for stocking and transport of fish pen materials in Laguna de Bay. There is a ban on the exportation of milkfish fry, shrimp fry, and gravid shrimp spawners. Furthermore, all imports of live fish fry and adults must be accompanied by quarantine and health certificates.
In Brunei fish pond leases are given to farmers for not less than 10 years, and cease immediately if the ponds are not kept in good condition or if advice given by the Department of Fisheries is not followed.
5.4 Trade and business associations
Many trade and business associations of traders, producers, exporters, suppliers, and service specialists, exist in the different countries at a national level. For example, there are national associations of shrimp producers, shrimp exporters, fish and shrimp processors, feedmillers, equipment manufacturers and suppliers, and feed distributors and dealers, etc., who unite to promote their products and services collectively. In the Philippines there are associations of consulting firms, which have recently joined into a federation, the Confederation of Filipino Consultants.
These various associations are invariably members of the larger national Chamber of Commerce and Industry in their respective countries. These Chambers may, in turn, have representatives at the ASEAN Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
In the Asia-Pacific region there is the Pacific Economic Cooperation Conference, a tripartite grouping of businessmen, academicians, and government representatives covering various sectors of industry, including fisheries.
5.5 Information resources for management
Sources of aquaculture information useful for administrators and managers are available in the region in the form of published materials, and workshops and seminars.
Many of the publications available to aquaculture producers (see 3.8) and professionals (see 4.6) are also used by management. For example, ADB and the World Bank publish monthly information on the status of their projects which invariably includes something on aquaculture. ADB publishes its monthly Operational Information on Proposed Projects and regular newletters and announcements on approved loans or technical assistance grants in the region. The latter give capsulized summaries of the scope of the approved projects, including the cost and the services to be required by either the Government agency, in the case of loans, or the Bank (in the case of technical assistance grants).
The World Bank publishes a monthly International Business Opportunities sheet, which summarizes information on the scope and status of approved projects as well as on contracts which have been awarded. These publications are available on a subscription basis only, except for the ADB circular announcements.
Other published material useful to aquaculture managers includes some FAO/ADCP publications (e.g. guideline documents for planning and development, and the newsletter "Aquaculture Minutes"), the INFOFISH "Trade News", and "INFOFISH International". These provide valuable information to aquaculture managers who need current information on supply and demand situations, prices, etc., for both export and import purposes.
There are a number of short-term courses and orientation workshops and seminars conducted specifically for managers. One example is the Aquaculture Project Development and Management course offered by SEAFDEC-AQD jointly with the Southeast Asian Regional Center for Agriculture in the Philippines. This is open only to professional managers with several years of experience in a managerial position. The course puts emphasis on the financial and management aspects of aquaculture enterprises. In the Philippines there are also short-term courses for managers which focus on the preparation and evaluation of feasibility studies, particularly on financial investment.
5.6 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
There are few technical assistance projects in the region which focus on national sector management.
FAO is strengthening the Inland Fisheries Research Institute in Viet Nam improving national aquaculture production in fish farming.
In the Philippines FAO provided support for a National Conference on Fisheries Policy and Planning to prepare recommendations to the Philippine Government on measures and strategies to adopt for the development of the fisheries sector (see Section 5.1).
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (Unesco) together with UNDP, provided funds for the institutional strengthening of the Marine Sciences Center of the University of the Philippines.
The technical assistance grant provided by ADB for the Philippine Aquaculture Development Project included funding for institutional strengthening of the BFAR. This particular component of national sector management (government organization) was identified as one of the more important areas of concern.
UNDP and FAO provided support for a workshop on production of commercial seaweeds in China, which included organization and management.
<section>8</section>
6. REGIONAL SECTOR MANAGEMENT
6.1 UN organizations in the region
6.2 Other organizations in the region
6.3 Economic communities in the region
6.4 Regional and global aquaculture development projects
6.1 UN organizations in the region
In the region as described, all countries, with the exception of Taiwan PC and Macau, are members of the United Nations. Most of these same countries participate in the individual organizations of the UN system which are actively represented in the region.
Of the many UN organizations represented in Asia the following are actively involved in aquaculture development: the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO); the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP): the World Food Programme (WFP); and on limited regional coverage, the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) which is concerned mainly with the Mekong Committee which works in countries in the Mekong Delta.
Other UN agencies have had lesser participation in aquaculture development in the region. These include the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (Unesco) and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) which provide mainly technical assistance in the conduct of research studies on special areas of concern. UNDP and Unesco collaborate closely in activities dealing with environmental education and training in the region, such as studies on water resources development of the lower Mekong Basin. UNEP established the Global Resource Information Database (GRID) which collates, integrates, and analyses all information received for purposes of environmental planning and management. Unesco has been actively involved in the conduct of coastal zone management activities in the region, including research and training in coastal zone development planning and development.
The Indo-Pacific Fisheries Commission (IPFC) of FAO (in which Japan, Republic of Korea, the Philippines, and Viet Nam are members) assists in aquaculture development through technical advice to member Governments on pertinent problems and issues. These are topics in the bi-annual meetings of the IPFC Working Party on Aquaculture, and the IPFC Working Party of Experts in Inland Fisheries.
The IPFC Working Party on Aquaculture assists in the collection and dissemination of information on aquaculture research; promotes and coordinates surveys on aquaculture and its potential for future development; promotes and coordinates studies on aquaculture socio-economics; coordinates the FAO/IPFC Cooperative Programme of Research on Aquaculture; and liaises with appropriate working parties on environmental problems affecting aquaculture. The IPFC Working Party on Inland Fisheries assists in the development and management of inland fisheries in the region, and assists the Working Party on Aquaculture in identifying problems of aquaculture and its interrelationships with inland capture fisheries.
The UN agencies provide mainly technical assistance in the form of project funding, expert services, procurement of equipment and supplies, and training fellowships to the UN member countries in the region.
6.2 Other organizations in the region
The Asian Development Bank, in Manila in the Philippines, raises funds from private and public sources for development purposes in the region, to assist member states in coordinating economic policies, and to give technical assistance in development projects. There are 47 members of the ADB, including China, Hong Kong, Japan, Laos, the Philippines, Taiwan PC and Viet Nam. Among its many sectoral activities, agriculture and agro-industry receive the largest part (41%) of loans approved (1986), and the bank supported over 129 technical assistance projects. The ADB has been the prime source of international funding for aquaculture sectoral development in the region.
Brunei and the Philippines are members of the ASEAN, which is based in Indonesia (see below).
The Colombo Plan for Cooperative Economic and Social Development in Asia and the Pacific has 26 members, among which are Japan, the Republic of Korea, Laos, and the Philippines. It is based in Sri Lanka. Among its many activities the Colombo Plan provides capital aid and technical cooperation between members. Training is one of its principal features and there have been many scholarships for education and training in agriculture and fisheries.
There are a number of smaller organizations in the region which are specific to agriculture, fisheries, and aquaculture.
The Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center (SEAFDEC) is the most important regional organization with interests in aquaculture development. It was established in December 1967 following a proposal of the Ministerial Conference for the Economic Development of Southeast Asia. It is a non-governmental treaty organization composed of Japan, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand. The policy-making body of the Center is the Council of Directors composed of representatives from the member countries, usually Directors of Fisheries. The SEAFDEC Council meets annually to discuss, review, and approve programmes of activity of the three Departments, viz., the Training Department in Thailand, the Marine Fisheries Research Department in Singapore, and the Aquaculture Department in the Philippines (SEAFDEC-AQD).
SEAFDEC activities range from developing skilled manpower resources for the fisheries industry to conducting research leading to rational utilization of fish resources of the region.
SEAFDEC collaborates with the governments of its member countries as well as those of several non-member countries. It also cooperates with regional and interregional organizations concerned with fisheries development, and is the recipient of external funding support from multilateral and bilateral agencies for its various activities.
The International Research and Development Centre (IDRC) has its Asia and Pacific office in Singapore. IDRC is a corporation created by the Government of Canada to stimulate and support scientific and technical research by developing countries for their own benefit. Among the many fields of investigation for which IDRC provides financial and professional support are farming and fisheries. For many years IDRC has supported research and training in aquaculture either directly or through other regional organizations such as NACA, ICLARM, and SEAFDEC.
The International Centre for Living Aquatic Resources Management (ICLARM) is based in Manila in the Philippines. ICLARM is a non-profit organization incorporated in the Philippines for charitable, educational, and scientific purposes. Aquaculture is one of Its prime fields of interest, and it undertakes research and other activities through collaborative projects with research institutes in the region funded by a third party, invariably a multilateral or bilateral donor. ICLARM is currently applying for financial support under the umbrella of the Consultative Group for International Agricultural Research.
The Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia (NACA) is currently a regional project funded by UNDP and executed by FAO. It is also supported by its member countries (see 6.4). However, at the present time NACA is in the process of becoming an independent inter-governmental body in the region. The project is based in Bangkok, Thailand.
INFOFISH is now an inter-governmental organization based in Kuala Lumpur. It has nine regional members including DPR Korea and Republic of Korea, from East Asia (as described) with Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Maldives, Solomon Islands and Sri Lanka. It was initiated by funds from the Norwegian Agency for International Development (NORAD).
6.3 Economic communities in the region
The most important economic community in the region is the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), a regional organization formed by the Governments of Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand, and subsequently joined by Brunei. ASEAN was established by the Bangkok Declaration signed by the Foreign Ministers of the ASEAN countries on 8 August 1967. Among its principal objectives is the acceleration of economic growth, social progress, and cultural development in conjunction with the members' efforts to promote active collaboration and provision of assistance to each other on all matters of common interest in the economic, social, cultural, technical, scientific, and administrative fields. ASEAN has eight functional committees. The Committee on Food, Agriculture and Forestry is concerned with fisheries development. A coordinating group on fisheries was established under the Committee in March 1979.
In the Fifth ASEAN Ministerial Meeting in 1983 the ASEAN Ministerial Understanding on Fisheries Cooperation was signed, wherein it was agreed that necessary action shall be taken towards closer cooperation in fisheries development and management. As a result a number of fisheries projects have been prepared for implementation. Among these the Regional Small-Scale Coastal Fisheries Development Project and the Post-Harvest Technology Project have been implemented - the former with UNDP/FAO assistance and the latter with CIDA support.
6.4 Regional and global aquaculture development projects
The Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia (NACA) initially had twelve member governments, including Brunei, China, Hong Kong, the Philippines, Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Nepal, Singapore, Sri Lanka, and Thailand. Most of these same governments are currently signing membership for the new Governing Council, including DPR Korea. NACA was created in 1980 and was designed to operate within the framework of Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries (TCDC). Under this scheme members pooled their resources and collaborated in the development of aquaculture technologies.
Four Lead Centres (in China, India, the Philippines, and Thailand) (see 4.1 and 4.3) have been identified for specific technologies for transfer among the various countries. Manpower training is the main focus of TCDC activities as is the coordination of implementation of regional projects.
NACA has two ongoing sub-regional projects on fish pathology and seafarming involving only eight governments.
NACA has laid the foundation for reorganizing itself into an inter-governmental institution in the Asia-Pacific region. A recent meeting of plenipotentiaries marked the signing of the agreement which will make NACA an Asia-Pacific network managed and operated by member governments by 1990. Before then other countries in the region are expected to join the network.
The ASEAN/UNDP/FAO Small-scale Coastal Fisheries Development Project is a regional project which includes some aquaculture activities. It is an action-oriented programme for inter-country cooperation and mutual assistance among ASEAN countries through institutional linkage of the fisheries departments. It also provides assistance in training and extension, and project formulation.
ASEAN in association with the European Economic Community (EEC) has initiated a new aquaculture project twinning research institutes in the region and in Europe to work on specific activities. The project is based in Bangkok, Thailand.
The UNDP created the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) in support of global initiatives in aquaculture. Its activities have extended into Africa, Asia, Latin America, and the Mediterranean regions. Advisory and guideline publications deal with both administration of the sector, such as technical assistance, economic development, planning, engineering, marketing, etc., and in technology.
As part of this Programme, and with further support at regional and global levels, the ADCP has prepared this and a number of other Regional Sector Surveys on Aquaculture.
<section>9</section>
ANNEX I
Table 1. Food Balance Sheet, Average (in t) 1982-1984
Country
Catch
Uses
Imports
Exports
Net Export/Import
Food Supply
Population
('000s)
Per caput
Supply (kg/yr)
Brunei
China
Hong Kong
Japan
Korea, DPR
Korea, Rep.
Laos
Macau
Mongolia
Philippines
Taiwan PC*
Viet Nam
Totals
East Asia
World
Source: FAO, Fisheries Statistics, Commodities, 1986.
*Source: SEAFDEC 1987, Fishery Statistics Bulletin for South China Sea Area
Table 2. Fishery Trade Balance, 1986 (in t)
Country
Total Catch
Exports
Percentage
Imports
Total Supply
(in 000 t)
Net
Export/Import
Brunei
China
Hong Kong
Japan
Korea, DPR
Korea, Rep.
Laos
Macau
Mongolia
Philippines
Taiwan PC
Viet Nam
Total, Region
Total, World
Source: FAO, Fishery Statistics, Commodities, 1986.
Table 3. Selected socio-economic indicators, East Asia
Country
Area
(sq.miles)
Population
Year
Population
Growth Rate (%)
GNP (US$)
Average GNP
Growth Rate (%)
GNP Per caput
(US$)
Brunei
4.4 B (1983)
China
9.6 M
1.07 B (109.5/km^2)
270 B (1987)
395 (urban)
124 (rural)
Hong Kong
5.64 M
37.41 B (1986)
Japan
118 M
1 046 T (1982)
Korea, DPR
19 M
18.1 B (1982)
Korea, Rep.
41.2 M
86.2 B
Laos
4.3 M (18.2/km^2)
Macau
975 M
Mongolia
1.9 M
1.6 B (1985)
Philippines
55.6 M
3.2 B
Taiwan PC
19.3 M
56.3 B (1985)
Viet Nam
60 M (181.9/km^2)
9 B
Source: The World Bank Atlas, 1987, and others.
B - thousand million
M - million
Table 4. Fish and Fish Products: Annual average imports and exports, triennium ending 1975 and 1985 in volume ('000 tons) and value (US$ 000)
Imports
Exports
Net (Export/Import)
Volume
Value
Volume
Value
Volume
Value
Volume
Value
(Volume)
(Volume)
Brunei
China
Hong Kong
Japan
Korea, DPR
Korea, RO
Laos
Macau
Mongolia
Philippines
Taiwan PC
Viet Nam
Source: FAO/RAPA, 1987
*Figures in parenthesis represent value of corresponding volumes
Table 5. Summarized information on aquaculture production and marketing in different countries of East Asia
Production
Dominant Culture Species/Methods
Consumption
Species/Commodities
FW BW MC
Major Exports
Major Imports
Brunei (all experimental, very little commercial production)
Carps Macrobrachium
Seabass
Grouper
Green mussels
Mostly fresh
Shrimps and prawns; fresh marine finfishes; preserved, canned fish
China
Carp in polyculture 10 major species tilapias (in ponds/ cages/pens)
Seaweeds (kelp and laver) Laminaria, Porphyra
Shrimps (ponds) (P. orientalis, merguiensis, penicillatus, japonicus, monodon
Molluscs (hanging method) (scallops, sea cucumber, mussels, abalone, oysters)
Finfish (mullet, milkfish, red sea bream)
Mostly fresh frozen: processed - fresh fish (carp and anchovy fish) frozen fish, shellfish (clams and shell), jellyfish
Shrimps (mostly to Hong Kong, Japan, Macau, and South East Asia salted, canned, dried, minced (fish cake/ sausage)
Fish meal
Hong Kong
- common, silver, grass, bighead carps; tilapia
- grey mullet (in ponds and in polyculture) integrated with duck farming
- cat fish (Pangasius)
- snakehead (Ophicephalus)
Finfish (cages)
groupers
sea bream
red pargo snapper
Molluscs
oysters
Shrimps
P. japonicus
live, fresh, chilled and gutted; processed salted dried canned
live marine fish and prawns, mainly to Japan
freshwater fish crustaceans molluscs for South East Asia mainly carps and mullet carp fry, from China
Japan
- rainbow trout "ayu" (salmonid)
- oysters, scallops - seaweeds (laver or "nori", kelp or "konbu", "wakame" or Undaria)
- finfish (yellowtail, red sea bream
fresh frozen, chilled
processed fish meat mixed canned
fish feeds
- Shrimps (for South East Asia, mainly Taiwan PC, Philippines, Viet Nam, Thailand, Indonesia
Seaweeds (from Republic of Korea)
- Molluscs (from China)Finfish (from China and Hong Kong)
Korea, DPR
rainbow trout
carps (common, silver, bighead, black)
mullet
eel
ayu
catfish
snakehead
in ponds and cages
clams
shrimps
brown seaweed
sea cucumber abalone
- fresh/frozen canned
(dried, salted) canned
Korea, Rep.
Carp
eel
rainbow trout
- Molluscs oysters, clams, cockles, mussels, abalone
- Seaweeds
laver, kelp, sea mustard ("wakame")
- Shrimps
(P. japonicus, P. orientalis)
- Finfish (yellowtail, black sea bream)
- mostly fresh but rapid growth of fish processing aid
- dried
- salted
- pickled
- canned
- frozen
- ground
- Seaweeds, mainly brown and red to Japan and China
- Monopoly of supplying Undaria ("wakame") to Japan, and Hizikia edible brown, to Japan
Oysters mainly to US, Canada, Australia, Holland, and Sweden
Alaska pollack (decreasing)
Laos
Carps (rohu, mrigal, catla, grass, bighead, silver, common) in polyculture
Fresh
Macau
No information
Mongolia
No information
Taiwan PC
Carps
grey mullet
tilapia
snakehead
eel (> 10 t/ha/y)
Macrobrachium
Milkfish
Mullet Shrimps (P. monodon)
P. penicillatus, P. orientalis
Seaweeds (Gracilaria)
Oyster (C. gigas)
Clams (Meritrix spp.)
Abalone (Haliotis)
Fresh/frozen processed-boil dried canned salt-dried
Shrimps - mainly to Japan
Eel - mainly to Japan (=> one third of Japan's consumption)
FW - Freshwater Aquaculture
BW - Brackishwater Aquaculture
MC - Mariculture
Country
Major Species
Consumption
Exports
FW
BW
MC
Philippines
Tilapia (cages/ponds) Milkfish (pens) Carps (pens/ponds)
Shrimps (P. monodon)
Milkfish (ponds
Seaweeds (Eucheuma spp.)
Oysters
Mussels
Finfish
Sea bass (limited)
Groupers (limited)
Seaweeds (Eucheuma spp.)
fresh
processed
dried
salted
fermented
paste/sauce
Shrimps - mainly to Japan, US, Europe
Seaweeds - to Japan Korea, Taiwan PC, China, Denmark, USA, Spain, France (for processing to carrageenan)
Viet Nam
Tilapia
Carps (Chinese) Macrobrachium
Catfish (Pangasius)
Gorramis
Snakehead
(in cages and in ricefields/reservoirs
Finfish
(milkfish, mullet) Crustaceans
(P. monodon
P. merguiensis
M. ensis)
Molluscs
Mussels
Oysters
Cockles
Seaweeds
Gracilaria
fresh, frozen, dried, fermented, smoked
fish flour, fish meal, fish sauce "muoc man"
Shrimps
FW - Freshwater Aquaculture
BW - Brackishwater Aquaculture
MC - Mariculture
Table 6. Contribution of East Asian aquaculture to world aquaculture production
% to Total
Production (in 000 t)
Growth Rate
Production (in 000 t)
Country
Total
Aquaculture
Total
Aquaculture
China
Hong Kong
Japan
Korea, DPR
Korea, Rep.
Laos
Macau
Mongolia
Philippines
Taiwan PC
Viet Nam
Total, Region
Total, World
Source: FAO, 1987
<section>a</section>
ANNEX II: BIBLIOGRAPHY
ABECOR Country Reports. Various dates. Barclays Bank.
Alfsen, C., 1985. The role of freshwater fish culture in China. INFOFISH Mktg. Dig. 2:27-29.
Anon., 1984. Huge local markets boost Hong Kong's aquaculture. Fish Farming Intl. July 1984.
Anon., 1985. "Korea re-exports drop". INFOFISH Mktg. Dig. 6.
Anon., 1986. "Freshwater farming in Asia and Pacific". Fish Farming Intl. September 1986.
Anon., 1986a. "Aquaculture practices in Korea", (mimeo). Anon., 1988. "China catch soars". Fishing News Intl. 27(3). March 1988.
Anon., 1988a. "Market permit scheme underway". Hong Kong Standard. 12 April 1988.
Australian Academy of Technological Sciences and Engineering, 1987. Report on the aquaculture mission to the People's Republic of China, May-June 1987.
Bainan, N., 1988. "China has big plans for marine farms". Fish Farming Intl. 15(1). January 1988.
Butlin, J., 1985. Joint venture opportunities in China's fisheries development. INFOFISH Mktg. Dig. 6:9-13.
Bureau of Aquatic Products, (undated). China Fishery. Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry, and Fisheries.
Chen, H., (undated). Taiwan. World Fish Marketing Review.
Cheng, K.W.J., 1976a. National perspective of inland fisheries in Hong Kong. IPFC. 17th Session, Colombo, Sri Lanka.
Cheng, K.W.J., 1976b. Marketing and utilization of inland culture fish in Hong Kong. IPFC. 17th Session, Colombo, Sri Lanka.
China Society of Fisheries, 1986. China's Fisheries. Commentary dedicated to the World Food Day in 1986. (mimeo).
Choi, I.H., 1983. The Korean seafood canning industry. INFOFISH Mktg. Dig. 5:9-10.
Chua, T.E., 1985. A preliminary assessment of aquaculture training requirements of Brunei Darussalam. NACA Mission Report.
Chua, T.E., 1987. Aquaculture training needs in developing Asia. Manuscript Report. IDRC. Feb. 1987.
Delmendo, M.N., 1987. Report of travel in connection with ASEAN/UNDP/FAO Regional small-scale coastal fisheries development project, 18 Oct.-2 Nov. 1987.
Csavas, I., 1988. Shrimp farming developments in Asia. Paper presented at Shrimp 88 Conference, Bangkok, Thailand, 26-28 Jan. 1988.
FAO, 1970. Fishery advisory services. Korea. Final Report. Vol. I.
FAO, 1974. Laos - Country Development Brief. Food and Agriculture Sector (including fisheries and forestry). DDF/CDB No. 13. Feb. 1974.
FAO, 1978. Fishery country profile, South Korea.
FAO, 1981. Fishery country profile, Japan.
FAO, 1987. FAO/UN in China. Annual Report.
FAO, 1987a. Rapport semestriel sur l'activité de la FAO en RDP Lao. Jan-Juin 1987.
FAO, 1988. Fishery Statistics, 1986.
FAO, 1988a. Fishery country profile, Hong Kong.
FAO, 1988b. Aquaculture Statistics, 1985-1987.
FAO/RAPA, 1987. Selected indicators of food and agriculture development in Asia-Pacific region, 1976-86. RAPA Publ: 1987/3.
FAO/UNDP, 1970. Survey of aquaculture indicators. Fishery Advisory Services. Republic of Korea.
FAO/UNDP, 1979. Aquaculture development in China. Report of an FAO/UNDP Aquaculture Study tour to PRC led by T.V.R. Pillay, ADCP, FAO, 2 May-1 June 1978.
Feller, M. and A.G. Herrforth, 1986. Developments in Asian shrimp culture. Marine Fish. Rev. 48 (1):50-54.
FIRI, (undated). Briefing notes on past and present projects and activities in China.
Floyd, J., 1985. The role of fish in Southeast Asian diets: Focus on Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, and Thailand. INFOFISH Mktg.Dig. 4:31-35.
Foreign Languages Publishing House, 1984. Fisheries of Korea. Fuji, A., 1987. Aquaculture and mariculture. Oceans 30(1):19-23.
Fujinami, N., 1974. Fisheries colleges and high schools, Korea. Working paper, FAO/WB Cooperative Programme.
Hotta, M., 1982. Japan as a market for fishery products. A statistical update. INFOFISH Rep. 5182.
IPFC, 1984. Hong Kong Fisheries Profile. 21st Session, KL., Dec. 1984. Japan Fisheries Association, 1984. Fisheries of Japan.
Joint Commission on Rural Reconstruction (JCRR). 1963. Fish markets in Taiwan. IPFC Current Affairs Bull. (38):10-11.
Liming, W., 1985. China's fish farming jumps upstream. Beijing Review. 49:21-23.
Lovatelli, A., 1988. Some notes on abalone culture in DPR Korea. NACA Newsletter.
Lu, X., 1986. A review of reservoir fisheries in China. FAO Fish. Circ. (803):37 p.
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries, Japan, 1986. Annual report on Japan's fisheries. Fiscal year 1986.
McHugh, D.G. and B.J. Lavier, 1984. Korea's edible seaweed trade. INFOFISH Mktg. Dig. 3:17-19.
Netto, J., 1985. China's fisheries sector. INFOFISH Mktg. Dig. 2:9-13.
Octavio, G.G., 1988. Assessing small-borrower credit programs: The case of BD and KKK. Research paper presented at a Round-Table Seminar at the Central Bank of the Philippines, 19 Jan. 1988.
OECD, 1988. Study on aquaculture - Japan. (Note by the Secretariat). Committee for Fisheries. Jan. 1988
Perovic, V., S. Sverdrup-Jensen, and S. Abrahamsen, 1985. Report of the FAO fisheries mission to DPR Korea.
Rabanal, H.R., 1979. Report on travel to Hong Kong in connection with SCSP, Oct. 1979.
Rabanal, H.R., 1987. Report on travel in connection with the ASEAN Project, 13-30 Aug. 1986.
Rankin, P., 1983. Mariculture spreading in Hong Kong. Aust. Fish. May 1983, pp. 18-20.
Riddell-Swan, J.M., 1984. Hong Kong Departmental Report by the Director of Agriculture and Fisheries for the financial year 1983-84.
Shang, Y.C., 1986. Coastal aquaculture developments in selected Asian countries: Status, potential, and constraints. FAO Fish. Circ. (799):63 p.
Taiwan Fisheries Bureau, 1976. Taiwan Fisheries.
Tang, Y.A., (undated). Pre-investment survey of aquaculture in Korea. Report prepared for FAO/IBRD Cooperative Programme.
Tubbs, J.A., 1964. Preliminary report on the fisheries industry State of Brunei.
UNDP, 1974. The South China Sea Fisheries Development and Coordinating Programme (Phase II). I. Background and supporting information.
UNDP, 1982. Report on development cooperation, Lao PDR. 1981. Vientiane, Sept. 1980.
US Department of State. Background notes.
van Nguyen, T., (undated). Fish utilization in Viet Nam.
World Bank, 1988. The World Bank Atlas, 1987.
Yamamoto, T., 1984. Japanese Fisheries. INFOFISH Mktg. Dig. 1:10-12.
Yuen, P. and R. Yang, 1971. Taiwan Fisheries Today. March 1971.
Zhu, D.G., 1980. A brief introduction to fisheries in China. FAO Fish. Circ. (726):31 p.
Zweig, R.D., 1984. China's prolific fish ponds. Ceres 17(4):22-26.
Zweig, R.D., 1986. Technical report on fish production through aquaculture. Appraisal mission. WFP-assisted project China 2814. "Development of integrated fish farming in nine cities".
<section>b</section>
ANNEX III: ABREVIATION
ADAB
Australian Development Bank
ADB
Asian Development Bank
ADCP
Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme
AIM
Asian Institute of Management
AIT
Asian Institute of Technology
ASEAN
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
BFAR
Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (Philippines)
BIOTROP
Southeast Asian Regiona Center for Tropical Biology
CIDA
Canadian International Development Agency
CNFC
China National Fisheries Corporation
CLSU
Central Luzon State University (Philippines)
DANIDA
Danish International Development Agency
DBP
Development Bank of the Philippines
EAS
European Aquaculture Society
EEC
European Economic Community
ESCAP
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FMO
Fish Marketing Organization (Hong Kong)
GTZ
German Agency for Technical Cooperation
IAEA
International Atomic Energy Agency (UN)
IBRD
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
ICLARM
International Centre for Living Aquatic Resources Management
IDA
International Development Association
IFAD
International Fund for Agricultural Development
IDRC
International Development Research Centre (Canada)
IPFC
Indo-Pacific Fisheries Commission
JETRO
Japanese External Trade Organization
JICA
Japan International Cooperation Agency
LLDA
Laguna Lake Development Authority (Philippines)
NACA
Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia
NORAD
Norwegian Agency for International Development
ODA
Overseas Development Administration (United Kingdom)
OPEC
Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries
PFDA
Philippines Fisheries Development Authority
SEAFDEC
Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center
SEAFDEC-AQD
SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department
SMC
San Miguel Corporation (Philippines)
UN
United Nations
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
UNEP
United Nations Environment Programme
Unesco
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Educational Organization
UPV
University of the Philippines in the Visayas
WAS
World Aquaculture Society
WB
World Bank
WFP
World Food Programme (UN)
Abbreviations of Databases and other Terminology
ASFIS
Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries Information Service
ASFA
Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries Abstracts
CD-ROM
Compact Disc - Read only Memory
DIALOG
Central Service for Accessing Databases
BRAIS
Brackishwater Aquaculture Information System
GLOBEFISH
FAO Computerized System of Fish Marketing Information
FISHDAB
FAO Yearly Statistics
GRID
Global Resource Information Database (GRID)
SEAFIS
Southeast Asian Fisheries Information Service
<section>c</section>
ANNEX IV: LIST OF ADCP REPORTS
ADCP/REP/75/1
(E/F)
Aquaculture Planning in Africa
ADCP/REP/76/2
Aquaculture Planning in Asia
ADCP/REP/76/3
(E/S)
Aquaculture Planning in Latin America
ADCP/REP/76/3A FI/R188
(E/F/S)
Kyoto Conference
ADCP/REP/78/4
Aid for Aquaculture Development
ADCP/REP/78/5
(E/S)
Outline of an Applied Research and Experimental Development Programme for the Latin American Regional Centre for Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/78/6
(E/S)
Curriculum for the Training of Aquaculturists in the Latin American Regional Centre for Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/79/7
(E/F)
Curriculum for the Training of Aquaculturists in the African Regional Centre for Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/79/8
Training in Fish Feed Technology. Report of the FAO/UNDP Training Course in Fish Feed Technology held in the University of Washington, Seattle, 9 October-15 December 1978
ADCP/REP/79/9
Aquaculture Information - Report of the Meeting of an Aquaculture Information Group held in Rome, 25-28 April 1979
ADCP/REP/79/10
Aquaculture Development in China - Report of a FAO/UNDP Aquaculture Study Tour to the People's Republic of China, 2 May-1 June 1978
ADCP/REP/80/11
Fish Feed Technology - Lectures presented at the FAO/UNDP Training Course in Fish Feed Technology, held at the College of Fisheries, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 9 October-15 December 1978
ADCP/REP/80/12
Outline Research Programme for the African Regional Aquaculture Centre, Port Harcourt, Rivers State, Nigeria. Report of a Task Force sponsored by the FAO/UNDP Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme, 3-19 February 1980
ADCP/REP/80/13
Curriculum for the Training of Aquaculturists in the Asian Aquaculture Network
ADCP/REP/80/14
Outline Research Programmes for the Regional Aquaculture Lead Centres in Asia - Parts I and II
ADCP/REP/80/15
Outline Research Programmes for the Regional Aquaculture Lead Centres in Asia - Part III
ADCP/REP/81/16 (out of print)
Reproductive Physiology of Teleost Fishes - A Review of Present Knowledge and Needs for Future Research
ADCP/REP/82/17
Aid for Aquaculture Development in the Third World - Report of the FAO/NORAD Round Table on Aid for Aquaculture Development in the Third World. Svanøy, Norway, 2-6 August 1982
ADCP/REP/83/18
Fish Feeds and Feeding in Developing Countries - An Interim Report on the ADCP Feed Development Programme
ADCP/REP/83/19
Rev. 1
AQUIS Aquaculture Information System - Users' Manual
ADCP/REP/83/20
Planification del Desarrollo de la Acuicultura - Guía Preliminar (An Introductory Guide to Aquaculture Development)
ADCP/REP/84/21
Inland Aquaculture Engineering - Lectures presented at the ADCP Interregional Training Course in Inland Aquaculture Engineering, Budapest
ADCP/REP/85/22
Nutritional Fish Pathology - Morphological Signs of Nutrient Deficiency and Toxicity in Farmed Fish
ADCP/REP/86/23
Observations on International Technical Assistance to Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/86/24
Planning an Aquaculture Facility - Guidelines for Bioprogramming and Design
ADCP/REP/87/25
Future Economic Outlook for Aquaculture and Related Assistance Needs
ADCP/REP/87/26
Feed and Feeding of Fish and Shrimp - A Manual on the Preparation and Presentation of Compound Feeds for Shrimp and Fish in Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/87/27
Aquaculture Sector Development - A Guideline for the Preparation of a National Plan
ADCP/REP/87/28
Women in Aquaculture - Proceedings of the ADCP/NORAD Workshop on Women in Aquaculture. Rome, FAO, 13-16 April 1987
ADCP/REP/87/29
The Markets for the Prime Mediterranean Species - Sea Bass, Sea Bream, Mullets and Eel - and their links with investment
ADCP/REP/88/30
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in Eleven Middle East Countries
ADCP/REP/88/31
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in East Asia
