<section>a</section>
Chapter V. Special forest plantations
1. Introduction
2. Windbreaks and shelterbelts
3. Sand dune stabilization
4. Canal-side plantation
5. River-bank plantations
6. Amenity plantations
1. Introduction
Of particular interest in many arid regions of the world are forest plantations that are established as windbreaks and shelterbelts, for sand dune stabilization, canal side and riverside plantations, and as amenity plantations. A discussion of these special forest plantations is presented below.
2. Windbreaks and shelterbelts
In arid zones, the harsh conditions of climate and the shortage of water are intensified by the strong winds. Living conditions and agricultural production can often be improved by planting trees and shrubs in protective windbreaks and shelterbelts which reduce wind velocity and provide shade. Windbreaks and shelterbelts, which are considered synonymous in this manual, are barriers of trees or shrubs that are planted to reduce wind velocities and, as a result, reduce evapotranspiration and prevent wind erosion; they frequently provide direct benefits to agricultural crops, resulting in higher yields, and provide shelter to livestock, grazing lands, and farms.
A main objective of windbreaks and shelterbelts is to protect the agricultural crops from physical damage by wind. Other benefits include:
- Preventing, or at least reducing, wind erosion;
- Reducing evaporation from the soil;
- Reducing transpiration from plants;
- Moderating extreme temperatures.
Quite often, protection can be combined with production by choosing tree and shrub species that, apart from furnishing the desired sheltering effect, yield needed wood products.
2.1 Design of windbreaks and shelterbelts
When considering windbreak or shelterbelt planting, three zones can be recognized: the windward zone (from which the wind blows); the leeward zone (on the side where the wind passes); and the protected zone (that in which the effect of the windbreak or shelterbelt is felt) (Figure 5.1).
Figure 5.1 Functioning of a windbreak
The effectiveness of the windbreak or shelterbelt is influenced by its permeability. If it is dense, like a solid wall (Figure 5.2), the airflow will pass over the top of it and cause turbulence on the leeward side due to the lower pressure on that side; this gives a comparatively limited zone of effective shelter on the leeward side compared to the zone that a moderately permeable shelter creates. Optimum permeability is 40 to 50 percent of open space, corresponding to a density of 50 to 60 percent in vegetation. Gaps in the barriers should be avoided. Permeability of dense shelterbelt can be improved by pruning lower branches at 0.50-0.8 m from the soil level (Figure 5.3).
It is generally accepted that a windbreak or shelterbelt protects an area over a distance up to its own height on the windward side and up to 20 times its height on the leeward side, depending on the strength of the wind. In reducing wind speeds, narrow barriers can be as effective as wide ones. Furthermore, a narrow shelterbelt has the advantage of occupying less land.
The shape of the cross-section of a windbreak or shelterbelt determines, to a great extent, the sheltering effect. To a large extent, the choice of tree or shrub species to plant, along with their planting arrangement, dictates the cross-sectional shape. In general, an inclined slope facing the wind should be avoided, as it only deflects the windflow upward. Barriers with a clear vertical side provide best wingspread reduction.
When designing a windbreak or shelterbelt, the direction of the wind must be considered. A barrier should be established perpendicular to the direction of the prevailing wind for maximum effect. To protect large areas, a number of separate barriers can be created as parts of an overall system. When the prevailing winds are mainly in one direction, a series of parallel shelterbelts perpendicular to that direction should be established; a checkerboard pattern is required when the winds originate from different directions. Before establishing windbreaks or shelterbelts, it is important to make a thorough study of the local winds and to plot on a map the direction and strength of the winds.
2.2 Selection of tree and shrub species
In the selection of tree or shrub species for windbreaks or shelterbelts, the following characteristics should be sought:
- Rapid growth;
- Straight stems;
- Wind firmness;
- Good crown formation;
- Deep root system, which does not spread into nearby fields;
- Resistance to drought;
- Desired phonological characteristics (leaves all year long or only part of the year).
Figure 5.2 A dense shelterbelt made of Acacia cysnophylla and Opuntesi pinus indica
Figure 5.3 Permeability of a dense shelterbelt of Parlinsonia oculeata and Azadiracheta indica improved by pruning lower branches.
2.3 Planting techniques
Planting techniques for windbreaks and shelterbelts are identical to those in other tree and shrub planting programmes. However, as windbreaks and shelterbelts require a high plant survival rate, as well as uniform and rapid growth, supplementary irrigation may be required during the establishment phase. Gaps cannot be tolerated and, when plants are lost, replacement must be prompt.
Although in theory, one-row barriers should suffice, experience has shown that the most effective windbreaks and shelterbelts are those consisting of several rows of trees. Quite often, initial spacing is 3 meters between the rows, with trees 2 meters apart in the rows. Where trees or shrubs have long roots that could extend into agricultural fields, vertical root pruning may be recommended; this can be done with special equipment or by digging trenches. A triangular arrangement of plants is frequently prescribed.
2.4 Management practices
Once established, the effectiveness and longevity of a windbreak or shelterbelt depends on its maintenance. As the trees and shrubs mature, they change in shape and appearance, which necessitates some level of maintenance to ensure a continuing shelter effect. Pruning may be required to stimulate height growth, while thinning can boost diameter growth. To keep a barrier at the desired density and permeability, occasional pruning or removal of plants may be necessary. If trees or shrubs are damaged by wind or pest attacks, a control is also needed. In all of these cases, the management practices depend on the desired composition of the barrier and the species used. Since these management practices can involve the removal of woody parts, the use of tree or shrub species that make fuelwood or fodder available on a continuous basis is desirable.
A windbreak or shelterbelt has a life that is dependent on the trees or shrubs of which it is composed. Therefore, to be able to furnish permanent shelter, a renewal plan should be adopted. To renew a barrier consisting of many rows, felling the rows on the leeward side and then replanting them is often recommended. If the windbreak or shelterbelt consists of one row, a new row may be planted parallel to the the old one; when the new row has matured, the old one is removed. To renew narrow windbreaks or shelterbelts arranged into a system, new belts can be planted midway between the existing barriers which, in turn, are to be removed when the new ones become effective.
When windbreaks or shelterbelts are established on grasslands or other areas where animals are allowed to graze, special attention must be paid to the protection of the barrier; this can be done by planting thorny vegetation or by using a barbed-wire fence along the edges of the barrier.
3. Sand dune stabilization
Sand dunes result from wind erosion. They are formed in many arid lands when winds regularly blow over poorly-vegetated areas. Sand dunes that are not covered with vegetation (because of overcropping or overgrazing) move in the direction of the wind at a speed which can approach 10 meters a year, endangering agricultural crops, forest plantations, irrigation canals, and roads (Figure 5.4). To prevent this encroachment, the sand dunes must be stabilized; one method of sand dune stabilization is to establish a vegetative cover.
In general, two types of sand dunes are recognized: coastal dunes and inland dunes. Techniques of stabilizing these two types of sand dunes through the establishment of a vegetative cover are discussed below.
3.1 Stabilization of coastal dunes
Coastal dunes originate from sand thrown up onto the shore by waves. At low tide, the sand dries and is blown away by the wind. When protective vegetation beyond the beaches is destroyed, coastal dunes move inland. To stop the advancement of coastal dunes, an artificial foredune should be constructed about 50 meters from the floodline. Normally, this initial barrier is built one year before a planting programme begins.
One method of building a foredune is by mechanical fixation of the sand by fences or palisades, 0.5 to 1 meter high. The materials used for the fences or palisades may include twigs from trees or shrubs, brushwood, grass sheaves, reeds, bushes, palm leaves, old railroad ties, used oil drums, and earth. When the prevailing wind has a prevailing direction, parallel lines of palisading are sufficient; however, a checkerboard system is advisable where fluctuating winds are common (Figure 5.5). Sand piles up behind the palisade and, when the artificial dune that is formed reaches a height of 0.5 to 0.75 meter, a second palisade is built on top of it. Sometimes, the original barriers can be raised, when necessary, instead of building a new palisade. Once the foredune is established, it is possible to stabilize the sand behind it by seeding or planting a vegetative species that provides good ground cover and is able to withstand (at least partially) covering by sand.
Figure 5.4 Dunes invading agricultural land (YAR)
Figure 5.5 A checkboard system of palisading.
Sand dune fixation also can be done by mechanical mulching; that is, the spreading of solid material on the surface of the sand. Chemical fixation can also be employed. Chemical fixation consists of stabilizing the sand surface by covering it with a continuous crust of sprayed chemical substances, such as petroleum derivatives or latex mixtures. Vegetative establishment is usually a follow-up or a concurrent operation. Chemical fixation is advisable when the cost of labour is high and the chemicals are readily available.
Sand dune stabilization with plant species is more permanent than mechanical mulching and chemical fixation techniques which are, in most cases, only temporary measures.
3.2 Stabilization of inland dunes
Inland dunes originate from sand produced by the weathering of rocks, mainly sandstone. The fine fraction can be blown far away, while the heavier fraction is blown short distances and forms dunes. Such dunes can pose serious stabilization problems, especially when the dunes are large and active. One way to combat this problem is by creating an artificial dune at the windward end of the dune. The method followed is similar to the one used to create the foredune in the stabilization of coastal sand dunes. The stabilization of inland dunes also follows the same general lines as mentioned for coastal dunes.
When a specific area of value (for example, an oasis) is threatened, protective work is initiated as close as possible to the area of concern, with the work gradually progressing toward the sand source area.
3.3 Planting techniques
As mentioned above, planting of vegetation is the best and most permanent method of coastal and inland sand dune stabilization; both direct and indirect benefits can be realized, including:
- Protection (of roads, canals, agricultural lands, and industrial areas);
- Wood production (fuel, lumber, etc.);
- Protection of watershed areas and water supplies;
- Livestock grazing benefits (including fodder);
- Wildlife benefits, recreation, and other amenities;
- Public works to combat unemployment.
The choice of vegetative species for planting should be based on studies of the natural vegetation in the area and on the environmental conditions. As planting of vegetation on sand dunes frequently consists of afforestation practices, it is recommended that species trials be included in the planting programmes to permit an evaluation of tree and shrub species for long-term use.
In practice, it is often necessary to plant relatively large containerized plants close together (1 x 1 meter) on the windward side, but they can be planted further apart (2 x 2 meters) on the sheltered side. Irrigation for initial establishment may be required to help the plants survive until they have sufficiently deep root systems. If water is not available in adequate quantities for irrigation to take place on a long term basis, it is advisable to irrigate (at least) during the first two or three months after planting, at weekly intervals.
Concerning maintenance, hand weeding is preferred to avoid problems of machinery traction in the sand. As a rule, all livestock movement and other traffic should be eliminated on the sand dunes; when necessary, delimited and protected passages for livestock can be established.
4. Canal-side plantation
In may arid countries, wherever rivers are available, efforts have been made to utilize the water for irrigation purposes through the construction of dams or using lift irrigation for the agricultural needs. Several thousands of kilometers of irrigation canals have been laid. The banks of such canals are available for planting purposes and constitute a considerable area for production of timber and firewood for the rural population. Full advantage is being taken of this in many countries like China, Egypt, India and Pakistan. A few rows of trees, varying from 4 to 6, are generally planted on each bank of the canal with an espacement depending on the characteristics of the species and the type of produce desired (Figures 5.6A and 5.6B).
When designing a canal plantation, the requirement may be the same as for the design of irrigated plantations with respect to climatic and soil conditions and to supply and quality of water. However, it should be remembered that the only water supply available to the trees is seepage from the canal into the root zone. In some places, it is cheaper to grow trees and thus utilize the seepage water rather than prevent seepage by canal linings of concrete, asphalt or other material.
Choice of species for canal side plantations should take into account both the particular character of the plantation and its purpose. The roots of the trees should strengthen the banks of the canal and the trees should keep the canal and its banks well shaded in order to suppress weed growth and reduce evaporation. Species that tend to increase water seepage through the sides and bottom of the canal should be avoided. Where canals have an intermittent flow, such as flood discharge canals, only trees able to adjust to varying water levels in the soil can be used.
Species that reproduce by suckers such as Robinia pseudo acacia should not be planted along canals. Plantation techniques should favor deep planting and roots should be planted in the moist layer.
5. River-bank plantations
There are many areas where river lengths are considerable. The ground on either side of the river is partly within the reach of the high level of water during the period the rivers are in flood. Beyond this level - and on the fringes of the agricultural land, strip plantation can be established to produce wood, fuelwood and fodder. Generally, the width of such strips is limited but does constitute a useful and productive linear plantation. Underground water is available at different levels. The species to be planted should be matched with this water level variation. Spacing within and between the rows depends on the characteristics of the species and the rotation planned for the crop. In the more arid areas, trees with xerophytic habit constitute the outermost rows while those close to the river bank are the ones with higher water requirement. In such locations, phreatophyte species such as Populus spp., Acacia nilotica, Dalbergio sisso, Prosopis spp. can be planted.
6. Amenity plantations
This type of plantation includes trees planted in gardens and parks, street planting, green belts around villages and cities, trees planted along roadsides to reduce noise and beautify the homestead or landscape. In arid zones "beautifying the landscape" usually means changing the countryside from its normal brown color to green, or "greening" of the landscape.
6.1 Tree planting in gardens
Tree planting in gardens is usually regarded as a beautification of the home environment but it also has a profound effect on man's psychological attitude toward life. A house located in a barren landscape without trees and shrubs lacks appeal and there is certainly a different psychological attitude towards it, compared with a home which has been beautified and protected by wisely selected trees and shrubs.
Tree planting in gardens also enhances self-esteem. The gardener identifies with his garden and builds a personal relationship with it.
Figure 5.6 A. Canal side planting
Planting along an irrigation canal
The garden becomes an extension of himself, a visible representation of his individuality. When it blooms, he has evidence of his success. He also becomes aware that a number of people he does not know pass by each day and enjoy his garden. He has given them an anonymous gift. All of this enhances his self image, helping to create self-esteem. The gardener, feeling better about himself, feels better about where he lives.
In selecting species for tree planting in gardens, the following should be considered:
- Trees have several functions to play in plantations around houses. The first point to be considered is therefore to decide on the purpose for which planting is to be done, that is: shelter, shade, ornament, hedges, scent and odors, as source of fruits or nesting sites for birds. Some plants will fill only one or two of these objectives while others may fill more.
- Trees selected should be suitable to local climate and soil conditions.
- Adaptability to pruning. The degree to which trees and shrubs will tolerate pruning and pollarding is an important consideration for planting around the homestead.
- Evergreen or deciduous habit: most arid-zone species are evergreen but many deciduous trees are also used for planting in gardens. In the Mediterranean arid region, deciduous trees have certain advantages and disadvantages when compared with evergreens. The most important advantage is their ability to provide shelter in summer but allow sunlight to penetrate in winter. The most important disadvantage is that the leaves need to be gathered during and after leaf fall.
6.2 Planting in parks
The first objective for planting in parks in arid zones is for shelter from the sun and dust. Where trees are not growing naturally, shelter may be provided by planting trees in favorable sites. A second objective is to enhance the beauty of the park by planting trees of different color, shape and size. Planting formal layout patterns of trees in long straight rows does not usually fit into the landscape pattern, and planting in small clumps or as individual dispersed trees is usually more suitable. Choice of species should not be dictated by the value of trees for wood, nor planting expenses weighed against the value of the wood produced. Costs for planting in parks for recreation should take into account aesthetic benefits and the intangible gains in the health and well-being of the people.
6.3 Street planting
Street plantings are often the responsibility of local municipalities and are made to beautify the cities, provide shade and control outdoor noise and traffic pollution (Figure 5.7A and B). In recent years, many of the towns and cities in the world have learned through experience that paving roadways, streets, and sidewalks does not complete the job. In most communities where there has been an increase in population and greater congestion of motorized traffic, it has become important that the city municipality assumes its responsibility of providing the amenities which add much pleasure to life in the city.
For use in street planting, trees should:
- be easy to establish, preferably with the ability to be transplanted as advanced nursery stock, and grow relatively quickly to the stage that they provide some amenity value;
- be healthy in the environment, relatively long-lived and not subject to wind-throw or the breakage of large limbs;
- be as maintenance-free as possible. Trees requiring permanent pruning and removal of fallen leaves will have a high maintenance cost.
- the form and height of the species must be suitable for the width of the street in which they are to be planted;
- whether to use a single variety or mix on the same street is a matter of taste. A variety might be used depending on the geographic section of the country and the width of the street.
6.4 Greenbelt planting
Several cities in arid zones have established in their municipal area green belts with a number of purposes:
- to enhance the beauty of the site;
- to provide a recreation area for the urban dwellers;
- to reduce the harmful effect of dry winds and dust storm and control sand encroachment.
There is a wide array of trees and shrubs for greenbelt planting. Any programme of this sort, however, should be well designed in advance, planned for a number of years and carefully implemented.
Figure 5.7 A. Planting in city.
Figure 5.7 B. Planting in industrial unit to reduce pollution.
6.5 Roadside plantations
Roadside plantations have several objectives:
- trees increase the comfort of travellers by providing shade and attractive surroundings;
- trees may protect the road itself against moving dunes or act as a windbreak for adjacent fields.
- trees may become an important factor by alleviating timber and fuelwood shortage. In fact, roadside trees are frequently considered a part of the national forest planting programme. Such trees may produce edible fruit, yield pods for feeding animals, furnish food and shelter for birds or, when in bloom, be valuable in beekeeping.
Species should be carefully chosen. Among the important factors which should be considered in planning the use of trees along highways are (Figures 5.8 A and 5.8 B):
- selection of the species for hardiness, longevity, freedom from windthrow and breakage, attractive appearance and minimal maintenance. In the arid zone there are a large number of native small trees and large shrubs which can be used, as well as some exotic species. Where the environment is suitable, consideration should be given to small patches of deciduous species with colorful foliage.
- suitability of the species to the climate, topography and soil.
- location of the trees in relation to road formation. Firstly consideration should be given to the existing road formation so that trees ar not planted close to the inside of curves or near road junctions where they could obscure vision and so create a driving hazard. Secondly, consideration should be given to the possibility of the future widening of roads, including the development of double traffic lanes.
6.6 Rail-side plantations
A trend toward rail-side planting for the provision of greenery, protection from dust and winds and creation of additional tree resources has developed in recent years in many countries. This trend is likely to spread to other countries due to the favourable results already achieved in certain countries. Three to six rows of trees on either side of the track are considered useful. The planting techniques are similar to those for roadside planting. Species vary and depend on the prevailing climatic conditions, mainly temperature, soil and rainfall.
Figure 5.8 A. Road side planting: Eucalyptus
Figure 5.8 B. Road side planting (one row of Populus nigra)
Under very arid conditions, the choice of species is rather limited. Where water is available, several species can be selected. Within an area each row can be given over to one or more species. Mixtures are thus created and are considered better as they yield different produce to meet local needs.
Species generally used for rail-side planting are:
- Arid areas: Tamarix spp, Eucalyptus spp, Acacia spp, Opuntia ficus indica, Prosopis spp;
- Semi-arid areas: Eucalyptus spp, Avaga spp, Acacia spp, Ficus spp, Sapium spp, Bauhinia spp.
<section>b</section>
Chapter VI. Rehabilitation of saline environment
1. Introduction
2. Aims of saline environment rehabilitation programmes
3. Salt-tolerant shrub resources
4. Plant selection
5. Establishment
6. Highlights of section
1. Introduction
Under natural conditions, salt affected soils support salt-tolerant vegetation, including trees, shrubs and grasses. Sheep, goats and camels utilize the vegetation for grazing, and the shrubs are also cut and used as fuel. As a result of heavy grazing and fuel gathering, many salt-affected areas become denuded.
Bare salt-affected soils also occur as a result of changes in landscape hydrology due to either land development for agriculture or the installation of irrigation and drainage schemes. The bare saline areas which result from development schemes or overuse are usually regarded as wastelands but they are capable of producing biomass useful as forage or fuel. In this section, salt-tolerant shrubs are considered.
2. Aims of saline environment rehabilitation programmes
Rehabilitation of salt-affected soils may serve a number of purposes:
- feed for grazing animals - Many salt-resistant plants provide a valuable reserve feed for drought conditions or fill regular gaps in feed supply caused by seasonal conditions. Chenopod shrubs are used extensively in natural stands and may be planted on denuded saline areas. They provide shelter as well as feed for grazing animals (Figure 6.1).
- reduction of soil erosion and degradation - Establishing a plant cover on otherwise bare saline areas contributes greatly to reducing wind and water erosion. Several Atriplex spp. exhibit a prostrate growth habit and natural stem layering, excellent characteristics for preventing soil erosion. Moreover, the layered stems are more able to resist heavy grazing (Figure 6.2).
- fuel production - Shrubs in natural saline areas are cut and used for fuel. Some species planted for forage production may be useful also as fuel; alternatively, species useful only as fuel may be planted.
- improvement of aesthetics - There are extensive tracts of land that are salty and unattractive around many cities in arid areas. -These areas provide a source of dust which blows over the city. Dust problems are also evident in areas such as airport grounds, highway developments and the fringes of irrigation projects. Chenopod shrubs, such as Atriplex cinerea which grows about 0.5 meter high and up to 6 meters in diameter, provide a possible means of preventing the dust and improving living conditions and aesthetics.
- wildlife conservation - Salt affected wastelands and overgrazed range country provide a very poor habitat for wildlife in terms of food, cover and breeding places. Species grown for cover include the large Atriplex lentiformis which is known as quail brush. Fuel species include salt- and drought-tolerant Melaleuca spp. which are also useful for nesting and shelter.
- to use shallow saline groundwater - There are vast areas in arid countries with shallow saline groundwater. These areas can be used for planting salt-tolerant species.
Figure 6.1 Grazing in a saline environment.
Figure 6.2 Atriplex omnicola produces natural stem layers which contribute to grazing and erosion control.
3. Salt-tolerant shrub resources
There are three broad groups of salt tolerant shrubs:
- Samphires (glassworts) - Include the genera Salicornia, Arthrocnemum, Halocnemum, Halosarcia and Allenrolfea. These plants occur on highly saline sites which are in many cases waterlogged at some times of the year. Usually saline groundwater is sufficiently shallow for the capillary fringe to intercept the surface for many months of the year. The stems of these leafless plants are succulent and highly saline but some samphires are eaten by sheep when other feed is scarce. Some samphires develop a substantial woody frame.
- Saltbushes (or goosefoots) - Include the genera Atriplex, Chenopodium, Rhagodia and Halimione. These leafy shrubs are typified by having a gray-green colour due to the development of salt bladders on their epidermal cells. They are highly salt-tolerant but occur in less waterlogged situations than the samphires. Saltbushes vary greatly in palatability but are an important component of arid and semi-arid shrub pastures in many countries. Atriplex spp. are used as fuel and some species produce a strong woody frame.
- Bluebushes and saltworts - Include the genera Salsola, Kochia, Maireana, Sarcobatus, Suaeda and Enchylaena. These shrubs have succulent leaves and vary greatly in their palatability to animals. They range in salt and waterlogging tolerance from those which occur in association with samphires and saltbushes to those which are less salt- and waterlogging-tolerant than most saltbushes.
4. Plant selection
Rehabilitation of saline environment depends on careful selection of salt-tolerant species. To this end the adaptation of a given plant species to environmental parameters such as climate, salinity, and site hydrology should be considered.
The most important differences in salt-affected soils at any one site relate to site/water relations. For coastal sites, depth and frequency of tidal inundation or depth to the watertable are major factors affecting species distribution. In endoreic basin, seeps and areas with high watertable, species zonation relates to the depth of watertable or susceptibility to inundation or surface water logging as well as to salinity. In Table 6.1 species are classified according to climatic zones and salt-affected land types on which they are reported to grow.
5. Establishment
Shrubs may be established in the field either as plants or cuttings or by sowing seeds. Cutting establishment is suitable for Tamarix spp. but insufficiently reliable for other shrubs. Planting of seedlings is reliable if adequate soil preparation is provided. Soil preparation techniques for salt affected areas should have two main thrusts: the first is to control groundwater where its presence influences the accumulation of salt at the soil surface. This can be achieved by drainage, deep furrowing and ridging; the second is to encourage salt to move downwards in the soil instead of accumulating at the surface. This can be achieved by selecting "niches" in the area where salt leaching is ensured naturally or by establishing artificially such "niches" where young seedlings or seeds can be established.
An illustration of the above is the "niche technique" developed in Australia for seeding salt-tolerant shrubs on salt affected areas. The technique consists of making a furrow and a ridge and establishing a "niche" on the ridge (Figure 6.3).
The furrow is intended to catch water and cause water to be stored in the subsoil close to the growing shrub to aid survival and growth. The ridge allows the planting site to be raised above the general ground level to avoid waterlogging or flooding problems and to help leach salt from the niche. The niche provides a sheltered planting site with compressed side slope for run-off to concentrate in the niche. The niche can be seeded or planted. When sowing is done, mulching can promote water penetration, salt leaching and reduce evaporation and soil crusting (Figure 6.4).
Figure 6.3 Cross-section of furrow, ridge and planting niche
Figure 6.4 Atriplex undulate established by the niche technique.
Types of salt affected land
Climate
Sea Coast
Endoreic basins
Areas with high watertables
Saline seeps
Upland salt affected areas
Warm - Mediterranean
Sporobolus virginicus, Atriplex cinerea, A. paludosa
Maireana brevifolia, Atriplex amnicola, A. undulata, A. lentiformia A. nummularia, Halosarcia pergranulata
Paspalum vaginatum, Puccinellia ciliata, Tamacix gallica, Agropyron elongatum
Maireana brevifolia
Dry - Steppe
Juncus acutus, J. cigilus Salsola tetrandra
Phragmites communis
Leptochloa fusca
Salsola vermiculata
var. villosa,
Atriplex halimux, A
glauca, Suaeda fruticosa
Haloxylon schmidtii
Atriplex undulata A. lampa
Puccinellia distants
Atriplex vesicaria, A. nummularia
- desert hot
Avicennia macina
Aeluropus spp
Sporobolus spicatus
Suaeda menoica
Atriplex undulata
A. amnicola A. canescens
A. farinosa
Suaeda fructicosa, Sporobulus marginatus, Aeluropus lagopoides
Atriplex argentina, A. boecheri, A. crenatifolia, A. undulata Aelucopus lagopoides, Sporobolus tremulus, Agropycon elongatum, A. leucoclada Salvadora persica
Tamacix gallica, T. pentandra
- cold
Kochia prostrata Aellenia subaphylla Haloxylonaphyllum, Salsola rigida
In many instances, it is also possible to establish shrubs by direct seeding. Research in several countries has demonstrated that shrub establishment by direct seeding into salt-affected soils faces many hazards. Problems arise due to:
- Low salt tolerance at germination;
- Poor utilization of incidental rainfall;
- Specific temperature requirement;
- Poor soil structure;
- Period of excess water;
- Insect attack and frost damage.
The best establishment method for each saline environment must be determined by field testing.
The following principles should be observed:
- The possibilities of surface waterlogging, flooding and erosion should be minimized by protecting the treatment area with appropriate soil conservation works.
- Salt levels in the surface soil may be reduced by cultivating before the first rains to encourage water penetration and salt leaching.
- The sown area should be protected against grazing by domestic animals or wildlife including rodents.
- Measures should be taken to counteract wind erosion hazards if present.
- Insect problems should be detected by regular inspection and dealt with promptly.
- A well-proven seeding method should be used.
6. Highlights of section
Under natural conditions many saline environments support salt-tolerant shrubs which are useful as forage and/or fuel.
Revegetation of bare salt-affected soils using these shrubs may provide forage or fuel, reduce run-off, erosion and groundwater levels and improve the aesthetic and wildlife values of an area.
Salt-tolerant shrub reconnaissance should be made to select suitable sites for planting. Species for planting in saline environments are listed and methods of planting in specific sites are discussed.
Cheaper establishment techniques (direct seeding) should be tested and the productivity of the shrubs measured to provide the basis for an economic evaluation of large-scale planting.
<section>c</section>
Chapter VII. Irrigated forest plantations
1. Introduction
2. Irrigation with permanent water supply
3. Irrigation with an intermittent water supply: Rainwater harvesting
4. Irrigation with waste water
1. Introduction
Irrigated forest plantations can be established for the commercial production of fuelwood, posts, construction lumber, and fodder. The use of irrigation practices also allows the use of more exacting fast-growing tree and shrub species. In many instances, the availability of wood from irrigated plantations will lessen the destruction of the natural vegetation.
In arid zones, irrigated forest plantations can be achieved using:
- a dependable and permanent water supply;
- an intermittent water supply;
- waste water.
2. Irrigation with permanent water supply
Depending upon the amount of water which can be made available from a dependable water supply (well, dam, river...), permanent irrigation systems can be established. Different designs of permanent irrigation systems can be chosen, depending on the prevailing conditions. Three types of such systems are reviewed in the following sections: gravity systems, sprinkler systems and localized systems.
2.1 Gravity systems
Gravity irrigation systems are characterized by the manner in which the irrigation stream is controlled by the soil surface. Four types can be distinguished: surface flooding, border check, basin and furrow irrigation.
Surface flooding - This system resembles the inundation that sometimes takes place on flat lands along rivers and it is the simplest form of permanent irrigation. On gently sloping land that requires little preparation, surface flooding is easy to implement. In essence, water is released from main ditches and allowed to spread over the surface. However simple, this method generally has been inadequate for tree and shrub crops, as it is difficult to obtain uniform distribution of the water. Also, there is a risk that the root system of the plants can become deprived of oxygen because of waterlogging.
Border check - In this method, parallel earth ridges guide the flowing water as it moves down the slope over the strips which vary from 3 to 30 meters in width and can be more than 100 meters in length. A relatively large flow of water is needed. The land should have a uniform moderate slope parallel to the checks. Careful land preparation is necessary to ensure stability of the ground. The method is suited to medium-textured, deep, permeable soils. On sandy soils, infiltration would be excessive unless the strips are short. Slow percolation renders it unsuitable for heavy soils. A drainage ditch should be sited at the end of the strip to carry away any excess water. Design involves achieving an optimum balance between soil type; slope, width, and length of strips; and water flow so that the desired depth of water will be applied uniformly to the compartment without excessive percolation at the input end. In agroforestry applications, it could be ideal because the trees
could be grown along the check, the width of which could be sufficient for one or two rows of trees.
Basin irrigation - This is a system in which the field or compartment is divided into small units each of which has a level surface. The basins are filled with water which is all allowed to infiltrate, any excess being drained off. When leaching salts from the soil, the depth of water can be maintained for considerable periods by allowing continuous flow into the basins. The method entails relatively high labour inputs.
Furrow irrigation - This is a common method to distribute irrigation water. Furrows are built from the main feeder channel in parallel lines spaced at regular intervals to permit the wetting of the tree rooting zone. The width of the furrows and their spacing depend, in large part, upon the permeability of the soil. The heavier the soil, the larger and the wider apart the furrows must be; the opposite applies in more porous soils. The method requires relatively high labour inputs and a high degree of skill and experience in directing water from supply channels into the furrows and controlling its flow. A disadvantage of the system is that tree roots tend to develop linearly along the furrow; trees tend to lean across the furrows and windthrow sometimes occurs later in the rotation. Unevenness of furrow levels and distribution of water can develop when soil conditions are not uniform. Regular maintenance of the furrows is important.
2.2 Sprinkler systems
Sprinkler systems are most applicable in areas of irregular topography where land grading is not feasible, in irregularly sloped areas, or when rapid application of relatively small quantities of water is desired. Applications to forestry are somewhat limited by crop height and costs, but such systems are applicable in the early establishment phase of forest plantation crops.
Figure 7.1 Drip system of irrigation
Figure 7.2 Field application of the drip system using a hand water pump, a drum and tubing.
All sprinkler systems have in common a source of water under pressure, a system of pipelines to deliver water to the point of delivery, and nozzles through which the water is distributed.
The advantages of sprinkler systems are that they are applicable to areas of irregular topography and shape without levelling; they can be used in areas of high watertable or where there is a hard pan near the surface without increasing soil salinity; the amount and rate of water application are easily controlled so that runoff and deep percolation can be avoided, this gives them advantages in areas of high permeability. They can utilize a small, continuous supply of water better than gravity methods; water is distributed evenly if it is not too greatly affected by wind; they do not require land for water channels, ditches, and borders, thus saving land and the maintenance costs and inconveniences of open distribution systems.
2.3 Localized systems
Localized irrigation systems, an umbrella term for trickle, drip, drop, or sip irrigation methods, are among those that cause wetting of only part of the soil, i.e. that at the base of and surrounding the root system of the plant. They are characterized by slow and low rates of application of water to the plant rooting zone through distribution pipes and orifices or nozzles organized either under or above the soil surface.
The basic components include a pressurized supply of water, a control head, a main line with laterals, and distributors (Figure 7.1). To create the appropriate pressure in the water supply usually requires a pump and storage tanks or reservoir. The control head is usually sited at the highest point in the field and connected to the water supply. The advantages of localized irrigation systems include the facts that, within limits, they can accommodate undulating ground, are relatively easy to manage, have relatively low labour costs, and are simple to operate. The principal problem of localized irrigation systems is the susceptibility of the smaller pipes and the distributors to clogging by sand, silt, organic matter, algae, bacterial slimes, and precipitation of nutrients, colloidal materials, or lime. Root system size or spread and depth being a function of the volume of water applied at each irrigation, root development can be restricted through inadequate watering. Also,
trees can die very rapidly if water is withheld for even a short period: thus the water supply must be reliable (Figure 7.2).
3. Irrigation with an intermittent water supply: Rainwater harvesting
Rainwater harvesting as a means of providing water seasonally, over longer periods, has been used in arid areas for thousands of years to grow agricultural crops and trees for fruit, amenity, and other purposes. Rainwater harvesting essentially involves two components: (1) a catchment or collector area, usually prepared in some manner to improve runoff efficiency, and (2) a smaller water storage area in which crop or tree plants are grown or where water is stored in small tanks or other structures for future use.
In the case of tree planting, rainwater is used directly without storage requirement. Four techniques are particularly relevant:
- runoff farming.
- desert strip-farming,
- contour terrace farming, and
- flood water spreading.
Runoff farming - Watersheds are divided into several micro-watersheds depending upon the area needed for each tree. The collection area for each micro-watershed may range from 20 to 1000 square meters, depending upon the area precipitation and tree water requirements. Micro-catchment procedures are used in complex terrain where other water harvesting techniques may be difficult to apply (Figure 7.3).
In a typical situation, a series of well-designed micro-watersheds with appropriate dimensions are prepared. At the lowest point, a basin is dug about 40 centimeters deep and a tree is planted. The depression collects and stores the runoff from the rest of the micro-watershed that feeds the plant. At the root zone, soil should be at least 1.5 meters deep. Diagonal distances between the lowest corner to the farthest contributing corner should be between 5 and 30 meters.
This technique is particularly successful in years of normal precipitation. In dry years, most annual crops will fail. It is therefore advisable to select drought-resistant plants for use with this system.
Desert strip-farming - Although only a very small percentage of the rainfall reaches major stream channels in arid and semi-arid regions, considerable runoff occurs on many of the gently sloping watershed areas. Desert strip-farming makes use of this water by employing a series of terraces that shed water onto a neighboring strip of productive soil (Figure 7.4).
Depending upon the topography, soil characteristics, and climatic conditions of the site, two types of micro-watersheds can be used: (a) one-sided micro-watershed for moderately permeable soils and natural land slope greater than 6 per cent, and (b) two-sided micro-watershed for highly permeable soils with natural land slope less than 4 per cent (Figure 7.5).
Figure 7.3 Runoff farming concept
Figure 7.4 Desert strip farming concept.
Figure 7.5 Two sided micro-watershed with different treatment applied to the collector sources.
Contour terrace - The purpose of terracing is to retard and collect all runoff between the terraces. If the runoff is properly managed, enough water can be added to the soil of the terrace to improve tree growth significantly. Terraces are essential on steep slopes where all woody vegetation has been destroyed and is not likely to be reestablished before severe erosion occurs. Terraces should be large enough to hold or carry the heaviest ten-year rain.
Contour planting consists of placing long, low barriers perpendicular to the gradients, along contour lines which intercept and retain runoff and silt. The barriers can be of stone, logs, earth or hedge.
Floodwater spreading
In arid regions, rainfall usually falls during short, intense storms. The water swiftly drains away into washes and gullies and is lost to the region. Sometimes floods occur, often in areas untouched by the storm. Waterspreading is a practice of deliberately diverting the floodwaters from their natural courses and spreading them over adjacent floodplains or detaining them on valley floors (Figure 7.6). The wet floodplains or valley floors are then used to grow tree or forage crops.
Site selection is the key to success in floodwater farming. Three principal types of sites are preferred: (1) slopes below escarpments, (2) alluvial deltas, or (3) floodplains.
While potential sites are found in many arid and semi-arid regions, waterspreading systems require careful design and engineering to withstand flood waters. They must be selected so as to optimize topography, soil type, and vegetation.
4. Irrigation with waste water
The use of waste water for agricultural crops and tree production constitutes an interesting approach for many arid countries. It can be justified by the following facts:
- Creation of a resource from waste water. Fertilizer equivalent contained in waste water from an urban center averaging 10,000 inhabitants without polluting industry amounts to some US$30,000.
- The technique can be considered an economical method for waste water treatment.
- It is a water saving device so essential for dry regions where water resources are scarce.
Figure 7.6 Sketch of a water spreading system.
Several trials have shown that irrigation with waste water improve tree growth. However, a number of facts remain to be documented, such as the optimum size of equipment, the most adequate techniques and the resolution of health problems associated with some techniques in practice.
Depending upon the available water resource and the type of exploitation, three situations can be distinguished:
- untreated waste water,
- partially treated waste water, and
- completely treated waste water.
4.1 Untreated waste water
The use of untreated waste water is usually impracticable on account of the odor. Untreated waste water is either transported by tankers from houses and factories and poured into prepared trenches, or spread directly in the area. Odor could be rendered less obnoxious by mixing untreated waste water with urea or ammonium sulphate and muriate of potash. There are two problems associated with this situation. The first is the organization of waste water transport, and the second, the agreement between the producer and the user of waste water as to when the water is needed by the user.
4.2 Partially treated waste water
This technique aims at reducing the cost of water treatment by replacing the water softening plant with a simple primary water softening device. Soil will complement the full treatment (Figure 7.7). This technique is also used to recuperate fertilizer contained in the semi-treated water.
4.3 Completely treated waste water
This situation is very common in many arid countries. Urban centers and nearby plants treat their water. Agricultural farms nearby can use this water by connecting water pipes to the main treated water canal. This treated water can be totally used for growing agricultural crops and forest trees, partly reused by the plant or poured into a nearby canal (Figure 7.8).
4.4 Technical considerations for irrigated plantations using waste water
The use of waste water for irrigated forest plantations requires a periodical chemical water analysis because the quality of waste water varies considerably. In addition to water pH, consideration should be given to the variation in the amount of chloride, sulfate, free ammonia, water fluorine, phosphate, zinc, boron and silica. Soils for plantations should have a good porosity without a high infiltration rate. Soil absorption capacity should be monitored to follow its evolution.
Figure 7.7 Partially treated waste water
Figure 7.8 Completely treated waster
4.5 Health aspects
There are a number of health hazards associated with the use of waste water. Contamination of soil and vegetation, effluent runoff polluting water canals, waste water infiltration to groundwater, germ dispersal through biotic and wind factor. This necessitates limiting the use of waste water when untreated or partially treated to sites with low slope, and with moderately permeable soil. Sites should also be distant from human settlements. Irrigation techniques by gravity limit the direct contact of waste water with the plant but have the disadvantage of contaminating underground water if waste water is applied in great quantity. Sprinkler irrigation techniques limit the risk of underground water pollution but lead to direct contact of waste water with plants. Localized irrigation systems can prove the most apt techniques provided the problems of clogging of hoses are solved.
Total security can be ensured only through a set of preventive measures adapted to each site:
- selection of suitable tree crop (forest tree species for wood and fuelwood are the least affected);
- selection of appropriate site and irrigation techniques;
- addition of appropriate decontamination products to waste water.
<section>d</section>
Chapter VIII. Non-wood forest products
1. Introduction
2. Foliage and fruits
3. Tannins
4. Gums
5. Resins
6. Oils and extracts
7. Fibres
8. Medicinal plants
1. Introduction
Utilization of native woody vegetation is important to the livelihood of the people in arid zones. Foodstuffs, tannins and gum, essential oils, pharmaceutical products are only a few of the numerous non-wood products obtained from woody vegetation. Although called minor forest products, they are of vital importance to the people and often constitute an important part of the total forest revenue.
Of the 350,000 plant species that have been described by botanists, only 3,000 are reported to be sources of useful material for people. Less than 100 of these plants are cultivated on a large scale and none are xerophytic. However, the search for native xerophytic plants of economic value has greatly intensified in recent years.
According to the type of their utilization, non-wood products from dry land vegetation can be divided into the following groups: foliage and fruits, tannins, gums and resins, oils and extracts, fibres and medicinal plants. These products are reviewed in the following sections.
2. Foliage and fruits
The foliage of woody plants is important to arid zone dwellers: that of palms (Phoenix, Hyphaene, Borassus), for instance, providing raw material for fibres, enclosures, sand-fixing palisades and household articles; that of trees such as Adansonia, Boscia, Cadaba and Balanites providing vitamin-rich food; foliage of Diospyros melanoxylon, Morus alba and Zizyphus mauritiana, raw material for local industry: cigarette making, sericulture and lac respectively.
The utility of foliage in recycling nutrients, providing shade and reducing wind speed should not be forgotten; well-managed stands of appropriate drought-resistant and palatable deep-rooting woody species also provide valuable aerial fodder for long drought periods when surface vegetation disappears.
Arid and semi-arid zone vegetation comprises a wide range of edible fruit-bearing and food-producing species: Phoenix, Borassus, Hyphaene (fruit, edible pollen and nuts); Grewia, Morus alba, Zizyphus, Tamarindus, Ficus carica, Opuntia, Ceratonia and Olea europea (fruit); Pistachio, Prunus amygdalinus, Pinus, pinea, P. cembroides, P. edulis (nuts). Many of the above play a multiple role in dry zone agroforestry systems, providing soil cover, wind protection, fuelwood and fodder as well as food.
The production and consumption of fruit in arid zones provides a dietary supplement as well as commercial opportunity. The growing of trees for fruit production encourages the preservation of more or less permanent stands or scattered individual trees in otherwise bare lands. Such trees are often a feature of Sahelian landscapes and form the basis of traditional agroforestry land use systems still practiced in parts of that region.
3. Tannins
Tannin is produced from the fruit, bark, leaves and roots of many arid-zone shrubs and trees. the preparation of tannin involves breaking or crushing the tannin-rich material which is then washed and boiled with water. after separation of insolubles, the thick, viscous extract is evaporated leaving crude tannin which can be purified by extraction of the crude portion with an alcohol-ether mixture depositing tannic acid. tannins can be of widely varying chemical structure but are capable of converting the gelatin of hides and pelts into insoluble non-putrefying material, that is, leather. tannins are readily soluble in water or alcohol giving strongly astringent solutions also useful in medicines. they are used with feric salts in compounding inks of greenish-black to bluish-black colours.
The practice of tanning hides and skins is extremely important in arid and semi-arid regions where pastoralism is the main land use and wildlife thrives, if protected or adequately managed. Tanning permits the processing and protection of the locally-produced raw materials adding utility and commercial value to a major byproduct of meat production.
A large number of arid and semi-arid zone species yield tannin in commercial quantities. For example, from the bark: Acacia nilotica, A. cyanophylla, Eucalyptus astringent, Parkia biglobosa; from the fruit: Calotropis procera, A. farnesiana; from the wood: A. polyacantha, Schinopsis lorentzii; from roots: Punica granatum, Zizyphus spina-christi.
The styptic and astringent properties of tannic acid are useful in the treatment of inflammations, skin eruptions and bowel conditions and thus form an important principle in the action of many medicinal products.
4. Gums
Gums are typical products of broadleaved trees and shrubs. they are complex carbohydrate derivatives of a polysaccharide nature and are either soluble in water as in the case of gum arabic or form mucilages by the absorption of large amounts of water (gum tragacanth). their principal use is in foodstuffs by nature of their ability to impart desired qualities to foods by influencing their viscosity, body and texture; most frequently in confectionery food, flavouring and soft drinks. they also have pharmaceutical applications as demulcents, adhesives in pill manufacture and as emulsifying agents. industrial uses are for adhesives, lithography, paints and inks.
Gums are produced from woody plants either naturally from exudations from cracks in the bark or damage to the bark by insects or animals. Gum flow is also artificially induced by incisions in the bark. The viscous, brittle nodule can be removed by hand.
Gum arabic is the main commercial gum exudate. This gum is mainly obtained from Acacia senegal and some from the related species A. laeta, A. polyaccantha and A. mellifera.
Other gums are gum Karaya from Sterculia urens, S. villosa (India), and S. setigera (Africa); they provide the raw material for emulsifiers, adhesives, fixatives and laxatives. Gum tragacanth from Astragalus spp. of Asia Minor is even more valuable: it is a natural emulsifier in food products such as mayonnaise but is now being replaced, because of its high cost, by synthetic fermentation type products. Gums of commercial interest are also obtainable from the fruit of the carob (Ceratonia siligua), gum Mesquite (Prosopis latifolia) and Indian Squill from Urginea indica.
5. Resins
Natural resins are distinguishable from gums because of their insolubility in water, but because the exudates from so many plants possess this quality, classification of resins is difficult. Resins comprise balsams: resins of a fluid character often used for healing purposes; oleoresins: generally from conifers. These are solutions of resins in essential oils; turpentines also from conifers and some broadleaved species; mastics, such as those from Pistachio spp., used in protecting oil paintings; hard resins soluble in alcohol and benzene such as "dragon's blood" and "gambage"; dammars soluble in aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons and sandarac, a base for spirit varnishes derived from Callitris and Tetraclinis. Others of the oil-soluble resin group include Copals, oriental lacquers, and substances such as Cashew shell-nut oil and Lac derived from the lac insect.
Resins are generally used in adhesives, paper sizing, surfacing, fixtures for perfumes and in medicines. Other resins for religious end uses include: frankicense and myrrh, from the dry-zone species Boswellia spp. and Commiphora spp.
Resin-bearing plants are fairly common in arid zones and the following list provides an indication of their range. USA: Grindelia camporum, Pinus cembroides, oleo-resins for naval stores; Larrea tridentata, resins and turpentines. North Africa: P. brutia and P. halepensis for oleo-resins, Tetraclinis articulata for sandarac. Latin America: Schinus terebinthifolius and Juniperus californica for medicinal resins and oleo-resins. Sahelian Africa: Commiphora africana and Boswellia dalzielii for myrrh, and frankincense. India: Boswellia serrata and Commiphora urghtii for products similar to those produced by African relatives. Near East: Juniperus macropodia and Boswellia sacra, oleoresins for perfumery and frankincense.
6. Oils and extracts
Plants that produce essential oils are very characteristic of dry areas, and some have been used since ancient times in the Mediterranean region where the essences of rosemary (Rosemarinus officinalis), thyme (Thymus vulgaris) and lavender (Lavandula angustifolia) are extracted by steam distillation for perfumery.
Eucalyptus oil is steam-distilled from fresh eucalypt foliage obtained from felled trees or cultured coppice shoots. Eucalyptus oils are useful for medicinal purposes (inhalants, embrocations, soaps, gargles, sprays and lozenges), industrial uses (disinfectants, solvents, synthetic thymol and menthol) and perfumery (eudesmil, geranyl acetate, citronella!). The dry-zone species E. astringens, E. leucoxylon, E. melliodora, E. occidentalis and E. populnea are known to produce oils with commercially high proportions of cineole, geranyl acetate (E. marcarthuri) or citronellal (E. citriodora).
Other oils include those of lauric acid from Salvadora oleoides which provides a substitute for coconut oil; vetiver oil for perfumery from Vetiveria zizanoides; palmarosa oil from Cymbopogon martini var. motia for geraniol; perfumery oils from Rosa demascena and Inula racemosa; zachun oil for soap making from Balanites aegyptica fruit; karite butter from the fruit of Butyrospermum parkii; jojoba oil from Simmondsia chinensis, a substitute for whale oil; lubricating oil from Jatropha curcas and-medicinal oils and waxes from Quillaja saponaria, Tabeluia toxofora and Pilocarpus jaborandi. Euphorbia anti-syphilitica (Figure 8.1 and 8.2) is another species producing a white wax, a substitute for beeswax, while the guaynle, Parthenium argentatum produces a latex similar to rubber.
7. Fibres
Dry-land woody species offer considerable scope for the extraction and use of fibres for cordage, ropes and handicrafts. The date palm, Phoenix dactylifera, is one such species. It is estimated that about 150 million Phoenix dactylifera can be found in the Near East and North Africa and these also form a potential source of fibre for paper manufacture.
Figure 8.1 Euphorbis antisyphilitica (Candelilla)
Figure 8.2 Extraction of wax from Candelilla
Borassus aethiopium and Hyphaene thebaica provide fibres from pounded leaf petioles from which fibres are manually separated and used for cordage, strings or raw fibres for binding and the manufacture of domestic articles and handicrafts.
In Latin America, Yucca carnerosana, Agave lechuguilla (Figures 8.3 and 8.4) and Agave sisalana are important producers of fibres in dry lands. Agave sisalana, the producer of sisal and a non-wood plant of the Amarillydaceae family, is planted in the dry lands of Brazil at a density of about 5,000 plants per hectare, yielding around 30 leaves per plant per year. The dried sisal fibre, about 6 per cent of the weight of the green leaves, is principally used for the manufacture of baler twine and also rope, cordage and handicrafts (such as macrame). It is also excellent for paper suitable for thin printing papers, cigarette papers, bank notes and teabags. It can be blended with other pulps for newsprint, wrappings and tissue paper.
In India, fibres are produced from the inner bark of the climber Bauhinia vahlii (ropes for domestic purposes); the bark of the shrubby dryland plants Calotropis gigantea, C. procera spp. hamiltonii and Leptadenia pyrotechnica also yield fibres useful for weaving string and nets.
Esparto grass or alpha grass, Lygeum spartum and stipa tenacissima provide important resources of fibre in North Africa yielding 0.2 to 0.7 tonnes per hectare for pulp. They also provide material for handicrafts in the form of baskets, woven mats and screens. Paper made from esparto is smooth with a soft surface possessing excellent printing qualities especially suitable for illustrations and colour with a high dimensional stability.
8. Medicinal plants
Possibly 80 per cent of the world's rural populations are reliant on medicinal plants to maintain their health and to cure their ailments.
Medicinal plants contain a wide range of chemical substances and are very varied in their effects and uses. For instance, diosegenin for wounds and stomach ailments can be obtained from Agave sisalana; steroidal saponins and sapogenins useful as anthelmintics and purgatives from Balanites aegyptica; glycosides and calotropin with strong cardiotonic action from Calotropis procera; the alkaloid artemitin, a potent stimulant, from Artemisia absinthium; astringent, carminative resins from Commiphora nukul; the cardiotonic, antiseptic and analgesic stachydrine and other compounds from Capparis decidua; ephedrine, a bronchodilator, from Ephedra sinica; hyoscyamine producing atropine for opthalmology from Duboisia leichardtti; astrogalin, rutin and cardiotonic glycosides from Nerius oleander.
The collection of herbal drugs has long afforded a gainful occupation for many people in the rural areas and the processing of herbal drugs in traditional phytotherapy includes simple operations such as the preparation of powders, pills, lotions, decoctions and liquid extracts.
Figure 8.3 Agave Lechuguilla
Figure 8.4 Extraction of fibre from Agave Lechuguilla
<section>e</section>
Chapter IX. Involvement of local people
1. Introduction
2. Constraints and conditions for people's involvement
3. Highlights of section
1. Introduction
In the arid zones of the world, products derived from the forests provide essential goods and services, such as fuel for cooking and heating, construction material for housing, forage for cattle, and nanwoody products. The forest itself helps to provide clean water and, in many areas, provides shade from a burning sun. In many instances, all these benefits have been taken for granted. However, due to increasing population pressures and lack of appropriate forest management strategies, these benefits are no longer readily available. Increasing pressures on the forests for these and other benefits have resulted in degradation of the vegetative resources and impoverishment of the land. Ultimately, the basic needs of people may no longer be satisfied. The situation can be countered by improved management of natural forests or by establishing forest plantations. But, to do so, people must participate in the design, implementation, and follow-up of these activities. To mobilize
this participation, a number of constraining factors have to be understood.
A central aim of forestry programmes is to help people become self-reliant. However, these programmes will not succeed unless they reflect the people's own interpretation of their needs, aspirations, and problems. Therefore, forestry must be forestry for the people and, importantly, involve the people.
2. Constraints and conditions for people's involvement
Some of the factors to be taken into account in analyzing the place of forestry in a rural economy are summarized in Table 9.1. These factors and some possible responses are discussed more fully below.
2.1 Competition for land
Table 9.1 - Factors to be taken into account in analyzing the place of forestry in a rural economy
Factors
Possible Responses
Competition for land (trees and shrubs are a less intensive use of land than crops)
- Competition for forest land
- Intercrop trees and crops
- Allocate forest land rationally between trees and crops
- Improve non-food benefits to forest communities (forest-food industries employment, non-woody product income, social infrastructure, etc.)
- Competition for crop-grazing land to afforest
- Plant trees on roadsides, river banks, field boundaries, and other unused lands; areas marginal for crop production; on erodable areas unsuitable for crop production or grazing
- Improve productivity on the more arable areas to release land for tree growing
- Plant multi-purpose tree and shrub species or mixture of species to increase productivity
- Intercrop trees and shrubs with other crops or combine with grazing
- Introduce additional source of income (for example, beekeeping)
Timescale of forestry (delayed returns from tree or shrub growing)
- Output from trees or shrubs will not meet immediate needs
- Plant multi-purpose tree and shrub species to give some early returns
- Provide financial support during the establishment periods; low-interest loans, grants, subsidies, paid employment, etc.
- Introduce or expand complementary non forestry sources of income
- Risk that the producer will not benefit
- Ensure security of tenure of land used for tree or shrub crop
Spatial distribution of benefits from forestry programmes
- Benefits from protection forests or from wood production may accrue, in part, outside of the community
- Provide compensation for those benefits foregone or inputs provided by the community, which generate benefits elsewhere
Seasonal shortage of labour
- Adopt forestry practices which do not compete with peak demands for labour inputs
Lack of a tradition in forestry (unfamiliarity with the necessary techniques, lack of understanding of cause and effect, behavioral patterns harmful or unfavorable to forestry practices)
- Provision of guidance and support through extension services; education of the people, technical advice and technical inputs, grass-roots training
- Demonstration projects
Competition for land occurs where population pressure is heavy and the land is needed for food production. Such type of competition may be avoided by taking up unused areas or by intercropping trees and crops.
Where the need to maintain land under tree cover is evident, such as on poor steep slopes, forestry gives way to the more urgent imperative of land for food production. A clear condition for inserting forestry into such a situation is that it be accompanied by measures to provide the farmer or the community with alternative ways of generating the crop or livestock production, or the income foregone by placing part of the land under trees.
Introducing trees and shrubs into intensive land-use patterns can be achieved through various forms of intercropping, to bring about multiple use of the land. The planting area may be intercropped with grass to provide fodder for stall-feeding animals. Fodder in the form of leaves from suitable trees is an important component of multiple use. Equally important are the measures to improve agricultural crop productivity on the flatter and more arable areas, and to improve other parts of the communities' economy and their physical and social infrastructures to enable them to divert land to tree and shrub cover.
The whole question of land use is usually confused by the lack of information about land capabilities and about the factors needed for land-use planning. Unfortunately, the boundaries between land which can support sustained agricultural cropping and land which needs to be devoted periodically or permanently to forest cover are seldom known.
2.2 The timescale of forestry
In many cases, attachment to a particular technique of food production is reinforced by considerations derived from the timescale of forestry. Historically, many rural populations have developed a dependence upon outputs of the forest, because the latter existed as an abundant available local natural resource which could be utilized almost at will. As long as the wood products remained abundant, this process of exploitation could take place without regard to the relatively long time involved in producing wood of usable sizes. However, once the point is reached where wood can be supplied only by growing it, the timeframe involved can become an important limiting factor.
Frequently, the timescale of forestry is in conflict with the priorities of the rural people; logically, these priorities are focused on meeting basic present needs. Present needs are imperative, particularly in subsistence situations. Land, labour, and other resources which could be devoted to providing the food, fuel, and income needed today cannot easily be diverted to the production of wood, which will be available only several or many years into the future.
Forestry can continue to exist or be introduced only if it allows the present needs of the people involved to be met. If local tree and shrub cover still exists, it may be possible to provide the same level of production in a less destructive way. In some areas, for example, destructive local cutting of the forest may be halted and reversed by concentrating the cut in designated areas and at designated times, and protecting the rest of the area so that natural regeneration can occur. In other areas, forestry may be introduced in conjunction with other activities which secure income to meet the needs of the farmer until his trees yield products.
2.3 The spatial distribution of benefits
Considerations of the spatial distribution of forest benefits are important. To the farmer, the forest is land upon which to cultivate his food and cash crops, a source of fuel and building materials, and a source of fodder and shade. The fact that the trees and shrubs that are utilized could provide the raw material for an economically-important industry elsewhere is of little relevance to him. To expect the farmer to adapt his way of life to accommodate the interests of others is unrealistic. Therefore, the build-up of more stable forest crop/tree systems will only occur when the community, in some way, benefits in appropriate measure from any change in the pattern of natural resources use.
The core of the problem for rural people is usually that they derive insufficient benefits from the forest; in general, this is attributable to conventional forest management objectives and administrative practices, such as an orientation of natural resources towards conservation, wood production, revenue collection, and regulation through punitive legislation and regulation. Consequently, the task of a forester is to engage the people more fully, positively, and beneficially in management, utilization, and protection; this may take the form of greater participation by the people in forest work, development of the income potential of miscellaneous products that can be produced in the forest, or the allocation of forest land for the concurrent production of wood and agricultural crops, or of forestry and livestock.
The issue of distribution of benefits can also arise with management designed to establish industrial wood crops through farming systems which grow trees or shrubs with food and cash crops. In themselves, the trees and shrubs may bring no direct benefit to the farmer; rather, they are an impediment which complicates his task. These systems will succeed only when the farmer perceives adequate compensation. Land, in itself, is not a sufficient inducement, other than perhaps in the short-term; it has been observed that, over time, multiple-use systems tend to evolve either into settled agriculture (with the rejection of the associated growing of trees or shrubs) or into full-time forestry employment.
2.4 Institutional and technical constraints
There remain situations in which there is no lack of interest in forestry nor any conflict with other aspects of the way of life, but only a lack of organization or means. Areas which are marginal for agriculture may also be marginal for forestry; this is particularly the case in arid areas, which tend to impose severe climatic constraints on the growing of trees and shrubs. Additionally, arid environments impose other constraints, including that of availability of labour. In arid areas, the planting seasons for both agriculture and forestry are short and coincide. As a result, the availability of labour for tree or shrub planting can be restricted, and planning must allow sufficient flexibility to overcome such a constraint.
Another constraint to forestry in arid environments is the associated cost. Successful tree or shrub planting programmes often involve elaborate site preparation and planting techniques which require sophisticated" and costly equipment. It may be an activity which is beyond the capability and resources of the local community. Therefore forestry, as an activity which the community can implement, is often confined to the manipulation of existing vegetation, with plantation forestry undertaken by the responsible technical branches of government.
Land management on steep upland areas is also likely to present problems of soil stabilization or control of water runoff; establishment of forest cover on parts of the watershed must be accompanied by conservation measures (such as the construction of terraces) to permit stable crop production on other parts. In many instances, farmers will not have the resources to do this. To establish terraces, for example, they would have to forego one crop. Therefore they will need external support, such as credit and food aid.
Another institutional issue is security of land tenure. Patterns and traditions of use on tribal or communal land often make no provision for usages such as forestry, which require the setting aside of land for a particular purpose for relatively long periods of time. Farmers must have assurance that they will control the land on which trees or shrubs are planted.
Frequently, the lack of a tradition in forestry extends beyond just a lack of knowledge about growing trees and shrubs or of an appropriate institutional framework within which to implement it. Usually, it contrasts with a "deep" tradition in agriculture. This contrast is reflected in the attitudes the people have toward forestry, which are significantly different from attitudes toward agricultural crops and livestock. A forest often tends to be seen as a negative element of the environment by farmers. To the settler, it is an impediment to the clearing of his lands and a haven for his enemies. These views can persist long after the forest has receded from the immediate vicinity of a farm or community. Hostility toward forests and trees can persist in areas which already experience shortages of fuelwood and building poles, because of the damage done to agricultural crops by birds which roost in trees.
Other institutional constraints can also limit the success of community forestry approaches: poor seedling distribution systems, poor management, lack of village funds in order to pay for labour, lack of labour at the right time, planting ill-suited exotics vis--vis other options for natural stand management, and so on.
Providing protection to communal woodlots is a particularly frequent problem which may sometimes be reduced by staggering tree planting over several years so that the area which must be protected at any time is kept as small as possible. When the trees have reached a stage where they will be safe from livestock damage, the area can be opened for grazing and browsing. People might also be given access to protected areas for fodder collection, and it is quite likely that fodder production will be greater on these lands if they are protected from free grazing.
The type of silvicultural management system which is adopted is also important. For example, if the community's on-going needs are to be met, annual cutting cycles may be required. However, if the woodlot is very small and the size of the community large, it may not be feasible to divide a small harvest on an annual basis. Similarly, if local people are to be involved in the harvesting, socially workable schemes such as clear-cutting may be preferable to more technically difficult systems like selective thinning. Any management system must, of course, be within the technical competence of the user group and be simple enough that members will feel confident that they can control it in practice.
3. Highlights of section
With increasing population pressures, the forest products which were taken for granted in the past are no longer as plentiful. With their strong tradition in agriculture, rural people are sometimes reluctant to practice forestry on their lands. However, rural dependence on forest products (such as fuelwood, lumber, food, income and employment) is a reality. For a tree or shrub planting programme to be successful, consideration of the present and future needs of the people, as well as their prejudices and traditions, is necessary. Because there is competition among agriculture, livestock grazing, and forestry developmental activities, the local people must be persuaded that multiple-use programmes (which are realized only after a period of years) have value.
Occasionally, there is an institutional constraint to the implementation of the tree and shrub planting programmes; such examples include situations where there may be lack of organizational structure or security of land tenure. The relatively high costs of some endeavours and the technical skill needed also can be prohibitive. Lack of understanding of the role of trees and shrubs in enriching the environment or a reluctance to change can hinder attempts to combat desertification with forestry.
<section>f</section>
Chapter X. Species for arid zone forestry
1. Introduction
2. List of tree and shrub species
1. Introduction
Ideally, forest plantations established in the arid zones should provide an array of products and services. While the tree and shrub species and techniques chosen must ensure soil and water conservation and provide shade and shelter, they also should yield the immediate requirements for fuel, fodder, and generally, multiple uses, whenever possible.
2. List of tree and shrub species
Important and commonly-used tree and shrub species for arid zone forestry are listed below. It should be noted, however, that a listing of this kind is never complete; there are always local trees or shrubs that, while not included in a particular listing, can meet the objectives of a planting programme. Nevertheless, the list presented in this manual can provide a "starting-point" in selecting a tree or shrub species to achieve a specific purpose.
In evaluating the value of the trees and shrubs listed in terms of fuel and fodder, ratings of "high", "good", or "moderate" value have been assigned to the species. These ratings are totally subjective and, therefore, must be so interpreted.
Species
Fuel
Fodder
Additional Uses and Remarks
Acacia aneura
XX
XXX
posts and poles
Acacia brachystachya
XX
X
small wood items, wood durable
Acacia cambagei
XXX
posts, termite-resistant
Acacia cyanophylla
XX
X
sand dune stabilization, windbreaks and shelterbelts
Acacia cyclops
XX
X
sand dune stabilization
Acacia farnesiana
XX
XX
posts, tannin from bark, hedges
Acacia mellifera
XX
XX
roundwood, hedges
Acacia nilotica
XX
XXX
building material, tannin from bark and pods, gum, wood durable
Acacia senegal
XXX
XXX
soil improvement, agroforestry, gum arable, roundwood
Acacia seyal
XX
XXX
roundwood, gum, wood hard
Acacia tortilis
XXX
XXX
posts, sand dune stabilization
Acacia victoriae
X
XX
Albizia lebbek
XX
XX
lumber, furniture, soil improvement, leaves for manure
Anogeissus leiocarpus
XX
XX
roundwood, tannin from leaves and bark
Anogeissus latifolia
XXX
XX
roundwood, gum, tannin, silkworms
Argania sideroxylon
XX
XX
construction material, oil from seed
Atriplex canescens
X
XX
windbreaks and shelterbelts
Atriplex nummulria
X
XXX
windbreaks and shelterbelts, sand dune stabilization
Atriplex glauca
XX
Atriplex halimus
X
XXX
windbreaks and shelterbelts
Atriplex semibaccata
XX
Atriplex vesicaria
XX
Atriplex indica
XX
X
poles, furniture, tannin, oil, windbreaks and shelterbelts, shade
Azadirachta indica
XX
X
poles, furniture, tannin, oil, windbreaks and shelterbelts, shade
Balanites aegyptiaca
XX
X
edible fruits, oil
Bolswellia papyrifera
XX
Frankincense gum
Boswellia serrate
X
Frankincense gum
Brachychiton populneum
XX
windbreaks and shelterbelts
Brosium alicastrum
X
XXX
construction material
Callitris glauca
XX
posts, poles, housebuilding, windbreaks and shelterbelts, resistant wood
Cassia auriculata
X
X
tannin, tea, hedge plant
Cassia siamea
XX
X
roadside plantations, lumber
Cassia sturtii
X
XX
Casuarina equisetifolia
XXX
posts, poles, tannin, sand dune stabilization, windbreaks and shelterbelts
Casuarina cunninghamiana
XXX
X
windbreaks and shelterbelts, shade
Ceratonia siliqua
X
XXX
honey, soil conservation
Colophospermum mopane
XXX
XX
roundwood, carvings
Conocarpus lancifolius
XXX
XX
poles, shipbuilding, shade
Cordeauxia edulis
XX
seeds for food
Cupressus arizonica
X
windbreaks and shelterbelts
Cupressus sempervirens
X
carpentry, furniture, windbreaks and shelterbelts
Dalbergia sissoo
XXX
furniture, building material, posts
Desmoodium spp.
XX
Dichrostachus cinerea
X
XX
posts, sand dune stabilization
Eucalyptus camaldulensis
XXX
lumber, honey, windbreaks and shelterbelts
Eucalyptus gomphocephala
XXX
construction material, windbreaks and shelterbelts, soil protection, roadside plantations
Eucalyptus salmonophloia
XX
wood durable, roundwood, windbreaks and shelterbelts, roadside plantations
Euphorbia tirucalli
X
hedges, windbreaks and shelterbelts, latex
Faiderbia albida
X
XXX
tanning from wood, soil improvement
Gleditsia triacanthos
X
XXX
wood durable, roundwood, windbreaks and shelterbelts
Haloxylon aphyllum
XX
XX
windbreaks and shelterbelts
Haloxylon persicum
XXX
XX
sand dune stabilization
Juniperus osteosperma
XXX
posts, berries for wildlife food, windbreaks and shelterbelts
Juniperus monosperma
XXX
posts, berries for wildlife food, windbreaks and shelterbelts
Juniperus depeeana
XXX
posts, berries for wildlife food
Juniperus scopulorum
XXX
posts, berries for wildlife food, windbreaks and shelterbelts
Leucaena leucocephala
XXX
XXX
roundwood, soil improvement
Parkinsonia aculeata
XX
XX
soil fixation, erosion control
Pinus halepensis
XX
construction material, resin, soil conservation
Pithecellobium dulce
X
XX
posts, edible fruits, tannin, shade, hedges
Prosopis chilensis
XXX
XXX
posts, soil conservation, sand dune stabilization, wood durable
Prosopis spicigera
XXX
XXX
soil improvement, agroforestry
Prosopis tamarugo
XX
XX
furniture
Quercus arizonica
XXX
Quercus emoryii
XXX
Quercus gambelli
XXX
posts
Quercus hypoleucoides
XXX
Robinia pseudoacacia
XX
X
posts, soil improvement
Salvadora persica
XX
XX
edible fruit, seeds give fat, roadside plantations
Schinus moue
X
windbreaks and shelterbelts, shade planting
Simmondsia chinensis
X
Jojoba oil from seeds
Tamarix aphylla
XX
turnery, carpentry, sand dune stabilization, windbreaks and shelterbelts
Tamarindus indica
XX
XX
roundwood, construction material, furniture, edible fruits, drinks
Tetraclinis articulate
XX
furniture, lumber, timber, resin, erosion control
Zizyphus jujube
XXX
XX
agricultural implements, edible fruits, drinks, fences, shellac
Zizyphus spina-christi
XX
XX
posts, hedges, erosion control
XXX = High Value
XX = Good Value
X = Moderate Value
<section>g</section>
Bibliography
ALI HILLAL AL-FARRAJII F. "Drought Resistance Evaluation of Six Desert Species Commonly Used for Sand Dune Fixation in Iraq" Doctoral Thesis, University of Ghent, Belgium, 1983.
ARNOLD J.E.M. "Wood Energy and Rural Communities" - 8th World Forestry Congress, Jakarta, 1978.
ALLAN T.G. "Handbook of Plantation Establishment Techniques in the Nigerian Savanna" - Savanna Forestry Research Station, Project Working Document NIR/73/007, FAO/UNDP, 1977.
BAILLY C., BARBIER C. et all (CTFT) "Les problmes de la satisfaction des besoins en bois en Afrique tropicale sche" - Revue des Bois et Forts des Tropiques N 197, 1982.
BEGUE L. "The Forests of the Republic of the Sudan" - FAO SAVATECH-FIELD stencilled note, 1963.
BENE J.G., BEALL H.W., COTE A. "Trees, Food and People: Land Management in the Tropics" - International Development Research Centre, Ottawa, 1977.
BEN SALEM B. "La fixation des dunes en Tunisie" - Bulletin d'Information N 17, Institut National de Recherches Forestires, Tunisie, 1975.
BEN SALEM B. "Arid Zone Forestry" - Unasylva Vol. 32 N 128, 1980.
BEN SALEM B., EREN T.M. "Forestry in a Sandy World" - FAO Unasylva Vol. 34 N 135, 1982.
BOOTH G.A. "La rgnration naturelle des Acacia spp. dans la savane  faible pluviosit" - FAO/SAVATECH-FIELD/5, 1963.
BOSSHARD W.C. "The Tree Vegetation of the Gash Delta" - Sudan Forests Department and UNDP/FAO Forestry Research and Education Project, Pamphlet N 10, 1966.
BOSSHARD W.C. "Irrigation Methods in Khartoum Greenbelt" - Sudan Forests Dept and UNDP/FAO Forestry Res. & Educ. Project, Pamphlet N 21, 1966.
BOSSHARD W.C. "Tree Species for the Khartoum Greenbelt and other Irrigated Plantations in Arid Zones" - Sudan Forests Dept and UNDP/FAO Forestry Res. & Educ. Project, Pamphlet N 22, 1966.
BROWN H.B. "Urban Streets and Parking Spaces Blight or Benefit Proceedings of the National Urban Forestry Conference, 222-234, 1978
BURLEY J. "Selection of Species for Fuelwood Plantations" 8th World Forestry Congress, Jakarta, 1978.
BURLEY J. "Obstacles to Tree Planting in Arid and Semi-arid Lands: Comparative Case Studies from India and Kenya" - The United Nations University, 1982.
BURLEY J., WOOD P.J. "A Manual on Species and Provenance Research with Particular Reference to the Tropics" - Dept. of Forestry, Commonwealth Forestry Institute, University of Oxford, Tropical Forestry Paper, N 10, 1976.
CHAPMAN G.W. "A Manual on Establishment Techniques in Man-made Forests" FAO, FO:MISC/73/3, 1973.
CHARFI M. "Utilit et amnagement des brise-vent" - Institut National de Recherches Forestires, Tunisie, Bulletin d'Information N 18, 1975.
COZZO D. "Tecnologa de la Forestacin en Argentina y Amrica Latina" Editorial Hemisferio Sur, Argentina, 1976.
CTFT, Centre Technique Forestier Tropical "Note sur le Gao" Rpublique du Niger, 1973.
DALZIEL J.M. "Useful Plants of West Tropical Africa" - Crown Agents for the Colonies, London, 1937.
DIMANCHE P. "Les sols en zones arides" - Unpublished report, 1982.
DONEEN I.D. "Irrigation Practice and Water Management" - FAO Irrigation and Drainage Paper N 1, Rome, 1972.
EL HAMROUNI A., SARSON M. "Valeur alimentaire de certaines plantes spontanees ou introduites en Tunisie" - Institut National de Recherches Forestieres, Tunisie, Note de Recherche 2, 1974.
EL HAMROUNI A., SARSON M. "Dveloppement de la culture d'Atriplex depuis 1971" - Institut National de Recherches Forestires, Tunisie, Bulletin d'Information N 18, 1975.
FAO "Grazing and Forest Economy" - Forestry and Forest Products Studies N 4, 1953.
FAO "Choice of Tree Species" - Forestry Development Paper N 13, 1958.
FAO "Practicas de Plantacin Forestal en Amrica Latina", Cuadernos de Fomento Forestal N 15, 1960.
FAO "Tree Planting Practices for Arid Zones" - Forestry Development Paper N 16, 1963.
FAO "FAO World Symposium on Man-made Forests" - Unasylva Vol. 21 (3-4), numbers 86-87, 1967.
FAO "Forestry Research and Education Centre, Sudan" - Final Report FAO/SF:70/SUD 3, 1969.
FAO "Automated Irrigation" - Land and Water Development Division, Irrigation and Drainage Paper N 5, Rome, 1971.
FAO "Tree Planting Practices in African Savannas" - Forestry Development Paper N 19, 1974.
FAO "Report on the FAO/DANIDA Inter-regional Training Centre on Heathland and Sand Dune Afforestation" - Rome, 1974.
FAO "Wood Fuel Energy Study, Jamaica, Project Findings and
Recommendations" - FO:DP:JAM/74/002 Terminal Report, 1975.
FAO "Report on the FAO/DANIDA Training Course on Forest Seed Collection and Handling - FOR:TF-RAS 11(DEN), 1975.
FAO "Eucalyptus for Planting" - Forestry Department, Rome, 1976.
FAO "Conservation: Arid and Semi-Arid Zones" - Conservation Guide N 3, Rome, 1976.
FAO/Unesco/WMO "World Map of Desertification" - United Nations Conference on Desertification, 1977.
FAO "Forestry for Local Community Development" - Forestry Paper N 7, Rome, 1978.
FAO "Establishment Techniques for Forest Plantations" - Forestry Report N 8, Rome, 1978.
FAO "Savanna Afforestation in Africa" - Forestry Paper N 11, 1977.
FAO "Eucalypts for Planting" - FAO Forestry Series N 11, 1979.
FAO "Arid Zone Hydrology" - Irrigation and Drainage Paper N 37, 1981.
FAO "Tree Growing by Rural People", Forestry Paper N 64, 1985.
FAO "Sand Dune Stabilization, Shelterbelts and Afforestation in Dry Zones" - Conservation Guide N 10, 1985.
FAO "Brise-vent et rideaux-abris avec rfrence particulire aux zones sches" - Cahier Conservation N 15, 1986.
FAO "Manuel de fixation des dunes" - Cahier Conservation N 18, 1988.
FORD-ROBERTSON F.C. "Terminology of Forest Science, Technology Practice and Products", English Language Version - The Multilingual Forestry Terminology Series, Society of American Foresters, 1971.
FRANCLET A., LE HOUEROU H.N. "Les Atriplex en Tunisie et en Afrique du Nord" - Institut de Reboisement, Tunisie, Rapport technique N 7, FO:SF/TUN 11, UNDP/FAO, 1971.
FRASER A.I. "A Manual on the Planning of Man-made Forests" Working Paper for a FAO Forestry Development Paper, 1973.
Forestry and Timber Bureau "Forest Trees of Australia" - Department of National Development, Australia, 1962.
Forestry and Timber Bureau "The Use of Trees and Shrubs in the Dry Country of Australia, 1972.
GAVANDE S.A. "Forestry in Arid and Semi-arid Lands with Special Reference to Desertification Control and Rural Development, Chapter 7.3 Water Harvesting in Arid Regions" - Note prepared for FAO and UNEP, 1982.
GIFFARD P.L. "Les gommiers, essences de reboisement pour les rgions sahliennes" - Revue Bois et Forts des Tropiques N 161, 1975.
GOOR A.Y., BARNEY C.W. "Forest Tree Planting in Arid Zones" Second Edition, 1976.
HADRI H., TSCHINKEL H. "Semis direct de pin d'Alep, comparaison de plusieurs techniques" - Institut National de Recherches Forestires, Tunisie, Note de Recherche N 5, 1975.
HADRI H., TSCHINKEL H. "Semis direct de pin d'Alep en Tunisie" Institut National de Recherches Forestieres, Tunisie, Annales Vol. 6, Fasc. 1, 1976.
HEADY H.J.F. "Arid Land Characteristics, Resources and Uses, An Overview" Paper presented at an International Workshop on Arid Land Resources Inventories: Developing Cost-efficient Methods. La Paz, Mexico, 1980.
HILLS E.S. "Arid Lands, a Geographical Appraisal", 1966.
JACOBS M.R. "Growth Habits of Eucalypts" - Forestry and Timber Bureau, Commonwealth of Australia, 1955.
KAMAL IBRAHIM "Glossary of Terms Used in Pasture and Range Survey Research, Ecology and Management" - FAO, 1975.
KENNETH JONES D. "Carob (Ceratonia siliqua) Culture in Cyprus" - FAO and Department of Agriculture Cyprus, 1953.
KING K.F.S. "The Integration of Agriculture and Forestry for Fuelwood Production" - ECA/FAO Subregional Seminar on Fuelwood and Energy Development for African Women, Lusaka, Zambia, 1983.
LE HOUEROU H.N. "Browse in Africa, the Current State of Knowledge" (edited by) - Papers presented at the International Symposium on Browse in Africa, Addis Ababa, International Livestock Centre for Africa, 1980.
LEPAPE M.C. "Rapport de fin de mission (reboisement)" FO:GCP/CVI/002/BEL, Document de terrain, Projet dveloppement forestier, reboisements (Santiago, Maio), Cap Vert, 1982.
LETOURNEUX C. "La mcanisation des plantations forestires dans les pays tropicaux" - Centre Technique Forestier Tropical - Note Technique N 3, 1960.
LITTLE E.L., WOODBURY R.O., WADSWORTH F.H. "Trees of Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands, second volume" - Agricultural Handbook N 449, USDA Forest Service, 1974.
LUNDGREN B. "Plantation Forestry in Tropical Countries: Physical and Biological Potentials and Risks" - Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, 1980.
MALCOLM C.V. "Rehabilitation of Saline Environment - FAO Expert Consultation on the Role of Forestry for Combating Desertification, 1985.
MARION J., SCHOENENBEKGER A. Quelques espces d'arbres a valeur ornementale recommandables en Tunisie" - Institut de Reboisement de Tunis, UNDP/FAO FO:SF/TUN 11, Rapport technique N 5, 1971.
MARION J., POUPON J. Manuel pratique de reboisement - Insitut de Reboisement, Tunis, FAO/PNUD FO:SF/TUN 11, Rapport technique N 2, 1974.
MC GINNIES W.G. "Hot Deserts in the World: what and Where" - Paper presented at the Arid Land Resource Inventories Developing Cost Efficient Methods Workshop, La Paz, Mexico, 1980.
MC GINNIES W.G., GOLDMAN B.J., PAYLOKE P. "Deserts of the World, an Appraisal of Research into their Physical and Biological Environment" - A United States Contribution to the International Hydrological Decade, 1968.
MONJAUZE A. "Doctrinal Solutions of the Pastoral Problem in Areas with a Xerotheric Climate" - General Report of Seminar on Soil and Water Conservation, Teheran, 1960.
MONJAUZE A. "Le reboisement sur rootage en plein et sur bourrelets" Revue Forestire Franaise N 1, 1960.
NAIR P.K.R. "The Re-marriage of Crops and Trees" International Agricultural Development, July-August, 1983.
National Academy of Sciences, USA "Underexploited Tropical Plants with Promising Economic Value" - Report N 16, 1975.
National Academy of Sciences, USA "Leucaena, Promising Forage and Tree Crop for the Tropics" - Report N 26, 1977.
National Academy of Sciences, USA "Tropical Legumes: Resources for the Future" - Report N 25, 1979.
National Academy of Sciences, USA "Firewood Crops: Shrubs and Tree Species for Energy Production" - Report N 27, 1980.
PALMBERG C. "A vital fuelwood gene pool is in danger" - Unasylva (FAO) Vol. 33 N 133, 1981.
PENMAN H.L. "Vegetation and Hydrology" - Commonwealth Bureau of Soils, Harpenden, Technical Communication N 53, 1963.
PIMENTEL L. "Algunas causes de las fallas en las repoblaciones forestales" - Mexico y sus Bosques Vol. 9 N 1, 1970.
RAMSAY D.MC. C. "The Forest Ecology of Central Darfur" - Sudan Forests Department, Forest Bulletin N 1, 1958.
RAPP A., LE HOUEROU H.N., LUNDHOLM B. (Editors) "Can Desert Encroachment be Stopped. A Study with Emphasis on Africa" - Ecological Bulletins N 24 (UNEP and SIES, Sweden), 1976.
REYNDERS M.I. Depth of Sowing Trial with Acacia senegal L. - Sudan Forests Department and UNDP/FAO Forestry Research and Education Project, Pamphlet N 7, 1965.
REYNDERS M.I. "Depth of Planting Trial with Azadirachta indica" - Sudan Forests Department and UNDP/FAO Forestry Research and Education Project, Pamphlet N 8, 1965.
REYNDERS M.I. "Assessment of Plantations in the Western Region (Kordofan and Darfur) of the Sudan - Sudan Forests Dept and UNDP/FAO Forestry Research and Education Project, Pamphlet N 15, 1966.
REYNDERS M.I. "Quelques modes de reiquage des essences forestires au Ruanda-Urundi" - Bulletin d'Information de l'INEAC, Vol. IX, N 6, 1960.
SCHOENENBERGER A. et al "Tunisie, premiers enseignements des Arboretum forestiers" - Institut de Reboisement de Tunis, UNDP/FAO, FO:SF/TUN 11, Rapport Technique 5, 1971.
SCHUBERT G.H., ADAMS R.S. "Reforestation Practices for Conifers in California" - State of California, Dept. of Conservation, Division of Forestry, 1971.
SHEIKH, M.I;. Afforestation in arid and semi-arid areas in Pakistan, 1985.
STONE E.C. "Prevention of Container-induced Root Malformation in Pinus pinaster and Pinus Halepensis Seedlings Following Transplantation" - Report for UNDP/FAO Project, Institut National de Recherches Forestires, Tunisie, 1972.
SUPER S. "Women, Key to Reforestation" - Agenda, Agency for International Development Vol. 3, No. 1, 1980.
TSCHINKEL H. "Effete de l'limination de la vgtation concurrence sur l'humidit du sol et sur la russite des boisements avec Pinus halepensis" - Institut National de Recherches Forestires, Tunisie, Note de Recherche N 10, 1976.
UNESCO "Development of Arid and Semi-arid Lands: Obstacles and Prospects" - MAB Technical Notes N 6, 1976.
UNITED NATIONS ECONOMIC COMMISSION FOR AFRICA "Workshop on Firewood and Energy Development for Rural African Women" - Workshop Report Series, 1980.
UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON DESERTIFICATION "Desertification: an Overview" - A/CONF.74/1/REV 1, 1977.
UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON DESERTIFICATION "Technology and Desertification" - Background Document A/CONF 74.6, 1977
UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON DESERTIFICATION "Ecological Change and Desertification" - Background Document A/CONF. 74.7, 1977.
UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON DESERTIFICATION "Population Society and Desertification" - Background Document A/CONF.74.8, 1977.
USDA Forest Service "Wildland Shrubs, Their Biology and Utilization" General Technical Report INT-1, August 1972.
VERMEIREN L., JOBLING G.A. "Localized Irrigation" - FAO Irrigation and Drainage Paper N 36, Rome, 1980.
VON MAYDELL H.J., "Tree and Shrub Species for Agroforestry Systems in the Sahelian Zone of Africa" - 8th World Forestry Congress, Jakarta, 1978.
WAHEED KHAN M.A. "Direct Sowing of Eucalyptus microtheca on Ridges in Irrigated Plantations" - Sudan Forests Dept. and UNDP/FAO Forestry Research and Education Project, Pamphlet N 27, 1966.
WALTER H., LIETH H. "Klimadiagramm Weltatlas" - VEB Gustav Fischer Verlag Jena, 1960.
WUNDER W.G. "Prosopis juliflora in the Arid Zone of Sudan" - Sudan Forests Dept and UNDP/FAO Forestry Research and Education project, pamphlet N 26, 1966.
WUNDER W.G. "Planting of Eucalyptus Microtheca with and without Polythene Bags, a Comparative Study" - Sudan Forests Dept. and UNDP/FAO Forestry Research and Education Project, pamphlet N 30, 1966.
YARON B. et al "Arid Zone Irrigation" - Ecological Studies 5, 1973.
<section>h</section>
FAO technical papers
FAO ENVIRONMENTAL AND ENERGY PAPERS
Natural resources and the human environment for food and agriculture, 1980 (E* F* S*)
Environmental impact assessment and agricultural development, 1982 (E* F*)
Management and utilization of mangroves in Asia and the Pacific, 1982 (E*)
Mangrove management in Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia, 1985 (E*)
Rural energy planning in China and other developing countries of Asia, 1985 (E*)
Natural resources and the human environment for food and agriculture in Africa, 1986 (E* F*)
Report on natural resources for food and agriculture in the Asia and Pacific region, 1986 (E*)
Report on natural resources for food and agriculture in Latin America and the Caribbean, 1986 (E* S*)
Environmental guidelines for resettlement projects in the humid tropics, 1988 (E*)
FAO CONSERVATION GUIDES
Guidelines for watershed management, 1977 (E* F*)
Hydrological technique for upstream conservation, 1976 (E. F*)
Conservation in arid and semi-arid zones, 1977 (Ar* E* F*)
Special readings in conservation techniques, 1977 (E F* S*)
Avalanche control, 1985 (E* F*)
Torrent control terminology, 1981 (E/F/S*)
Environmental impact on forestry, 1982 (E* S*)
Management of upland watersheds: participation of the mountain communities, 1983 (E* F* S*)
Operations manual for protected area systems, 1984 (E* F* S*)
Sand dune stabilization, shelterbelts and afforestation in dry zones, 1985 (E*)
Management of vicua: its contribution to rural development in the High Andes of Peru, 1985 (E* S*)
Incentives for community involvement in conservation programmes, 1987 (E* S*)
FAO watershed management field manual - Vegetation and soil treatment measures, 1985 (E* S*)
FAO watershed management field manual - Gully control, 1986 (E*)
FAO watershed management field manual - Slope treatment measures and practices, 1988 (E*)
FAO watershed management field manual - Landslide prevention measures, 1988 (E*)
Strategies, approaches and systems in integrated watershed management, 1986 (E*)
Brise-vent et rideaux abris avec rfrence particulire aux zones sches, 1986 (F*)
Guidelines for economic appraisal of watershed management projects,- 1987 (E*)
National parks planning: a manual with annotated examples, 1988 (E*)
Manuel de fixation des dunes, 1988 (F*)
Non-timber uses of selected arid zone trees and shrubs in Africa, 1988 (E*)
Arid zone forestry - A guide for field technicians, 1989 (E*)
Availability: January 1989
Ar - Arabic
E - English
F - French
S - Spanish
* Available
** Out of print
*** In preparation
The FAO Technical Papers can be purchased locally through FAO Sales Agents or directly from Distribution and Sales Section, FAO, Via delle Terme di Caracalla. 00100 Rome, Italy.
M-33/T0122E/1/3.89/1800
ISBN 92-5-102809-5
<title>Arid zone forestry: A guide for field technicians</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
Half of the countries of the world lie partly or wholly in arid and semi-arid zones. These zones, together with their sub-humid margins, or the so-called dry lands, cover a total area of about 45 million km or one-third of the total land area of the world. Ecological degradation develops at an alarming rate in the areas and threatens the livelihood of some 850 million inhabitants.
Human intervention, through control operations or application of viable land use systems, can halt and eventually reverse the process of degradation. The conception, formulation and application of such interventions have to be based on sound knowledge and an appreciation of the human, ecological and economic factors involved in any given situation. They also require that field personnel be kept abreast with technological progress. However, one dominant constraint in this respect so far has been the dearth of manuals for forestry field technicians.
This manual aims, therefore, at upgrading the skills of forestry field personnel in the operation of tree nurseries, the planting of trees and shrubs, the prevention and control of wind erosion, and the execution of other types of activities related to tree planting in agricultural lands. Basic understanding of constraints and conditions for people's participation is also provided.
FAO is grateful to the many authors who have contributed to the preparation of this publication. Mr H. Sjholm, during his assignment in the Forest Resources Division, prepared the first draft of this document. Mr M. I. Reynders, former FAO staff member and currently Professor at the Forestry Faculty of the University of Gent (Belgium), expanded and edited the draft. Professor P. Ffolliott, School of Renewable Natural Resources, University of Arizona (United States of America), finalized the present text.
Mr B. Ben Salem of this Division coordinated the planning and the preparation of the publication.
It is hoped that this manual will be useful to forestry instructors in the arid regions for training field technicians, and that it will thus contribute to the success of arid land forest restoration programmes.
<section>2</section>
Preface
This manual has been prepared as a working guide for field technicians involved in arid zone forestry practices. As such, it is more of a "here's how" publication than a detailed explanation of the theory and practice of forestry. Field technicians interested in more details on the technical subjects presented are encouraged to review appropriate references on these topics.
In presentation, the manual is organized into ten sections, including a general description of the arid environment, the function and place of trees and shrubs in arid zones, techniques of nursery operations in arid regions, the establishment and management techniques of forest plantations, special forest plantations, irrigated forest plantations, rehabilitation of saline environment, non-wood forest products, the involvement of local people, and tree and shrub species for arid zone forestry.
<section>3</section>
Chapter I. The arid environments
1. Meaning of aridity
2. Causes of aridity
3. Arid zone climate
4. Rainfall
5. Temperature
6. Atmospheric humidity
7. Wind
8. Arid zone soils and importance of soil properties
9. Arid zone vegetation
10. Classification of vegetation
11. Highlights of section
1. Meaning of aridity
Arid environments are extremely diverse in terms of their land forms, soils, fauna, flora, water balances, and human activities. Because of this diversity, no practical definition of arid environments can be derived. However, the one binding element to all arid regions is aridity.
Aridity is usually expressed as a function of rainfall and temperature. A useful "representation" of aridity is the following climatic aridity index: p/ETP
where
P = precipitation
ETP = potential evapotranspiration, calculated by method of Penman, taking into account atmospheric humidity, solar radiation, and wind.
Three arid zones can be delineated by this index: namely, hyper-arid, arid and semi-arid. Of the total land area of the world, the hyper-arid zone covers 4.2 percent, the arid zone 14.6 percent, and the semiarid zone 12.2 percent. Therefore, almost one-third of the total area of the world is arid land.
The hyper-arid zone (arid index 0.03) comprises dryland areas without vegetation, with the exception of a few scattered shrubs. True nomadic pastoralism is frequently practiced. Annual rainfall is low, rarely exceeding 100 millimeters. The rains are infrequent and irregular, sometimes with no rain during long periods of several years.
The arid zone (arid index 0.03-0.20) is characterized by pastoralism and no farming except with irrigation. For the most part, the native vegetation is sparse, being comprised of annual and perennial grasses and other herbaceous vegetation, and shrubs and small trees. There is high rainfall variability, with annual amounts ranging between 100 and 300 millimeters.
The semi-arid zone (arid index 0.20-0.50) can support rain-fed agriculture with more or less sustained levels of production. Sedentary livestock production also occurs. Native vegetation is represented by a variety of species, such as grasses and grass-like plants, fortes and half-shrubs, and shrubs and trees. Annual precipitation varies from 300-600 to 700-800 millimeters, with summer rains, and from 200-250 to 450-500 millimeters with winter rains.
Arid conditions also are found in the sub-humid zone (arid index 0.50-0.75). The term "arid zone" is used here to collectively represent the hyper-arid, arid, semi-arid, and sub-humid zones.
2. Causes of aridity
Aridity results from the presence of dry, descending air. Therefore, aridity is found mostly in places where anticyclonic conditions are persistent, as is the case in the regions lying under the anticyclones of the subtropics.
The influence of subtropical anticyclones on rainfall increases with the presence of cool surfaces. Arid conditions also occur in the lee of major mountain ranges that disrupt the structure of cyclones passing over them, creating "rain shadow" effects. Rainfall is also hindered by the presence of greatly heated land surfaces; as a consequence, large areas of dry climate exist far from the sea.
3. Arid zone climate
The arid zone is characterized by excessive heat and inadequate, variable precipitation; however, contrasts in climate occur. In general, these climatic contrasts result from differences in temperature, the season in which rain falls, and in the degree of aridity. Three major types of climate are distinguished when describing the arid zone: the Mediterranean climate, the tropical climate and the continental climate.
In the Mediterranean climate, the rainy season is during autumn and winter. Summers are hot with no rains; winter temperatures are mild. Figure 1.1 illustrates the Mediterranean climate, with a wet season starting in October and ending in April or May, followed by 5 months of dry season.
In the tropical climate, rainfall occurs during the summer. The greater the distance from the Equator, the shorter the rainy season. Winters are long and dry. In Sennar, Sudan, an area that is typical of the tropical climate, the wet season extends from the middle of June until the end of September, followed by a dry season of almost 9 months (Figure 1.2).
In the continental climate, the rainfall is distributed evenly throughout the year, although there is a tendency toward greater summer precipitation. In Alice Springs, Australia, each monthly precipitation is less than twice the corresponding mean monthly temperature; hence, the dry season extends over the whole year (Figure 1.3).
Figure 1.1 Annual precipitation and temperature in Rabat, Morocco.
Figure 1.2 Annual precipitation and temperature in Sennar, Sudan.
Figure 1.3 Annual precipitation and temperature in Alice Springs, Australia.
4. Rainfall
The rainfall that falls from the atmosphere at a particular location is either intercepted by trees, shrubs, and other vegetation, or it strikes the ground surface and becomes overland flow, subsurface flow, and groundwater flow. Regardless of its deposition, much of the rainfall eventually is returned to the atmosphere by evapotranspiration processes from the vegetation or by evaporation from streams and other bodies of water into which overland, subsurface, and groundwater flow move, as illustrated by the hydrologic cycle in Figure 1,4. The relative dynamics of the hydrologic cycle in an area are determined, in large part, by the spatial and temporal nature of the rainfall patterns, temperature and atmospheric humidity regimes, soil and topographic features, and vegetative characteristics of the area.
Unlike conditions in temperate regions, the rainfall distribution in arid zones varies between summer and winter. For example, Rabat, Morocco, receives rain during the cold winter period, while the warm summer months are almost devoid of rainfall. On the other hand, Sennar, Sudan, has a long dry season during the winter, while the rains fall during the summer months. Although Rabat and Sennar receive about the same amount of rainfall, the variation in rainfall is considerable. Winter rains in Rabat can penetrate the soil to underground storage, while the summer rains in Sennar fall on a hot soil surface and are lost to evaporation, particularly when rain falls in the form of light showers. Therefore, the effective rainfall available to plants is higher in Rabat than in Sennar.
This example shows that more annual precipitation is required in summer rainfall areas than in cooler winter rainfall climates to obtain the same amount of water available to the plants. However, where plants are dormant during the winter, they cannot completely use the available water during that period.
Rainfall also varies from one year to another in arid zones; this can easily be confirmed by looking at rainfall statistics over time for a particular place. The difference between the lowest and highest rainfall recorded in different years can be substantial, although it is usually within a range of  50 per cent of the mean annual rainfall. The variation in monthly rainfall is even greater.
In most instances, the expected rainfall in a given place is not the same as the mean annual rainfall recorded over a number of years. Variation in rainfall is important to forestry activities, because when the rains fail, newly-established forest plantations suffer. The selection of a planting date to coincide with rainfall is of paramount importance to the success of a forest plantation.
Figure 1.4 The hydrologic cycle.
Rainfall intensity is another parameter which must be considered. Because the soil may not be able to absorb all the water during a heavy rainfall, water may be lost by runoff. Likewise, the water from a rain of low intensity can be lost due to evaporation, particularly if it falls on a dry surface. Rainfall intensity can be measured as the number of rainy days or, more preferably, as the amount of rain per hour or per day.
Rainfall intensity also relates to the risk of soil erosion. It is known that individual raindrops carry energy capable of removing soil, particularly topsoil. The erosion caused by falling drops of water, called splash erosion, also can degrade or destroy the soil structure. It has been found that, as the rainfall intensity approaches 35 millimeters per hour, there is a steep rise in the erosive power of the rain. A large percentage of rainfall in the tropics occurs above this value (the so-called "erosion threshold").
5. Temperature
The climatic pattern in the arid zones is frequently characterized by a relatively "cool" dry season, followed by a relatively "hot" dry season, and ultimately by a "moderate" rainy season. In general, there are significant diurnal temperature fluctuations within these seasons. Quite often, during the "cool" dry season, daytime temperatures peak between 35 and 45 centigrade and fall to 10 to 15 centigrade at night. Daytime temperatures can approach 45 centigrade during the "hot" dry season and drop to 15 centigrade during the night. During the rainy season, temperatures can range from 35 centigrade in the daytime to 20 centigrade at night. In many situations, these diurnal temperature fluctuations restrict the growth of plant species.
Growth of plants can take place only between certain maximum and minimum temperatures. Extremely high or low temperatures can be damaging to plants. Plants might survive high temperatures, as long as they can compensate for these high temperatures by transpiration, but growth will be affected negatively. High temperatures in the surface layer of the soil result in rapid loss of soil moisture due to the high levels of evaporation and transpiration. Although problems of low temperatures, in general, are less common in arid zones, when they do occur for relatively long periods of time, plant growth can be restricted; at temperatures below 0 centigrade, the plants can die.
6. Atmospheric humidity
Although rainfall and temperature are the primary factors upon which aridity is based, other factors have an influence. The moisture in the air has importance for the water balance in the soil. When the moisture content in the soil is higher than in the air, there is a tendency for water to evaporate into the air. When the opposite is the case, water will condense into the soil. Humidity is generally low in arid zones.
In many areas, the occurrence of dew and mist is necessary for the survival of plants. Dew is the result of condensation of water vapor from the air onto surfaces during the night, while mist is a suspension of microscopic water droplets in the air. Water that is collected on the leaves of plants in the form of dew or mist can, at times, be imbibed through the open stomata, or alternatively, fall onto the ground and contribute to soil moisture. The presence of dew and mist leads to higher humidity in the air and, therefore, reduced evapotranspiration and conservation of soil moisture.
7. Wind
Because of the scarcity of vegetation that can reduce air movements, arid regions typically are windy. Winds remove the moist air around the plants and soil and, as a result, increase evapotranspiration.
Soil erosion by wind will occur wherever soil, vegetative, and climatic conditions are conducive to this kind of erosion. These conditions (loose, dry, or fine soil, smooth ground surface, sparse vegetative cover, and wind sufficiently strong to initiate soil movement) are frequently encountered in arid zones. Depletion of vegetative cover on the land is the basic cause of soil erosion by wind. The most serious damage from wind-blown soil particles is the sorting of soil material; wind erosion gradually removes silt, clay, and organic matter from the surface soil. The remaining materials may be sandy and infertile. Often, sand piles up in dunes and presents a serious threat to surrounding lands.
Precipitation represents the main transfer of moisture from the water vapor of the air to the ground. The completion of this hydrologic cycle is through evaporation. Loss of water from the soil due to evaporation is important when considering "effective" rainfall. Evaporation increases with strong winds, high temperatures, and low humidity.
As mentioned above, plants must transpire to compensate for high temperatures. Transpiration accounts for great losses of moisture from the soil. The intensity of transpiration depends on wind, temperature, humidity, and the plant itself. Some plants are more adapted to dry conditions and transpire less than others. Therefore, the composition of the vegetation has a great influence on the rate of transpiration. The combination of evaporation and transpiration, called evapotranspiration, is the principal component of the water cycle that can be influenced by land management to increase water yield.
8. Arid zone soils and importance of soil properties
Soils are formed over time as climate and vegetation act on parent rock material. Important aspects of soil formation in an arid climate
- Significant diurnal changes in temperature, causing mechanical or physical disintegration of rocks.
- Wind-blown sands that score and abrade exposed rock surfaces.
The physical disintegration of rocks leaves relatively large fragments; it is only chemical weathering which can break up these fragments. The process of chemical weathering in arid zones is slow because of the characteristic water deficit. Also, extended periods of water deficiencies are important in the elimination or leaching of soluble salts, for which the accumulation is enhanced by the high evaporation. Short periods of water runoff do not permit deep penetration of salts (only short-distance transport), often resulting in accumulation of salts in closed depressions.
Vegetation plays a fundamental role in the process of soil formation by breaking up the rock particles and enriching the soil with organic matter from aerial and subterranean parts. However, this role of the vegetation is diminished in arid zones because of the sparse canopy cover and the limited development of aerial parts. Nevertheless, the root systems often exhibit exceptional development and have the greatest influence on the soil.
A forester is usually more concerned with the soil properties that are important to support growth of trees and shrubs than with the evolution of the soil profile or with the systems of regional soil classification. Of primary importance for arid zone soils are the water-holding capacity and the ability to supply nutrients.
The water-holding capacity of a soil depends on its physical characteristics, including texture, structure, and soil depth. Texture refers to the relative distribution of the particles (clay, sand, and silt). In general, the finer the texture, the greater is the water retention. Structure, the internal arrangement of the soil particles, is influenced by the amount of organic matter that binds the soil particles. Sandy soils have no structure; clayey soils have different forms of structure and the spaces between particles enable circulation of air and water. The larger these spaces, the greater is the permeability.
The soil depth governs the amount of soil moisture and the type of root disposition of trees. In general, colluvial and alluvial soils are deep; but residual soils are highly variable in depth, depending on the degree of slope, the length and intensity of weathering, and the biotic influences (cultivation, livestock grazing, etc.). Soils of the ridges and upper slopes are often shallow, while those of the midslopes and valleys are moderately deep to very deep. The depth of soils in arid regions is often limited by a "hardpan" layer. Such hardpans, which consist of ironstone or laterite gravel in the tropical zone and consolidated calcite in the Mediterranean region, can be more or less continuous and from 5 to 60 centimeters below the surface.
As there is little deposition and accumulation of organic litter in arid zones, the organic matter content of the soil is low. When these soils are cultivated, the limited organic matter content that exists is quickly lost.
The chemical properties of soil control the availability of nutrients. Arid soils are characterized by significant leaching of nutrients and intensive weathering of minerals, although these two activities are slowed with decreasing rainfall. Natural fertility (which largely depends upon the organic matter content of the topsoil) is often low.
Because of the aridity of the climate, edaphic characteristics which ease the water constraints will be favorable to planting of trees or shrubs. Some of these edaphic characteristics are:
- The presence of a water table at a depth attainable by the roots.
- A soil thickness adequate to allow a water reserve.
- A soil texture which retains the maximum amount of water.
It should not be overlooked that the topography of the terrain can also play an important role. For instance, the shallows and the lower parts of sand dunes can accumulate a considerable quantity of water which can be used by an adapted vegetation.
Finally, because arid zone soils are vulnerable to both wind and water erosion, soil fixation and conservation are important.
9. Arid zone vegetation
The vegetation cover in arid zones is scarce. Nevertheless, three plant forms can be distinguished:
- Ephemeral annuals.
- Succulent perennials.
- Nonsucculent perennials.
Ephemeral annuals, which appear after rains, complete their life cycle during a short season ( 8 weeks). Their growth is restricted to a short wet period. Ephemerals do not have the xeromorphic features of perennials. In general, ephemerals are small in size, have shallow roots, and their physiological adaptation consists of their active growth. Ephemerals live through the dry season, which may last a number of years, in the form of seeds. At times, ephemerals can form dense stands and provide some forage.
Succulent perennials are able to accumulate and store water (that may be consumed during periods of drought); this is because of the proliferation and enlargement of the parenchymal tissue of the stems and leaves and their physiological feature of low rates of transpiration. Cacti are typical succulent perennials.
Nonsucculent perennials comprise the majority of plants in the arid zone. These are hardy plants, including grasses, woody herbs, shrubs and trees that withstand the stress of the arid zone environment. Many nonsucculent perennials have "hard" seeds that do not readily germinate; these seeds often must be treated (by soaking in water or acid) before they will germinate. Three growth forms of nonsucculent perennials can be distinguished:
- Evergreen - biologically active throughout the year.
- Drought-deciduous - biologically dormant during the dry season.
- Cold-deciduous - biologically dormant during the cold season.
Ephemerials are drought-escaping species and, in general, are not considered true xerophytes; succulent and nonsucculent perennials are drought-enduring and drought-resisting species and are true xerophytes. Xerophytism refers to adaptive attributes of plants which can subsist with small amounts of moisture. Some of the features of xerophytic plants are:
- Development of an extensive root system - the main growth of the roots can be vertical, horizontal, or both, and seems to depend on the site conditions. Roots penetrating 10 to 15 meters in depth are not unusual; horizontally extending roots are common in shallow soils. Some xerophytic species produce "rain roots" below the soil surface, in response to light rainfall or during periods of dew formation.
- Shoots not as large as their roots - shoot-to-root ratios of 1:3.5 to 1:6 are frequent.
- Reduction of the transpiring surface - transpiring surfaces reduced by shedding of foliage and rolling of leaves.
- Seasonal reduction of the transpiring surface of the plant this feature results in a reduction of the water loss during the dry season.
- Special adaptations in "evergreen" species lessen transpiration their leaves are leathery and often heavily wax-coated; these plants are referred to as sclerophylls.
Other distinguishing anatomical characteristics associated with xerophytism are:
- Cuticularization - the formation of a surface plaster-like layer of cutin.
- Cutinazation - the impregnation of the cell wall with cutin, which forms a watertight layer with abundant hairs.
- Special arrangements of the stomata in recesses and grooves which provide protection from the arid atmosphere.
10. Classification of vegetation
In classifying the vegetation of the arid zones, the major "delineations" are usually characterized in terms of rainfall amount and the pattern of occurrence.
- Desert - In this manual, the term "desert" is used in its narrowest sense to classify land where vegetation is virtually absent, except by watercourses. Ephemeral grasses and herbs can appear after infrequent rain showers. On the average, rainfall is less than 100 millimeters per year.
- Semidesert - Vegetation in semidesert regions is a mixture of grasses, herbs, and small, short trees and shrubs up to 2 meters in height, interspersed with bare areas. Semidesert grasslands occur in areas where geological erosion has been less intense and the soils can absorb the limited rainfall that falls on them; the resulting vegetation is a uniform cover of mixed grasses and herbs. Scattered trees and scattered shrubs occur on areas where there is an excess of water, along drainage lines, and on catchment sites. Succulent shrubs consist of open plant communities dominated by succulent plants; grasses may or may not be present. In general, the vegetation in semidesert regions is characterized by an abundance of plants with extreme reduction of leaves, the development of storage tissues to form succulent stems, and the presence of thorns and spines. The rainfall in these regions varies from 100 to 300 millimeters; most of this is unreliable and confined to several
months, occurring as local storms or scattered rain showers.
- Low rainfall woodland savanna - The vegetation in this region includes a mixed type of grasses and herbs, with shrubs or trees (or both), in which the proportion of grass to shrubs or trees is determined by the frequency and intensity of fires. The trees and shrubs often have flat, umbrella-like crowns. Their crowns do not form a closed canopy, but leave large openings filled with low shrubs, grasses, and herbs, although bare spots occur as well; sometimes these bare areas are covered with ephemerals after rains. Grasses seldom attain 2 meters, and the shrubs and trees are not higher than 6 meters. The shrubs and trees normally do not provide sufficient shade to prevent the development of grasses. During the dry season, these plants become a potential fire hazard. However, the species of the woodland savanna have some degree of fire tolerance. When grasses and herbs are dominant and shrubs and trees cover less than 50 per cent of the ground, the woodland is classified
as open and wooded grassland. This kind of woodland savanna is typical of the dry tropics, with a short rainy period followed by a long, hot dry period. Rainfall ranges from 300 to 600 millimeters.
- Evergreen scrub - This type of arid zone vegetation consists of a closed scrub of evergreen or semievergreen shrubs, small trees, climbers, and occasionally, some large trees. Shrubs have glossy, leathery leaves or thorny, succulent leaves and are 2 to 3 meters high. The larger trees are widely scattered. Annual rainfall exceeds 500 millimeters.
11. Highlights of section
The arid environment can be defined as one in which the amount of precipitation an area receives, divided by the amount which is lost to evapotranspiration, yields a fraction which is less than 0.50. The arid environment can be stratified into three zones: hyper-arid, arid, and semi-arid. The zones are characterized by low annual precipitation (0 to 800 millimeters), which occurs infrequently and irregularly, and is vegetated by drought resistant species. Almost one-third of the total land area of the world is arid.
In the arid zones, there are three major climatic types: Mediterranean, tropical, and continental. Rainfall distribution of these types varies between winter and summer and from year to year. Also, rainfall intensity affects the arid zones differently, as losses due to evaporation and runoff can vary among the climatic types; the potential for soil erosion differs depending on edaphic characteristics. Temperature is characterized by significant diurnal fluctuation and affects plant growth. Plant growth also is affected by atmospheric humidity, which is generally low. Evapotranspiration is increased by wind, which also can cause soil erosion. Soils in the arid zones are formed when the significant diurnal temperature changes mechanically disintegrate rocks, wind-blown sand abrades rock surfaces, or the root systems of plants break up rock particles. In general, chemical weathering is not significant, as the low water content of the soil slows this process. The water-holding
capacity of arid zone soils depends on the structure (internal arrangement of soil particles), texture (relative distribution of different-sized particles), and depth (often limited by a hardpan layer). Leaching of nutrients and weathering of minerals are slowed with decreasing rainfall.
When choosing planting sites, soils and edaphic characteristics which ease water constraints are favored. Vegetative growth in arid zones are: ephemeral annuals (growth that is restricted to the short wet period), succulent perennials (which can store water to use during drought), and nonsucculent perennials (the majority of plants which can withstand the stress of the arid environment). Xerophytic plants, also found in arid environments, have extensive root systems, reduced transpiring surfaces, a layer of cutin, and other anatomical characteristics that protect the plant from the arid atmosphere. Arid zone vegetation is classified as desert (less than 100 millimeters of rainfall annually), semidesert (100 to 300 millimeters of annual rainfall, low rainfall woodland savanna (300 to 600 millimeters), and evergreen scrub (in excess of 500 millimeters).
<section>4</section>
Chapter II. Function and place of trees and shrubs in arid zones
1. Introduction
2. Function of trees and shrubs
3. Place of trees and shrubs in rural landscapes
4. Combined production systems
5. Highlights of section
1. Introduction
Trees and shrubs play a vital role in maintaining an ecological balance and improving the livelihood of people in the arid regions. If this role is to be developed and expanded, the function and place of trees and shrubs in the rural landscape must be analysed and understood.
2. Function of trees and shrubs
Trees and shrubs in arid zones perform several functions, some of which are described below:
- They can act as a soil stabilizer and prevent water and soil erosion. Woody vegetation protects the soil better and lasts longer than annual plants. Its roots deepen and improve the soil, and the shade it provides facilitates ecosystem metabolism. These functions are essential for ensuring the soil stability and the continuity of agricultural activities.
- They are an important source of forage for livestock and wildlife at a time when herbaceous fodder is not available. A number of multi-purpose trees and shrubs are ideal for protecting and improving the soil, while providing a high fodder yield in the dry months without impairing agricultural production in the rainy season.
- They are a source of wood products, including fuelwood, poles, and lumber. Fuelwood is almost the only domestic fuel, not only in the rural areas but in some urbanized areas as well. Wood is also used as a construction material.
- They are a source of foodstuff for the population. Many fruits, leaves, young shoots, and roots provide valuable food in the dry season and, therefore, comprise an important reserve for emergencies.
- They are a source of non-woody products. Many trees and shrubs yield products which are important for everyday use by the inhabitants, for industry, and at times, for export. For example, a variety of tree and shrub species are characterized by a high content of tannin (utilized by the leather industry) in their bark or fruit. Other trees and shrubs yield fibers, dyes, and pharmaceuticals. The pollen of many trees and shrubs is used for honey production (beekeeping).
Due to unrestricted cutting of wood of vegetation, overgrazing by livestock, and cultivation of unsuitable lands, many arid zones have an inadequate forest cover and, therefore, inadequate timber, fuelwood, and fodder resources.
Development programmes in arid regions should include a forestry component. This component should not be seen separately but must be integrated with agriculture and animal husbandry to optimize land use. The elements for such integration are explained in the following sections.
2.1 Fuelwood
Forest plantations in arid zones are often proposed for the production of fuelwood. The production of fuelwood can be crucial to people, because over 50 percent of the wood removed from the world's forests is used for fuel and 90 percent of the inhabitants of developing countries rely on it for their domestic needs; these people simply cannot afford other sources of energy.
Fuelwood is a marketable commodity that is transported over long distances (Figure 2.1). Demands for fuelwood and charcoal are increasing, and wood is likely to continue to be an important source of domestic fuel and fuel for small-scale industrial use in rural and urban areas (figure 2.2). Most of the fuelwood still comes from natural forests and woodlands that are being cut down and destroyed at alarming rates. However, fuelwood can also be grown on an intensive and sustained scale in forest plantations.
Scarcity of fuelwood can create further problems. People frequently turn to the next available fuel, such as agricultural residues and dung, instead of using these materials to maintain the soil fertility of agricultural land. Furthermore, a change in availability of fuelwood will often affect the health and nutrition of a whole family, which will use more fast-cooking foods and have less money for food as fuel prices increase. Also, fuelwood scarcities affect several aspects of family life, as more time must be spent in fuel gathering at the expense of more productive work.
To meet the increasing demand for fuelwood, land must be set aside to secure a production base, either as well-managed natural stands or in forest plantations. Large-scale fuelwood plantations may be required to supply urban areas, including industrial operations. For rural areas, which are under less population pressure, small-scale forestry activities may be sufficient to meet the demand for fuelwood. It is this latter type of plantation which is usually required in arid zones.
Figure 2.1 Fuelwood from Prosopei spp.
Figure 2.2 Wood prepared for charcoal making.
2.2 Fodder
A significant role of woody vegetation in arid zones is its contribution to a pastoral economy by providing arboreal fodder. The protein from ligneous vegetation during the dry season constitutes an essential element in the animal diet. Among the various sources of feed (concentrates, cereals, and annual fodder crops), woody vegetation is generally the cheapest and the one on which the majority of the livestock rely (figure 2.3).
The role of woody vegetation in fodder production can be examined in three situations:
- Normal scarcity situations - During the dry season (when grass and forte vegetation is not available), only trees and shrubs can provide the necessary feed for livestock; this is a traditional use of the woody vegetation in arid regions. When such vegetation is not available, the production of livestock can be seriously affected, as people do not normally have the resources to acquire other types of feed for their animals. The creation of fodder resources for scarcity situations is, therefore, a vital activity for maintaining the production of animals. Overall fodder resources can be enhanced by managing existing woody vegetation for increased fodder production or by creating additional fodder resources through tree and shrub plantations.
- Emergency situations - Rainfall in arid zones is not only variable during the year, but there is considerable annual variation and, at times, extended periods of drought. Under this situation, trees and shrubs assume greater importance in the form of emergency fodder reserves for livestock, since ligneous vegetation is better able to survive extended periods of drought than annual plants.
- Contribution to the feed budget - The most intensive method of fodder production may be the creation of year-long forage plantations on convenient sites to improve animal production. Forage species can be grown in pure stands, harvested in a controlled way, and then fed to livestock. Where grasses are grown, livestock could be moved between the different areas of production to enable optimal use of both types of forage. Another possibility is to establish two-storied pastures, with suitable browse species over an understorey of grasses or fortes and legumes (figure 2.4).
Figure 2.3 Fodder from the forest
Figure 2.4 Eucalyptus Camalanlensis and Acacia cyanaphylla The ground was covered with grass.
2.3 Improvement in Agricultural Production
The productivity of agricultural land in arid zones is inherently low and the risk of failure is high.
This is due not only to the minimal and unreliable rainfall, but to the effect of wind and water erosion and low soil fertility, as described below:
- Wind erosion - In most of the arid zones, wind erosion is a serious problem. The destruction of the vegetative cover exposes the soil to the desiccative effects of hot, dry wind, resulting in dust storms, the formation of sand dunes, and other forms of severe wind erosion. Winds are not only responsible for the transport of soil particles, but through their desiccating effect, they prevent the growth and development of food and animal production. In irrigated agriculture, wind, by increasing evaporation, facilitates the upward movement of salts and their subsequent concentration in the rooting zones of agricultural crops. Particles of dust and sand carried by wind can be deposited in irrigation channels and drainage ditches, increasing the maintenance costs of irrigation. Such damage can be diminished by the establishment of windbreaks and shelterbelts.
- Water erosion - Erosion by water is an important phenomenon in most of the arid zones; this type of erosion is the result of the susceptibility of the soil to high rainfall intensities, and the frequent destruction of the vegetative cover. When these conditions occur, considerable amounts of soil are washed down from catchment areas. Roads are damaged, lowlands are flooded, and streams and wadis are filled with muddy water. Some of this sediment-laden water accumulates in reservoirs or is transported to lakes or the sea. The loss of water through runoff and the ensuing soil erosion can be controlled by adopting preventive soil conservation measures. The role of vegetation in reducing siltation of dams, regulating stream flow and preventing floods and soil erosion can be invaluable (Figure 2.5).
- Soil fertility - Agricultural production in arid zones is frequently hindered by poor soil fertility. However, the importance of soil fertility is often overlooked; water shortage is considered the principal constraint. Whereas the conventional method to improve soil fertility commonly consists of repeated application of mineral fertilizers, this problem may also be solved through the systematic use of soil-improving species.
3. Place of trees and shrubs in rural landscapes
To grow trees or shrubs (in any form) is a forestry practice; forestry, in turn, is a land use exercise. Pressure on land for agriculture is high in arid zones, so high that land unsuitable for agriculture is sometimes used in a desperate effort to grow agricultural crops. As a result, forestry can be relegated to lands which are too poor for plant growth.
Figure 2.5 A watershed protected against erosion by a dense vegetation cover.
There is a generally-held misconception that forestry is best suited to poor sites. However, it must be realized that forestry, like agriculture, places demands on the land to reach satisfying production levels. Two basic requirements are needed: trees and shrubs should not be confined to areas designated as "marginal", and forestry should be integrated in the overall land use (Figure 2.6).
There are several ways to plant trees and shrubs in the rural landscape, including:
- Trees in rows (windbreaks and shelterbelts) to protect crops and pastures against wind and desiccation.
- Trees intermingled with agricultural crops to protect the crops and to reconstitute and enrich the soil.
- Trees and shrubs grown during the fallow period to enrich the soil, and to provide fuel, fodder, and secondary forest products.
- Linear plantations along roads and waterways to protect infrastructures and adjacent fields, and to provide shade and contribute to the production of fuelwood, fodder and non-woody products.
- Woodlots established under rain-fed or irrigated conditions to make the best use of unused land, and to contribute to needed wood supplies.
- Intensive management of natural forests and woodlands to maintain a stable environment and yield essential products traditionally used by the local population.
- Areas threatened by sand dune encroachment can be stabilized by making use of trees and shrubs.
Within the above, it is possible to select the most appropriate combination of land uses to:
- Improve agricultural and livestock production.
- Stabilize and enrich the environment.
- Meet essential needs for fuelwood, farm timber and non-wood products for the rural population.
In general, the introduction of trees and shrubs into rural landscapes can improve the living conditions and the rural economy of the arid zone inhabitants, and contribute to rural development.
Figure 2.6 Place of trees and shrubs in the management of a mountain and a plain.
4. Combined production systems
In combined production systems, agriculture, livestock production, forestry, and combinations thereof are practiced on the same piece of land, either in rotation, simultaneously, or spatially. Such combinations, also called "agroforestry", can involve agricultural crop production or animal husbandry, within which trees or shrubs play a significant role. The basic aim of agroforestry is to attain ecological stability and, at the same time, to provide maximum short-term and long-term benefits to the user of the land.
Agroforestry in rotation involves the alternation of agriculture, livestock production, and/or forestry practices through time on the same piece of land. When combinations of these land uses are implemented at the same time on the same piece of land, agroforestry is considered to be practiced simultaneously. Where the land use practices are placed side-by-side, as they are in the case of windbreaks and shelterbelts, agroforestry is spatially practiced. All three practices are legitimate types of agroforestry, and each should be followed where most appropriate.
Depending on the land use, three "types" of agroforestry can be distinguished in arid zones; namely:
- Agrisilviculture - where the land use is agriculture and forestry production.
- Silvipasture - when the land use is forestry and animal husbandry.
- Agrosilvipasture - where the land use is agriculture, forestry, and animal husbandry.
The elements for each type are outlined in the following sections.
4.1 Agrisilviculture
Agrisilviculture is a land use system where both agricultural crops and forest products are produced, simultaneously or sequentially. This form of land use represents an improvement on the traditional system of "shifting cultivation", a method of cyclical agricultural cultivation in which farmers cut some or all of the tree crop, burn it, and raise agricultural crops for one or more years before moving on to another site and repeating the process, as illustrated in Figure 2.7.
Agrisilviculture is ecologically sound, provided that the fallow period is long enough to allow the trees to restore soil fertility. To shorten the fallow, trees or shrubs can be planted or sown instead of allowing the forest to establish itself by natural regeneration when the shifting cultivator abandons the land.
4.2 Silvipasture
Silvipasture, practiced when the land use is primarily the growing of forest products and the raising of livestock through grazing, involves controlled grazing of forest vegetation. Arid zones are generally livestock raising areas, where silvipasture is a dominant land use system. The vegetative resources of these vast low-yield areas are frequently best utilized through grazing. Under this system, the main source of fodder for livestock consists of natural vegetation, including grasses and other forage plants, and trees and shrubs.
At times, silvipasture involves the controlled grazing of forest vegetation, but it must be realized that there is a limit to the number of cattle the land can support. Proper management of the vegetation resources to prevent overgrazing is vitally important. Sometimes, introducing trees and shrubs in natural grasslands can be feasible, since (quite often) a combination of trees, shrubs, and grasses offers optimal benefits. Individual trees on grazing lands offer the additional benefit of providing shade and shelter for the animals (Figure 2.8). Animals droppings that collect under these trees can be of further benefit in enriching soil fertility.
To avoid problems of overgrazing, an effort must be made to equate the number of grazing animals to the carrying capacity of the land. Efforts to improve the grazing land's capability should be introduced at the same time, although there is no point in undertaking improvements where livestock numbers cannot be controlled.
Because periods of drought are impossible to predict and will always occur, silvipastoral systems must have a "built-in" component to handle a drought, such as the establishment of fodder-producing trees and shrubs.
4.3 Agrisilvipasture
As the name indicates, this land use system is a combination of agricultural and silvipastoral practices. The land use can be a mixture of agriculture and livestock raising, relying heavily on fodder from tree and shrub species. Agrisilvipasture should be practiced in areas that can support agriculture. Quite often, agrisilvipasture can take place in a valley, where agriculture is practiced on the valley floor and silvipasture is employed on the forest-covered slopes around the valley. Agrisilvipasture also can be practiced on the same piece of land, but not always at the same time. In some cases, fields in which trees or shrubs are growing can be farmed only during certain periods of the year, and grazed during other periods.
Figure 2.7 Examples of agrisilviculture practices.
5. Highlights of section
Trees and shrubs can maintain ecological balance and, in many instances, can improve the livelihood for the inhabitants of arid zones. Also, woody vegetation acts as a soil stabilizer and prevents water and soil erosion. Woody vegetation can be a source of forage for livestock and wildlife; fuelwood, poles, lumber, and food for humans; and non-wood products such as fibers, dyes, and pharmaceuticals. Over 50 percent of the wood from the world's forests is used as fuel. Scarcity of this resource can have detrimental effects on the well-being of some populations.
Woody vegetation is important as fodder for livestock during dry seasons and years when grasses and fortes are scarce. Creating forage plantations and two-storied pastures using trees and shrubs are ways to ensure a source of fodder. Also, trees and shrubs can improve agricultural production by reducing wind and water erosion and by improving soil fertility.
Agriculture, livestock production, and forestry can be practiced in rotation, simultaneously, or spatially on the same piece of land. Agroforestry aims to ensure ecological stability and to maximize benefits to the user of the land. Agroforestry can be agrosilviculture (where agricultural crops and forest products are grown simultaneously or sequentially), silvipasture (in which forest products and livestock are grown), and agrosilvipasture (where food is grown for humans, domestic livestock graze, and woody vegetation provides wood products for humans and fodder for animals).
Figure 2.8 Trees for shade for animals.
<section>5</section>
Chapter III. Techniques of nursery operations in arid zones
1. Introduction
2. Choice of site for the nursery
3. Design of the nursery
4. Collection, handling, storage and pre-treatment of seeds
5. Seedling production
6. Highlights of section
1. Introduction
Nurseries are places where seedlings are raised for planting purposes. In the nursery the young seedlings are tended from sowing to develop in such a way as to be able to endure the hard field conditions. Whether local or introduced species, nursery seedlings are found to have better survival than seeds sown directly in the field or through natural regeneration. So nursery seedlings become the planting material for plantations, whether these plantations are for production, protection or amenity.
Nurseries are of two types, i.e.:
Temporary nurseries: These are established in or near the planting site. Once the seedlings for planting are raised, the nursery becomes part of the planted site. There are sometimes called "flying nurseries" (Figure 3.1).
Permanent nurseries: These can be large or small depending on the objective and the number of seedlings raised annually. Small nurseries contain less than 100,000 seedlings at a time while large nurseries contain more than this number. In all cases permanent nurseries must be well-designed, properly sited and with adequate water supply (Figure 3.2).
Seedling production is a major expense of afforestation and every effort should be made to produce good quality seedlings at a reasonable cost. To this end mastering the techniques of nursery operations is essential. This chapter will review the various operations involved in the production of seedlings.
2. Choice of site for the nursery
When the site of the nursery is to be selected, four questions arise:
A. What is the type of the nursery?
Is it temporary or permanent?
B. What is the size of the nursery?
Is it large with 100,000 seedlings per year and more, or is it small with 50,000 seedling capacity per year or less?
Figure 3.1 A temporary nursery.
Figure 3.2 A permanent nursery.
C. Seedling demand
How big is the seedling demand? For example, a nursery surrounded by several development projects may demand huge amounts of different seedlings every year, whereas a nursery for small community woodlots may have a low annual seedling production.
D. Transport or distance from the nursery to places of seedling demand.
When these questions are answered, the nursery is sited where:
- Good water supply source is available, e.g. near a river or a well. Because water is very crucial to the nursery, this is a determining factor.
- Good soil source is available; as soil is bulky, it is needed in great quantities. Site soil must be at least free from salinity and alkalinity.
- Also the site must be well drained to avoid waterlogging and be fairly safe from flood hazards.
- Shelter against prevailing winds: sites which have a natural shelter by vegetation or any other formation are preferred to exposed sites. If the site is exposed then it must be sheltered artificially.
- The site must have good access roads to places of seedling demand. This will ensure that seedlings can reach the site in good condition. Bad roads and long journeys reduce seedling survival to a great extent.
- The nursery must be sited where labour is available or can be easily obtained and accommodated. Nursery work is labor-intensive and placing nurseries far away from habitation centres will be very costly.
3. Design of the nursery
Having decided on the site and size of the nursery, the site is carefully levelled, fenced, and a shelter from the prevailing wind is established.
The nursery must be well designed. The nursery is divided into a suitable number of blocks. These blocks contain adequate roads among them. Blocks are normally labelled by letters, e.g. A, B. C, etc. or by Roman numbers: block I, block II, block III, etc. Roads between the blocks should be wide enough to provide space for on-loading and offloading and contain turning space with a minimum width of 5 meters.
Each block is further divided into 4-8 sections with paths among them. Sections are labelled by their respective block label followed by a small letter, e.g. Section Ia denotes the first section from the left hand corner of block I (Figure 3.3).
Each section is further divided into beds. The bed is the smallest unit in the nursery design. Beds are normally one meter wide and their length may vary from 6-10 meters. Beds may be sunk in the ground at a depth of 30-35 cm below general ground level. In this case they may be laid with concrete, stone or bricks.
Also beds may be designed slightly higher than the general ground surface. In this case, the beds are surrounded by stakes, bricks or stones. In every case drainage in these beds is very important for seedling development and for nursery hygiene.
Beds are labelled by their blocks and section followed by Arabic figures, e.g. bed No. Ia1 denotes the first bed in section (a) of block I. Beds are separated by paths one meter wide to facilitate work and transport of seedlings by hand or wheelbarrow, watering and tending of seedlings.
In addition to these, the nursery design should contain adequate space for soil mixing (at least 5 x 5 meters). It should also contain a separate area for making compost. This is better placed slightly away from the nursery beds.
3.1 Size of the Nursery
The size of the nursery area stacked with containers (when containers are employed) and the total nursery area will vary with the diameter of the containers. The relationship between the diameter of containers (from 5 to 15 centimers) and the surface of the nursery area (in square meters) for the production of 100,000 potted plants is illustrated in Figure 3.4.
From Figure 3.4, one can see that, for containers with a diameter of 5 centimeters, 240 square meters of beds are required. To estimate the total nursery area, the area of seedbeds is multiplied by 2.5, to include road and service areas, and 100 square meters are added (for paths), based on the production of 2,000 seedlings per square meter of seedbed. Therefore, in general:
the total nursery area = (2.5 x area of seedbed) + 100 square meters and, for this example:
the total nursery area = (2.5 x 240) + 100 square meters
Figure 3.4 Relationship between the diameter of the containers and the surface of the nursery area.
Not all nursery operations involve the use of containers. When bare-rooted planting stock is produced, the size of a nursery will depend, in large part, upon the "average" size of the planting stock and the level of production to be maintained.
3.2 Nursery water supply
Two aspects should be emphasized: (a) water quality; and (b) daily water requirement.
Water quality: It must be slightly acidic with a pH less than 7, with dissolved salts less than 550 parts/million, and with a conductivity less than 0.8 mho/cm. Generally fairly sweet and clear.
Water quantity: Adequate water of the above description should be supplied daily to the nursery.
The amount of water applied (at any one time) will vary with the weather conditions, the soil infiltration rate, and the size of the plant. During the period of germination, frequent light" watering is required to keep the seedbeds moist, but not saturated. As plants become larger, the total quantity of water applied is increased and the frequency of application is reduced.
As a guide to estimate the quantity of water to apply in one month, the following calculation can be made:
water quantity = water loss factor x E x area of seedbed where: water loss factor = values between 1.2 and 1.4, averaging 1.3
E = monthly evaporation
For example, assuming a water loss factor of 1.3, for a monthly evapotranspiration (E) of 0.2 meter and a seedbed area of 10,000 square meters, the water requirement for one month is:
water quantity = 1.3 x 0.2 x 10,000 = 2,600 cubic meters
Watering can be either by hand or through irrigation. Hand watering with cans, hoses fitted with spray-nozzles, or knapsack mist sprayers are methods used by small nurseries. For watering containers or seedbeds in which seeds have been sown, a fine droplet size is essential. Otherwise, the seeds can be washed out of the ground or the seed covering material can be washed away and the soil surface will be consolidated. Therefore, hand watering of the seedbeds is commonly done with a gardener's watering can or a knapsack pressure sprayer fitted with a fine mist-producing nozzle.
4. Collection, handling, storage and pre-treatment of seeds
4.1 Seed quality
Seeds are either collected by the forester or obtained from a known seed source in the country or abroad. In the latter case, the seed must be of good quality:
- it must be clean from dirt, debris and chaff;
- it must be free from pests and pathogens;
- it must have a high percentage of germination;
- it must be accompanied by a note, carrying the scientific name of the species, place of collection, date of collection, number of seeds/unit weight and whether any treatment has been applied.
4.2 Seed collection
To ensure good seed quality, fruit collection must be made from trees having the desirable characters. Such trees are labelled and their locality recorded on a map (Figure 3.5).
The phonology of these trees should be observed as to when they would flower, set fruit, and have mature fruits. Does fruiting take place every year, every two years? Are there any factors affecting fruit production? e.g. drought, defoliation by insects, etc.
Nature of fruit: dehiscent or intact. Does it remain on the tree or fall to the ground?
Hazards to the fruits: collected by humans, animals, insects, pathogens, blown by wind?
Collection time and method: well developed and mature fruits contain good seeds. So the collection time is when fruits are fully matured.
Fruits are either collected from the tree by beating the tree with a stick, or shaking the crown with a long hook, or by climbing.
Some fruits fall to the ground and they are collected. In such a case, the place of collection is cleaned beforehand.
Treatment of fruits: Collected fruits are cleaned, sprayed against insects and spread on a clean sheet to dry.
Figure 3.5 Collection of seeds from Acacia victoriae
4.3 Seed extraction
This is the process of separating the seeds from the fruit. Therefore, the method of extraction varies with the type of fruit. For example, Acacia seyal and A. senegal legumes dehisce once they are completely dry and a gentle shaking is sufficient to extract the seeds, while Prosopis spp. seeds are difficult to extract. The fruit is first pounded to remove the pulpy material, then the remaining part of the fruit is treated with dilute hot hydrochloric acid for 30 minutes; then washed and dried and then pounded again to get rid of the thin cover over the seed.
Eucalyptus seeds are extracted very easily when fruits become brown on top; they are collected and put in clean open tins to dry, once dried the fruits open, shedding the seeds and chaff.
Hyphaene thebaica seeds are extracted by sawing-off the shell.
4.4 Seed drying
Once seeds are extracted, they are cleaned of chaff and dirt and dried in the sun or in an oven. If seeds are stored wet, moulds and pathogens may spoil them.
4.5 Seed storage
Seeds, whether bought or collected, must be stored in a proper way until needed. Dry seeds can be safely stored in air-tight polythene bags at room temperature.
When seeds are stored they are normally labelled, given a number and placed in an air-tight bag inside a closed tin. A single tin may contain several bags and a card register system is used to indicate in which tin seeds are stored and how much is left after using a given quantity.
4.6 Seed viability
Some seeds lose their viability in a short period, e.g. Azadirachta indica seeds lose viability in about 6 months. Therefore it is important to test seeds which are stored to determine their germination percentage and it is useless to store any seeds that fall below 40% germination unless they are very rare or very expensive. The viability can be tested by:
Germination test: Filter paper method - where seeds are small, about 100 seeds are germinated in a petri-dish over a filter paper. Silt test - 100 seeds are sown in a container with silt soil.
Tetrazonium chloride test: This is a chemical that imparts colour to living tissue. The seed is cut and the liquid is smeared onto the cut surface to find whether the embryo is alive.
4.7 Number of seeds per unit weight
It is very important to know the number of seeds per gram or kilogram. Because seeds are ordered by weight, unless one knows how many seeds there are per unit weight, one may order too few or too many seeds.
The number of seeds/unit weight for any species is determined by taking about ten random samples of seeds having the same weight, counting the number of each sample and obtaining the mean.
5. Seedling production
There are many operations involved in seedling production. The most essential ones are described below:
5.1 Nursery soil mixtures
Nursery potting soil should have the following characteristics:
- it must be light;
- it must be cohesive;
- it must have good water retention capacity;
- it must have high organic matter;
- it must be fairly fertile or made so by the addition of 2 kg NPK/M^3 of soil.
In the majority of countries with arid conditions, a mixture of one part sand, one part clay, and one part animal manure would be adequate. This is called 1:1:1 mixture. In the Sahel region, the mixture is formed of one part sand, one part manure and two parts soil. If river alluvium is available, it can be used directly.
5.2 Nursery soil treatment
Potting soil must be acidic (i.e. pH6). If it happens to be alkaline, it can be acidified by a solution of 2% sulphuric acid. Sometimes nursery soil has to be sterilized against pathogens by use of a 40% solution of formaldehyde applied as 80 cc per 5 litres of water and applied to the soil 7 to 10 days before sowing the seeds. Soil fumigation is also a treatment against fungi by methyl bromide gas.
5.3 Filling the pots/pot size
Polythene pots of different sizes are now used for raising nursery plants. This does not preclude the use of other containers like boxes, half tins, earth pots, etc (Figure 3.6). The pots are filled with nursery soil, taking care to have no voids by shaking and knocking regularly. The pots are filled, leaving a small space at the top, and stacked side by side on nursery beds.
It is very important to determine the pot size because: large pots require more soil, take a lot of labour to fill and transport; they occupy a large nursery space and require more water in contrast to small pots. But they produce large plants in a short time. The general rule is that "the harsher the planting site, the larger the pot should be".
The quantity of soil needed in a containerized nursery operation is directly related to the size of the containers used. The relationships between the diameter of the containers (ranging from 5 to 15 centimers) and their heights (15, 20 and 25 centimeters) and the soil volume (in square meters) is shown in Figure 3.7. A comparison between the smallest containers (diameter 5 centimeters, height 15 centimeters) and the largest (diameter 15 centimers, height 25 centimeters) is quite eloquent. To fill 100,000 small containers, 28 cubic meters of soil are needed; whereas 442 cubic meters of soil are needed for filling 100,000 of the largest containers (16 times more). Figure 3.6 can be used as a rapid method for estimating the amount of soil needed to fill containers with diameters between 5 and 15 centimeters, and heights ranging from 15 to 25 centimeters.
5.4 Pretreatment of seed
Some tree and shrub seeds are ready for sowing as soon as they are collected; others pass through a dormant stage, during which time the embryo completes its development. Often, a pre-treatment is used to hasten germination or to obtain a more even germination. The methods of pre-treatment vary with the different types of dormancy of tree and shrub seeds. The main types of dormancy are:
- Exogenous dormancy - associated with the properties of the pericarp or the seed coat (mechanical, physical, or chemical).
- Endogenous dormancy - determined by the properties of the embryo or the endosperm (morphological or physiological).
- Combined exogenous and endogenous dormancy.
Figure 3.6 Different kind of containers used for raising nursery stock.
Figure 3.7 Relationship between the diameter of the containers and their heights and the soil volume.
In general, the most frequently encountered type of dormancy in arid zones is exogenous dormancy. Some of the more commonly used methods of attempting to overcome this type of dormancy are described below.
Mechanical treatment - A small number of seeds can be scarified by scratching each seed with sandpaper, by cutting each seed with a knife, or by sandpapering the end of the seed that is opposite the radicle until the cotyledon is seen. With large quantities of seed, mechanical scarification can be achieved by pounding the seeds with sand, or by rubbing the seeds over an abrasive slab. A variety of other methods of scarification are also available.
Soaking in cold water - For a number of tree and shrub species soaking their seeds in cold water for from one to several days is sufficient to ensure germination. The improvement in germination is caused by the softening of the seed coat and the ensuring of adequate water absorption by the living tissues. When long soaking periods are used, it is recommended that the water be changed at intervals. Usually, it is important to sow the seed immediately after soaking without drying, because drying generally reduces the viability of the seed.
Soaking in hot or boiling water - The seeds of many leguminous species have extremely tough outer coats, which can delay germination for months or years after sowing, unless subjected to pre-treatment by immersion in hot or boiling water. The seed is immersed in two to three times its volume of boiling water, and allowed to soak from 1 to 10 minutes, or until the water is cold. The gummy mucilaginous exudations from the seed coat are then washed off by stirring in several lots of clean water.
Acid treatments - Soaking in solutions of acid is frequently used in the case of seeds with hard seed coats. Concentrated sulphuric acid (98 per cent) is the chemical used most generally. Most commonly, soaking times vary from 15 to 30 minutes. After soaking, the seed must be washed immediately in clean water. Tests should be made to determine the optimum period of treatment for each tree or shrub species, and even for different provenances, since overexposure to solutions of acid can easily damage the seed.
Seed inoculation - Legume trees have root nodules which harbor nitrogen-fixing bacteria. When seeds are planted outside their natural range, the soil should be inoculated with crushed nodules from natural stands. Some inoculum are available on the market which can be mixed with the seeds before germination.
Other treatments - For a number of salt bushes and shrubs such as Atriplex, washing seeds in cold water for one to two hours is sufficient to remove salt from the seeds and improve germination.
5.5 Sowing of seeds
Having determined the soil mixture, kind and size of container, one would proceed to sow the seeds.
Type of sowing: When the containers are beds or boxes, seeds can be sown by broadcasting or in lines. When the containers are pots, then it is pit sowing.
Depth of sowing: Seeds are sown at a depth of 1-3 times their diameter. When seeds are sown at this depth adequate moisture and optimum temperature will hasten their germination. Excessively deep sowing will impair seedling emergence. Small seeds like those of Eucalyptus are mixed with fine soil before sowing to facilitate uniform distribution of seeds and to avoid seed waste by dense sowing. To economize in sowing Eucalyptus seeds, the seeds are mixed with fine sand in the ratio of 2 sand: 1 seed. This mixture is placed in a container while a small brush is first dipped in water, then dipped in the sand/seed mixture and then brushed gently onto 4-5 nursery pots containing soil. This was found to give a maximum number of 4-5 seedlings per pot.
Ideal sowing time: This is determined by the period required to raise a plantable seedling of the desired size. For example, if it takes four months in the nursery to raise plantable seedlings of E. microtheca, to be planted in June; then the ideal sowing date for that species and locality is the first of February. Similarly, for planting in October, the ideal sowing date is the first of June.
5.6 Watering plants in the Nursery
After sowing, seed beds should be watered using a fine nozzle spray, producing almost a mist. This will-guard against removing and washing away fine seeds. Hand watering, whether by a container or with a hose, is the best method of watering. Watering is done frequently until seeds germinate.
5.7 Pricking out of seedlings
When seedlings raised in beds and boxes reach the 2-leaf stage, they are carefully picked up using a sharp stick and carefully replanted in pots or other beds. This is a very delicate process which is now avoided by sowing the seeds directly in pots and thinning the excess seedlings leaving only one good seedling per pot.
5.8 Care of Nursery Stock
The production of good quality seedlings will depend on how well the following activities have been executed in its nursery:
Weeding: Weeds compete for water and soil nutrients. They also block the circulation of air and may harbor insects and disease organisms. Where weeds are permitted to grow in the seedbeds, seedlings will be of poor quality; therefore weed competition must be eliminated.
The methods of ensuring a minimum of weeds in the nursery are: prevention, eradication and control.
Prevention is the practical method. It is accomplished by making sure that weeds are not carelessly introduced in the nursery. Eradication is the complete removal of weeds and their seeds from the nursery.
Control is the process of limiting weed dissemination. Eradication and control are generally carried out as one operation in the nursery.
Root pruning: Some of the tree and shrub species best adapted to arid zone environments are characterized by a strong taproot. However, when raised in a container, the development of the taproot becomes constricted; it can emerge from the bottom and will grow into the soil of the bed beneath if it is not cut.
The purpose of root pruning is not only to prevent the development of a long taproot, but to encourage the growth of a fibrous lateral root system in the pot or bed.
Root pruning can be done by drawing a piano wire between the base of the containers and the bed surface so as to cut through the descending roots. Alternatively, it can be done by lifting the pots and snapping off the roots. The timing and frequency of the pruning must be adjusted to the speed with which the roots grow and emerge from the bottom of the containers.
Control of Damping-off: Damping-off is a common and serious disease in many forest nurseries. It can occur either in seed beds or in containers after transplanting. Damping-off is a pre-emergent and seedling disease caused by various fungi. Some of these fungi attack the seed just as germination starts, whereas others infect the newly germinated seedlings. Affected seedlings topple over, as though broken at the ground line, or remain erect and dry up. A watery-appearing constriction of the stem at the ground line is generally visible evidence of the disease. Damping-off is favored by high humidity, damp soil surface, heavy soil, cloudy weather, an excess of shade, a dense stand of seedlings, and alkaline conditions.
One of the best preventive measures for damping-off is to maintain a dry soil surface through cultivation, to reduce the sowing density, and to thin the seedlings to create better aeration at the ground line. The need for soil fumigation is minimized in nurseries where fresh soil mixtures are prepared annually.
Hardening-off: Seedlings continue under nursery care while they develop for 2-3 months. Then the good ones will be selected and placed in separate beds. They are given less water and exposed to the sun gradually to condition them for planting in the site. This hard treatment is called hardening-off. Seedlings will develop a dark green colour and look healthier in the open than under nursery shade.
5.9 Vegetative propagation
Not all trees and shrubs used in planting programmes are produced from seed. Species whose propagation by seed is difficult can often be reproduced by vegetative propagation. Nursery stock that is obtained by vegetative propagation includes stumps, cuttings, and sets.
"Stump" is a term applied to nursery stock of broad-leaved species which has been subjected to drastic pruning of both the roots and the shoot. The top is generally cut back to 2 centimeters and the root to about 22 centimeters. Stump planting is suitable for "taproot-dominated" species. Frequently, stumped plants are used in sand dune stabilization plantations. Stumps are normally covered with wet sacks or layers of large leaves during transit to the planting site.
Cuttings and sets are also commonly used as planting stock. A "cutting" is a short length cut from a young living stem or branch for propagating; a cutting produces a whole plant when planted in the field. A rooted cutting is one that has been rooted in the nursery prior to field planting. "Sets" are long, relatively thin, stem cuttings or whole branches.
5.10 Size and quality of planting stock
There is a considerable range in what is considered the desired size of tree or shrub seedlings for planting. The optimum size varies, depending on whether the seedlings are bare-rooted or containerized, on the tree or shrub species to be planted, and on the characteristics of the planting site.
In general, it is agreed that plants with a well-proportioned root-to-shoot ratio represent good planting stock, but it is difficult to define an "optimum" root-to-shoot ratio. A root-to-shoot ratio based on weight might give a more accurate measure of balance. Stem diameter and height are other criteria for evaluating planting stock that might allow the setting of minimum acceptable limits. Experience indicates that medium-sized stock, between 15 and 40 centimeters, with a woody root collar, have a better survival rate that do smaller plants.
The maximum size for planting potted stock is largely determined by the size of the container. The larger the container, the larger the plant that can be grown in it; but the period of growth is limited to that free of harmful root restriction. Excessively tall plants can be lessened in the ground or blown over, and root development might be restricted or inadequate to cope with the high transpiration demand of a large top.
5.11 Preparation of seedlings for the planting site
Seedlings of plantable size are first graded. The grading of planting stock depends, to a large extent, on local experience and the establishment of local standards. The main objectives of a grading system for planting stock are:
- To eliminate culls, seedlings with damaged or diseased tops or roots.
- To eliminate seedlings below minimum standards of size and root development.
- To segregate the seedlings that exceed the minimum standards into two or more quality classes.
5.12 Transport of seedlings to the planting site
Packing of container-raised plants for transport presents few problems. They are put in trays and loaded into vehicles. The tins which have been used for seedling trays can be used for transporting container plants. Sometimes wooden trays are used, but these are heavy.
Often, plants are damaged during transport to the planting site. Therefore, adequate care must be taken to avoid mishandling of plants during loading and unloading from vehicles. Something that is often forgotten is that plants require protection during transportation, as the air-flow can cause drying. It also is important that the containers are packed tightly, so that they cannot move. Special shelves for stacking pots or trays can be added to the vehicle platform (each layer of trays being placed on a shelf, with one shelf about 50 centimeters above the other). When possible, plants should be transported in the planting season on cool, cloudy, or even rainy days to prevent desiccation during transport.
Shipping schedules should be planned to avoid delays and to allow proper disposition of the plants immediately upon arrival. Normally, plants should arrive one day ahead of planting; where shade and watering facilities are available, supplies can be brought several days in advance. As soon as the plants arrive at the planting site, they must be watered and, if necessary, heeled-in in a cool, moist, shaded place until they are needed for planting.
5.13 Organization of seedling production
Seedling production must be organized in such a way that plantable seedlings of good quality are produced in time. As time of planting is critical in arid countries - except when irrigation is applied - the organization becomes very important. All the processes which have been described earlier must be done perfectly and in time. These include a) seeds and their treatment; b) soil mixture; c) filling of pots; d) sowing; e) watering; f) pricking out; g) weeding; h) root pruning; i) provision of shade and shelter; j) cutting; k) hardening off; and l) transport to the planting site.
Only the number which can be planted in one day should be removed from the nursery to the site. According to the planting programme seedlings are hardened off and transported. The number of plants raised originally in the nursery is about 20% more than that planted in the field. This is to make up for culling and a reserve for replacing dead plants.
Administration is also very important in nursery work to ensure that:
a) nursery activities (jobs) are done correctly;
b) these activities are done in time;
c) labour requirement is available (man-days) for performing the work; and
d) materials/tools and equipment required to do the work are suitable.
This requires a nurseryman having a fair knowledge of labour productivity, nursery technique and prices of materials. Records of nursery seedling production as well as costs of materials and labour are kept to show the economics of nursery work.
Labour and material requirements depend on the size of the nursery.
Forms showing cost of tasks, e.g. seed collection, filling of pots with soil, sieving, mixing and preparing nursery soil, should be designed and filled in regularly.
<section>6</section>
6. Highlights of section
Successful nursery operations in arid zones require an adequate water supply, a nearby source of suitable soil, a well-drained surface area, shelter from wind and sun, accessibility, and knowledge of the planting season. Consideration of soil mixing, container storage, vehicular movement, transplanting, irrigation, seed storage and seed testing for viability, purity, and germination is necessary for a successful layout of the nursery site.
Planting stock can be bare-rooted, or potted plants. A variety of materials can be used to form containers; however, the most common is polythene. Desirable characteristics of soil mixture for containers include lightness, cohesiveness, good water retentive capacity, and high organic and mineral content. The quantity of soil required is directly related to the size of the containers.
Damping-off, a potentially serious problem in nurseries, is a disease which can be chemically controlled with soil acidification (using sulphuric acid), sterilization (with formaldehyde or methyl bromide), and treatment of soil or seeds with fungicides.
Dormancy in seeds can be overcome with a variety of treatments, such as soaking in cold, hot, or boiling water, or in acids. Seeds are commonly sown in seedbeds or seedling trays; then the seedlings are transplanted into containers. Root pruning is a method of encouraging growth of the fibrous lateral root system and of preventing development of a long tap root. In addition to germination from seed, plants may be propagated from stumps, cuttings, or sets.
The size and quality of planting stock, and the conditions related to transportation of the seedlings to the planting site, are also necessary considerations for a successful planting programme in arid zones.
A nursery record should follow the seedlings to the planting site, carrying: name of the nursery, species, date of sowing and date of lifting from the nursery, number of seedlings and mean height of seedlings.
<section>7</section>
Chapter IV. Establishment and management techniques of forest plantations
1. Introduction
2. Site reconnaissance
3. Selection of the planting site
4. Species selection
5. Preparation of the planting site
6. Time of planting
7. Planting of containerized stock
8. Spacing of plantings
9. Maintenance of the plantation
10. Harvesting operations
11. Highlights of section
1. Introduction
To appreciate the need for forest plantations in arid zones, the roles played by these plantations must be defined. Quite often, there are a number of roles (such as fuelwood or fodder production) which, through careful planning, can be combined to achieve multiple benefits. This section of the manual describes the techniques for the establishment and management of forest plantations in arid zones.
2. Site reconnaissance
The more information there is available about the site conditions in the area being considered for tree and shrub planting, the better are the chances of selecting the tree and shrub species best suited to the area. Information most commonly included in site reconnaissance is:
- Climate - temperature, rainfall (amount and distribution), relative humidity, and wind.
- Soil - depth of soil and its capacity to retain moisture, texture, structure, parent material, pH, degree of compaction, and drainage.
- Topography - important for its modifying effects on both climate and soil.
- Vegetation - composition and ecological characteristics of natural and (when present) introduced vegetation. On areas which have not been degraded by man, the vegetation can provide an indication of the site. Unfortunately, over much of the arid world, the vegetation has been so disturbed that it is no longer a reliable indicator of potential planting sites; in these situations, site selection should be based on soil surveys.
- Other biotic factors - past history and present land use influences on the site, including fire, domestic livestock and wild animals, insects and diseases.
- Watertable levels - a knowledge of the depth and variation of the watertable levels in the wet and dry seasons is valuable and can be crucial in determining the tree and shrub species that can be grown. Watertable levels can be estimated from observations in wells or by borings made for this purpose.
- Availability of supplementary water sources - ponds, lakes, streams, and other water sources.
- Distance from nursery.
Apart from the above biophysical information, socio-economic factors also play an important role. Among these factors are:
- The availability of labour.
- Motivation of the local population.
- The distance of the forest plantation to the market and consumer centers.
- Land ownership and tenure.
3. Selection of the planting site
Where to plant is generally a collective decision made by policy makers, foresters, and the planting crews, based on information obtained in the site reconnaissance. The key is to select the site that, when planted, will lead to the establishment of a successful forest plantation. Often, the choice of the planting site is limited to lands which are not suited for agriculture or livestock production; when this is the case, the site reconnaissance information gains importance.
The boundaries of the planting site, once the area has been chosen, should be marked with boundary posts. When there is a danger of trespassing and damage by grazing animals, a boundary fence should be established. Fencing is costly and, therefore, should only be built when other means of protection are not effective. Once a forest plantation is well established and the trees are sufficiently tall, the fences can be removed and reused at another planting site.
When roads and other passageways traverse the planting site, they should also be contained with fences.
In many instances, tree and shrub planting is undertaken to protect fragile sites from degradation. However, in some situations, the fragile sites should not be planted; it may be better not to disturb the soil in these areas. Where gullies have been severely degraded by erosion, protective measures other than the planting of vegetation (such as building small checkdams) may be necessary.
4. Species selection
When the best possible information has been collected on the characteristics of the site to be planted, the next step is the selection of the tree or shrub species to plant. The aim is to choose species which are suited to the site, will remain healthy throughout the anticipated rotation, will produce acceptable growth and yield, and will meet the objectives of the plantation (fuelwood production, protection, etc.).
For a successful planting, performance data may have to be extrapolated from one locality to another. Results from a locality where a tree or shrub species is growing (either naturally or as an exotic) strictly apply only to that locality; their application in another locality involves the assumption of site comparability, an assumption which may or may not be justified. When reliable information shows a close similarity between the site to be planted and that on which the species is already successful, it is generally possible to proceed to large-scale planting with confidence.
In practice, the above data are seldom available, and planting on the new site becomes (in effect) experimental and should proceed on a small scale; when this occurs, detailed performance records should be maintained throughout the experimental planting period.
The selection of tree or shrub species through the use of analogous climates is important as a first step; but this must be amplified by an evaluation of localized factors which can be more important (for example, soil, slope, and biotic factors). However, the ability to match closely a planting site and a natural habitat may not preclude the need for species trials, since climatological or ecological matching may not reveal the adaptability of a species. It cannot be emphasized too strongly that, without such trials, the choice of tree or shrub species is (in most cases) a risky business. Since planting in arid environments is normally an expensive undertaking, large-scale failures which result from the wrong choice of species or failure to test them can prove costly.
5. Preparation of the planting site
When the tree or shrub seedlings arrive from the nursery, the site should have been prepared to ensure that planting can proceed without delay. Arid zone conditions frequently demand more intensive and thorough site preparation than is necessary for planting programmes in moister climates.
5.1 Objectives of site preparation
Among the objectives of site preparation in arid zones are to:
- Remove competing vegetation from the site.
- Create conditions that will enable the soil to catch and absorb as much rainfall as possible. Surface runoff should be reduced to increase the moisture in the soil.
- Provide good rooting conditions for the planting, including a sufficient volume of rootable soil. Hardpans must be eliminated.
- Create conditions where danger from fire and pests is minimized.
Site preparation is directed toward giving the seedlings a good start with rapid early growth. In general, the methods used to achieve site preparation will vary with the type of vegetation, amount and distribution of rainfall, presence or absence of impermeable layers in the soil, the need for protection from desiccating winds, and scale of the planting operations. Additionally, the value of the tree or shrub crop to be grown is important in determining the amount of expense that may be justified in plantation establishment.
5.2 Methods of site preparation
In general, preparation of the site by hand is possible and economical only for relatively small-scale projects, where the labour of clearing the competing vegetation and working the soil is not too time-consuming. Under certain conditions, animal-drawn ploughs and harrows can also be economical for small-scale operations.
Mechanical soil preparation, used increasingly in large-scale planting programmes, has become a common practice in many areas; often, this is because the supply of labour and the time available for ground preparation are too limited to permit large-scale projects to be undertaken by hand. Some operations, such as deep subsoiling and the breaking up of hardpans, can only be done by machines.
Whatever method of site preparation is used, a planting pit (of an appropriate size) should be prepared. The objective of creating planting pits is to aerate and loosen the soil in which the plants will grow. When these planting pits are prepared, they should not be left empty with the excavated soil lying on the ground, but refilled immediately, otherwise sun and wind will dry out the soil completely (Figure 4.1 A & B).
Figure 4.1A Planting holes 0.4 m x 0.4 m x 0.4 m at a density of 3 m x 3 m.
Figure 4.1B One year old Eucalyptus planted in holes (Gujaab) India
Soil preparation can be carried out in patches, strips, or by complete cultivation. Complete cultivation is necessary for tree and shrub species which are intolerant of competition from grass, forte, and woody growth (such as most eucalyptus species). Sometimes, spot preparation may be sufficient, but the spots should be large (for example, 1 to 1.5 meters in diameter). Also, it is important that the work be done thoroughly.
Other methods of soil preparation by hand are the ash-bed method, tie-ridging, contour trenching and terracing, and the "steppe" method.
The ash-bed technique consists of piling the debris from harvesting or clearing the land into long lines or stacks. After drying, the debris is burned and vegetation is planted in the ash patches. Sometimes, the lines or stacks of debris are covered with "clods" to obtain a more intense heat when burning. Advantages of this method are that the burning kills the competing vegetation, the area remains free of this vegetation for an appreciable period, and the ash provides a useful fertilizer for the planted trees or shrubs.
The tie-ridging technique involves the cultivation of the entire area and the establishment of ridges at specified intervals. The main ridges, aligned along the contours, are joined by smaller ridges at right-angles to create a series of more-or-less square basins which retain rainwater and prevent erosion. The ridges are generally 3 meters apart. The trees and shrubs are planted on the ridges. This method is suitable for flat or gently sloping ground and can be combined with an agricultural crop during the initial years of plantation establishment (Figures 4.2 and 4.3).
Trenching techniques along the contours are used in site preparation in hilly country. The trenches can be continuous (Figure 4.4), divided by cross banks, or consist of short discontinuous lengths (Figure 4.5), arranged so that the gaps between the trenches in one row are opposite those in the next row; in this latter instance, runoff from rainfall is caught. Trenches are formed manually or mechanically. On gently sloping ground, the herring-bone technique can be used (Figure 4.6).
Terraces, which are wider and flatter than trenches, can be either manually or mechanically formed on the side of a hill by digging soil from the uphill side and depositing it on the downhill side. Usually, the bottom of the terrace is made to slope into the hillside. The purpose of terracing is to retard and collect water runoff between the terraces. Because of the improved soil moisture conditions, the terrace provides improved conditions for plant growth. Planting is done on the ridge of soil, at the base of the ridge, or in patches at the bottom of the trench, according to moisture conditions. Terraces are used widely on moderate to severe slopes. Terraces can be 2 to 3 meters or several hundred meters in length (Figure 4.7). If short, they can be staggered on the hillside wherever convenient. Sometimes, crescent-shaped terraces are constructed with the two tips of the crescent pointing uphill.
Figure 4.2 Soil preparation involving winging
Figure 4.3 Growth of fodder species and annuals one year after winging
Figure 4.4 2 year old Acacia modesta planted in continuous trenches.
Figure 4.5 Acacia modesta and Acacia nilotica planted in discontinuous trenches.
Figure 4.6 Herring-bone technique for soil preparation.
Figure 4.7 Soil preparation technique on steep slopes.
The "steppe method of site preparation is designed to promote growth of trees and shrubs in extremely dry areas. In this method, the surface of the soil is modified by breaking-up and stirring the deep layers of the soil with rooters, rippers, or large discs, and then building widely-spaced, parallel ridges following the contour. Ridges are built with the topsoil, and trees or shrubs are planted on the lower half of the ridges facing the slope; here, the depth of moist soil is greatest, due to accumulation of water after rain. The purpose of the "steppe" method is to maintain a reserve of moisture in the deep layers of the soil. Spacing between ridges is greater with lower rainfall, as the catchment area between the ridges is increased.
6. Time of planting
The planting season generally coincides with the rainy season; usually, planting is started as soon as a specified quantity of rain has fallen. This amount of precipitation must be judged on the basis of local knowledge. Planting can also be initiated when the soil is wet to a specified depth (approximately 20 centimeters).
A common mistake is to start planting too soon. On the other hand, if planting is started too late, it may be difficult to complete a large planting programme in the scheduled time, and the plants will lose the maximum benefit of rains after planting; this can be a serious matter where the rainfall is low and erratic.
7. Planting of containerized stock
Planting of containerized stock is usually done in holes that are large enough to take the containers or the root-balls when the plants are removed from the containers. It is essential that the surrounding soil is firmed down around the plant immediately after planting to avoid the formation of air gaps which can lead to root desiccation.
A good practice for the preparation of planting holes is to surround the planting pit with a small ridge (15 to 20 centimeters in height) of soil, to obtain a small basin (about 80 centimeters in diameter); this is especially helpful when the plants are watered individually after planting. The small prepared basin can also be covered with a plastic sheet (held in place on the ground with stones or earth), with an opening in the center for the plant, as illustrated in Figure 4.8. The plastic sheet impedes evaporation of ground water from the planting hole; also, dew collects on its surface and runs to the central opening of the sheet to irrigate the roots. Through conservation of soil moisture, plastic films facilitate more rapid establishment and growth of trees and shrubs during the initial, and most critical years. Another benefit of opaque plastic films is that they inhibit weed growth by reducing light penetration. With the suppression of weeds in the immediate vicinity
of the plants, labour also can be saved.
Figure 4.8 A planting hole with plastic apron to impede evaporation of ground water.
A threat to newly-planted trees in arid zones is the high rate of transpiration. Unless the plants can establish themselves quickly and compensate for the transpiration by taking water through their root systems, they will wilt soon after planting. This explains why even a single watering immediately after planting can be useful. In general, containerized seedlings have a distinct advantage over barerooted seedlings, in that the earthball surrounding the roots provides protection during transport and enables the plant to establish itself quickly and easily.
The restriction of lateral root extension, a result of using containers, can cause root malformation, coiling, and spiralling (Figure 4.9). In extreme cases, the coiling can lead to strangulation of the roots and the death of the plant (Figure 4.10). In other situations, it may reduce wind-firmness or lead to stunted growth. Unfortunately, the symptoms may not become apparent until 4 to 5 years after planting.
To reduce the damage of root malformation in containerized plants, a common practice is to remove the container from the soil cylinder before planting and make two or three vertical incisions to a depth of one centimeter with a knife to cut "strangler" roots. As a further precaution, the bottom 0.5 to 1 centimeter of the soil cylinder can be sliced off. Care must be used to ensure that the soil does not disintegrate and expose the roots to desiccation.
<section>8</section>
8. Spacing of plantings
By observing trees and shrubs growing under natural conditions, it is often found that plants grow widely apart in low rainfall areas. Therefore, wide spacing of plantings in arid zones generally should be practiced to avoid competition for soil moisture.
The amount of water available to a tree or shrub in a plantation is proportional to the stand density. On dry sites, it is necessary to plant widely apart and to remove all competing ground vegetation; this increases infiltration of rainwater and decreases water losses through transpiration by plants and evaporation from the soil. When irrigation or mechanical cultivation is practiced, it is necessary to adjust spacing to the width of the machinery used and to ensure that plants are placed in straight rows. Actual spacing varies with species, site, and the purpose of the forest plantation. In fuelwood plantations, for example, one might prefer closer spacings than employed in other kinds of plantations. Seldom can a spacing of less than 3 x 3 meters be applied, however.
The number of trees per hectare, according to the spacing between the lines in a plantation and the spacing of plants within a line, is given in Table 4.1. For example, with a spacing between lines of 3 meters and a spacing of plants within a line of 3 meters, a planting density of 1,111 trees per hectare will be required.
Figure 4.9 Illustration showing the most common type of root doiling (one lateral root and the main root)
Figure 4.10 Ten old Pinus pinea planted with the plastic container.
Table 4.1. Number of trees per hectare according to spacing
Spacing of plants in the lines
Spacing between lines
0.50 m
0.50 m
<section>9</section>
9. Maintenance of the plantation
Once a plantation has been established, the work should not be considered finished. It will be necessary, for example, to protect the plantation against weather, fire, insects and fungi, and animals. A variety of cultural treatments also may be required to meet the purpose of the plantation.
9.1 Protection
Weather Phenomena: the occurrence of damaging weather phenomena is usually unpredictable. Little can be done to protect forest plantations against the damage caused by weather, except to grow tree and shrub species known to be resistant to the detrimental effects of local weather patterns, or locating the stands of trees or shrubs in sheltered areas. Some tree and shrub species are more windfirm than others, or are less prone to crowns and branches breaking off in high winds. Other species are more tolerant to salt spray and, therefore, can be used for planting in belts along exposed seaward flanks to give protection to other less tolerant species forming the main plantation. Thin-barked species are more susceptible to damage and to subsequent attacks by insects or fungi than are other species.
Fire: damage by fire imposes a serious threat to plantations. The fire risk is generally high in the dryer climatic regions; but, even in relatively moist or high rainfall areas, there may be warm and dry spells when the fire risk is high. Fire risk should be a major consideration from the early stages of plantation development.
Fires can originate from natural causes, such as lightning, but many occur as a result of the activities of man. Plantation fires can start from fires spreading from farmland on the perimeter, from the activities of hunters, or from burning by herdsman to improve livestock grazing. There have been instances of deliberate burning to create employment (in the fire suppression and subsequent replanting) or to show disapproval of forest policies. It is not possible to prevent a climatic build-up of fire hazard conditions, but much can be done to minimize the risk of fire through public education and involving local people in forestry.
A main principle in protecting forest plantations against fire is that, where there is insufficient combustible material to allow a ground fire to develop, there is little or no fire risk. Dangerous and damaging plantation fires can only develop when fire is able to occur at ground level.
In many parts of the world, annual or periodic burning of vegetation is commonly practiced to improve grazing conditions, to reduce the build-up of fuels, or to improve soil fertility through accumulation of ash.
Insects and fungi: most insects and fungi are selective of the host species. In their natural environment, trees and shrubs normally attain a state of equilibrium with indigenous pests. However, when exotic trees and shrubs are planted, exotic pests can also be introduced. Quite often, these exotic pests readily adapt themselves to the conditions of their new habitat. In general, the risk of damage from pests is higher when the plants are physiologically weakened from planting on unsuitable sites, improper site preparation, inefficient planting, adverse climatic conditions, or neglect of weeding and other maintenance operations. But even healthy trees and shrubs are attacked at times. For many insects and fungi, no control measures are available; when this is the case, the best precaution is to plant tree and shrub species or varieties known to be resistant to the pests.
The main precautions to be taken in guarding against possible future damage from insects and fungi are to plant tree or shrub species that are suitable to the climatic and soil conditions of the site, and to make surveys of indigenous pests to ensure that none are among the known forms to which the selected species is susceptible; but this is seldom easy, especially in view of the gaps in available knowledge on site requirements and susceptibility of exotic species to insects and fungi. To obtain this needed information, carefully controlled experiments should be initiated before developing large-scale planting programmes.
Care taken in establishment and maintenance operations during the early years of a plantation (resulting in healthy vigorous young trees or shrubs) can help to make a plantation more resistant to insects and fungi. However, when evidence of pest attack appears, it should be investigated promptly and the cause identified. Various control measures are available; these may be silvicultural, chemical, biological, or mechanical.
Silvicultural measures include well timed, careful thinnings after establishment of the forest plantation. Through thinning, poor and suppressed stems are eliminated, maintaining the plantation in a thrifty and vigorous growing condition. In young plantations, prompt removal and destruction of infested trees and shrubs can be effective in preventing the spread of the pest attacks to the rest of the plantation. Where a threat of infection is known to exist, planting of tree or shrub mixed species also can be considered a silvicultural control measure.
One disadvantage of mixed plantings is that subsequent forest management can be complicated; however, this may be avoided, at least partially, by planting alternate blocks or wide belts with different tree or shrub species, forming barriers to the spread of a pest or disease from the initial point of infection.
Insects and fungi can often be checked by applications of appropriate chemical insecticides or fungicides. Usually, these chemicals are available as liquids (or wettable powder), dusts, or smokes. Spraying with hand-operated spray guns or portable mist-blowers is frequently used to control attacks in young plantations; with canopy closure, aerial spraying and dusting or smoking can be more effective and cheaper. Only previously tested and environmentally sound insecticides and fungicides should be prescribed for use.
Biological control of insects has been employed with success in some situations; in most instances, the introduction of a parasite to control the insects is required. The greatest success in biological control is usually achieved after the problem has grown to epidemic proportions.
Mechanical control, either by physically removing and destroying the pests or by eliminating the alternative hosts, can be effective.
Wild animals: damage to forest plantations by wild animals mainly takes the form of tree browsing or de-barking. In general, there are three orders of wild animals responsible for damage: rodents (rats, mice, and moles and squirrels); lagomophs (hares and rabbits); and artiodactyls (deer, antelopes, pigs and buffaloes). The principal methods of controlling damage by wild animals involves the use of fences, hedges or ditches, trapping and removal, and poison baits.
Domestic animals: in some countries, grazing or browsing by sheep, goats and cattle can be a menace to young plantations. At times, hedges and fences are used to prevent intrusion by domestic animals. Where fencing costs are high, trespass by livestock can be controlled by guards.
In many dry areas, grazing by goats is a traditional land use. Extensive enclosures of forest plantations can impose drastic changes in the habits and economies of the rural communities affected. In such situations, it would be unwise to initiate planting programmes unless alternative means of livelihood can be provided beforehand; generally, this requires the integration of community development schemes (for example, improved agriculture or animal husbandry, better communications, schools, or medical welfare) and increased opportunities for employment by the development of rural industries (such as afforestation programmes and rural forest industries).
9.2 Cultural treatments
Cultural operations are required to promote the conditions that are favorable to the survival and subsequent growth and yield of the trees or shrubs in the plantation. In most forest plantations, cultural operations are concerned with preventing the trees and shrubs from being suppressed by competing vegetation; quite often, this treatment is called weeding. Other cultural treatments are thinning to achieve a desired spacing among the trees or shrubs, and the periodic watering of the plants.
Weeding: weeding is a cultural operation that eliminates or suppresses undesirable vegetation which, if no action were taken, would impair the growth of the plantation crop. This undesirable vegetation competes with trees and shrubs for light, water, and nutrients; weeding increases the availability of all or the most critical of these elements to the trees and shrubs. A primary objective of weeding is to promote growth and development of the plantation crop, while keeping the costs of the operation within acceptable limits.
A main factor affecting the intensity and duration of weeding treatments is the relationship between the tree or shrub crop and the weeds. On some sites, the plantation crop eventually grows through the weeds, dominates the site, and becomes established; on such sites, the function of weeding is to increase crop uniformity and speed up the process of establishment and growth. On other sites, the type or density of the weed growth is such that, in the early stage of a forest plantation, it may suppress and kill some or all of the planted trees or shrubs; in such areas, the main purpose of weeding is to reduce mortality and maintain an adequate stocking of trees or shrubs.
The methods of weeding involve either suppression or elimination of the competing vegetation. Suppression of weeds consists of physically beating down or crushing them, or cutting the weeds back at or above ground level. Weed elimination can be achieved by killing the weeds, destroying the whole plant either by cultivation or by the use of chemicals. Weeding may be total or partial.
Thinning: thinning of forest plantations, particularly those established for wood production, may be required to obtain the desired spacing between the trees. In general, this spacing is a compromise between a "wide" spacing to reduce planting costs and inter-tree competition in times of drought, and a "close" spacing to attain early canopy closure, the suppression of weeds, the reduction of weeding costs, and natural pruning of branches through shading.
In "first-rotation" forest plantations, the thinning objective is frequently to adjust the initial spacing among plants, so that the size and type of tree or shrub required is attained on a short rotation, without secondary thinning treatments. Where a tree or shrub of larger size and higher quality is required, closer than final spacing is often prescribed in an initial thinning; usually, some form of secondary thinning is necessary as a subsequent treatment. The element of selection in thinning should ensure that the increment growth of the final crop is concentrated on the best stems.
Regardless of the purpose of the thinning operation, it should follow closely the timing and spacing requirements that are outlined in a prescribed thinning schedule for the area.
Watering: often, forest plantations in arid regions need at least periodic watering during the first growing season to obtain a satisfactory survival rate. Watering should begin after the cessation of rains, when the moisture content of the soil has fallen to near the wilting coefficient; then watering should be repeated at intervals until the onset of the next rainy season. Before each watering, the area around the tree should be cleared of weeds, and a shallow basin should be made around the stem of each tree or shrub to collect as much water as possible.
Watering can be an expensive operation, especially on terrain too steep or too rough for the passage of tank vehicles. Pack animals may be required to carry drums of water to the plantation site. Watering can be uneconomic for large forest plantations, particularly when the source of water is a long distance from the plantation, but it may be justified in the case of small plantations or for establishing roadside avenues.
In some instances, regular cultivation and weeding, especially during the first growing season, are sufficient measures to conserve soil moisture for satisfactory survival of the plants, eliminating the need for watering.
10. Harvesting operations
For forest plantations that are established for purposes of wood production, trees and shrubs are harvested once they attain the "optimum size" for the wood product wanted. From a biological standpoint, trees and shrubs should not be cut until they have at least grown to the minimum size required for production utilization. Beyond attaining the minimum size, the question of when to harvest must still be answered, however.
Quite often, the average annual growth rates of a forest plantation can be used as a guide in determining when to harvest wood. In general, the average annual growth of trees and shrubs increases slowly during the initial years of plantation establishment, reaches a maximum, and then falls more gradually, as illustrated in Figure 4.11. Trees and shrubs usually should not be allowed to grow beyond the point of maximum average annual growth, which is the age of maximum productivity; foresters call this the "rotation" age of the forest plantation.
To determine the average annual growth rate of a forest plantation at a point-in-time, the volume and age of the trees or shrubs must be estimated; then the average annual growth (at the specified point-in-time) is determined by dividing the standing volume by the corresponding age. Again, careful measurements of volumes and known ages are necessary for this determination.
Figure 4.11 Relationship between tree age and tree growth indicating the rotation age.
Economic considerations also help to determine when to harvest trees and shrubs for wood products. When based solely on market factors, the time to harvest is when the profit is maximized. Profit is maximized when the returns generated from harvesting and selling the wood minus the costs of harvesting and (when required) processing the wood into the desired products is the greatest.
The methods of felling trees and shrubs, cutting the stems and branchwood into the desired lengths, and removing the wood from the plantation site should be chosen to minimize degradation of the site. Axes, saws, wedges and sledges may be all that are necessary to fell the trees and shrubs and cut them into the desired lengths. Power-chainsaws are used in many instances; while their use makes harvesting easier, their high cost of operation can make then uneconomical.
Once the trees and shrubs are felled and cut into desired lengths, they must be carried or pulled to loading points for transport to processing sites or directly to a market place. When stem lengths are too heavy to carry, a simple drag or sled can be employed to move them, using an available power source, such as a domestic animal or a tractor. When residual trees or shrubs are left in the forest plantation, the harvesting operation should be carried out to prevent damage to this standing resource.
It is important that the methods of harvesting should be selected to "match" the skills of the people who will harvest the trees or shrubs. Once again, advanced planning will be necessary to ensure that the labour and required equipment will be available for use at the needed time.
11. Highlights of section
In selecting appropriate tree and shrub species for plantations in arid zones, site condition information (on climate, soils, topography, biotic factors, vegetation, and water table levels), as well as knowledge of socio-economic factors, must be known. Once the site and species have been selected for planting, fencing which marks boundaries and protects the trees and shrubs should be erected, if required. For a successful tree or shrub crop, site preparation is often necessary; site preparation may include removal of competing vegetation, enhancing water catchment, reducing water runoff, providing good soil conditions, eliminating fire hazards, and preparing the soil.
In general, planting coincides with the rainy season. After planting, use of opaque plastic films can impede evaporation and inhibit weed growth around potted stock. The spacings of the plantings should be wide enough to prevent competition for soil moisture, or when part of management, to accommodate machinery used for irrigation.
Maintenance of forest plantations includes protecting the plants from detrimental climatic conditions, fire, insects and fungi, and animals. Maintenance may include measures that are silvicultural (such as well-timed and careful removal of damaged trees and shrubs), chemical (with insecticides or fungicides), biological (with parasites), or mechanical (removing or destroying pests, erecting fences, etc.). Because trespass by man can threaten the success of a planting programme, planning should also include methods of dealing with this potential problem.
Cultural treatments to promote favorable growth conditions include weeding, thinning, and watering. Harvesting operations, when required, should match the skills of the people who will perform the tasks.
