<title>The impact of structural adjustment on smallholders</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
The importance of smallholder agriculture in a balanced development strategy for most developing countries has been strongly emphasized by FAO. It is labour-intensive and a source of nutritional safety for hundreds of millions in the Third World; its rapid decline can greatly destabilize societies by accentuating income distribution inequalities, endangering nutritional standards and increasing the pace and cost of urbanization. Structural adjustment policies in many developing countries change, sometimes significantly, the macro-economic and sectoral environment in which rural households make their decisions. What are the likely consequences for smallholders?
This study by Jean-Marc Boussard speculates on possible answers to this question. In general, he claims, by reducing inflation, improving the efficiency of marketing systems and increasing the producer prices of export crops, structural adjustment policies should have a beneficial impact on smallholders. Conversely, mismanaged privatizations, increases in input prices and cuts in public expenditure may have detrimental effects.
The major thesis, however, is that if smallholders are responsive to average prices, they are even more responsive to price variability and, more generally, to changes in the degree of uncertainty of their environment. Consequently, the author concludes, the development of smallholder agriculture requires institutional innovations aimed at reducing this uncertainty. Such innovations could represent a new dimension in structural adjustment programmes and policies.
The paper, in its final chapter on directions for research, advocates a coordinated use of macro-economic and micro-economic modelling approaches and sketches possible case-studies.
T. Kelley White
Director
Policy Analysis Division
Acknowledgements
Thanks are due to Dr Apostolos Condos and Heinrich Becker, for their comments on an earlier draft of this paper; to Mrs Susan BrownRichaudeau and Mrs 1. Boussard for linguistic improvement; and to Ms Valérie Wallet for her patience and care in typing. All remaining errors are the author's responsibility.
<section>2</section>
Executive summary
Smallholders represent a significant proportion of rural poor in most developing countries. Their economic importance is far from negligible, because they constitute virtually the only source of domestic food production as well as, in many countries, a large proportion of export crop growers. In general, by reducing inflation, improving the efficiency of marketing systems and increasing the prices of export crops, structural adjustment policies should have a beneficial impact on smallholders. Conversely, it is also true that mismanaged privatizations, increases in input prices and cuts in public expenditure may have detrimental effects. But more important considerations must be kept in mind. If smallholders are responsive to average prices, they are even more responsive to price variability and, more generally, to changes in the degree of uncertainty in their environment. Consequently, smallholder development necessitates institutional innovations aimed at reducing this
uncertainty. This could represent a new dimension in structural adjustment programmes and policies.
In conclusion, further research in this direction is recommended, based on household models on the miero-economic side, and on computable general equilibrium models on the macro-economic side.
<section>3</section>
Part one : Smallholders and their characteristics
Introduction
Chapter 1 : What is a smallholder?
Chapter 2 : The role of smallholders in economic development
Introduction
Since the mid-1970s, as a consequence of the "debt crisis" and other developments, new economic policies have been proposed to many developing countries by a number of international organizations such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank, the Inter- American Bank, and other institutions, under the general heading of "structural adjustment programmes". These cover a wide spectrum of proposals, from tight monetary policy to tax system reforms and rate of exchange adjustments. The general idea behind these proposals is that the debt crisis is fundamentally a consequence of inadequate economic structures, that is, a bad arrangement of all the parts of the economic system. Therefore, the solution to the debt crisis depends on structural adjustment. They are not so new: most of them have been implemented long ago, in many developed countries. During the 1950s, few western European countries were exempt from the kind of recommendations we are dealing with here.
These recommendations, however, are now being made to developing countries. This is an important point since, in this context, historical investigations can be helpful in predicting the consequences of present policies, in so far as historical and present situations are comparable.
Another characteristic of these policies is that they are painful. This is not a case of pure masochism on the part of their promoters. On the contrary; their intended long-term effects are highly beneficial, with steadier economic growth and higher incomes for every section of the population. But, in the short term, changing the rules of the economic game makes economic agents revise their expectations and strategies, thus introducing the risk of error and failure. Apart from expressing scepticism about their final success (a point which will not be examined here), this is probably the most serious objection that can be made about structural policies.
But there are other causes for concern. It is quite possible that, in spite of their long-term beneficial effects, structural policies may at least temporarily impose severe losses to certain people. Such a possibility must be taken seriously, especially if these people are the poorest. In this case, it would probably be necessary to provide some form of compensation, or to mitigate the contemplated policies to avoid their most detrimental effects. Together with the urban poor and the landless rural workers, smallholders may be permanent or temporary losers in the structural policy game. This is an important reason for taking an interest in them.
Even so, although they are poor, smallholders play an essential role in the economic life of most developing countries. The success or failure of structural adjustment policies will thus depend upon how much they are resented by smallholders, whose production is individually negligible but who, taken as a whole, represent a significant share of the GNP.
The subject of this paper is, therefore, to examine the possible consequences of structural policies on smallholders, both in the long and in the short term, in terms of equity as well as productive efficiency.
But, before going further, the notion of smallholder must be defined.
Chapter 1 : What is a smallholder?
The difficulties of a statistical definition
Common features of smallholders
The difficulties of a statistical definition
In agricultural matters, especially when poor and traditional farmers are concerned, economic ideas are usually severely biased by the European and North American situation. The farmer is a well-identified decision-maker, most of the time head of a family presenting a certain degree of "stability". The farm itself is well defined by a set of clearly identified plots, which either belong to the farmer (who, in this case, possesses the corresponding titles) or are hired from a landlord, who can produce proof of his or her rights. Land is supplemented by machinery, cattle, buildings and trees, each of which has a clearly identified owner. In this case, defining a smallholder is mainly a matter of threshold: more precisely, a farm size index can be defined and below a certain size a farmer is called a smallholder.
Certain problems are involved in these two operations. The size of a farm may be defined by the cultivated area (however, a vegetable grower with 5 ha is obviously larger, from an economic point of view, than a cereal grower with 10 ha), or by gross income (however, the size will depend upon the price system), or by a weighed sum of outputs (with the same problem as above, the size then depending upon the weights, which play exactly the same role as prices and are just as arbitrary). The threshold is even more difficult to define: changing the minimum size required for being considered a farm in the European Community from I ha to 0.5 ha doubles the number of farms. This is because the size distribution of the plots of land belonging to, or being cultivated by, the same person has a very long lower tail (Figure 1). A slight change in any threshold in this region of the distribution may considerably change the number of cases belonging to one category or another. The same is
true whatever measure is chosen for farm size. This makes any definition of a smallholder rather arbitrary in these countries: one would have preferred a "double-peaked" distribution, such as the one shown in Figure 2. Such distributions are not uncommon in many developing countries, with the lower peak corresponding to peasant or traditional farmers, and the upper peak corresponding to colonial or modem or cooperative farming (other words are used, but these are adequate for our present purpose). In this case, defining smallholders is relatively easy, because fixing the threshold at a particular level in the valley between the two peaks is of limited consequence for the classification of most of the farms in the population.
FIGURE 1 : Typical distribution of farm area in developed countries.
Unfortunately, in many other developing countries, the problem is even more difficult, because the real problem is not so much the choice of a threshold as the definition of a farm. In these countries, land-use decisions are made at different levels, and by different individuals, so that the notion of "farmer" is not clearly identified. As an example, let us consider the Senegalese carré. The carré is a local community headed by a chief, usually the elder of a large family. All carré members live together in the same village, each household (husband, wife and young children) having its own house. The carré, as a whole, collectively cultivates cash crops, such as groundnuts or cotton. In this respect, the carré is a collective farm, the farmer being its head, just as the farmer of a cooperative farm is the president of the board of the cooperative.
FIGURE 2 : Double-peaked distribution of farm areas in many devoloping countries.
Apart from collective fields, the chief allocates plots of land to each household. Originally the plots allocated were intended for food crops. But it is now quite common to see ambitious young men growing cash crops on their individual plots, because cash crops give them more freedom, or are more profitable. At the same time, there is a division of labour between the sexes in the household. The wife is responsible for food, including growing crops such as paddy or cassava, necessary for feeding the family, whereas the husband is concerned exclusively with cash crops. Thus the household plot is again divided into two parts, one for food crops under the responsibility of the wife, and one for cash crops operated by the husband. In such a case, should husband and wife be described as two separate farmers? This is a question that may be raised.
An additional complication is that many meals from the carré kitchen are taken in common, men on one side and women on the other. The kitchen itself is supplied with foodcrops taken from collective fields. The working time allocation between individual and collective field is a matter of permanent negotiation between the various members of the community, with presumably an enormous amount of time devoted to these discussions.
Whatever the reasons for this situation, it does not facilitate the definition of the smallholder. The same kind of difficulty with other farms, for example, semi-collective farming, such as the eijidos in Mexico; the colonos in Peru; many forms of sharecropping arrangements; and even the kolkhoz in the USSR, which is a typical large farm, but which fosters links with the farm workers' individual plots in such a way that it is really difficult to define the latter either as an intrinsic part of the big kolkhoz, or as separate, small part-time holdings).
Another aspect is the existence of herder and nomads who do not own land in the usual sense. They usually claim right of passage or of pasture, although these claims are often denied by sedentary farmers whose land they cross. The size of their holdings cannot, therefore, be measured in terms of acreage. An alternative measurement is the number of head of cattle they possess, although this is often a somewhat elastic yardstick. Herders are disappearing in many countries, but still play an important role in Sahelian Africa, especially with respect to meat exports.
A difficulty arises from the fact that farming is not necessarily the only occupation of a smallholder. In the case of pan-time farmers, the judgement of the economic situation of a smallholder may be considerably modified by the consideration of other jobs he or she may have. In many Latin American countries, for example, it is fashionable for a doctor or a lawyer to operate a farm, usually not too far from the large town where they live. As a rule, this farm is relatively small (because the time spent on the farm is limited), and "modern" (again because this kind of "farmer", unlike real poor farmers, can obtain credit from banks and other sources). In this context, the naive analyst of a farm survey could reach the preposterous conclusion that small farms are among the richest and most modern!
The notion of a smallholder must not be considered in a purely static framework. If a particular man or woman is described as a smallholder at a certain date, he or she may not have been so for long, and the situation may not last until his or her death. In fact, it is a well-known feature of social statistics that the permanency of the number of cases falling into a given category may hide an important turnover, with many individuals departing, and being replaced by newcomers, between two surveys. This may be the case for smallholders. In the best situations, some of them will become mediumholders, or they may get a job in town. At worst, they may become landless workers or unemployed. Conversely, landless workers may become smallholders. Even industrial workers (although this is not very likely) may return to the land and also become smallholders. In any ease, the outcome of this process of state transition may be just as important as, if not more than, what happens to the
state of the smallholder, taken in isolation.
A statistical definition of a smallholder is, therefore, very difficult. This accounts for the scarcity of statistical data on performance of smallholders and is also an obstacle to the knowledge of their specificities and potentialities, as well as the main cause of the difficulty in assessing the impact of structural adjustment programmes on them. Nevertheless, smallholders do exist and can be defined at least notionally, even if such a definition is not of much use to a statistical office.
They constitute mainly the rural poor, because the notion of smallholders refers to poverty, although poverty is essentially relative, i.e. a full-time farmer with 10 ha of grain crops in Africa is rather rich, whereas the same situation would classify him/her automatically as poor in any western European country. However, the smallholder category excludes the rural poor who are so poor they would never be able to operate a farm of their own. This is because of the specific role of smallholders, in comparison with "simple" landless workers and other rural poor, in shaping economic activity in their countries. If the impact of structural adjustment programmes on smallholders was only a matter of equity, there might be no reason for taking an interest in this segment of the population. But smallholders play a important role in economic development, a role that is probably much more important than is apparent from their relative number or from their total income. Neglecting
their welfare could actually jeopardize the success of economic policies that would otherwise have every chance of succeeding. Here lies the basic justification for the present paper. We shall try to explain the reasons in the next chapter. For the moment, we shall define the common features which, despite their diversities, make smallholders a useful category for economic analysis.
Common features of smallholders
Despite the incredible variety of socio-economic status and organization of poor agricultural producers, they have many common features, especially with respect to their production techniques.
Specificity of production techniques
It is almost tautological to say that a poor entrepreneur has virtually no capital and thus the basic system of production is mainly a combination of land and labour. This is the original of "traditional agriculture" and the source of many justified comments about it.
First, it is not "backward" (with its pejorative connotation of irrationality). On the contrary, plain elementary economic theory teaches us that, with very small capital, the optimal techniques of the income-maximizing entrepreneur should actually be labour- and land-intensive. This has a number of consequences.
FIGURE 3 : Total output of labour functions at various levels of capital availability
Low productivity of labour
Labour productivity is low. Again, this is a consequence of the most elementary economic theory (see Figure 3).
As a consequence, since most of their incomes are derived from the rewards of labour, incomes are low, and this is both the cause and the consequence of poverty.
Land productivity depends on demography
Land productivity is also low, as shown by low yields, and for the same reason: far from being a proof of backwardness, the low yields of smallholders are a consequence of their lack of capital, and a mark of economic rationality. Two contrasted situations can nevertheless occur with respect to yields: in some cases, land is abundant at the regional or national level. This is the case in many parts of Africa or in the Amazonian region in South America. The productivity of land can then be extremely low, the limiting factor being the working time lost in cultivating remote fields. On the contrary, in overpopulated regions, such as the "groundnut basin" in Senegal, northeastern Brazil and many other regions, land is scarce. Yields are comparatively higher than in underpopulated areas. But the marginal productivity of labour is lower and people, in general, are poorer, especially if the land rent is appropriated by landlords not belonging to the class of smallholders.
Of course, there are intermediary situations between these two extremes, because land is never homogeneous. Scarcity usually begins with some types of land being defined by their pedological characteristics (such as the famous "grey soils" in Africa), or by distance to road or village, or by other geographical features. In this case, some soils are intensively cultivated, whereas others remain apparently idle (they are often used for extensive activities such as hunting, wild fruit harvest or even pasture). In any case, demography is the main determinant of these types of soil occupation, because land scarcity arises when there is population growth over a certain limit (otherwise, with free land available, newcomers simply occupy virgin land).
High productivity of capital
Capital productivity, by the same token, is extremely high: again, it is well known in economics that a very scarce factor can have a very high return. Simple budget calculations show the high profitability of simple tools such as spades, or bicycle wheels, or even donkeys or buffaloes. High capital productivity is also indirectly shown by the large interest rates charged by traditional moneylenders, which may reach several hundred percent. Without passing a moral judgement on usury, it must be recognized that such rates could not exist if the marginal productivity of capital were not large enough.
In such a case, economic theory assumes that firms only have to borrow to increase the quantity of capital they use, thus decreasing the marginal productivity of capital at a level commensurate with that in other activities. But, here, economic theory is wrong, because it neglects two points that are very important and, to a large extent, specific to smallholders.
First, the elements of capital at stake are very small: for example, a plough, or a fertilizer dose per hectare; the largest indivisible piece of equipment is a pair of oxen. Yet, oxen are often hired for few individuals can afford them. Nowadays, which bank would open a file for a credit of $50? Thus, the relative efficiency and the comparative advantage of the traditional moneylender begin to appear. He or she can make a loan of $50 without opening a file, simply because they know their client personally.
Second, lender availability is not the only obstacle to borrowing. Unless the peasant is dishonest (and this is rare), he or she knows the loan must be reimbursed. But nobody is ever sure of anything, especially in the case of a smallholder, who is subject to a variety of risks, both climatic and economic. Thus, peasant behaviour in borrowing matters is extremely conservative and highly "risk-averse". In fact, borrowing is a risk in itself! Only rich people can afford it. This is why so few poor people in developing countries borrow (and also, why is it so difficult for them to find a lender).
The blocking scheme just described must not be considered as the only obstacle to smallholders' economic development. If it were possible to remove it, other obstacles such as land scarcity or market saturation would appear. But it is an important factor in the explanation of the permanency of the smallholder's situation, whatever form it takes. It accounts for the combination of the low productivity of land and labour and the high capital productivity that are the fundamental characteristics of smallholders. The consequences of this situation will be examined from a macro-economic point of view.
Role of risk in economic decisions
One of the lessons learned from the above is the importance of risk as a deterrent to investment. But this is not the only effect of risk on smallholders. Risk plays a particular role in the decisions of smallholders simply because they are poor and, thus, considerably risk-averse. Whatever the technical solution chosen to express this risk aversion in models, it can be said that risk imposes diversified patterns of production, and costly practices to avoid it as far as possible. Also, the existence of risk and of risk aversion implies that average prices and yields are not the only elements entering into utility computations of rational producers. Their variability is just as important, as is illustrated by the following simple example. Let us assume that a farmer has the choice between two crops, with the same prices, the same yields and the same inputs. Of course, the decision-maker will be indifferent between the two. At the same time, the slighest change in prices or
yields will induce him or her to shift the totality of their resources from one production to another. If all producers act in the same manner, the markets of these crops will be characterized by a devastating instability.
Let us assume now that the yields are random, and independently distributed with, again, the same mean and variance. Nothing is changed with a risk-neutral decision-maker. But only a slight degree of risk aversion will suffice to induce any risk-averse farmer to choose unhesitatingly a 5050 output mix, which minimizes income variance. Even better, in such a situation, if the price of crop A decreases slightly, farmers will increase their production of B. but never cease to devote a part of their production capacity to A. Thus, risk not only clearly defines an optimum where it apparently does not exist, but it may stabilize markets and stand as the major determinant of price supply elasticity.
We shall now assume that the government decides to stabilize crop A. Since farmers are compensated for any loss due to random changes in the price or in the yield of A, with the unitary income at the previous average level being guaranteed, crop A is riskless. Then, every risk-averse farmer shifts to A, so that the production of B is nil. If the government wants to have the least quantity of B harvested, the return for A should be fixed at a level significantly below the average unitary income of B. particularly as farmers are more risk-averse.
This simple theoretical example has more applications than one might imagine at first. Consider the case of export crops and food crops (that is, crops consumed within the country) in most African countries. As a rule, export crops have a price guaranteed by stabilization boards, or other agencies, whereas food crops are sold (when they are sold) on unorganized markets, with tremendous seasonal and interannual fluctuations. Thus, mutatis mutandis, export crops resemble crop A, and food crops crop B in the preceding example. At present, prices give a definite advantage to export crops, and this has been the object of complaints from international organizations, and of recommendations to increase the prices of food crops, to make them competitive with export crops. The above analysis suggests that it would suffice to stabilize food crops at their previous average level to induce a very significant shift of resource allocation from cash to food crops. This illustrates the
importance of risk considerations in agricultural policy. Other examples are given later.
Supply responsiveness
The question of smallholder sensitivity to price variations has been the subject of controversy. Some economists deny any price responsiveness on the part of smallholders, either because they are "irrational" (a very strong assumption) or because their rationality is different from that of the capitalist entrepreneur. In this respect, 20 years ago, Sicco Mansholt, a member of the European Community's Commission in charge of agricultural questions, prepared a plan for the restructuring of European agriculture. The backbone of the "Mansholt plan" was to increase farm size to make farms more responsive to prices. European farms nowadays are, on average, considerably larger than was intended by Mansholt, and apparently not much more responsive to prices than before. Of course, smallholders in developing countries cannot be compared with European farmers; nevertheless, this story shows the need for intellectual modesty.
The smallholders response to price is never zero, but is determined by complicated patterns that jeopardize any attempt to measure it statistically. This is because a price variation in one crop (say, a price increase) has two separate effects:
* A profitability effect, because the cultivation of the crop is now more (and that of other crops less) advantageous. This effect always induces farmers to increase the production of the crop in question.
* An income effect. If the farmers already cultivate this crop, their income is now greater. A part of the incremental income will be saved. If this saving is reinvested in farming (this is not always he case ), it will serve to buy new inputs which will be allocated to the most profitable crop, not necessarily the crop whose price has been increased. Thus, in a situation where, say, groundnut and paddy compete for the allocation of scarce inputs in a Senegalese farm, it may happen that an increase in the price of paddy generates an increase in the sale of groundnuts, and vice-versa.
These considerations interfere with the risk effect which has been described above, in two different ways:
* Because of expectations: a sudden change in price may not be interpreted as permanent by farmers. It may be considered as a transitory expression of the "noise", exactly as for income expectation in the permanent income theory of consumption. For that reason, the lag for farmers' supply response may be large, perhaps several years, which considerably complicates econometric estimations.
* Because of the utility of financial reserves: in an uncertain world, keeping liquid or semi-liquid reserves is one of the most popular (as well as rational) anti-risk strategies. Even with very scarce liquidities, smallholders in developing countries make extensive use of reserves constituted, for example, by cattle and granaries, not to mention fostering good relations with the neighbourhood. Of course, the increased saving obtained from any price increase may be invested in reserves of any kind, with the consequence that the farmer can take more risks with increased reserves and, thus, expand the most risky crops at the expense of safer ones. Thus, increasing the price of a "safe" crop (say, groundnuts in Senegal) may decrease its supply and increase the supply of a riskier crop, such as sorghum, in excess of the needs of the family.
Admittedly, such results are complex and represent a challenge for econometric analysis (see Mundlak, 1988). It is not surprising, in such a context, that the latter gives back contradictory results. What is surprising is that, despite the difficulty of taking account of the preceding considerations, the results nevertheless generally suggest a relatively large and positive direct supply elasticity for many developing countries and for many commodities. A possible reason for this result might be found in the fact that fixed factors for smallholders in developing countries are not numerous, thus giving decisive weight to direct profitability in the decision-making process. This is contrary to what happens with farmers in developed countries. This point deserves funkier research.
Having thus shown both the diversity and the common characteristics of smallholders, before examining the likely impact of structural adjustments we have yet to demonstrate their economic role. This is the subject of next chapter.
Chapter 2 : The role of smallholders in economic development
They are a huge reservoir of labour
They constitute almost the sole source of domestic food production
They are often export crop producers and a source of foreign exchange
They constitute a potential market for non-food goods
Their disappearance should be among the targets of economic development
They are a huge reservoir of labour
Because of low labour productivity, smallholders represent a huge reservoir of labour which, like any reservoir, is probably capable of dampening the effects of sudden changes in labour demand.
The problem of labour transfers from the "traditional" to the "modern" sectors is recurrent in literature pertaining to development from the early works of Nurkse or Sir Arthur Lewis (1954) to the modern "computable general equilibrium models''.
In the early stages of economic analysis applied to development, it was thought that labour from the "traditional" sector (that is, essentially, labour coming from agriculture) was available in unlimited quantities, for virtually any wage. Of course, this was an over simplified view of reality and was later reassessed. It is now widely acknowledged that smallholders and landless workers do act according to economic considerations when leaving farming to seek an urban job, or a non-agricultural rural job. They compare their marginal productivity as smallholders or hired workers in traditional farming with expected wages in other sectors. The computation is greatly complicated by the considerable uncertainty on both sides of the balance sheet. As we have seen, the productivity of smallholders and rural workers is extremely variable, depending upon many circumstances. And if urban wages are more predictable, in general, than agricultural incomes, the probability of finding a
job is always small, and the risk of staying idle in an unknown town in very precarious conditions is never negligible.
In such situations, mean values of agricultural incomes and urban wages do not play a large role in the decision. Their variability, as measured, for instance, by variances or other dispersion indicators, is actually much more important. The migration flow between rural and urban zones may exist in both directions, and is regulated by forces resembling market forces (although perhaps more complicated) in the sense that kinship and other sociological factors play a large role in determining the subjective degree of uncertainty attached to migration. These non-measurable factors are, thus, the main determinants of this special "market". This is also true for changes from rural agricultural to rural non-agricultural occupations, such as local transport entrepreneurs (for example, the "taxi brousse", whose existence is so important in most regions of West Africa) or craftsmen.
But if migration and occupational changes can take place in both directions, this means that the "labour reservoir" constituted by the smallholder and rural poor may play an important regulatory role in the economy. Changes in the "wage differential" between urban and rural labour may change the pattern of migration, with sometimes dramatic consequences.
Indeed, over the last 20 years urban growth has become a real economic problem for most developing countries. The accumulation of huge concentrations of men in large towns is politically dangerous and economically costly. It is one of the causes of the present "debt crisis", because at least part of the excessive borrowing at the origin of the crisis was explicitly aimed at lodging, feeding, sanitizing and educating these urban concentrations. The final outcome, in these respects, is far from satisfactory. Efforts to put public goods at the disposal of the urban poor, however, increase the implicit urban wage and the probability of migrants finding better conditions in town than in their village, thus creating a vicious circle: each effort to relieve the predicament of the urban poor increases their number by attracting new migrants from rural areas.
Although it is probably impossible to reverse the movement (that is, to create a massive migration flow from suburban bidonvilles or favellas to country villages), it is probably possible to reduce significantly the flow of migration from rural to urban zones. Here, the situation of smallholders plays an important role, because migrants are either smallholders themselves (this is the case of people fleeing after failing to reimburse debts, or people in despair at their low income and hoping for better job opportunities in town), or, more frequently, people likely to be employed by smallholders, such as relatives (sons, cousins) or landless workers who could get temporary or permanent jobs in smallholdings, if there were a chance of their being paid.
Thus, smallholders represent one of the key determinants of the equilibrium between rural and urban labour forces. Improving their situation, even slightly, could significantly contribute to solving urban problems of congestion and unemployment, although, of course, it would be necessary in each specific case to compare the effects of one dollar spent helping smallholders with spending it directly on improving the situation of the urban poor.
In this respect, an important and somewhat ironical macro-economic effect must be pointed out. Improving the situation of smallholders requires the use of more capital-intensive techniques (animal draught ploughing instead of hand-tilling, for instance) which will decrease the optimal ratio of workers per hectare. Especially in regions where land is limited, this will require the emigration to town or to other rural occupations of at least a fraction of former land workers. This fact must be considered when planning rural development.
They constitute almost the sole source of domestic food production
Except in very specific situations (such as Argentina), large farms or agricultural plants seldom contribute to supplying domestic food markets. This is because large farms are more or less compelled to put into operation techniques similar to those in use in developed countries (for example, the extensive use of machinery, especially for harvesting as well as for ploughing). Otherwise, the necessity of monitoring the large number of workers necessary to compensate for machines would require a numerous and costly staff, together with coercive measures which were possible on the "plantations" when slavery existed but which, fortunately, are now unthinkable.
As a consequence, large firms in developing countries do not have a large comparative advantage over the producer of the same (or similar) product in developed countries. The fact that the wages of the (necessary) workers are lower is counterbalanced by natural conditions which are often worse in tropical than in temperate countries (this is the reason for the specific nature of Argentina - a country located mainly in a temperate climate, with definite natural comparative advantages). Therefore, the comparative advantage of large farms in tropical countries cannot be materialized other than by crops which cannot be profitably grown in the conditions of temperate countries, such as coffee, cocoa and rubber.
However, smallholders are obliged to make use of radically different labour- and land-intensive techniques. They accept a very low reward for their labour and, in so far as they are their own employers, they monitor themselves very efficiently. In such a situation, they may be perfectly competitive with large-scale and foreign producers. This was at least true until recently, when agricultural surpluses in developed countries led Western governments to dump large quantities of staple food a/international prices which bear no relation to production costs. Even so, despite the incredibly low price of grain on international markets, African maize and sorghum growers or Latin American pea growers are still competitive and continue to produce large quantities of European and American grain substitutes. Admittedly, this competitiveness is now being challenged. It is increasingly difficult to sell traditional food in African city markets. In the countryside, however, as well as for
their own food needs (which, because of their large number, represent a significant share of the nation's food intake), the competitiveness of traditional producers remains largely unaffected. The cost of transporting imported food, and of dividing large quantities into small batches, rapidly offsets its artificial price advantage. At the same time, pseudo-traditional techniques are now emerging: these techniques (sometimes called "soft technologies") do not belong to the set of traditional techniques sensu stricto, but they are shaped to be put into operation by smallholders with a little more capital and a little less labour than the "true" traditional 8 techniques. In this way, smallholders may be placed in the position of adapting themselves to a new environment, hopefully where there is a little less poverty. This is the economic interpretation of "draught animal cultivation" and other similar systems. Whatever the validity of this interpretation, such improvements are
likely to reinforce the competitivity of smallholders against large-scale farming, and even against open dumping.
They are often export crop producers and a source of foreign exchange
Apart from producing staple foods, smallholders also often produce export crops. It is a source of permanent astonishment to many general economists that small-scale producers can remain competitive against large firms. Although there are few explanations for this, scale economies are virtually absent from agriculture. Whenever this is the case, large colonial firms have no comparative advantages in producing export crops. They may actually have severe comparative disadvantages, given the workers' monitoring difficulties referred to above. This explains the failure not only of many colonial or neo-colonial plantations but also of a number of state or pseudo-cooperative farms, which can survive only by massively substituting capital for labour, against all economic rationality, in countries where labour is abundant and capital is scarce.
Conversely, the same considerations explain the success of contract fanning, where a large firm makes a contract with smallholders for the production of a certain crop, grown according to certain rules. Here it is the smallholder who monitors, whereas the technical specifications which are imposed by the large firm (and enforced by the direct execution of sensible and standardized tasks, such as tillage, as well as by the direct supply of adequate seeds) guarantee the achievement of certain standards of quality. The large firm remains in charge of operations for which economies of scale do exist, such as transport and marketing.
Everything that has been said already about what determines the supply to markets of food crop products is also valid for "cash crops" (except, perhaps, that as a rule cash crops do have guaranteed prices and, therefore, are less risky to be marketed than food crops)."
Much has been said about the prices of cash crops which, owing to their high levels, are blamed for discouraging food crop production. Ironically, other authors criticize taxes, which disconnect the internal prices of export crops from their international level, and advocate farm gate price increases. These two positions are not only contradictory, but also irrelevant. We have already seen that not only the average level of prices but also their variability are among the determinants of farmers' decisions on their crop mix. Therefore, it is possible to change the pattern of crop production without changing the average price levels. These issues will be discussed later.
They constitute a potential market for non-food goods
Smallholders, in general, do not at present represent a very lucrative market. They buy a few plastic articles (such as basins), some carbonated beverages, a few radio sets and a few pieces of cloth. For most of the other consumption goods they are self-sufficient. But this is, hopefully, temporary and a result of their poverty. Their income demand elasticity for simple articles is considerable.
Furthermore, among the reasons why smallholders often seem to be reluctant to increase their food production in excess of their foreseeable needs is their conviction that they would not be able to exchange possible food surpluses for the non-food goods they require (Berthelemy and Morrisson, 1987). At present, many reports from Madagascar, the United Republic of Tanzania and other similar countries tend to show that increasing the availability of non-food commodities in rural areas is likely to increase agricultural production. Otherwise, peasants restrict their production to their immediate needs.
Such production deadlocks frequently arise when socialist governments stop the activities of traditional traders (often the same people as the traditional moneylenders) on the grounds of their exaggerated profits, and without replacing them by institutions that provide the same services. Just as for traditional moneylenders, providing services for smallholders is extremely costly because, as for credit, very small quantities must be spread overlarge areas. As soon as smallholders become richer, they buy in larger quantities. They may even acquire their own means of transport. Thus, quick cumulative effects can be expected of even limited rural development. But the opposite is true also. A slight lowering of smallholders' income, due to various causes, can very well result in the disappearance of traditional shopkeepers, and to the collapse of rural economic life.
Their disappearance should be among the targets of economic development
Of course, such a statement may seem very odd, after what has been said about their potential contribution to development. Nevertheless, it must be taken seriously, if one recalls that most of the virtues of smallholders (such as high productivity of capital) come from the fact that they are poor. Since removing poverty is clearly one of the ultimate targets of economic development, it follows that smallholders should disappear during the process. This is actually what has happened in developed countries since the end of the eighteenth century (a movement which gained momentum in the 1880s, and even more in the 1950s. See Bairoch, 1964).
At the same time, this statement has many far-reaching implications for economic policy. It means that, in most countries, the total area under cultivation, instead of being divided into plots of between 0.5 and 5 ha, will have to be shared between farms of 100 to 150 ha. This also means that a large number of people will be expelled from farming and will have to find other occupations, either as wage workers, or in the trade sector or in administration. In Western countries, these changes have often been very painful. Would it be possible for currently developing countries to obtain similar results at a smaller cost? This is a point to be taken into account when devising agricultural policy.
Before this final outcome, agricultural policies (or their absence) are likely progressively to reveal formerly unnoticed constraints resulting from the fact that a previously free resource suddenly becomes scarce as a consequence of depletion. An example is firewood in Africa, which was in ample supply 20 years ago, and which now poses a serious problem (Webley, 1986). More broadly, Boserup (1965) contends that increasing the number of people leads naturally to an increase in farming intensity. This long-term dynamic must be kept in mind.
We have not mentioned the role of smallholders as "money traps", which is a controversial subject. In any case, the points just presented are sufficiently important for some care to be taken to avoid "hurting" smallholders by structural adjustment programmes, aside from considerations of equity.
<section>4</section>
Part two : Structural adjustment and smallholders
Chapter 3 : Structural adjustment programmes and policies
Chapter 4 : Public intervention in agriculture under structural adjustment programmes
Chapter 5 : Macro-economic policies and agriculture
Chapter 6 : Conclusions and directions for research
Chapter 3 : Structural adjustment programmes and policies
Historical context
What are structural adjustment policies supposed to do?
The role of the public sector in agriculture
Historical context
Structural adjustment programmes were briefly defined in the Introduction. To assess the impact of structural adjustment on smallholders, it is now necessary to go further and make this definition more accurate. This is all the more necessary as the content of structural adjustment programmes has evolved over time. The term seems to have been forged by the International Monetary Fund to facilitate the dialogue between it and the indebted countries. The latter were aware of the necessity of new economic policies to overcome their immediate debt reimbursement problems. The Fund was reluctant to suggest any precise internal policy measures, which could have been interpreted as taking over sovereignty attributes.
Its recommendations were, therefore, very broad, pertaining mainly to what could be called "foreign economic policy". The essential recommendation was adjusting rates of exchange to increase the internal price of imports, so making them less attractive as well as making exports more profitable. For the same reason, a recommendation was made to remove taxes on exports (such as taxes on cocoa, groundnuts and coffee, which are common in many African countries). Rather than impose import duties, it recommended at least the removal of all import subsidies, such as those that were applied to a number of "strategic commodities", which often included fertilizers and, in some cases, staple foods. Such fiscal policies were especially recommended whenever a rare-of-exchange policy was not possible, as in the case of most of West Africa where currency is tied with the French franc (Comité Monétaire de la Zone Franc).
Such policies can succeed only if internal does not increase all internal prices, thus nullifying the effect of devaluations and tax exemptions. This is why anti-inflationary measures were also suggested, essentially to limit public-deficit spending (one of the sources of fresh money likely to fuel inflation), and to tighten the overall supply of credit by banks. At this stage, no specific suggestions were made on the nature of public spending to be cut, taxes to be raised and credit to be reduced. But country economic authorities were soon faced with this choice. In addition, since their short-term problems were urgent, they required structural adjustment loans to pay the extra costs that setting up a new policy was unavoidably creating. The World Bank was solicited. This organization is more concerned with long-term rather than short-term adjustments. Its recommendations are usually more subtle, and more far-reaching. For these reasons, World Bank authorities were less
reluctant to suggest packages of relatively specific suggestions for economic policy and to subordinate borrowing allowances to their adoption.
Thus, structural adjustment loans were granted in exchange for promises of reforms, from temporary wage freeze to divestment of parastatal organizations. The general purpose was not so much to contract global demand as to expand production. The idea was to generate the savings necessary to repay debt, and to prepare for future production increases. In this respect, structural adjustment programmes resembled growth programmes, except that emphasis was put on liberalism, market and free enterprise, whereas during the preceding period direct state intervention in production was deemed, if not a prerequisite to growth policy, at least a necessary evil.
The World Bank took advantage of these structural adjustment loans to correct economic inefficiencies that many people had long been aware of, but had not dared to question openly.
At the same time, many local political authorities were rather satisfied to receive apparently sound suggestions for improving their efficiency as administrators, and to have a good opportunity to let international organizations bear the brunt of their unpopularity. Some were even tempted to add a few measures of their own to the package.
Finally, after nearly ten years of application, some of these measures prove to be less efficient, indeed more harmful, than was expected. Hence, they were sometimes removed, but most of the time adapted and often deprived of their original logic. Other proposals were made, with varying degrees of success. Nowadays, there is a tendency to call structural adjustment "any proposed change of economic policy aimed at restoring financial orthodoxy and increasing the role of markets in economic decisions" (Griffon, 1988).
In addition, as far as agriculture is concerned, there has recently been a new development resulting from what could be termed "the project quarrel". Whereas at the end of the colonial period and at the begining of independence agricultural policy issues were mainly in terms of institutional choices (socialism or liberalism or, more concretely, the form of marketing boards and role of government in development), after the mid-1960s, and until recently there was a tendency for administrations to limit their roles to the management of a variety of "projects" proposed by various organizations, either local or, more frequently, international. As a consequence, plans had a tendency to become mere lists of projects, not necessarily coherent. Often, as has been noted by Griffon (1988), "rather than by plans, general lines of agricultural policies were in fact defined by formal or informal contacts between donor agencies, often on good terms with local authorities". Such an approach
had the merit of being practical and possessing a certain empirical efficiency, with discussion mainly focused upon micro-economic issues. Its drawback was that macro-economic consequences of choices were often neglected. This is one of the numerous reasons for the debt crisis: there were too many projects, some of them being poorly designed, with no concern for general equilibria.
The emphasis put on structural adjustment, to some extent, corrects this tendency. It is now necessary to think about agricultural policy in terms of global equilibrium, balance of payments and rate of exchange. As a consequence, agricultural policy has caught the attention of a number of distinguished general economists.
In such a context, there is a temptation to leave out the "projects approach", and to be content with macro-economic policy. The danger is of going too far from field realities. In particular, too much emphasis put on macro-policy may divert attention from those whose political "voice" is weak, according to the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD, 1988).
It would be easy to solve this question by simply observing that both approaches are complementary, and that a small dose of projects could very well be a useful addition to macro-economic policies. It seems, nevertheless, that the quarrel goes deeper than this and concerns the nature of state intervention in agriculture. With the project approach, governments (or other non-profit organizations, in relation with governments) directly supply farmers with services such as roads, irrigation facilities and market organization. In the macro-economic policy approach, the government is only responsible for creating the general conditions under which market forces will spontaneously provide these services, at least if their need is important enough to generate an actual willingness to pay for their cost.
The logic of these two types of action is so different that they would be perfectly antagonistic without an effort to state the conditions under which they could be complementary.
What are structural adjustment policies supposed to do?
The root of the problem lies in the difficulty of designing and implementing viable projects in highly distorted economics. When prices do not reflect true scarcities, rates of return more misleading than useful. Of course, the theory of shadow pricing was designed to solve this difficulty.. But it is notoriously difficult to operate correctly, and all the more so as distortions increase and last longer. After a long time of great distortion, the techniques that should have been chosen as the best on the basis of shadow prices no longer exist, or are not feasible at current prices. This is the result of a phenomenon known as "induced innovation". In any economic activity, the system of research and development produces techniques whose characteristics are determined by entrepreneurs' demand: if labour is expensive, the techniques produced will be labour-saving. They will be capital-saving if labour is cheap. In agriculture, where research and development is mainly financed
by the state, the reasons for this situation are less evident than with other sectors, where research and development are under the direct control of capitalist firms. Yet, there is overwhelming evidence of its reality (Binswanger and Ruttan, 1978). Thus, whenever price systems do not favour the use of fertilizers, plant breeds that are not responsive to fertilizers are selected. Whenever export crops are the exclusive concern of government agencies, technical progress is restricted to the cultivation of such crops. As a consequence, even when economic evaluations are made on the basis of shadow prices instead of current prices, the bias in favour of current price-responding techniques is so large that they easily supersede those that would have emerged under a more rational price system.
It might be contended that the above reasoning is valid only for commercial farms, and that smallholders, obeying a different rationale, are less sensitive than other entrepreneurs to such incentives. However, in view of the remarks already made about smallholders' logic, the relevance of this statement is dubious.
In addition, in this paper we are not as interested in totality as in the marketed fraction of smallholders' production. For this fraction, smallholders are good customers of research and extension services that supply them with the necessary "transition" techniques, that is, techniques which are more capital-intensive than the true traditional techniques, and yet less capital-intensive than those in operation in highly capitalistic countries. We have noted above the necessity of adopting such techniques to foster modernity without wasting labour. It is clear that the current price system wilt play a central role in the generation and adoption of such techniques.
The main advantage of successful structural adjustment is the disappearance of the "economic schizophrenia" involved in the distinction between current and shadow prices. By imposing "real" exchange rates, a major cause of differences between social utility values and current prices is removed. The removal of distortive taxes and subsidies, as welt as the imposition of "modem" tax systems, such as the value-added tax, obey the same logic.
Even the withdrawal of the state from many commercial ventures, such as the sale of fertilizer or credit distribution, may be linked to the same line of thought, despite the mixed character of almost any state intervention in these fields. For instance, when a parastatal organization distributes subsidized fertilizers as a part of a comprehensive scheme of "paddy production modernization", this action belongs to three different categories, which could be identified as:
* supplying technical information on fertilizer use; providing current goods and services to farmers on a near commercial basis;
* subsidizing an input and lowering its price to increase the profitability of its use.
Clearly, in this case, privatization of the activity will remove some price distortions, although it can also have side-effects, for instance, improving the commercial efficiency of the system, or depriving farmers of free access to technical information. If such side-effects are undesirable they may be corrected by relevant projects; for instance, the setting up of an extension service which would not recommend fertilizer use for the sole purpose of augmenting the volume of its turnover.
In addition, there are situations where public intervention is obviously necessary, independently of any structural adjustment programme. Without speaking of police or of army services, it is difficult to imagine a purely private road or postal system. In such cases, whenever economic calculations are necessary to decide on the size or location of state-provided facilities (this is certainly the situation for roads), using "real" prices for such computations is obviously easier and recommended.
In such a context, one can see how structural adjustment programmes and projects can be fully complementary. At the same time, the above discussion implies the necessity of a better understanding of the respective roles of the public and private sectors. This why we shall now devote a few pages to this subject, at least as far as it concerns agriculture.
The role of the public sector in agriculture
An important characteristic of the "project approach", as described above, is that a new administration was established as soon as a problem was detected and money supplied. For instance, after a drought, an irrigation project was set up; or if the product of a particular crop was needed, a state farm was founded to grow it.
Probably, the most conspicuous example of such a situation is the case of Mexico (Austin and Esteva, 1987), where a gigantic nationwide organization was put in operation during the mid-1970s, in order to attain food self-sufficiency. It involved a plan for crop insurance, a government supply of seeds and a large number of extension officers to aid Mexican agriculture in covering the nation's basic needs. It was terminated at the beginning of the 1980s because of lack of money. During the last few years of its operation it was clearly successful in reaching its target: for years, Mexico had never been so close to selfsufficiency. The only problem was the cost: for each dollar of food produced by the system, the cost was about $1.40 (Meissner, 1987).
The efficiency of this kind of action is highly questionable. This is not a consequence of the alleged inability of bureaucracies to be efficient. Of course, it is easy to find examples of inefficient bureaucracies, but this is not a general rule. Actually, most of the bureaucracies in question were perfectly efficient in that they reached the intended targets. The fact that the cost was, in general, far greater than the benefit was another problem, since bureaucracies are not equipped to deal with costs and benefits. They are made to achieve the goals that have been assigned to them, given the means with which they are endowed.
The difficulty arises from a confusion between "aims and means", or between "cause and effect". For instance, if drought is a problem irrigation can solve it. But, since this problem is not new, there were probably reasons for not having recourse to irrigation before. If one reason is the inability of people to associate in a body large enough to pay for the indivisible costs of a dam, then, clearly, a public intervention aimed a/establishing a new board in charge of this project is justified. But if reluctance to irrigate comes from other causes (for instance, from farmers' poverty, which prevents them paying for any investment, either collective or private), then the project board will not be able to reach its target unless it can provide farmers with the necessary equipment. Then it will be deemed inefficient in any case. If it chooses to distribute equipment, it will reach the target, but at a high cost; and, if it chooses not to, it will join the pitiful list of
"non-irrigating" irrigation projects. In this case, the root of the problem lies in the inability of farmers to adopt intensive irrigation techniques, which is a consequence of a lack of capital and not a lack of administration. Perhaps food security, in this context, could be achieved other than by irrigation (for instance, emergency food distribution) so long as capital accumulation does not make irrigation techniques profitable.
It is, therefore, important to identify carefully the means and purposes of state intervention in agriculture as well as to check the suitability of means to purposes. In this respect, we may list the following types of public intervention:
* Providing non-marketable facilities such as roads, extension services and police to enhance productivity, or for equity reasons.
* Providing marketable facilities such as fertilizers, seeds, tractor services and irrigation schemes, including trade and transport. Again, this kind of intervention is usually justified by the necessity of spreading "modern" techniques. Sometimes they are implemented for equity reasons (for instance, to correct other distortions).
* Price distortions or regulations through subsidies and levies, for instance. This category includes the automatic buying of excess quantities at fixed prices or, conversely, the automatic release of imported or of stockpiled quantities at fixed prices, even when these buying or selling activities are not physically performed by the state or any parastatal organization, but by contract firms private traders operating on governmental instructions. Most of these actions are supposed to increase equity, or food security, or both.
* Providing institutional innovations such as land reforms and property laws for efficiency or equity reasons.
* Redistributing income through measures like taxes and social services for equity.
* Purely macro-economic interventions through rate-of-exchange modifications, inflation control and other measures, according to the logic already mentioned.
Clearly, structural adjustment measures, in the narrow sense, belong to the last category. But they have some influence over the others. If structural adjustment results in a "true" price system, that is, a price system that correctly reflects scarcities in the economy, the necessity of providing marketable facilities and price distortions or regulations is far less evident than otherwise. This does not mean that they would be suppressed from the government agenda.
The first item (providing non-marketable facilities) remains unchanged, although a tighter budget policy may make its achievement more difficult. Providing institutional innovations, however, could be reinforced, since it costs virtually nothing.
Finally, redistributing income is also important, although the means to be employed are no longer found in price manipulations (at either input or output levels), but in direct taxes on, or subsidies to, households.
As pointed out by Lemarchand (1986), if in many countries such as the United Republic of Tanzania and Angola socialist experiments ended as "egregious failures" due to "certain fundamental shortcomings in the strategies associated with agrarian socialism", "capitalist models show a very mixed track record, ranging from poor (Nigeria) to disastrous (Zaire), and seldom anywhere has rural capitalism generated a pattern of self sustaining growth". Although this opinion is presented in a deliberately provocative way, it is, at least, partly true. In all agriculturally affluent, developed countries, and contrary to what happens in the case of "agrarian socialism", the private free enterprise sector plays a vital role in the production and marketing of agricultural products. But in these same countries, and contrary to the case of "wild capitalism", the role of the state is also essential in determining floor and ceiling prices for agricultural commodities, financing the
stockpiling or the dumping of excess quantities and providing a legal framework for all transactions, especially relating to land ownership. Thus, in these countries, a sort of division of labour between state and private enterprise has been put into operation. It is far from perfect. A lot of problems are pending, the most conspicuous of them being the presence of a permanent excess production. But it is certainly less dramatic to be plagued by excess production than by shortages. In any case, if increasing production is the immediate target of most developing countries' agricultural policies, the lessons should be drawn from this particular division of labour. It will help to understand the consequences of political changes in developing countries. This was the purpose of the above remarks. They will be developed in the next chapter.
Chapter 4 : Public intervention in agriculture under structural adjustment programmes
Two cases for intervention in marketable facilities
The necessity of intervention in non-marketable facilities
New perspectives of institutional innovations
In this clear that the main challenge of structural adjustment to agricultural policies is to determine the proper role of the public sector in agriculture. There are two facets to this problem. One pertains to the long term. Assuming a "good" general adjustment policy, what are the roles and instruments of agricultural policy? The other is more short-term related: in the process of establishing a more competitive and more efficient economic system, steps must be taken to prevent the transition being too harmful, especially for the weakest segment of the population, smallholders belonging to this group. Let us begin with long-term considerations.
Two cases for intervention in marketable facilities
In a purely competitive riskless economy, state involvement in marketable facilities should be ruled out, since it is well established that, in this case, competition ensures the only feasible pareto optimum, given current income distribution. But risk is ever present in economic life. Moreover, competition may not achieve efficiency if technical circumstances allow for economies of scale. For instance, it would tee foolish to build up two railways on the same itinerary just for the sake of competition. It is certainly better to have the line operated by only one company, even if it is necessary, at the same time, to watch out for its monopoly power.
Thus, risk and economies of scale are, in principle, the sole justifications of public intervention.
Economies of scale and monopoly power
We have seen above that economies of scale are virtually absent from agricultural production. However, they are present, to a high degree, in foodprocessing industries and in agricultural input-supplying industries. This is because these activities require transport; transportation systems, because of the "yes or no" character of the decision of building a pipeline, a railway or any similar facility, almost always exhibit increasing returns to scale.
On a smaller level, this is also the reason for the greater efficiency of the multi-trade country shopkeeper compared with the specialized parastatal agency. With many very small individual transactions, as has already been shown, the multi-trade shopkeeper spreads his or her fixed costs over a relatively large number of customers in the same location. For the same number of customers, the specialized parastatal agency would incur much higher transportation costs. Most of the time these costs are not actually incurred with, consequently, a significant lowering of the service quality in comparison to the traditional shopkeeper. This explains what could be called the tragedy of local traders in sub-Saharan Africa. When, in the 1960s, administrations were playing a greater role in the region, a large number of foreign traditional traders were eliminated and replaced by parastatal organizations. There is now overwhelming evidence that this movement was extremely detrimental to
peasants. The network of local traders provided transport and collective facilities with a flexibility and a resilience' that has never been achieved by a centrally administered agency.
However, the existence of economies of scale does not imply that the government should take these activities in charge entirely. Such a policy would be justified only if the corresponding investments were so large that they could not be easily financed by a private entrepreneur. In view of the modest size of most of the investments in question, as well as considering the small size of most public budgets compared with those of many multinational companies, the argument is hardly valid, except perhaps in the case of some irrigation projects. It is true, however, that these indivisibilities, small as they are, provide a real monopoly power to some agents.
The responsibility of governments may be to impose a "quasi competitive price system" by requiring marginal cost pricing policies from monopolists. For it is a well-known theory of welfare economics that the virtue of competition, and the source of its optimality, lies in the fact that it imposes a marginal cost pricing system which, itself, maximizes the sum of the producer's and consumer's surplus.
Yet, marginal cost pricing must not be confused with product differentiation. It is one thing to define a product as "water supplied in location X, at Y hour of the day, with maximum flow of Z", and a different one to compute (and charge) the corresponding marginal price. In general, optimal welfare requires marginal cost pricing along with a high degree of product differentiation. The failure of many state monopoly experiments is mainly ascribable to the omission of this precept. The example of traditional country trades is again fully relevant here. Apart from being able to spread their fixed costs over a larger number of customers, their success has been due to their ability to charge peasants for the additional services they provide, contrary to parastatal organizations, for which one kilogram of paddy was one kilogram of paddy, whatever its location, period of the year, or quality.
Another case of state intervention in marketable facilities is with large and risky investments, for which the average cost is less than the marginal profit, but the risk of failure is so great that no private enterprise could bear it. Irrigation is among the most obvious examples of such a situation, with often high ex post benefit cost ratios when computed over very long periods, but very dubious results in the short or medium term, as well as large lump investments at the beginning. Arrow (1971) has shown that risk-taking by governments may increase general welfare, provided that the sources of risk are numerous and independently distributed (an assumption more difficult to make than many people imagine; this point is discussed below).
Risk and stabilization
It has been shown that farmers are very vulnerable to risk. We have also seen that their supply responses are often considerably retarded. Let us draw the policy conclusion of such an analysis. If markets are left to themselves, the time-lag necessary to get a definite supply response will be long, thus creating the possibility of very large disequilibria before recovery. Moreover, equilibrium will not necessarily be met. It is more likely to be bypassed, in such a way that a symmetrical will arise with an oscillatory movement. At least, many models (derived from the basic "Cobweb model") suggest the possibility of such behaviour from long-lagged supply response markets (for instance, Day, 1969; or Boussard, 1988), and empirical evidence seems to confirm this view.
From the smallholders' point of view, such oscillations are simply random movements, which should be taken into consideration by means of a prudent policy of diversification and credit avoidance, as we have seen. The resulting average equilibrium is shown in Figure 4.
These are standard supply and demand curves, with supply being identified with marginal cost, as usual. In the absence of risk, competition means that equilibrium will occur for the quantity q*, and the price p*, which maximizes the joint sum of producers' and consumers' surplus.
In the presence of risk, farmers will not base their economic calculus on the demand price, as reflected by the demand curve. They will rather make use of the certainty equivalent of this price. This is a shadow price, which is always below the demand price. Thus, it looks as though the demand curve has been replaced by a lower surrogate demand curve. The new average equilibrium quantity is lower and the new average equilibrium price higher than without risk. On the average, the consumer surplus is decreased and producers get a profit. It must be stressed that the distance between the "real" and "surrogate" demand curve may be great. For instance, in an early study in southern France (Boussard and Petit, 1966), the risk premium was about 50 percent of the actual average price. Even if removing all risk is impossible (making the feasible risk premium reduction much smaller), this is enormous.
FIGURE 4 : Average market equilibrium in the presence of risk
Thus, farmer income stabilization through government intervention on agricultural prices is not what is commonly assumed. It is designed less for the benefit of farmers, and more for consumers' welfare. This aspect should not be exaggerated. Because the quantity is smaller in ease of risk, if the demand is elastic (as in the ease for developing countries) the overall quantity of money flowing into farmers pockets may be smaller. And if the marginal cost is virtually constant, which is also the case for smallholders (we have seen that their production function is nearly homogeneous and of degree 1), the producers' profit is almost nil. Thus, equilibrium with risk, rather than benefiting anybody, is detrimental to the collectivity. It is really an unproductive deadlock and the consequence of a market failure.
This is a case for government intervention. Experience has shown that production increases when governments offer stable price policies to farmers. It is true not only in developed but also in developing countries. It is true for any kind of commodity, be it export crops, as in most African countries, or staple food and paddy, as in many Asian countries, or even industrial crops, such as sugar cane in Brazil.
Such intervention is not without dangers. The greatest is a flood of excess production, as is happening in most developed countries, where price guarantees were fixed years ago at levels which are no longer necessary, but that are politically difficult to decrease. In developing countries, this risk is not too great, except perhaps for export productions, such as groundnuts, copra, cocoa and coffee. The latter have long been supported in this way. As a consequence, production increases almost without limit in each producer state. In the face of limited demand, this triggers a fall in prices. It explains the terms of trade deterioration which is so often stigmatized by international organizations.
We can hypothesize that increasing the coverage of price support and extending it to staple foods would probably reduce the supply of export productions (thus increasing their average prices and improving developing countries' terms of trade), as well as increasing the supply of these foods without any change in present average price levels.
A consequence of the above remark is that, in this context, artificially low producer prices for export commodities, in connection with the market role of parastatals, are probably more justified than is usually recognized by international organizations. The low level of these prices is a type of compensation for their stability. Otherwise, the political risk is an exaggerated specialization in export crops, to the detriment of food crops, and also a permanent deterioration of the terms of trade because of global oversupply.
This situation, however, is not the best one. Without any land constraint, the supply of any "safe" commodity can increase to infinity, whatever the price level (Boussard, 1988). Therefore, under the present regime of marketing boards, one may be afraid of an oversupply of export crops, whatever the internal price level chosen by a particular government.
However, a destabilization of export crop prices would increase average prices, allow farmers to make profits and re-establish a production equilibrium in favour of urban required food crops. Symmetrically, a stabilization of currently unstable food crop prices would increase production, without needing to increase average prices and, therefore, without affecting urban consumers.
It must also be stressed that the kind of stabilization policy envisaged here does not imply heavy commitment of government officials in trade. "Light" stabilization boards can co-exist with the bulk of physical trade operations being performed by private merchants. This is shown not only by the experience of developed countries, but also by that of many developing countries, such as Thailand, Taiwan, province of China, and even India. In India parastatals and bureaucracies play a notoriously important role and "the Indian Food Corporation, probably the largest and most renowned intervention agency, does not normally handle more than 15 percent of India's grain crop, that is 20-25 percent of marketed production." (Reusse, 1987).
Finally, the most important problem facing governments embarking on this kind of policy is choosing the stabilization level. It has apparently never been solved satisfactorily, as is exemplified by the present difficulties of developed countries and also of some developing countries, such as Panama.
The necessity of intervention in non-marketable facilities
Defining a non-marketable facility
Apart from specific situations listed above, government interventions should be very limited in the case of marketable facilities, such as roads, research and extension. In this case, the impossibility of the operator's making a profit precludes any attempt at privatization.
Defining a non-marketable facility can be a problem, however. For instance, roads are normally logged in this category. Yet, in most developed countries, only secondary and rural roads are toll-free. Highways have tolls. Similarly, customers of public or private health services pay or do not pay, depending upon which "sector" they choose, for a service that is usually technically better in the well-equipped public sector than in the private sector (although the quality of the hospital service is obviously better in private hospitals).
Even the status of agricultural research may be ambiguous from this point of view. As is shown by Berland (1987), the research effort on hybrids (considerable since the 1930s, particularly in the development of hybrid maize varieties) was made possible mainly because the use of hybrid seeds necessitates purchases each year from a dealer, whereas autogamous plant seeds can simply be deducted in advance from the previous harvest. Thus, the hybrid seed producer is in a much better situation than the producer of autogamous plant seeds for making a profit over a comparable initial investment. This is the explanation for the outstanding quality of most hybrid seeds, rather than in so-called "hybrid strength", the existence of which has never been proved.
In the latter example, a technical circumstance limits the domain of activities that can or cannot be privatized. But, in general, policy-makers have some control over the delineation of this frontier. Yet, there is no firmly established rule for exercising this power. Judgement criteria are a combination of equity considerations (this is often the case in health services), technical constraints (as exemplified by the hybrid seeds case), risk considerations (Arrow's reasoning on the government bearing risks instead of private bodies is relevant here), and national traditions. This list is not comprehensive.
Consequences for smallholders
It is clear that the elimination of non-marketable facilities is generally harmful to smallholders when they are in the habit of using them. This is true especially of road transportation facilities. A bitumen road is even more useful for a bicycle than for an automobile. A large farm can load its harvest on a truck for sale in the regional capital. The alternative, the small farmer, is to rely on the country bus service, if it exists. The existence of a network of rural roads is a prerequisite for incorporating smallholders into the economy. The building of such roads has been the aim of a number of successful projects, such as the pistes cacaoyères in Cameroon and the routes de pêche in Senegal.
At the same time, this prerequisite is not sufficient. For instance, Algeria was famous for the density of its network of secondary roads, built during the colonial period for the convenience of European farmers. It was not sufficient to trigger a significant development of traditional farming, because all other political conditions for this (high output prices, marketing facilities and input availability) did not exist during the last 20 years (and earlier).
Special case for research and extension
A special mention should be made of research and extension services. These are clearly non-marketable facilities. Their rates of return are extremely difficult to assess, because the bulk of their output has no direct value although, occasionally, and completely unpredictably, they generate enormous benefits: this is a case of applying Arrow's principle of the state bearing large risks. An additional argument for state involvement in research and extension is that benefits may not accrue to their instigators. In agriculture, in particular, a large proportion of technical progress is embodied in pure information (e.g. the genome of a plant or an animal) which can be reproduced at virtually no cost and, therefore, cannot be charged to anybody. It is unthinkable to put a policeman behind each farmer to check if he is violating a copyright law or not. This is all the more true because we are concerned with smallholders, that is, people who are spread over large areas and who,
individually, would not be able to pay much. Collecting a tax on agricultural innovation, therefore, would not be worth the travel cost of the collector from one smallholder to another.
Yet agricultural research and extension are highly beneficial, especially for smallholders. Over the centuries extension has developed a set of techniques that are well adapted to self-sufficient systems. These techniques are no longer adapted to the conditions of an exchange economy. At the same time, however, the techniques in use in developed countries are not adapted to the transition between purely traditional and "modem" cultivation systems, as shown by the above considerations of the necessity for the progressive disappearance of smallholders. Thus, there exists a "niche" for the development of transition techniques (one often speaks of `'adapted technology"). Such developments are specific to local conditions so that research carried out in developed countries cannot be of much use for that. But they require a high professional level, and may be embodied in more fundamental research. Thus, they must not be considered as secondary research activities. As theorists of
induced innovation observe, researchers and developers are often market-oriented. Since smallholders are poor, they do not represent a worthwhile "market" likely to bring about any significant rewards in terms of wealth or honours. It is thus the responsibility of the government to create such rewards. Such actions can be exceptionally useful, as was the ease for the creation of the International Centre for Maize and Wheat Improvement (CIMMYT) by the Mexican government in 1961. It attracted a number of distinguished scientists, including Norman Borlaugh, who was awarded the Nobel Prize. As a result, a new family of wheat varieties was developed. These varieties were spread worldwide, covering more than 30 million ha, mostly cultivated by small and medium farmers. They permitted the Mexican government to gain an excellent reputation in international scientific circles and, more generally, in public opinion.
This does not mean that managing agricultural research and extension services does not raise any problem. If managed poorly and in a bureaucratic fashion they may divert huge resources from direct production, as exemplified by the Lyssenko case in the USSR during the 1940s. Nevertheless, experience shows that no progress or technical change can take place in a country without a dynamic research and extension service.
Special case for irrigation
Because a dam is a long-term investment involving considerable risks (throughout the world there are numerous examples of unused dams), and often implying a collective organization of farmers to make the best use of water, it is understandable that irrigation is often considered as a typical case for public investment. This is true in developed as well as in developing countries. Besides, waterworks are spectacular installations that can be shown to the press and publicized in tourist offices. This explains the interest many officials take in such projects.
Nevertheless, we must not lose sight of the essential. If it is true that some publicly funded irrigation works were perfectly justified and highly successful, it is also true that, in many cases, the money spent would have been much better employed elsewhere. Here, again, the question of the capitalistic nature of production techniques arises. If irrigation makes use of the kind of adapted techniques referred to in the last paragraph, and which can be put into operation by smallholders, then it may be useful. If, in addition, the nature of the water resource implies the necessity of big collective works, then public intervention is probably justified. But if public irrigation consists of eliminating existing smallholders and replacing them by large (publicly funded) companies which will operate typically capitalistic agricultural systems over the freed fields, this is a waste of resources. (This type of action was common during the 1960s and 1970s, on the grounds of
efficiency, since smallholders were considered backward and lazy.) Capital would have been more productive in the hands of smallholders (we have seen that they obtain a high rate of capital productivity) and human resources are poorly used, since the expelled smallholders are now idle, whereas relatively high wages must be paid to a smaller number of displaced wage-earning workers.
New perspectives of institutional innovations
We have kept for the end the question of government involvement in measures in which the cost is very small yet in which impact may be great.
At the beginning of the nineteenth century, many countries which are now developed were in a situation comparable to that of currently developing countries. Because industrialization was in its infancy, and because the spectrum of available techniques was much narrower than now, they were actually much poorer than most modem developing countries, particularly as they were often engaged in wars which absorbed most of their resources. In any case, massive involvement of the state in production activities was out of the question. Yet, they developed their agricultural production parallel to their industrial activities, mainly by establishing a number of laws and regulations (e.g. the Code civil in France), which did not strain the budget (a parliament is an affordable luxury!), but which brought security and transparency to rural areas. It is difficult to assess to what extent safety and transparency accounted for the outstanding agricultural progress that took place during the
nineteenth century but, if the above analyses concerning the role of risk and uncertainty in small farmers' behaviour are correct, one must assume that this role was indeed important.
Because clear and detailed laws regulated and guaranteed landownership, inheritance and all the essential details of rural life, small peasants were induced to extend and accumulate much more than before. The main virtue of landownership is that it reduces the lenders' risk in credit operations, thus making possible cheap credit for agriculture.
Notice that private landownership of smallholders in Western Europe was mainly obtained by three mechanisms:
* "Privatization" of public land, as happened during the French Revolution, when church land was seized and sold to individual farmers;
* Spontaneous land reform occurred in many countries, including France. Despite the French Revolution, many "nobles" had kept large domains, which progressively disappeared during the nineteenth century) when landlords believed that economies of scale were far less important in agriculture than in industry. Consequently, they were induced to sell their agricultural domains, to reinvest the money in industry (a similar evolution is perceptible in many Latin American countries. See Deere and de Janvry, 1979, or Delahaye, 1989).
* Taxation of inheritance is also a powerful inducement for land reform. A tax of 20 to 50 percent of the value of inheritance obliges landlords' heirs to sell their estates at regular intervals, thus feeding the land market, depressing land prices and permitting smallholders to grow gradually through land acquisition.
These legal mechanisms also constitute efficient systems for transferring agricultural savings to the industrial sector through the government budget: in order to accumulate, farmers live frugaly, and die wealthy, for the benefit of the state.
In view of the advantages of such systems for the state, it is surprising that so few governments in developing countries have tried to apply this formula during the last few years. This would be all the easier since such measures are virtually costless. The only real cost is the setting up of a cadastre, a task probably far less costly, and far more accessible to many intermediate members of the civil servant staff, than extension work which, to be successful, requires so many conditions it is almost Utopian to find them among such poorly paid people.
<section>5</section>
Chapter 5 : Macro-economic policies and agriculture
Inflation control
Currency devaluations
Credit tightening
Difficulties with other short-term effects of structural adjustment programmes
We now tackle the problem of those aspects of economic policy which certainly do not belong to agricultural policy, which are not primarily intended to affect farmers, and yet which greatly impinge upon their daily life: inflation, currency devaluation and credit policy.
Inflation control
Inflation is not a decision of economic policy. Rather it is the outcome of a number of decisions and historical legacies. Removing inflation is one of the targets of many macro-economic and structural adjustment policies. At the same time, in many Latin American countries inflation is viewed as a "second best"- a way of avoiding more dramatic situations - and certainly not as a permanent obstacle in daily economic life.
Inflation, when it exists, is probably one of the major obstacles to the incorporation of small fanners into the monetary system. So long as they remain autarkic, they can ignore inflation. But as soon as they want to sell something, their only possible strategy to avoid money depreciation is to buy back other assets immediately. But this is precisely what a small farmer in a remote area, with transport problems and imperfect markets, cannot do. This is most important as many quasi-monetary assets that can be used to protect savings from inflation are usually sold in indivisible batches, the size of which is far too large for a small farmer. Thus, in the case of inflation, small farmers are deprived of their best means of action, namely the possibility of accumulating capital year after year in order to increase farming intensity and expand production. They cannot play the roles indicated above, and they are doomed to stay poor autarkic farmers, without profit for anybody
(again, a market failure).
In addition, inflation increases both nominal and real rates of interest. This is not apparent at the begining of the process: for instance, in Argentina, in the mid- 1970s, real interest rates were negative, because the rate of inflation was higher than the current interest rate. As a consequence, for one peso borrowed one year, the borrower had to reimburse a sum of I + t the following year. Since the average cost of living had been raised by I + x, with x > t, the true cost of the reimbursement was (I + t)/l + x, less than 1. Notice that such reasoning does not necessarily apply to smallholders. Their own cost-of-living index may not be the same as the general cost of living, because they do not buy the same commodities as the average consumer. Setting aside this objection, it must be stressed that a situation where the real rate of interest is negative cannot last for very long. Sooner or later, the real rate of interest becomes positive, and the nominal rate becomes the
sum of the real rate and of the rate of inflation. In fact, it is much higher because the rate of inflation is never constant. Thus, there is great uncertainty over the true value of the average rate of inflation in the medium term. As with any uncertainty, the latter has a cost, which is reflected in the "normal" real rates of interest being increased by a risk premium.
As a consequence of the above remarks, it is likely that any successful measure against inflation can be considered as highly beneficial for smallholders. Nevertheless, it would be foolish to attribute any failure in rural development programmes to inflation. Failure in rural development programmes is much more common than inflation. Bolivia, with an average annual rate of inflation of about 50 percent, is not worse off than Senegal with a rate of 9 percent, and is much better than Ethiopia with a rate of 4.4 percent.
Currency devaluations
Currency devaluations have two contradictory effects. First, they increase the internal price of exported commodities. This is, in principle, beneficial to smallholders, inasmuch as they produce exported commodities. Notice that farmgate prices of groundnuts, cocoa or coffee do not increase automatically after a devaluation and, in any case, do not increase at the same rate as the rate of devaluation. In the long chain of processes from farmgates to borders, many intermediate decision-makers (including governments) may maintain the difference between increased selling prices and former buying prices. The simplest case is depicted in Figure 5, which represents a monopolist trader buying agricultural products for export from peasants and selling them abroad.
FIGURE 5 : Consequences of devaluations for a monopolist country trader: the case of output
Before devaluation, themonopolist, maximizing his or her profit, operates quantity q[b], which equates world price (in local currency, at current exchange rate) with marginal benefit (receipt, minus price given to farmer). This is a curve with the same intercept and twice the slope of the peasants' supply curve. Therefore, he or she purchases quantity q[b] at price P[fb] to farmers. After devaluation, the same reasoning leads to quantity q[a], paid to farmer price p[fa]. It is important to note that, because of the slope of the peasants supply curve, the difference p[fa]- P[fb] (the price increase to farmers) is less than p[wa]- p[wb] (the difference in border prices between "before" and "after" devaluation). Thus, peasants benefit from a price advantage, which is significant, although smaller than the devaluation itself.
They also benefit from an increase in the quantity they sell, as is depicted by the difference between q[a]. and q[b]. The more elastic the peasants' supply curve, the bigger the difference between q[a]. and q[b]. We have already seen that such a high elasticity of supply with respect to price was not Utopian in the context of smallholder agriculture. But this classroom situation is probably less complicated than the reality, so the above conclusions should be taken lightly.
Second, devaluations increase the internal cost of imported inputs. This is, in principle, detrimental to smallholders. But, again, this is not necessarily the rule, for a number of reasons. Smallholders normally use comparatively fewer imported inputs than modern capital-intensive farms which cannot work without imported spare parts for tractors and fertilizers, for instance. Thus, smallholders are less affected by this consequence of devaluations than modem farm companies. Moreover, just as the increased price of output may vanish between the border and farmgate, the cost of smallholders' inputs may not be fully adjusted to the new border price, especially if traditional country traders are involved in the distribution. In so far as the latter behave like monopolists in their remote zones of operation, they are aware of the demand curve of their customers, as shown in Figure 6. Before devaluation, the situation is a classical monopoly equilibrium, with optimal quantity at
the intersection of the marginal cost of monopolist and of the marginal receipt (derived from the demand curve by doubling the slope, and keeping the P axis intersect).
Devaluation increases the marginal cost of the monopolist. As a consequence, the latter reduces the quantity sold and increases its selling price by an amount which is less than the increase in marginal cost.
The total impact of a devaluation on smallholders is a combination of the two effects just described. Although it is difficult to predict their overall direction, these effects are most likely to be beneficial, with increased benefits greater than increased costs. In addition, because devaluation increases the price of purchased inputs, it increases the smallholder's need for cash. We shall now see how this is important.
FIGURE 6 : Consequences of a devaluation on a monopolist country trader
Credit tightening
Credit policies are among the most controversial of the measures taken on behalf of structural adjustment. Economic theory teaches us that credit must be tightened and interest rates increased to curb inflation and restore monetary value. At the same time, credit is needed to increase production, to match the excess demand and to create an exportable surplus. The case of smallholders illustrates this dilemma. They will benefit from the reduction of inflation, as we have seen. At the same time, because they cannot expand their production without cash, they have to be given some sort of credit to be able to play their role properly in producing exportable goods for debt repayment, and domestic food for urban consumers.
Things are, nevertheless, a little more complicated than this. First, are smallholders directly hit by credit restrictions decided at a macro-economic level? Such restrictions normally affect commercial banks. But, for the reasons indicated above, commercial banks are not interested in smallholders. Even agricultural banks are seldom involved in operations with smallholders, whose only sources of financing are credit from their customers, or credit from relatives or associates, or traditional moneylenders, landlords and so on.
It may happen that national credit tightening reduces the availability of these sources of credit to smallholders, but not automatically. In addition, given the high marginal productivity of capital in traditional agriculture it is unlikely that, even if money becomes scarcer for these decision-makers, they will react by cutting credit to smallholders, or by increasing the (largely traditional) rate of interest. More probably, as far as possible, they would rather reduce the volume of their operations with partners other than smallholders, at least because, as we have seen, the latter are paying higher rates of interest.
Would credit restrictions reduce the supply from smallholders? This is also questionable. Obviously, credit restrictions will not affect those who do not have recourse to credit. They certainly represent the vast majority of smallholders, although the proportion of "credit using" smallholders may vary considerably from one country to another. For the others, they probably will lower their production and adopt new production systems closer to autarky. This does not mean they would cut their production in proportion to the reduction in credit availability.
Finally, both credit demand by smallholders and credit supply by lenders are determined by many variables other than the supply of money in the economy. We have seen that risk aversion and security seeking are probably determining in this respect. For this reason, it may very well happen that smallholders make use of much larger sums of fresh money in periods of economic stability, low inflation, and steady prices than in periods of monetary turbulence and price instability. This would mean that the reduction in agricultural production, which may eventually be observed immediately after a structural adjustment period, is probably more the consequence of the instability that such an adjustment triggers, or reveals, than of the adjustment itself.
Difficulties with other short-term effects of structural adjustment programmes
The common features of the policy instruments examined in this chapter are those dealing with short-term effects of structural adjustment programmes. The three most important points in this respect have just been discussed. As we have seen, the overall impression is that these aspects of structural adjustment, even in the short term, are quite beneficial to smallholders, so that no particular steps should be taken to protect the latter from temporary harm that they may suffer as a result of this policy. But other aspects may not be as favourable.
Removal of Input subsidies
Before structural adjustment, input subsidies had previously been viewed as a compensation for low output prices, and a way of solving the conflict between the two contradictory goals of cheap food and increased agricultural production. It is true that, ceteris paribus, removing input subsidies will, in general, decrease agricultural production and be harmful to smallholders. At the same time, the ceteris paribus clause does not hold here, since output prices must increase as well. Nevertheless, discrepancies can arise between input and output price increases.
A theoretical consideration must be kept in view at this stage: we have seen that the agricultural production function is homogeneous and of degree one. In that case, according to Euler's theorem, value of outputs equals the value of inputs, measured at marginal productivity prices. It follows that removing input subsidies will decrease the value of agricultural production by no more than the value of the subsidies. This is far less than ordinarily assumed by policy analysts. Most of them justify the subsidy assuming that, by encouraging "modem practices", it will trigger a production increase much larger than the amount of government money spent. In fact, by encouraging a better allocative efficiency, removing the subsidy will probably lower agricultural production by less than the value of the subsidy. In addition, smallholders will be hurt in proportion to their previous use of subsidized inputs: it is reasonable to assume that the poorest will be the least hurt, because
they are the smaller users.
Privatization of parastatals
We have seen that, as a rule, there are no reasons for governments to commit themselves in trade operations. The privatization of parastatal agencies is, therefore, a sound policy in principle, aiming at correcting former mistakes. However, privatization itself may raise serious problems when the old system is no longer in use, and private organizations are not ready to relay them immediately. Let us examine, for instance, the case of the Turkish parastatal wheat monopoly (Reusse, 1987). At the time of its abolition, it owned the only bulk handling port facility. Nobody left instructions for this facility to be put at the disposal of private institutions which, in such a context, were greatly handicapped, with export and grain collection falling abruptly as a consequence of liberalization.
Numerous examples of analogous difficulties are given by Reusse ( 1987). To some extent, they are more illustrations of the lack of adaptability of parastatals - including adaptability to their own disappearance - than proofs of the failures of the private sector. However, sensible policy-makers must still be very careful with this type of difficulty, the solution of which depends essentially on local circumstances.
Removal of facilities
The search for a "real price" regime implies that some facilities, which previously were provided free vat a price far belong their actual cost, should be discontinued. As an example of such a service, let us consider the
Mexican crop insurance scheme (Hazel!, Pomareda and Valdes, 1986). The system originated in an early perception of the role of risk in smallholders' decisions, as presented above. Now, if risk is so important in preventing farmers from increasing their production, why not eliminate it by an adequate crop insurance scheme? This was certainly a good idea, except that the difficulty was to avoid "moral hazard", that is, unjustified claims for indemnities (e.g. if the crop failure was due to inadequate cultural practices instead of climatic conditions). To deal with this problem, supervisors were recruited with the mission of monitoring peasants' activity. They were so numerous that no private firm would have taken on such a task and no peasant would have subscribed to any crop insurance contract if he or she had been charged the full cost. In this kind of circumstance, state withdrawal entails a fall in production (this is whet happened in Mexico when President de la Madrid
decided to discontinue the ambitious Systema Alimentario Mexicano set up by his predecessor President López Portillo), a tragedy for civil servants, and a loss of welfare for smallholders. But the fact is that the previous system was simply impossible to maintain. It would have been cheaper to distribute free the food bought on international markets.
The mistake was not in discontinuing the system, which imposed a severe strain on all other productive segments of the population, but rather in allowing such a system to develop in the first place. Nevertheless, it is equally difficult to eliminate the mistake without taking precautions, particularly as wrong systems tend to perpetuate. (Thus, the Mexican system is going to rise anew from its ashes, under the pressure of necessity, see Austin and Esteva, 1987.) Again, no general precepts can be given in this respect, the golden rule being probably to go slowly and to compensate vested interests whenever they are hurt.
Chapter 6 : Conclusions and directions for research
Summary
Approaches available for assessing the impact of structural adjustment on smallholders
Outline of possible case studies
Summary
Defining the notion of smallholders is not easy especially if this definition is to be used for statistical purposes. Nevertheless, smallholders, taken together, present certain permanent features-mainly, in the techniques with which they work - which make them a distinct subject of study, despite their diversities.
Smallholders have a role to play in economic growth - that of bringing about the necessary smooth transition between traditional, labour-intensive, small productivity, and modern capital-intensive, high productivity techniques. The best way for them to play this role is to "disappear", either by leaving agriculture, or by becoming large farmers. But, for this disappearance to be worthwhile, it should be the result of an enrichment process. It is the responsibility of goverments to create the necessary conditions for the latter to be triggered.
Until recently, it was generally accepted that this objective should be achieved by a direct involvement in rural development of the state, through its participation in a variety of projects, and of parastatal organizations. Such policies have been shown to be incompatible with considerations of general equilibrium, as well as lacking efficiency in general. After the 1970s they were progressively abandoned, either spontaneously or under the pressure of international organizations, such as the IMF or the World Bank. The impact of structural adjustment on smallholders must be seen in this historical context.
Economic theory suggests that smallholders will suffer from state withdrawal from non-marketable facilities, such as roads, railways and irrigation. They will suffer even more from a reduction in size or efficiency of agricultural research and extension. Conversely, they will generally benefit from state withdrawal from marketable facilities, because parastatal organizations are usually less flexible, and provide less reliable services, than private traders. However, there may be difficulties the transition period. In addition, the policies distributional effects may be important, some smallholders benefiting (the best located, and the richer, for example) and some suffering.
Removing inflation, whenever it exists, is probably extremely beneficial to smallholders, although there exist cases where inflation is very low, and peasants are very poor, thus showing that inflation is not the main obstacle to the development of smallholders. The same can be said for devaluations, which are usually beneficial.
The main obstacle to development, nevertheless, seems to be the difficulty of obtaining credit, despite the high productivity of capital in smallholdings. This is a consequence of risk and uncertainty, which prevent peasants from requesting loans and bankers from granting them. This casts a new light on several structural adjustment issues. In particular, it shows that directly linking domestic and foreign markets, without any stabilizing device dampening the fluctuations of the latter, may be very detrimental to smallholders, and may induce them to withdraw from markets, being content with self-sufficiency. Similarly, risk issues are important when discussing the equilibrium between food and export crops. In Africa, for instance, a stabilization of food crop markets is likely to trigger an increase in food crop production, without changes in average prices.
The possibility of compensating for the detrimental effects of state withdrawal by institutional improvements has been examined. The importance of private land ownership has been stressed.
In general, smallholders should not be too directly affected by structural adjustment or, rather, it is often possible to design structural adjustment so as not to hurt smallholders too directly. Nevertheless, inadequate measures can affect their welfare and, even more, their production potential. In addition, there are situations - especially when too optimistic governments have provided too costly rural services at no charge - where structural adjustment unavoidably hurts smallholders. In such cases, the supply of agricultural commodities by smallholders shrinks. Fanners return to self-sufficiency and traditional extensive techniques. As a consequence, land becomes scarce, and urban labour markets are rapidly flooded by rural unemployed.
Situations vary enormously from one country to another and, even within one country, from one region to another. Therefore, generalizations are dangerous and generally ill-founded. This explains why this paper is so difficult write, and why it is so vague. It is impossible to deal with such a variety of situations.
This is why further studies should both improve basic theory and provide empirical information for action.
Approaches available for assessing the impact of structural adjustment on smallholders
The necessity of modelling
There are a number of difficulties involved in designing a plan for research and information-gathering on smallholders:
First, there is the difficulty of defining stratifications among smallholders. Throughout this paper, although the diversity of smallholder populations has been stressed, no attempt has been made to provide a typology of smallholders, as the reader may have expected. This deserves a few explanations.
When dealing with any heterogeneous population, it is natural to try to split it up into segments which could be treated homogeneously one after another. This is, after all, what was done when planning a paper on "smallholders". The latter are supposed to constitute a more homogeneous category than "the poor" or "farmers". But we have seen the difficulties involved in defining "smallholders": they belong to a continuum. It is difficult to say that the smallholder category stops at a particular point in this continuum, because any other point in the vicinity could have been chosen just as well. This difficulty is real when speaking of "smallholders" in general. It is even more acute when speaking of any smallholder subcategory.
For this reason, another approach has been taken. According to a line of thought which also has its tradition (see, for instance, Just and Zilberman, 1988), a general model of smallholders (to which most individual farmers, even relatively large ones, are added), should be constructed. It should treat any observed case as a particular point in a multi-dimensional space, defined by labour, capital and land endowments, as well as by technical, economic and institutional environment, including risk and uncertainty. Thus, despite obvious individual differences, the basic homogeneity of farmer populations is stressed. It is possible to understand how an agricultural worker, during a life span, can traverse the whole continuum beginning as a small-scale smallholder and ending as a wealthy farmer, or the contrary.
Ignoring this possibility, and assuming that people fall into a definite and permanent category, is probably a major error in policy-making, liable to suggest useless and inappropriate measures. It is hoped that readers of the present study will not fall into this trap.
Second, there is the difficulty of attributing an observed change to a particular measure. Suppose we observe simultaneously (or, rather, after a year's lapse, so that a price increase can play its assumed role) an increase in the price of groundnuts, and an increase in groundnut supply. It is tempting to describe the increase in price as the cause of the production increase. But this is not necessarily true. The production increase may have been caused by better climatic conditions, or some other reason. A similar well-known case is milk supply in the European Community: it has been observed for years that the milk price has been decreasing, and production increasing. Supporters of the milk price increase have argued that this is proof that an increasing price would decrease production. But this is wrong. Econometric evidence, and a few current experiences, show that with higher prices, production would have been even greater. The observed increase in production comes from
technical progress, capital accumulation, and other circumstances which have nothing to do with price decrease. On the contrary, the decrease in price contributes to slowing down an evolution which otherwise could have been more rapid.
The same line of reasoning applies to the appraisal of many structural adjustment programmes and measures.' The associated difficulty is sometimes called the "counter factual analysis" issue. Indeed, what is observed is the situation before structural adjustment, and the situation after. But this is not what we need. We need to compare the situation with structural adjustment and the situation without structural adjustment. Unfortunately, such situations are not observable, so it is necessary to construct them mentally, or by using explicit models.
But which models can we use? Two types of approaches have been envisaged: one is micro-economic, and the other macro-economic. In fact, they are complementary.
Macro-economic approaches
These are the approaches followed by early analysts of the sectoral effects of adjustment programmes, such as Zulu and Nsouli (1985) or Johnson and Salop (1986), or even Heller et. al. (1988). The general idea consists of identifying target groups for the analysis (in our case, "smallholders" constitute a target group, but the "smallholder" category will normally be split up into various subcategories, such as "producers of export crops" and "producers of marketed domestic food". The characteristics of each group are then determined, using national accountancy techniques. Thus, for each group of smallholders, one must try to determine the magnitude and nature (self-consumption or market sales) of gross receipts, the magnitude and nature (self-supplied, or market-purchased) of input expenses, the distribution of income between members of the holdings (wage paid, income of wives, for instance), the magnitude and nature of savings and consumption, and so on. In this way, a
partial social account matrix (SAM) is built up, explicity or implicity. Then, assuming no change whatsoever, it is possible to assess the impact of a given change in any price or quantity on smallholders, using (again, explicitly or implicitly) the techniques known under the general heading of "computable general equilibrium models".
In their most classical form, these models consist of a set of equations expressing that anything produced must be used as intermediate inputs, consumed, saved or traded with foreign countries. Another set of equations expresses that the value of each product (that is, its price) is distributed between variable inputs and fixed factors. In general, a certain amount of input substitutability is assumed: if the price of one input increases, ceteris paribus, then this input is used in smaller quantities. Other equations "close" the model, with a description of foreign exchange decisions, as well as consumption and savings decisions.
The main advantage of such models is that they provide perfectly consistent projections of the main variables in the economy. By their very logic, demand equates supply, income equates expenses, and so on. In addition, they take account of the many feedbacks and simultaneity existing in any economic system. For instance, increasing agricultural prices, in principle, increases agricultural incomes and demand, but decreases urban incomes and demand. What will be the overall effect of these contradictory motions on the gross national product ? These models are designed to answer such questions. Finally, although until now they have been used almost exclusively at the national or international they could (and should) be used for regional planning, where the criticisms that have been addressed to them are probably less valid.
But they have been criticized. Without going too deeply into the famous "closure debate" (see Bell, 1979 or Ratts, I 9 82), let us lust note that the heart of the matter is in the definition of endogenous and exogenous variables, especially regarding to the levels and prices of fixed factors. For instance, if labour is considered a fixed factor, it is still possible to assume either that its price is given exogenously(in which case, the corresponding endogenous variable is the quantity of labour used in the economy eventually far less than the available amount of labour, thus implying the possibility of unemployment), or that its quantity is predetermined (in which case, the wage adapts itself to the marginal productivity of labour, which can be smaller than the current average level). Theory shows, and experience confirms, that the model behaves in a completely different way under these two alternative assumptions concerning the supply and demand of labour. Similar problems
arise with interest rates and savings, as well as with foreign trade, and, finally, with government expenditure.
These questions are obviously of the utmost importance when planning national economic policies, and assessing the global impact of structural adjustment. To some extent, they recall the ongoing debate among "neoclassical", "Keynesian" and "Kaldorian" theorists. Thus, they widely encompass the problem addressed here.
But the same kind of model can be used at a more modest regional level, with probably fewer difficulties in the choice of key variables. To some extent, many studies (such as those quoted above) which do not make explicit reference to computable general equilibrium models in fact belong to this category, although with somewhat naive "closing rules" involving, for instance, no substitutability among inputs and in consumption decision. Rather than despising "complicated" models and relying upon a false simplicity, it would be as well to be aware of the assumptions of simple models or accounting schemes, and to establish clear and explicit ties between them and more comprehensive models of the whole economy.
However, such models must not be used for their predictive power (which is probably poor), but rather for their ability to suggest situations that would not have been envisaged otherwise, and whose consideration could avoid serious mistakes. This is why a prudent use of computable general equilibrium models is recommended in this paper, at least as an adjuvant to micro-models, provided that users are aware of the multiple caveats that have to be issued.
Micro-economic approaches
As we have seen, macro-economic approaches rely upon micro-economic assumptions. The latter must be formulated and checked before use. The basic tool for doing so (at least, whenever the farm sector is concerned) is another category of models called "farm household models". They consist of building a complete farm plan under different assumptions (for instance, "with" or "without" structural measures), and deducing forecast behavioural changes from the comparison of various alternatives. It is essential to stress the fact that the "farm plans" in question must include the household consumption plan as well as the farm production plan. Given the observations in Chapter 2 about the interrelationship between the two, this is not surprising, and justifies the generic name of these kinds of model.
The farm plan building itself can be done using several methodological options: using a pencil and an eraser on a sheet of paper, or with the help of a computer, avoiding tedious arithmetical operations by using a spreadsheet program. For farm planning, in particular, there exist a number of specialized programs, such as FAO's DASI (Data Analysis and Simulation), (Cappi, 1984). However, for the kind of services we expect from them in the present context, the best and most reliable way of building up household models is probably to use a mathematical programming system. It will maximize the utility of family consumption, under the constraint that what is consumed must have been previously produced or bought. In some cases, bought. In some cases, as suggested by Singh, Squire and Strauss (1986), it would be possible to simplify the problem by making use of certain separability theorems, allowing for a recursive analysis of the production and consumption plans. Although it may
have a certain practical relevance, this aspect is not very important. It is much more important to take account of two things that are essential in the case of smallholders:
* There is usually a considerable difference between the selling price and the purchasing price of any item. Typically, food crops will be sold for much less than it will be necessary to spend to buy them again. This is a major element of fixity in farm household decisions, and a major determinant of elasticities.
* As we have seen, risk plays an essential role in smallholders' decisions. It is, therefore, indispensable to deal with it explicitly in modelling, either by maximizing an expected utility of consumption (as required by traditional risk analysis) or by imposing constraints to secure a minimum level of consumption after debt repayment(Boussard, 1980).
Although these factors were recognized as early as 1923 in the case of Tchayanov and, more recently, by a number of authors, including Nakajima (1970), they have been little employed in an actual model. Nevertheless, such considerations usually express quite well many factors that otherwise would be difficult to understand in the behaviour of small farmers; for instance, why they are so reluctant to borrow, even if the expected marginal productivity of capital is higher than the interest rate; why they constitute reserves of financial or other assets (granaries and herds, for example) and borrow at the same time.
Most of the remarks made in this paper are derived from the empirical operation of this kind of model. Such empirical studies suggest a conclusion that cannot be drawn in a paper like this or, rather, that cannot be made apparent, as is the case in reality: that is, the incredible variety of situations, and the difficulty of formulating general statements about smallholders' behaviour. Slight variations in prices, institutional settings, available techniques and technical coefficients are sufficient to trigger great differences in model outcomes, and to yield apparently contradictory results. This is why careful picturing of each particular situation is so badly needed.
Outline of possible case studies
In view of this heterogeneity, it would certainly be useful to launch a few empirical case-studies.
Studies have already been performed by various organizations, such as the IMF (Heller et al., 1988); the World Bank (especially, Glewwe and de Tray, 1987); and the OECD (Bonvin, 1986, and Lecaillon et al., 1987). Others include Demery, 1988, and Delgado, 1983. These references represent only a small sample of what has been done.
These studies are not primarily concerned with smallholders. They deal with the poor and, since smallholders form the bulk of rural poor, they more or less cover our field. Yet, in the present study, emphasis has been placed on two points that are still largely neglected in the literature:
* Smallholders are not only poor, they are also producers. Structural adjustment programmes and policies are likely to affect not only equity, but also productive capacity. It is thus important and necessary to raise the question of productive capacity of srnallholders, and of the impact of structural adjustment on this area.
* Risk is a key factor in explaining the productive behaviour of smallholders. It is likely to trigger apparently irrational behaviour and market failure. It is, therefore, important to assess the consequences of structural measures on the stability of smallholders' environment, as well as to evaluate the impact of an eventual modification of this environment on production and consumption behaviour of smallholders, both in the short and long term.
Thus, a set of case-studies on the impact of structural adjustment on smallholders should emphasize these two points. The two approaches that have just been identified (that is, the "macro-economic approach" and the "micro-economic approach") should be used in parallel, and their results compared, to assess the influence of alternative assumptions.
Concretely, the study could take the shape of a set of village studies, in a few selected countries (at least one in the Far East, Thailand or Indonesia; one in Africa, Burkina Faso, Mali, Malawi or the United Republic of Tanzania; and one in Latin America, Colombia, Honduras or Ecuador).
If possible, a survey could be performed at the village level (therefore, not too costly), to identify a few key subgroups of smallholders and other decision-makers, as well as to estimate reliable input/output coefficients, consumption coefficients, and an income distribution map. From this information, a social account matrix would be built up for the village (the methodology is well established; see Hazell and Roell, 1983), and a computable general equilibrium model built up along the general lines indicated above.
At the same time, a household model study would be conducted over a set of farms, if possible representative of the categories revealed by the survey. Again, the same kind of experiment would be performed with these farm models. Results would be compared with the assessment of smallholders' productive capacity to assess to what extent risk considerations modify the conclusions drawn from the relatively light SAM approach.
In this way, not only would an undisputable assessment of the effect of structural adjustment on selected villages be available from a comparison of results in different states, but it would be possible to obtain information about the effect of institutional setting on possible reactions from smallholders. In addition, two general methodologies would be available: one for assessing the consequences of structural policies at a relatively simple level (it could be called the "SAM" methodology, although another name will have to be found, if only to keep good relations with the promoters of the SAM idea!); and the other, more costly and more detailed, the "risk constrained programming approach".
Of course, field-work would have to be performed by local citizens, preferably scholars from local universities. The bulk of the study team should consist of economists. The assistance of at least one sociologist would be needed to set up smallholder behaviour models. Computer operating expertise should also be made available. The relatively heavy infrastructure of FAO projects, for example, give it a definite comparative advantage for this kind of study. It should be easy to find FAO projects with farm surveys in each state concerned. This would considerably alleviate the data collection task. Ideally, surveys would already be completed, with questionnaires detailed enough for only a little additional processing to be necessary. Probably, it would be necessary to add a few questions to "starting" questionnaires. In any case, this would only be a marginal effort required from FAO project officers, and a way of involving them in more thorough studies than those to which they
are accustomed.
<section>6</section>
Bibliography
Arrow, K. J.1971. Essays in the theory of risk bearing. Chicago, Markham Publishing Co.
Austin, J. E. & Esteva, G.1987. Food policy in Mexico: the search for self-sufficiency. Ithaca, N.Y., Cornell University Press.
Bairoch, P. 1964. Révolution industrielle et so us développement . Paris, SEDEIS.
Becker, H. 1989. Factor input decisions of subsistence farm households in Central Africa. Paper presented at EAAE meeting, (May) Montpellier, France.
Behrman, J. R. 1968. Supply response in under-developed agriculture. Amsterdam, North Holland Publishing Co.
Bell, C. 1979. The behaviour of actual economies under different closing rules. Journal of Development Economics, 6(1): 47-72.
Benoit Cattin, M. & Faye, J. 1982. L' exploitation agricole en Afrique Soudano sahélienne. Paris, PUP, Agence de Cooperation Cullurelle et Technique.
Benito, C. 1983. Farmers' response to rural development projects in Puebla. In R. Norton and L. Solis, eds. The book of Chac. Baltimore, Johns Hopkins University Press, p. 412457.
Berg, E. 1981. Accelerated development in sub-Saharan Africa: agenda for action. Washington, D.C., World Bank.
Berland, J.-P. 1987. Recherches sur l'économie politique d'un changement technique: le cas du maïs hybride. These d'Etat, Université d'Aix, Marseille 2.754 pp.
Berthelemy, J. C. & Morrisson, C. 1987. Manufactured goods supply and cash crops in sub-Saharan Africa. World Development, 15 (10-11): 1353-1367.
Binswanger, H.P. 1981. Attitudes toward risk: experimental measures in rural India. The Economic Journal, 91 (364): 867890.
Binswanger, H. P. & Pingali, P.L.1985. The evolution of farming systems and agricultural technology in sub-Saharan Africa. In C.E. Schuh, ed.
Technology, human capital and the world food problem. Alexander von Humbolt Award Colloquium, p. 2952.
Binswanger, H. P. & Rosenzweig, M.R.1986. Behavioural and material determinant of production relations in agriculture. Journal of Development Studies, 22 (3): 503539.
Binswanger, H. P. & Ruttan, V. W. 1978. The induced innovation, technology, institutions and development. Baltimore, John Hopkins University Press.
Bonvin, J. 1986. Changements sociaux et productivité agricole en Afrique centrale. Paris OCDE.
Boserup, E. 1965. The conditions of agricultural growth. Chicago, Aldine.
Bourdon, M. 1982. Le rôle désinflationiste de l'agriculture dans la crise. Purpan, 125.
Boussard, J. M. 1980. The risk aversion coefficient in risk programming models. In C.H. Hanf and G. Schieffer, eds. Consideration and modelling of risk in the agri-business sector. Kiel, Kieler Wissenschaft Verlag Vauck, p. 29-36.
Boussard, J. M. 1987. Economie de l'agriculture. Paris, Economical
Boussard, J. M. 1988. Maîtriser la production agricole. Revue Française d'Economie, 3(4): 239261.
Boussard, J. M., Bourliaud, J. & Leblanc,J.1977. La programmation linéaire comme outil descriptif de comportement des agriculteurs: une etude pilote au Senegal. Mondes en développement, 17: 5174.
Boussard, J. M. & Petit, M. 1966. Problème de l'accession à l'irrigation. Paris, INRA.
Burnisux, J. M. 1987. Le radeau de la méduse. Paris, Economica
Calegar, G. & Schuh, G.E. 1988. Brazilian wheat policy. IFPRI Research Report, No. 66 Washington, D.C.
Cappi, C. 1984. DASI computer program for project analysis. User's guide. Rome, FAO.
Child, B., Muir, K. & Blackie, M. 1985. An improved maize marketing system for African countries: the case of Zimbabwe. Food Policy, 10 (4) (Nov.): 365373.
Day, R. H. 1969. Cycles, phases and growth in a generalized cobweb model. The Economic Journal, 69 (313): 90-110.
Day, R. H., Dasgupta, S., Data, S.K. & Nugent, J.B. 1987. Instability in rural-urban migration. The Economic Journal, 97 (Dec.): 940950.
Deere, C. D. & de Janvry, A. 1979. A conceptual framework for the empirical analysis of peasants. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 61(4) Nov): 601-611.
Delahaye, O. 1989. Laréforme agraire en Amérique latine, une strategic de développement agricole fondée sur l'établissement d'un marché fancier. Economie Rurale, Paris.
Delgado, C.1983. The changing role of coarse grains in semi-arid tropical West Africa - a collaborative research proposal. Washington, Hyderabad and Montpellier, lFPRI, ICRISAT and GERDAT. (mimeo)
Demery, L. 1988. The impact of structural adjustment policies on the rural poor in sub-Saharan Africa. Inception paper. London, Overseas Development Institute. (mimeo)
Dubresson, A. 1988. Urbanisation et consummation alimentaire citadine en Côte d'Ivoire. Economie Rurale, Paris.
Elias, V. J. 1985. Government expenditures on agriculture and agricultural growth in Latin America. IFPRI Research Report, No. 50. Washington, D.C.
FIAC. 1984. Fertilizer application equipment for small farmers. Rome, Fertilizer Industry Advisory Committee (FIAC/FAO).
Flichmann, G., Vicien, C. & Deybe, D. 1989. Comparaisons internationales d'efficacité dans la production de grain. Le cas de l'Argentine et de la France. Paper presented at the autumn meeting of the Société Française d'Économie Rurale, Paris.
Glantz, M. H., ed. 1987. Drought and hunger in Africa: denying famine a future. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Glewwe, P. 1988. Economic liberation and income inequality: further evidence on the Sri Lankan experience. Journal of Development Economics, 28 (2) (March): 217-233.
Glewwe, P. & de Tray, D. 1987. The poor during adjustment: a case study of the Côte d'lvoire. Washington, D.C., World Bank. (mimeo)
Griffin, K.1974. The political economy of agrarian change. An essay on the green revolution. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press.
Griffon, M. 1988. Ajustement structurel et politique agricole en Afrique. Paper presented to the spring meeting of the Société Française d'Économie Rurale. Paris, 22 pp.
Hanf, C. H. & Schieffer, C. 1981. Consideration and modelling of risk in the agri-business sector. Kiel, Kieler Wissenschaft Verlag Vauck.
Hansen, A. & McMillan, D.E. 1986. Food in sub-Saharan Africa. Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner.
Hazell, P.B.R. 1988. Risk and uncertainty in domestic production and prices. ln J. W.Mellor and R. Ahmed, eds. Agricultural price policy for developing countries. Baltimore and London, Johns Hopkins University Press.
Hazell, P.B.R., Pomareda, C. & Valdes, A.1986. Crop inswance for agricultural development: issues and experiences. Baltimore, John Hopkins University Press.
Hazell, P.B.R. & Roell, A.1983. Rural growth linkages: household expenditure patterns in Malaysia and Nigeria. IFPRI Report, No. 41. Washington, D.C.
Heller, P.S.A., Bovenberg, L., Catsambas, T., Chu, K.Y. & Shome, P.1988. The implications of Fund-supported adjustment prograrns for poverty: experiences in selected countries. IMF Occasional Paper, No. 58, Washington, D.C.
IFAD. 1988. The impact of structural adjustment on African smallholders and the rural poor. Summary of discussions during an informal retreat held in Cadenablia, Italy, July 1987. Rome. (mimeo)
Jabara, C. & Thompson, R. 1980. Agricultural comparative advantage under international price uncertainty: the case of Senegal. American
Journal of Agricultural Economics, 62 (2): 188-198.
Jaeger, W. K. 1986. Agricultural mechanization: the economics of an/mar draft power in West Africa. Boulder, CO, Westview.
Johnson, G. L. 1966. Agricultural supply functions: some facts and notions. In E.O. Heady, et al. Agricultural adjustment problems in a growing economy. Ames, IA, Iowa State College Press.
Johnson, O. & Salop, J. 1986. Distributional aspects of stabilization programs in developing countries. IMP Staff Paper, No. 27, Washington, D.C.
Just, R. E. & Zilberman, D.1988. The effects of agricultural development policies on income distribution and technological change in agriculture. Journal of Development Economics, (28): 193-216.
Kennedy, E. T. & Cogill, B. 1988. Income and nutritional effects of the commercialization of agriculture in southwestern Kenya. IFPRI Research Report, No. 63. Washington, D.C.
Krueger, A. O., Schiff, M. & Valdes, A. 1988. Agricultural incentives in developing countries: measuring the effect of sectoral and economywide policies. World Bank Economic Review, 2 (3) (Sept.): 295-272.
Lecaillon, J., Morrisson, C., Schneider, H. & Thorbecke, E. 1987. Politiques économiques et performances agricoles dans les pays faible revenu. Paris, OCDE.
Lele, U. 1975. The design of rural development: lessons from Africa. Baltimore, Johns Hopkins University Press.
Lemarchand, R. 1986. The political economy of food issues. In A. Hansen and D.E. McMillan, eds. Food in sub-Saharan Africa. Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner, p. 2542.
Lewis, W.A. 1954. Economic development with unlimited supplies of labour. The Manchester School, 22: 139-191.
Lewis, W.A. 1977. The evolution of the international economic order. Princeton, Princeton University Press.
Lipton, M. 1979. Agricultural risk, rural credit and the inefficiency of inequality. In Roumasset et al. (1979), p. 341-362.
McMillan, D. E. 1986. Distribution of resources and products in Mossi households. In A. Hansen and D.E. McMillan, eds. Food in sub-Saharan Africa. Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner, p. 260-273.
Meissner, F. 1987. SAM and his children. Food Policy, 12(4) (Nov.): 391-397.
Mellor, J. W. & Ahmed, R. 1988. Agricultural price policy for developing countries. Baltimore and London, Johns Hopkins University Press.
Morlon, P. 1987. Del clime a la comercialización: un riesgo puede oculta otra. Ejemplos sobre el Altiplano peruano. Agricultura y sociedad, (45): 133-182.
Mundlak, Y. 1979. Intersectoral factor mobility, and agricultural growth. IFPRI Research Report, No. 6, Washington, D.C.
Mundlak, Y. 1988. Capital accumulation, the choice of techniques and agricultural output. In J.W. Mellor and R. Ahmed, eds. Agricultural price policy for developing countries. Baltimore and London, Johns Hopkins University Press, p.171-189.
Nakajima, C. 1970. Subsistence and commercial family farms: some theoretical models of subjective equilibrium. In C.R. Wharton, ed. Subsistence agriculture and economic development. London, Aldine, p. 165-185.
Nerlove, M. 1979. The dynamic of supply: retrospect and prospect. American Journal of Agricultural
Economics, 61 (5) (Dec.): 874888. Neveux, H. & Jacquart, J. 1975. Histoire de la France rurale. Tome2: L'age classique des paysans. Paris, Seuil.
Norton, R.1987. Agricultural issues in structural adjustment programmes. Economic and Social Development paper, No. 66, Rome, FAO.
O'Mahony, F. & Peters, J. 1987. Transformation du lait - options pour les petite producteurs. Revue mondiale de zootechnie, 62, (avriljuin): 16-30.
Palma, V. 1983. Review of evaluation studies of return to agricultural research. Fourth Latin American meeting of the Econometric Society, (July) Santiago, Chile. (mimeo)
Park, W. L. 1985. Pricing milk in Ecuador. the impact of transport costs. Food policy, 10 (4) (Nov.): 374-377.
Pyatt, G. & Round, J.l., eds. 1985. Social accounting matrices: a basis for planning. Washington, D.C., World Bank.
Ratts,J.1982. Different macro closures of the original Johansen model, and their impact on policy evaluation. Journal of Policy Modelling, 4 (1): 85-97.
Reardon, T. A., Thiombiono, T. & Delgado, C.L. 1988. L'importance des céréales non traditionnelles dans la consommation des riches et des pauvres a Ouagadougou. Economie Rurale, No.188.
Reusse, E. 1987. Liberalization and agricultural marketing: recent causes end effects in Third World economics. Food Policy, 12 (4) (Nov.): 299-317.
Rosegrant, M. W. & Siamwalla, A. 1988. Government credit programs: justification, benefit and cost. In J.W. Mellor and R. Ahmed, eds. Agricultural price policy for developing countries. Baltimore and London, Johns Hopkins University Press, p. 219-238.
Roumasset, J., Boussard, J.M. & Singh, 1.1979. Risk and agricultural development. College, Laguna, Philippines, SEARCA.
Russel, M. 1985. Landlessness in Swaziland. Rome, FAO.
Salehi-lsfani, D.1988. Technology and preferences in the Boserup model of agricultural growth. Journal of Development Economics, 28: 175191.
Sarris, A. 1987a. The impact of structural adjustment on African smallholder farmers and the rural poor. Rome, IFAD, 27 pp. (mimeo)
Sarris, A. 1987b. Agriculture, nonagriculture interaction and the impact of stabilization and structural adjustment programmes. Rome, FAO, ESP. (mimeo)
Schuh, G.E., ed. 1985. Technology, human capital and the world food problem. Alexander von Humbolt Award Colloquium.
Senauer, B. 1985. A protectionist food grain price policy: the case of rice in Panama. Food Policy, 10 (4) (Nov.): 352-364.
Singb, I., Squire, L. & Strauss, J. 1986. A survey of households models: recent findings and policy implications. The World Bank Economic Review, 1 (1): 1-30.
Spring, A. 1986. Women farmers and food in Africa: some considerations and suggested solutions. In A. Hansen and D.E. McMillan, eds. Food in subSaharan Africa. Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner.
Stone, B. 1988. Relative prices in the People's Republic of China: rural taxation through public monopsomy. In J.W. Mellor and R. Ahmed, eds. Agricultural price policy for developing countries. Baltimore and London, Johns Hopkins University Press, p.124155. von Braun, J., Puetz, D. & Webb, P. 1987. Irrigation technology and commercialization of rice in the Gambia: effects on income and nutrition. IFPRI Research Report, No.41, Washington. D.C.
Watts, M.1987. Drought, environment and food security: some reflections on peasants, pastoralists and commoditization in dryland West Africa. In M.H. Glantz, ed. Drought and hunger in Africa: denying famine a future. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, p.171-211.
Walbroeck, J.L. & Ginsburg, V.A. 1981. Activity analysis and general equilibrium modelling. Amsterdam, North Holland Publishing Co.
Webley, O. 1986. Fuelwood. In A. Hansen and D.E. McMillan, eds. Food in sub-Saharan Africa. Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner, p. 254-259.
World Bank. 1986. World development report 1986, Washington, D.C.
Zulu, J.B. & Nsouli, S.M. 1985. Adjustment programs in Africa: the recent experience. IMF Occasional Paper, No. 34, Washington, D.C.
