<title>Energy conservation in the mechanical forest industries</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
The enormous price increases on fossil fuels in the 1970s and the consequent higher unit costs of industrial products have sharpened awareness of the importance of minimizing energy consumption in the industrial sector. Many developed countries accord high priority to energy conservation and management, and apply a variety of measures to achieve economies.
The recent fall in crude oil prices can at best be taken as a short-term advantage. This opportunity facilitates the adoption of energy conservation measures aimed at realistic long-term solutions to future price rises resulting from expected shortages.
Energy conservation has played an important role in improving energy efficiency in forest industries of industrialized countries. Forest industries in the developing countries which depend on imported fuel can also benefit from energy conservation to improve their efficiency and reduce their dependence on foreign currency.
This document deals with small- and medium-scale sawmilling, plywood and particleboard manufacturing industries, but several comments and recommendations are also applicable to larger and more sophisticated units, also found in developed countries.
The aim of this paper is to make government departments, industry planners and investors aware of the importance of energy conservation in the mechanical wood industries in the developing countries. Thus, it provides the reader with an overview of what is available to the industry and places the role of energy in proper perspective.
C.H. Murray
Assistant Director-General
Forestry Department
<section>2</section>
Introduction
Although energy conservation has played an important role in improving the energy efficiency of forest industries in the industrialized world, it has received less attention by those industries in the developing countries. For these countries, energy conservation would be especially important since most of them spend large amounts of valuable foreign currency on their fuel imports. Increased energy efficiency would also reduce their manufacturing costs.
Both the finite nature and the dramatic effect that price rises of conventional fossil fuels has on both the industries and industrialized societies is now widely recognized, particularly after the three-fold price increases were imposed by the OPEC oil producers in 1973. Not only were oil users hard-hit, but the embargo had political implications and an inflationary impact on national economies. Therefore the combination of declining resources, energy vulnerability and rising costs have forced several countries and decision-makers in the manufacturing industry to give greater priority to the issues of energy conservation and management.
Although the recent dramatic fall in crude oil prices has led to complacency in some sectors of the energy using industry, such a situation is best regarded as short-term and should be viewed as a breathing space enabling the wind-fall gains, resulting from the lower energy prices, to be ploughed back into energy saving projects in preparation for the inevitable rise in the price of energy and the expected shortfall in the supply of fossil fuel over the long-term.
The mechanical wood-based industries in developing countries are relatively unsophisticated, using low technology compared to many new, fast developing industries. In particular sawmilling is the least sophisticated of all mechanical forest industries, originally with relatively low capital involvement and energy requirements, although labour-intensive. Yet there is an overall trend towards more energy consuming mechanical processing.
A growing awareness as to the importance of reducing energy consumption is becoming widespread throughout the industry of developed countries, resulting in conservation measures being adopted through capital expenditure, management involvement and improved plant operation and maintenance. However, by the very nature of the mechanical forest industries, in which no two mills are alike, combined with the diversity of raw materials and products, the applications and results of energy conservation measures will vary according to individual circumstances. However, the close relationship of energy costs and profit margins is common to most mills, in which improved energy efficiency may be directly related to improved profits.
Management should actively participate in conservation programmes and be encouraged to identify reasonable energy-saving alternatives and to assess whether they be worthwhile investments, once their capital costs have been estimated and annual operating margins identified. By establishing a clear line of communication to all levels of employees, the objectives will be better understood, and thus a greater willingness to partake in the programme fostered.
Yet the greatest potential savings are at the planning stage, during which time energy saving design features may be incorporated into the overall concept of the new project, thereby taking advantage of the lack of physical or other constraints imposed upon the design of the energy efficiency systems and allowing the designer freedom of choice in selecting the most appropriate and cost-effective options available to him. Additionally, design contractors and equipment manufacturers alike should regard energy savings as a basic feature of their design standards.
All efforts by management and operators to conserve energy will be thwarted if their plant is ill-conceived, poorly designed and laid out with building designs, material handling systems and process plan that are energy hungry, in need of high maintenance and encourage lax housekeeping.
In spite of high fuel costs mills can still be found burning their residues, simply to dispose of it in the absence of a market outlet. The use of wood waste as an alternative fuel source definitely warrants investigation so as to maximize its use with the view to increasing the operation's energy self-sufficiency. However, because of the numerous options available and the high cost of capital plant involved, the advantages of its use, compared to that of traditional energy supplies, should be examined professionally on a case by case basis in order that its economic viability be studied and the most appropriate and cost effective system determined.
<section>3</section>
1. Descriptions of manufacturing processes
1.1 Introduction
1.2 Sawmilling
1.3 Plywood production
1.4 Particleboard production
1.1 Introduction
Due to the adoption of energy conservation measures it was necessary to make a-detailed analysis of the process involved and equipment used in such a process. This analysis had to identify the amount, type and quality of energy required so as to identify possible energy savings compatible to the respective cost-benefit analysis.
The following process descriptions of the manufacture of sawn timber, plywood and particleboard are of a general nature and should provide the reader with a broad outline of the production processes involved in the mechanical wood-based industry and the role in which energy plays a part.
1.2 Sawmilling
1.2.1 Log sorting and barking
1.2.2 Log sawing or breakdown
1.2.3 Sorting and grading
1.2.4 Drying
1.2.5 Regrading and surfacing
Sawmilling is a less sophisticated activity of the mechanical forest industries. It implies a certain number of operations from handling and transportation of logs to timber drying, sorting and classification which require different types of energy. Whereas in developing countries most of the processes are highly mechanized and the energy requirements are met basically with the generation of a few kW to drive the main saws. The rest of the processes are carried out using animal power and low-cost manpower.
Nevertheless, independently of the nature of the processes and activities involved, all actions aimed to save energy require a detailed analysis of existing processes and possible solutions.
Figure 1 provides a layout of a typical plant and a description of the main processes to familiarize the reader.
1.2.1 Log sorting and barking
On arrival at the mill's storage yard, logs are sorted and stored according to species, diameter, length and end-use, etc. Sufficient quantities are stockpiled to ensure the sawmill's continuous operation, particularly during adverse weather conditions when log extraction and supply from the forests may be adversely affected.
Transportation and handling of logs vary from mill to mill and largely depend on the capacity of the sawmill operation and the size of the loss received. Manual and animal power, as may be used in small portable sawmill units, through to log-carrying front-end loaders and overhead cranes indicate the wide variety of handling equipment currently in use.
Figure 1. Sawmilling - A simplied process flow
Debarking of logs, whether it be undertaken manually or by mechanical debarkers, in the forests or at the mill site, is now becoming a generally adopted practice. Debarking is to safeguard saws and other equipment from undue wear and damage that would otherwise result from stones, metal and other such contraries embedded in the bark; debarking also facilitates the head sawyer to evaluate the timber. Log washers may also be used to remove any remaining sand or dirt that may adher to the logs' surface.
1.2.2 Log sawing or breakdown
Before the log is presented to the headrig for breakdown, it is cut to the longest permissible straight length with a cut-off saw, whereupon it is loaded onto the headsaw carriage and positioned in such a manner as to allow the operator to achieve a sawing pattern, which will result in the optimum production of sawntimber with the minimum of waste. The pattern of cut is largely determined by the dimension and condition of the log, as well as the market requirements for the widths and thicknesses of the lumber.
Sawing of the log is achieved by the use of a bandsaw or a circular saw with a second saw mounted vertically above the first in the event of sawing large diameter logs. A log carriage conveys the log through the headsaw on which the log may be clamped and turned, so as to enable it to be presented to the headsaw in order to achieve the best sawing pattern.
Following the headrig, further breakdown of slabs, flitches and cants takes place in the resaw, which enables the wood to be upgraded; thick slabs being sawn into planks and the flitches and cants sawn into planks and boards. The rough round edges of the pieces coming from the headrig and resaws are removed by either a circular saw or chipper edger so as to produce standardized widths as required.
On leaving the headrig, resaw or edger, the lumber is cut to standardized lengths, edges squared and defects removed by the use of one or more fixed or moveable trimming saws, whereupon the lumber proceeds to be sorted and graded.
1.2.3 Sorting and grading
The sawn and trimmed timber is sorted according to thickness, width, length, quality, grade and species depending on the market requirements; such an activity may be undertaken manually or, in the case of mills where low-cost labour is not available, by mechanized sorters. Grading is a means to segregate the lumber according to the overall quality, direction of grain, presence of knots and defects, as well as general appearance, etc.
To protect the sawntimber against attack from fungi and insects, as well as to inhibit the tendency of air-dried lumber to check and split, the ends may be brushed either manually or mechanically dipped in a suitably prepared chemical solution. Wax or paint is applied to the end-grain of lumber to be air-dried, either by brush or spraying, so as to act as a sealant in order to bring about a slower drying of the extremities and hence, give rise to a more uniform drying of the lumber.
1.2.4 Drying
Sawntimber that is not sold green is either air- or kiln-dried, thus improving its marketability. By drying and lowering the moisture content to an acceptable level its value is enhanced by virtue of the fact that the timber is dimensionally stabilized and its strength and colour improved; also a reduction in weight lowers transport costs.
Air drying involves the stacking of sawntimber in piles in the open or under sheds on suitably prepared ground, in such a manner that they are exposed to a good flow of air until such time that the required moisture content is attained.
Although air drying involves minimal capital and operating costs it does require a large amount of land, involves large inventories which constitute a fire risk, and the conditions and rate of drying are very much beyond the yard operator's control.
Kiln drying, on the other hand, enables the sawntimber to dry in a closed and controlled environment where temperature, air circulation and humidity may be regulated so as to achieve the most economical drying conditions without resulting in degrade. The two most common kilns are the batch and progressive type. The former dries the timber in chambers as a batch charge, whereas the latter dries the timber whilst it progresses through the length of the kiln on trucks.
As kiln-drying of sawntimber accounts for some 70-90 percent of the total energy consumed in the sawmilling process, it is now becoming a widely accepted practice in the sawmilling industry to use its residues as a fuel source, the energy value of which may even be surplus to the mill's requirements.
1.2.5 Regrading and surfacing
Before stacking the sawntimber for storage, it is normally inspected for any defects which may have resulted during the drying process, such as split-ends, loose knots, etc., which may be removed by trimming and therefore upgrading its value.
Further upgrading may be effected by surface planing with the use of rotary knife planers or abrasive belts, according to the needs of the market.
1.3 Plywood production
1.3.1 Log sorting, conditioning and barking
1.3.2 Peeling, reeling and clipping
1.3.3 Veneer drying
1.3.4 Assembly
1.3.5 Pressing
1.3.6 Finishing
In Figure 2, a typical plant layout is provided to illustrate to the readers the processes involved.
1.3.1 Log sorting, conditioning and barking
Logs of suitable dimension and quality for slicing and peeling are generally sorted in the log-yard upon arrival, according to size and species. Handling may be by heavy lift trucks, derricks or cranes, all of which are sized to cater for the logs' dimensions and weight.
Figure 2. Plywood production - A simplified process flow
Before peeling, the majority of timbers need to be conditioned so as to soften the wood in order to facilitate peeling and to produce an acceptable quality of veneer. Conditioning involves the exposure of the peeler blocks to both heat and moisture by way of soaking in hot water vats or exposed to live steam or hot water sprays.
Debarking of the logs then takes place so as to facilitate the lathe operator's task and to remove the dirt and debris which would otherwise prove detrimental to the lathe knife, whereupon the logs are cut to length to fit the lathe, which is normally 240-270 cm.
1.3.2 Peeling, reeling and clipping
Nowadays, in almost all cases, plywood veneer is rotary cut, in that the peeler block is rotated around its axis in a lathe, whilst a continous veneer sheet is cut by a knife mounted parallel to the block's axis.
The veneer sheet is then wound on spools, or led to a multi-tray system, so as to provide storage and surge capacity in the event of fluctuations in the veneer feed from the lathe; speeds of both storage systems are generally synchronized to that of the lathe.
The green veneer is then clipped to size, either manually or by high-speed knives, graded and stored in piles ready for drying. Any defects, such as knots and splits, are then cut out of the sheet.
1.3.3 Veneer drying
The drying of veneer, to between two and ten percent moisture content, is to aid the gluing process during the manufacture of the plywood. Depending on the location and sophistication of the plywood mill, the veneer sheets may either be left outside to dry in the air or kiln-dried. Kiln-drying involves the drying of stacked veneer in batches or the continuous drying of sheets which are mechanically conveyed either on a continous belt or roller system through the length of the dryer. Obviously a controlled drying environment, with minimal handling, will result in a more uniformly dried veneer, with the least amount of damage.
Veneer drying accounts for some 70 percent of the thermal energy consumed in plywood production and approximately 60 percent of the mill's total energy requirement. For this reason new and improved drying systems are being constantly developed, as well as the manner in which they are heated.
Dryer heating may be by the indirect use of steam or thermic oil, or direct firing with the temperature being controlled by the regulation of the fresh-air make-up. Although drying temperatures of between 90-160°C may be considered normal, increased temperatures of some 175°C are being used on certain species in order to reduce the overall drying time.
1.3.4 Assembly
The assembly of the plywood prior to pressing entails the jointing of the narrow strips of veneer, which are edge-glued so as to make sheets of the required size. Glue is then applied to the inner plies or core, which in turn, are laid between the outer veneers ready for bonding. This operation accounts for a large share of the manual labour employed in the production process.
Although hand roller spreaders is a widely used method of glue application, developments in alternative systems have led to the adoption of curtain coaters, extruders, spray booths, etc., each with their own following.
1.3.5 Pressing
Once the veneers are laid-up as assembly plywood sheets, they are fed into hydraulic presses so as to bring the veneer into direct contact with the adhesive, where the application of heat cures the glue.
The departure from single opening cold presses towards multiple-opening hot presses, with between 5 to 25 daylights and operating at platen temperatures in the order of 80-180°C, has considerably reduced the overall pressing cycle time and increased press capacity. Heating of the platens is generally by hot water or steam, although thermic oil is used when pressing at higher temperatures.
Cold pre-pressing, at comparatively low pressures, is not being incorporated in the more recent production lines. This is largely due to the fact that veneer stuck together is easier to handle and load into the hot-press, added to which the ply's reduced thickness allows for smaller daylight openings in the hot press resulting in an overall reduction in loading and hot pressing time.
1.3.6 Finishing
Primary finishing, which entails the trimming, sanding and upgrading of the plywood after pressing, is undertaken so as to enhance the marketability of the product. It is carried out at either separate work stations, or, in the case of modern mills, as a combined operation in a continuous semi-automatic line.
Trimming saws cut the plywood boards to the required size, which are then sanded in machines fitted with wide-belt or drum sanders so as to obtain the desired surface smoothness. Damage or imperfections to the face veneers are then manually repaired by plugging and the application of patches.
Plywood is produced in a wide range of sizes and thicknesses, although the sizes most commonly produced are 1220 x 2440 mm together with 1830 x 3050 mm and 915 x 915 mm sized panels. Thicknesses may range from 3-25 mm, with the number of plies being between three for boards up to 7.5 mm thick, to five or more plies for thicker varieties.
1.4 Particleboard production
1.4.1 Particle preparation
1.4.2 Particle drying and screening
1.4.3 Blending and mat forming
1.4.4 Pressing
1.4.5 Board finishing
In most cases, particle production involves a certain number of operations as described below (see Figure 3) which require different amounts and types of energy.
Figure 3. Particleboard production - A simplified process flow
1.4.1 Particle preparation
Particleboard furnish is derived from a multiple of sources and as the competition for solid wood and solid wood residues increases, manufacturers are having to resort to the use of low grade residues, such as hogged mill waste, sawdust, planer shavings, etc., as well as wood species not previously considered.
In view of the wide assortment of furnish delivered to the mill-yard, segregation as to size, and if possible, species, must be carried out prior to the reduction process. Bark is removed from logs, if not already done in the forests, so as to avoid blunting chipper knives, and the provision of stone-traps and magnetic separators safeguard other reduction equipment from damage which would otherwise be caused if contraries were introduced with the fibre furnish.
The particle size and geometry, as required for the core and surface layers of the particleboard, are produced by a diverse range of reduction equipment which is matched to the variety and size of wood and wood residues used. Chippers, knife-ring-flakers, hammer mills, disc refiners, etc., each operating on a different principle, using either knives, hammer bars, grooved disc plates, etc., are but some in common use in the industry.
1.4.2 Particle drying and screening
The greater part of the furnish delivered to the mill needs to be dried so that the overall moisture level of the particles is in the order of three to eight percent for the purpose of bonding with liquid resins.
Particle drying is a continuous process with the particles moving along the length of rotating horizontal dryers whilst being suspended and exposed to hot gases or heat emitted from tube bundles which convey hot water, steam or thermic oil. Heat is produced by the combustion of oil, gas or process residues. Flash drying is now being considered an acceptable alternative to rotary dryers and requires somewhat lower drying temperatures.
Directly after drying, the particles are screened for size in vibrating or gyrating screens, or by way of air classification. Screening normally takes place after the dryers as moist particles tend to stick together, plugging screen plates and lowering the overall efficiency of the screening process.
Particles are separated according to size, for the purpose of grading the furnish for the board face and core layers. It is essential that the oversized particles be recycled for further reduction and that the fines are screened out, so as to avoid consuming a disproportionate amount of resin binder, and to provide a valued source of fuel.
1.4.3 Blending and mat forming
Adhesives in the form of urea, phenol and melamine formaldehyde are generally used to bind together the particle mix, with the former being the most favoured resin in use. Between three and ten percent by weight of resin, together with other additives used to impart such properties as fire resistance, etc., are blended under controlled conditions in batches or as a continous operation. Blending may either take place in large vats at slow speed, or in small blenders with rapid mixing and shorter blending times.
In the more modern particleboard plants mat forming is a wholly mechanical process, whereas the older formers require manual equalizing. In spite of the wide variety of formers currently available, the underlying principles of mat formation are generally similar, in that a uniform flow of particles are fed to the former from a surge bin, which in turn meters an evenly distributed layer of particles into a frame on a moving belt or caul.
The formers may be fitted with single or multiple forming heads, which are either stationary or moving, and are so designed that the finest particles are delivered to form the surface layers of the mat and the coarser materials to form the core. In all cases it is paramount that an evenly distributed mat of the desired weight be formed. Mats that do not conform to standard are rejected and recycled.
Transportation of the mats to the pre-press and hot press is undertaken by either forming the mat on metal plates, called cauls, which are then either manually or mechanically wheeled to the presses, or in the case of caulless systems, by using flexible metal webs, plastic belts and trays that transport the mats through to the hot-press.
1.4.4 Pressing
Pre-pressing of the mats prior to the introduction in the multi-platen hot presses, is now becoming a common feature in the pressing operation, due to the consolidation and reduction in mat width. This allows for ease of handling and the use of narrower openings in the hot-press, thereby considerably reducing pressing time.
Whereas the pre-presses may be of the hot or cold type, the main press is always heated, by passing hot water, steam or oil through the platens to attain temperatures in the order of 140-200°C, depending on the resins in use and the type of press.
Single or multiple opening hot presses may be used with the loading and unloading undertaken manually or mechanically by cable, chain lifts or hydraulics, depending on the age and sophistication of the plant. Although in the larger modern installations both pressing time and pressures are automatically regulated, hand control is still preferred in many plants as it permits adjustments to be made for the different mat qualities.
1.4.5 Board finishing
On leaving the hot press the boards are either separated from the cauls by hand, or mechanically by means of chains or turning devices. The cauls are stacked, allowed to cool and then returned to the forming station on push carts or mechanically transported on a fixed return line. The boards in turn, are cooled and conditioned so as to avoid degradation of the urea resins.
Trimming saws are used to cut the boards to size, with the edge trimmings being either recycled or used for fuel. In order to meet set standards as to thickness and surface quality, a combination of knife planers and belt or drum sanders may be used.
Once the boards have been surface finished they are cut to size along their length and widths with a combination of saws, according to the dictates of the market. Particleboard is normally produced as 1220 x 2440 mm panels with thicknesses ranging from 3-35 mm, 19 mm being the most common. Generally boards are manufactured in the medium-density range of 400-800 kg per cubic metre, although high-density board of 800-1120 kg per cubic metre is used as core stock.
<section>4</section>
2. Energy consumption
2.1 Energy consumed by the industry
2.2 Energy supply
2.3 Pattern of energy input
2.4 Specific energy consumption
2.5 Proportional energy utilization in the manufacturing process
2.1 Energy consumed by the industry
Compared to other industries the wood and wood products industry is not considered energy intensive, and, as shown in Table 1, it consumed some 7.34 mtoe of energy in the OECD countries during the year 1983, accounting for approximately 0.3 percent of the OECD countries primary energy demand.
Table 1. Energy consumption in the OECD countries (1983)
Electricity
Oil
Gas
Solid Fuels
Total
(mtoe)
(mtoe)
(mtoe)
(mtoe)
(mtoe)
TOTAL CONSUMPTION
inclusive of
TOTAL INDUSTRY
including:
Iron and steel
Chemicals:
Feedstocks
Food & tobacco
Pulp, paper & printing^1^/
Wood & wood products^1^/
^1^/ Does not include energy derived from process residues Source: (50)
However, on a national scale the proportion of energy consumed in the wood and wood products industry in relationship to industry as a whole, will vary according to the degree of its importance to the national economy, as indicated in Table 2. In the Nordic countries where the first industry, including pulp and paper, is regarded as one of the major manufacturers in their industrial sector, it accounts for 15 percent (101) of energy input to the manufacturing industry, and in the case of Finland their forest industry represents some 46 percent (101).
Table 2. Purchased energy consumption by the wood and wood products industry of selected OECD countries (1983)
Country
Purchased energy consumption
Total industry
Wood & wood products industry
(mtoe)
(mtoe)
Austria
Canada
Finland
France
Germany W.
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
USA
OECD Total
Source: (50)
2.2 Energy supply
2.2.1 Electric power
2.2.2 Heat
2.2.3 Heat applications
2.2.4 Secondary energy
In general, the energy supplied to the mechanical forest industries comprises electric power and heat.
2.2.1 Electric power
Electricity being mainly obtained from the following sources:
(a) purchased;
(b) on-site generation by:
- diesel or gasoline-driven generators;
- steam driven turbo-generators (in the case of co-generation plants);
and largely used for electric driven-motors and lighting.
2.2.2 Heat
Heat is derived from the combustion of such fuels as oil, coal, natural gas, wood residues, etc., which provide the thermal energy needed for process heating and drying as well as the conversion into secondary energy.
Steam, hot water and thermal oil serve as heating mediums and although saturated steam is considered the most efficient means to transmit heat in the production process in developing countries, hot water is generally used in small-scale mills. In recent years, the direct-firing of veneer drying kilns and particle dryers has become an acceptable option.
2.2.3 Heat applications
Apart from the generation of secondary energy, heat is used in the following production processes:
Sawmilling
- lumber drying
Plywood production
- log conditioning
- glue preparation
- veneer drying
- hot pressing
Particleboard production
- particle drying
- resin preparation
- hot pressing
2.2.4 Secondary energy
Secondary energy may be produced with the aid of:
- steam driven turbo-generators;
- steam engines or turbine drives;
- diesel or gasoline driven direct mechanical drives.
2.3 Pattern of energy input
2.3.1 Input variations
On examining Table 3, it may be seen that electricity is the main source of energy in the mechanical wood processing industry, accounting for some 40-50 percent of the industry's energy needs. However, it should be noted that the predominant use of electricity reflects a proportionally larger use of mechanical processes (e.g. sawmilling, chipping, planing, peeling, transport) over those processes that require heat (e.g. drying, gluing, pressing) (101), in which fuel oil is the major source of thermal energy.
Although there has been a marked change in recent years in the industry's attitude towards the introduction of energy saving equipment and the adoption of conservation measures, the national trends for the industry over the past decade, in the selected countries examined, indicate an upward swing in consumption of between 20-40 percent per unit of product in most cases (101).
Such a rise may be generally attributed to the introduction of highly mechanized equipment and automated systems, with the object of increasing production and reducing manning levels. Also, more mills are kiln-drying their sawn wood and the drying of chips is now becoming widespread in the particleboard industry, combined with an overall increase in product finishing.
Table 3. Proportional fuel use in the mechanical wood processing industry of selected developed countries (1972)
Country
Proportion of total energy input
Purchased electricity
Oil-based
Gas
Coal-based
Wood-based
Other
Austria
Canada
Finland
Germany W.
Hungary
Norway
Spain
Sweden
U.S.A.
Yugoslavia
^1^/ predominantly purchased steam
^2^/ own-generated hydroelectricity
Sources: (101)(102)
Although there has been a marked change in recent years in the industry's attitude towards the introduction of energy saving equipment and the adoption of conservation measures, the national trends for the industry over the past decade, in the selected countries examined, indicate an upward swing in consumption of between 25-40 percent per unit of product in most cases (101).
Such a rise may be generally attributed to the introduction of highly mechanized equipment and automated systems, with the object of increasing production and reducing manning levels. Also more mills are kiln-drying their sawn wood and the drying of chips is now becoming widespread in the particleboard industry, combined with an overall increase in product finishing.
Yet, in spite of the high cost of fuel oil the use of coal is steadily declining, although the use of natural gas in the European countries and Canada has increased since the early seventies. In the USA and Scandinavia, purchased steam, from the combustion of wood residues and pulping liquors, is becoming an important energy source to the industry.
Regardless of the fact that wood residues are indigenous to the mechanical wood products industry they only account for some three percent of the total energy input (with the exception of USA, Canada and Finland and the sawmilling industry). However, there appears to be a general trend towards greater use of residues as a fuel source in modern installations.
Although the USA is the world's intensive user of energy in the sawmilling industry, it does obtain the major portion of its needs from its own resources and continually strives towards greater energy efficiency and use of residues as a fuel for kiln-drying. But the generation of electricity for sawmill use alone from waste is generally considered uneconomical (100), when compared to power drawn from the national grid, due to the capital costs involved and the low efficiencies of the relatively small generators deemed appropriate for sawmill use.
Table 4. Proportional fuel use in the sawmilling industry of selected developed countries (1981)
Country
Proportion of total energy input
Purchased electricity
Oil-based
Gas
Coal-based
Wood-based
Finland
France
Germany W.
Hungary
Poland
Portugal
Sweden
U.S.A.
^1^/ Thermal energy
Source: (100)
2.3.1 Input variations
The variations in the proportional input of different forms of energy, as may be observed from Tables 3 and 4, are largely attributed to the overall energy supply situation in the country examined, the cost of power from the national grid, relative prices of fossil fuels, their ready availability, the national energy infrastructure and the make-up of the industry.
In the case of the sawmilling industry (Table 4), even greater variations exist, partly due to the above-mentioned reasons, but influenced mainly by the proportion of mills that kiln dry their lumber, differences in wood species, dimensions, etc., as well as the country's climatic conditions which play a major role in the drying process and the energy involved.
2.4 Specific energy consumption
2.4.1 Factors which influence energy consumption
2.4.2 Specific energy requirements
Unlike most other industries, there exist considerable variations between one like mechanical wood-processing plant and another, and the energy consumed in the production of lumber, plywood or particleboard are very much site specific.
International comparisons of energy consumed per unit of product, on a national average basis, are made difficult by the inconsistencies in data recording and reporting. Additionally, the extremely wide range of factors which may significantly influence both the specific energy consumption of individual mills and the national averages, as illustrated in Table 5, further complicates matters.
Table 5. Approximate national averages of specific energy consumption in the sawmilling sector of selected developed countries
Country
Electrical energy
Thermal energy
Total energy
(kWh/m3)^1^/
(GJ/m^3)
(GJ/m^3)
Canada
Finland
Greece
Poland
Sweden
USSR
^1^/ per m^3 of finished product
Source: (100)
A study commissioned by the Canadian Forestry Service in 1982 highlighted such variations in the energy requirements of Canadian sawmills, the range being:
electrical energy
20 - 90 kWh/m^3
thermal energy
0.3 - 1.6 GJ/m^3
2.4.1 Factors which influence energy consumption
Such differences may largely be attributed to a multitude of factors, several of which are listed below:
- plant capacity;
- rate of plant utilization;
- age;
- equipment and the manufacturing process adopted;
- integrated or non-integrated operation;
- site layout;
- overall efficiency of operation;
- degree of mechanization of materials handling;
- extent of process automation;
- wood species, size and moisture content;
- product type and mix;
- degree of product finishing;
- proportion of air to kiln drying;
- climatic conditions;
- energy prices;
- load factor;
- steam and power balances;
- extent of energy conservation measures adopted;
- standard of housekeeping and maintenance.
2.4.2 Specific energy requirements
Obviously such dissimilarities between mills lead to an equally diverse range in the amount of energy required to produce each particular product.
Product
Range of process energy requirement
(GJ/m^3)
Sawntimber (air-dried)
Sawntimber (kiln-dried)
Plywood
Particleboard
However, the average specific energy requirements of typical plants which are well run and maintained, may be generally represented in Table 6.
2.5 Proportional energy utilization in the manufacturing process
Energy consumption in the mechanical wood-based industry may be broadly placed in three major categories, i.e.
- processing and materials handling;
- raw material and product drying;
- services, such as compressed air, space heating and lighting of premises.
Hence, for the purposes of comparative analysis the production processes of sawntimber, plywood and particleboard have been divided into various stages so as to provide an order of magnitude as to the proportion of total energy that each major process centre consumes during the products' manufacture.
The Sankey-type diagrams (Figures 5, 7 and 9) have been constructed in such a manner as to indicate the total energy input in the form of heat and electricity and the proportion of output at the various production stages.
Figure 4. Major energy consuming centres in the manufacture of sawntimber
Table 6. Energy requirements within the mechanical wood-based industry ^1^/
Electrical
Thermal
Motor fuel
(kWh/m^3)
(GJ/m^3)
(l/m^3)
SAWNTIMBER (air dried)
- hardwood
- softwood
SAWNTIMBER (kiln dried)
- hardwood
- softwood
PLYWOOD
- hardwood
- softwood
PARTICLEBOARD ^2^/
- hardwood
- softwood
^1^/ Primary processing
^2^/ Applicable for plant of 100-500 m3/day capacity
Source: (38)
Figure 5. Energy utilization in sawmilling
Figure 6. Major energy consuming centres in the manufacture of plywood
Figure 7. Energy utilization in plywood production
The bar charts (Figures 4, 6 and 8) help to illustrate the magnitude of each major energy consuming stage in the production process in relationship to the total electrical energy requirement, which in turn is compared to the overall thermal energy requirement. Additionally, the charts provide a rough guide as to the energy consumed as units of GJ/m^3 of finished products. (For further details refer to Appendix IV, Tables 1, 2 and 3).
Figure 8. Major energy consuming centres in the manufacture of particleboard
Figure 9. Energy utilization in particleboard production
Although the diagrams are of an approximate nature they do serve to identify the relationship that each major energy consuming centre has with each other and also readily identifies the prime energy users to which particular attention should be paid in any conservation effort.
In all three product manufacturing processes heating is by far the largest user of energy, representing some 82-87 percent of the total energy requirement in the manufacture of sawntimber, plywood and particleboard, with drying accounting for approximately 87 percent, 61 percent and 62 percent respectively.
Log sawing, veneer peeling and particle reduction are the predominant users of power, representing approximately 27 percent, 23 percent and 30 percent of the manufacturing processes' total electrical requirements. In all three processes, materials handling features as a major consumer of electricity, accounting for some 1528 percent. Such services as lighting, space heating, hot water or steam systems, compressed air and workshops facilities have been grouped under the heading of miscellaneous, and although individually they do not represent a large power user, as a collective group their energy needs are quite significant.
<section>5</section>
3. Government energy conservation policies
3.1 Introduction
3.2 Common policy aims
3.3 A selection of adopted national energy policies
3.4 Energy policies of selected developed countries
3.5 Suggested recommendations for Government action
3.1 Introduction
It is generally accepted that a country's energy supplies are considered of utmost importance at the level of national energy planning. As such, policies are established in order to afford Government a measure of control on overall consumption, without dire consequences to either its industry or commerce.
Countries which had turned to oil in preference to other fuel forms, due to its competitive prices and convenience of use, were suddenly faced with high inflation rates and large deficits in their balance of payments as a direct result of the energy crisis in 1973. To disengage themselves from such imbalances and their economic vulnerability to fluctuations in the oil supply market, governments made strident efforts to establish, what was hoped would be, effective energy policies without compromising existing strategy towards growth in industry and commerce.
Indeed the legacy of the "oil embargo" has left the major industries of the developed countries with a greater respect as to the real importance of energy in their operations. The forest products industry for their part, previously complacent to the role of energy in their overall operation, now regard it as an area where potential savings may be made, thereby affording significant reductions to production costs. Yet, in spite of the fact that the present day oil glut has allowed a relaxation in most energy conservation investment projects, both government, industry and commerce, on a worldwide basis, are seen to be keeping a wary eye on developments in the oil market.
An upward trend in energy prices is inevitable, though to what extent is difficult to predict, nor can events such as civil disturbances, local wars or failure in diplomatic relations be foreseen so as to avoid the sharp increases in oil prices, as took place during the years 1973/74, and to allow governments the lead time necessary to establish buffer stocks and implement effective energy conservation measures.
3.2 Common policy aims
As a consequence of the dramatic price rises in oil on the international markets in 1973/74 and 1979/80, an overall awareness and concern was felt by both governments and industry alike as to their security of supplies, vulnerability to further price rises and the finite nature of the world's fossil fuel reserves.
Energy situations, strategies, degree of exposure to such a recurrence, and the inevitable rise in energy cost were reviewed by the governments of every oil importing country, resulting in national policies being adopted. Although such policies were shaped according to whether the governments were energy producers, such as USA, USSR and UK, or net importers, the overall aims and objectives generally undertook a common theme (100), i.e.:
- the substitution of oil-based energy by other energy types;
- the substitution of imported energy by domestic energy;
- the strive towards less dependence on a single type of fuel;
- the development of new and renewable forms of energy (biomass);
- the encouragement in the use of waste heat and industrial waste as a secondary energy form;
- the adoption of energy conservation on a national scale.
3.3 A selection of adopted national energy policies
In order to encourage and bring about energy savings in the forest products industry, national energy policies have been established in the developed countries which take the following form (100):
- research, development and demonstration is being financed by several governments in the domain of energy conservation and alternative fuels and energy forms;
- education and training in energy saving techniques is being actively encouraged and supported by most governments so as to bring about a more widespread awareness as to the importance and manner in which energy conservation can be introduced into mill operations;
- investment grants to encourage the installation of energy-saving equipment, and combustion plant based on non-oil-based fuels, particularly mill residues. Examples of grants made available to industry, linked to the cost of the investment, are as follows: Sweden, 35 percent; Canada, 10-20 percent; France, 15 percent; USA, 10 percent (100).
- loans on favourable terms are made available in France and Sweden to those industries wishing to invest in conservation plant and the like;
- central directives and allocation of resources are a means of control practiced by centrally planned economies;
- energy price structures or pricing policies are also regarded by some governments as an effective means to bring about energy conservation and fuel substitution.
Although the implementation of a pricing policy may restrain energy consumption, it could well introduce the risk of inflation and disruption to income distribution. Industry views the regulation of the energy supply, through pricing, as an external factor beyond their control which necessitates that measures be taken internally in order to pay the price and bring about a reduction in consumption without jeopardizing either their output or competitiveness (101), a fact which may be illustrated by the dramatic cut-backs in energy consumption resulting from the 1973/74 oil crisis.
At mill level, management are encouraged to carry out their energy conservation strategies in three different, yet as interrelated phases, namely:
(a) as a low level of investment in which energy conservation measures are adopted so as to make more efficient use of the available energy sources and in particular to adopt good housekeeping practices;
(b) as a medium level of investment which involves the substitution of old and obsolete equipment where applicable;
(c) as a high level of investment which entails major technological modifications and additions to the manufacturing process in order to achieve an energy efficient operation.
Such investment strategies shall be covered in more detail in Chapter 4.
3.4 Energy policies of selected developed countries
3.4.1 United Kingdom
3.4.2 Canada
3.4.3 Sweden
3.4.4 Finland
3.4.5 United States
3.4.6 France
3.4.7 Germany
3.4.8 Greece
This section provides a basic background as to how some energy conservation policies and government bodies were established in selected developed countries in order to handle their specific energy problems. Comment is restricted, however, to those adopted policies which are considered applicable to the forest industries.
3.4.1 United Kingdom
Apart from encouraging industry to undertake co-ordinated efforts to reduce its energy consumption, the British Government is becoming increasingly involved in energy technology and conservation measures. Financial support is being offered to industry, equipment manufacturers and research and development institutions so as to promote energy related research projects. Additionally, financial incentives are also being offered to induce manufacturers into implementing energy saving methods into their operations and to install such a plant that would generate heat more efficiently and recover waste heat wherever possible.
In recent years the Government set up an Energy Efficiency Office, embracing all government departments, with the object of monitoring, co-ordinating and developing energy conservation policies. By way of publicity, information and advice, the Office aims to create an awareness as to the benefits of energy efficiency and encourages energy conservation in all user sectors through its efforts to administer such schemes as: (21)
(a) getting top management to actively support and become involved in energy efficiency, as well as appointing energy managers;
(b) developing and running educational courses as workshops or day courses in conjunction with educational establishments and professional and trade associations. The production of literature and short films, available on free loan, covering the various aspects of energy conservation;
(c) the organization of an annual national energy management conference and exhibition aimed at both the private and public sectors of industry and commerce,
(d) the offer of advice on most energy efficiency aspects by specialist staff located in regional offices. The staff also maintain close links with the industries' appointed energy managers and encourage the formation of regional groups for the interchange of ideas and experiences in energy conservation efforts;
(e) the collection of data from selected representative plants is being undertaken to gain an insight into the overall operating efficiencies and the potential areas for energy savings. Hence, recommendations may be made as to those modifications to both plant and operating methods which should bring about a greater degree of energy efficiency in the forest products industry as a whole;
(f) energy monitoring and target setting by trade and research associations is being assisted in selected industrial sectors and the resultant pilot studies and recommendations are freely available to interested parties. Additionally, energy audit reports, resulting from detailed study of specific lead companies of a particular product line, are published as information guides;
(g) grants of 50 percent of consultants' fees, up to a maximum of £250, are available for short surveys and up to a maximum of £10 000 for extended surveys and combined heat and power feasibility studies. The aim of such studies being:
- short survey: to identify areas where energy savings may be made by simple modifications or operational changes;
- extended survey: to examine in detail the site's energy consumption and to appraise the management techniques adopted, operating procedures and process equipment with the view to identifying potential energy saving opportunities;
- combined heat and power feasibility studies: to undertake an energy audit, including existing generating facilities and to examine the choice of fuels and the overall operating efficiency of the plant. To put forward recommendations as to modifications, new heat raising plant, recovery systems or alternative power systems as considered economically feasible, together with capital and operating cost estimates.
Grants are also available to those industries wishing to convert existing oil or gas fired equipment to coal. Those industries whose energy bill exceeds £100 000 per year may also receive £8 000 towards consulting fees and 50 percent of fees above that level, up to a maximum of £10 000, for the design and tendering of heat recovery projects.
Small businesses are eligible for loan guarantees, from the Department of Trade and Industry, of up to £75 000, to cover 80 percent of each qualifying loan from the banks.
(h) 100 percent first-year tax allowance on capital expenditure may be applied for by firms installing energy efficient machinery or plant, or who are undertaking the insulation of existing buildings;
(i) equipment manufacturers and suppliers of service are given incentives to undertake research and development in new and improved energy saving technologies which may prove cost-effective;
(j) financial assistance, the appointment of a monitoring organization and the dissemination of results are on offer to those organizations able to demonstrate new or improved technologies which will bring about efficiency;
(k) free publications, aimed at management and plant operators alike, are made available to provide the latest information on energy saving technologies and materials. Advertising and publicity campaigns are also aimed at all levels of energy consumers, and demonstration facilities are sponsored for potential investors in energy efficient plant or production methods.
To date, a six percent (21) reduction in overall energy consumption has been recorded between 1973 and 1982 as a result of such measures and pricing. It is estimated that there is potential for a further 20 percent reduction by the end of the century, through increased efficiency in the use of energy.
3.4.2 Canada
In spite of vast natural energy resources Canada depends very much on its imported oil, for which reason the 1973 oil crisis prompted the Government into establishing a Renewable Energy branch within the Department of Energy, Mines and Resources, in order to assess the renewable energy potential of the forest biomass in Canada. The industrial sector was also examined and it was found that the forest products industry, being the largest industrial consumer of petroleum products in the country, had the potential in certain of its activities to be able to substitute oil from its own residues.
Based on recommendations, federal support was made available for research, development and demonstration projects so as to encourage industry to reduce its dependence on oil and look towards energy conservation and its own resources in the form of residues.
In order to establish priorities in forest usage, the scheme was divided into three time frames: short-term to 1983, medium-term to 1990 and long-term to 2025, allowing for research and development into processes which would ultimately lead to the establishment of a large-scale energy or synthetic chemical industry.
Surveys were commissioned to gather statistical data on the forest industry and to ascertain the production levels of residues and to what extent they were being used to meet the mills' own energy requirements. In 1973 a survey of the wood products industry in British Columbia indicated that 50 percent of their energy requirements were obtained from hog fuel, whereas between 12-17 percent of energy for lumber drying was derived from mill waste (95).
In 1976 the Government introduced a tax incentive which allowed for a 50 percent (95) capital write-off on wood-waste energy conversion plant installed to replace traditional fuels; a scheme which did encourage several mills to participate.
A federal-provincial-industry committee was formed in 1977 to coordinate activities so as to increase the use of mill residues and to investigate the reasons for reluctance to convert to such systems by the industry itself. A review of currently available wood-waste energy conversion systems was commissioned by the committee to examine the state of the art and assess the potential afforded to the industry of such a system. However, although conversion systems were found to be adequately proven, the lack of response from the industry would appear to be based primarily on economic considerations of the wood waste as fuel, compared to natural gas.
Incentives towards modifying existing equipment or the establishment of new conversion plant, by way of contributions of 1020 percent (101) of direct capital costs, was offered to the industry through the Forest Industry Renewable Energy Programme (FIRE). In addition to the FIRE programme, a five-year budget, co-funded by the federal and provincial governments, was set up in 1978 for the years 1979-84, with the object of providing financial assistance for research, development and demonstration projects in forest biomass supply and conversion to fuels and chemical, through the Energy from the Forest Programme (ENFOR).
In 1980 the National Energy Programme was established by the Canadian Government for the purpose of reducing, still further, its dependence on oil to the point of becoming self-sufficient in oil by the year 1990. By so doing a renewed effort was made in offering financial and fiscal incentives; programmes involving the demonstration of new energy saving technologies and production methods were launched, together with a campaign in training and publicity so as to develop national awareness as to the needs and benefits of energy conservation.
3.4.3 Sweden
Not unlike the majority of Governments, the Swedish Government, jolted by the oil crisis in 1973, initiated several investigations and studies with the object of establishing a new basis for energy planning. An energy policy programme was introduced in 1975 which coincided with the formation of several government agencies, of which the National Industrial Board administered grants for energy conservation to the forest industry. Research and development into energy saving plant and processes were also given financial support through the National Board for Technical Development and the National Board for Energy Source Development.
The tasks of such Boards may be summarized as follows: (86)
- the analysis of industrial, energy and mineral policy;
- coordination, planning and administration of industrial support and development;
- the offer of education and technical services to small and medium-sized companies;
- the handling of questions concerning security, licensing and authorization in the energy field;
- the administration of grants for energy conservation measures in industry and commerce.
Like most other countries, the programme is aimed at conservation, research and development, security of power supplies, an active oil policy and the development of international cooperation. Pricing policies were put into effect, particularly by way of taxes and charges and an active programme of education in energy conservation through information centres and advisory services was established.
Oil substitution by coal, forest residues and peat is being encouraged by the Government, with the object of increasing their use to three times present consumption rates. Financial support is offered by the Government for large projects by way of loans, or grants in the case of highly technical risk ventures, particularly in prototype or demonstration plant.
Grants are only intended to assist in the conversion of existing buildings or processes where the investment would, to all intents and purposes, not be considered profitable by the company, as capital investment or energy efficient technology in new projects is expected to pay for itself by virtue of energy savings.
Grants of up to 35 percent (86) of approved costs are offered to all sectors of industry and commerce wishing to undertake energy saving measures within their existing process, and cover:
- heat recovery;
- conversion to less energy consuming process equipment;
- modifications to process chains;
- energy saving instrumentation and control equipment;
- conversions from fossil fuel burning equipment to solid fuels such as bark, wood waste, etc.
In all cases the provision of such-grants are based on the premise that the energy savings should provide a pay-off within a set period of time. Those projects that are deemed so highly profitable that they can be self-financing are not applicable.
Additionally, up to 50 percent (86) grant is available to companies who wish to manufacture and construct prototypes and demonstration plants which incorporate a new energy saving technique. These may be in the form of new production methods, processes or technologies which will improve the energy economy, produce or convert energy or the utilization of energy from waste. However, research and development must be fairly well advanced, with a demons/ratable potential market.
3.4.4 Finland
With a natural energy resource restricted to hydro-electric power, peat, wood and pulp mill waste liquor, Finnish Government support has been actively given to the forest industry and other heat consumers to use wood more efficiently as a fuel, and for the effective conversion of forest and forest product residues to energy.
During the period 1980-1982 (100), with financing by the Ministry of Trade and Industry and specialist assistance from the forest products industry, an energy research project was undertaken to study the overall energy consumption and potential opportunities for saving energy in the mechanical wood-based industry. All aspects of raw material transportation, production, energy generation and use were examined in detail and specific projects were carried out in areas of high energy usage, such as lumber and veneer drying. The study effectively highlighted the needs for development in dryer design, the effect of varying drying temperatures in relationship to energy consumption, product quality and degrade as well as the optimization of dryer operation.
As a result of the report, much was learnt about the energy aspects of the industry, which was not previously fully documented. The effect of conservation measures and the use of energy-efficient plant was better appreciated and areas where potential savings could be made, as well as the short-comings in standard equipment and process design, became plainly obvious. The report also allowed for comparisons of energy use to be made with similar forest product operations in other countries, added to which it has proved beneficial to mill managers and investors enabling them both to plan with a better understanding of the energy aspects of their industry.
3.4.5 United States
America's main aim, since the 1973 oil embargo, is for increased self-sufficiency in energy by way of adopting policies which discourage the consumption of scarce and imported fuels and encouraging the development of its own energy resources. This has been done through price controls and a nationwide drive towards energy conservation.
All industries consuming in excess of one million GJ/A (100) must report their energy consumption and conservation efforts to the Department of Energy, who assist the company in becoming aware of its usage and the means with which to bring about greater efficiency of use. Incentives in the form of ten percent investment tax credits are also provided for expenditures on new capital plant which are based on an alternative energy source to fossil fuels. In order to achieve a greater national energy independence, government agencies are directly involved in research and development, advisory services and education, which are funded and conducted through such bodies as the Forestry Service, Department of Energy and State Governments.
A survey undertaken in 1982 indicated that self-generated residues accounted for some 80 percent (100) of the sawmills' energy needs, of which bark made up 10-20 percent. In fact maximum use is now being made of sawmill waste, either as fuel, pulp chips or for panel production.
Recently federal legislation was approved to allow the production of electricity by sawmills and other small producers to be purchased by the electrical power utility companies, thereby encouraging yet greater efforts to utilize residues as an energy source.
3.4.6 France
French Government policy objectives are basically:
- the investigation into energy savings;
- diversification of energy sources;
- the realization of the national energy potential.
Loans in the order of 35-55 percent of the total investment are made available, at five percent interest per year over an eight year period, for energy saving projects, particularly those in which bark and wood waste are used to meet the plant's energy needs.
3.4.7 Germany
The Federal Government of Germany has based its Energy Policy Programme on market economy principles, whereby higher prices of energy bring about a desire for reduced consumption and the substitution of oil by other traditional and renewable resources.
Industry is also encouraged to actively undertake energy conservation measures so as to maintain their competitiveness in international markets. Financial incentives are on offer to allow for the introduction of energy saving plant and processes, as well as research and development into such fields. Small- and medium-sized companies are offered special advisory services as part of the energy conservation programme.
3.4.8 Greece
Greece's energy policies are strongly oriented towards conservation, and in 1980 an act was passed by the Government whereby all industries, whose consumption exceeded 50 mtoe (100), had to reduce their consumption to below five percent of that for the year 1978. Additionally, the industrial sector was to invest at least three percent of its total capital investment, within the following three year period, on plant which would bring about improvements in energy efficiency and reduce energy losses. All new installations had to be designed to international standards and incorporate accepted techniques, with the view to bringing about efficient use of energy during the plant's operation.
In 1982 (100) a grant, amounting to some 15 percent of total investment in new projects, was made available for the substitution of oil or electricity for gas or other alternative energy sources, as well as for the installation of heat recovery plant.
3.5 Suggested recommendations for Government action
3.5.1 Expected benefits
It is true to say that the majority of Governments have established energy policies tailored to their specific situations and future aims with respect to national energy consumption. However, listed below are some pertinent recommendations based on policies and initiatives which have been taken by various countries and found to have made an impact on the attitude of their industrial sector towards energy conservation and which equally apply to the forest industry.
(a) The establishment of an accurate national data base^1^/ and an effective means to collect and record information, would enable Government departments and the forest products industry to draw up effective policies, monitor results and effect adjustments when needed. Such information as product types, plant capacity and output, production methods, generation and use of residues, sources of energy, energy consumption and trends, conservation measures adopted, etc., are considered essential if an overall picture is to be gained of any nation's forest products industry.
^1^/ During the process of research and compilation of data for the purposes of this document it became evident that for most countries, and in particular developing countries, accurate and meaningful statistics pertaining to their forest products industry was scant, did not cover the industry as a whole and, in many cases, was found to be inaccurate and out-of-date
(b) Governments should enlist the support and actively participate in conservation programmes afforded by the relevant United Nations specialized agencies, international institutions, international development banks, non-government organizations and bilateral assistance programmes.
(c) International cooperation within the forest industries should be encouraged, with the transfer and adoption of technologies, as well as the exchange of information and persons directly related to the conservation effort.
(d) A programme of energy conservation measure should be established on a national scale and actively supported by all government departments. Policy-makers should be afforded a thorough understanding of the conservation measures available in order to promote a greater liaison between governmental, non-governmental agencies and those directly involved in their implementation.
(e) Government encouragement and financial support for worthwhile national studies, and research and development in energy related activities of the forest industry, combined with the dissemination of the data would lead to real energy savings.
(f) Current educational facilities should be extended and training schemes developed in order to improve the skills, knowledge and methods in the management and implementation of conservation measures.
(g) By way of publicity on a national scale, seminars, freely available literature and visits by energy specialists to educational centres and production plants, the need for energy savings may become more widely recognized and accepted, and the means available to bring about conservation measures understood.
(h) By engaging the support of manufacturers associations and the major producers of forest products, a pool of data and technical advisors could be formed. Financial support should be made available to those plants wishing to engage consultants on matters directly related to their energy conservation effort.
(i) To accelerate the introduction of energy saving methods and plant into the forest products industry, by way of plant modifications and capital investment, managers need to be offered financial incentives so as to improve the short-term economics and reduce the risks involved.
(j) In view of the potential of certain forest products plants to generate power in excess of their needs from their waste, serious consideration should be given to authorizing the sale of the surplus to the national grid.
3.5.1 Expected benefits
Notwithstanding the short-term hardship imposed on the forest industries by the introduction of certain energy policies, it must be appreciated that ill-equipped and poorly managed plants, operating on narrow profit margins, would eventually succumb as energy prices continue to rise. Yet in the long-term such policies would lead to benefits in the form of: (101)
- a greater awareness by management as to the role energy plays in the price of forest products and profitability;
- an alertness to future trends in energy prices and supply, and their overall effect on the industry's operation;
- the recognition as to the need for energy conservation measures and the willingness to bring about both immediate and long-term steps by planned investment and implementation;
- a new attitude by planners, designers, equipment manufacturers and investors alike as to the necessity of embodying energy saving features in new investment projects;
- a positive attitude towards the collection and re-use of residues as a fuel source;
- a re-appraisal of the pricing levels of various forest products in relationship to their energy input, market competition and competing materials.
<section>6</section>
4. Managing an energy conservation programme
4.1 Introduction
4.2 Role of management
4.3 Staff development, training and motivation
4.4 Investment appraisal
4.5 Strategic approach to planning
4.1 Introduction
4.1.1 Fuel price increases
4.1.2 Benefits of energy conservation
4.1.3 Some examples of reasons held for caution
The need to conserve energy in the mechanical forest industries is now widely accepted. Although energy may account for less than ten percent of the product sales value, it is an area that can be greatly improved upon, helping mills contain escalating costs, maintain financial viability and gain a marketing edge on their competitors.
Yet compared to other resources, energy is possibly the most widely neglected, although one of the easiest to control. To manage energy and bring about worthwhile savings, the same degree of management skill and expertise is required to energy management as that which is needed to operate a well-run production enterprise.
4.1.1 Fuel price increases
In spite of the present glut of oil on the international market, fuel prices are continually rising, as indicated in Figure 10. As the recession eases demand for manufactured products will undoubtedly increase and with it the demand for energy, resulting in yet further price rises. Additionally, one must take into consideration the fact that fossil fuel supplies are limited, which in turn will create further pressures as time passes.
Hence, those that have already taken steps to reduce their energy demand will be better placed in the event of future fuel shortages and sharp price rises, and not be forced to cut-back on production nor face closure due to a dramatic erosion of profit margins and competitiveness.
4.1.2 Benefits of energy conservation
As stated previously, no two mills are alike and for that reason the extent of rewards of energy management and conservation efforts will vary from mill to mill. Yet, in spite of the site-specific nature of the potential for conservation, it has been found that energy savings in the order of ten percent may be expected in the low investment phase, 10 - 25 percent for the medium phase and between 15 - 20 percent in the higher investment level. (21) However, in all cases the more efficient use of energy will be directly related to a reduction in energy consumption per unit of finished product.
Not only will management effort and financial investment in energy conservation lead to an eventual increase in profits and competitiveness on the national and international markets, but will continue to provide benefits long after the capital investment has been recouped. When the inevitable price rises in fuel occurs the energy conscious mill will be better placed to handle the impact, added to which its reduction in dependence on energy will tend to make it less vulnerable during periods of fuel shortages.
Figure 10. Industrial fuel price rises during the period 1974-84. Source (21)
4.1.3 Some examples of reasons held for caution
Although the benefits of energy conservation may be well appreciated by mill managers, the reluctance of some to embark upon a major energy saving programme could well stem from any of the following reasons, the most common being:
- the lack of knowledge as to what is involved and the full benefits to be gained;
- the lack of knowledge of available materials, equipment and processes which could bring about effective energy savings;
- concern as to adopting new technology which may prove a risk and cause production losses;
- lack of the necessary inhouse expertise which may be needed to identify energy saving opportunities;
- lack of trained personnel sufficiently competent to undertake the tasks involved;
- insufficient funds to modernize or replace old and obsolete plant;
- anticipation of long pay-back periods, particularly in the present economic climate.
In addition to the above, a view-point which is erroneously held by some management is, that as energy costs are generally less than ten percent of production costs, energy savings are low in priority compared to the improvements needed in other areas of production. Concerns such as these are understandable in the smaller isolated manufacturing unit, yet confidence can be developed by way of providing the appropriate information and professional guidance, which should help to dispel many ill-conceived fears and encourage a more positive attitude towards taking the first steps towards energy conservation.
4.2 Role of management
4.2.1 Energy manager
Management's role in energy conservation commences at the very start of a manufacturing plant's conception, in the choice of plant layout, building design and in the selection of energy efficient equipment and processes. Also, a greater degree of support and participation in energy schemes and conservation efforts would be given by all levels of mill personnel, if an energy savings ethic be established at the very beginning of operations.
Any energy saving effort, however large or small, involves a multitude of disciplines from finance, planning, engineering, purchasing, operation and maintenance. In the larger manufacturing operations, where a lateral organizational structure can lead to a more dispersed chain of command, it is essential that effective lines of communication be established in order that a free two-way flow of information may develop. To maintain such a communication system and to secure the assistance and co-operation of all involved, necessitates the appointment of an energy manager.
4.2.1 Energy manager
If a mill's energy programme is to have any measure of success it is essential that an energy manager be appointed. This post, depending on the size of the mill's operation, may be a full-time job or undertaken in addition to other duties.
The qualification for such a post should include:
- a knowledge of the mill's manufacturing process and interrelated departments;
- the ability to communicate with all levels of mill personnel, from top management to plant operators and maintenance crews. To be able to collect relevant data and ideas, provide information and instructions and to put forward his recommendations with confidence to the decision-makers;
- he must be able to motivate people and possess the energy and enthusiasm to get things done.
In order that the energy manager's role proves of value, top management should provide him with the authority and the means with which to carry out his task.
Apart from initiating and actively participating in the development of action plans, the energy manager would be expected to keep check on energy supplies and usage, monitor the day to day results of energy saving efforts, establish new targets, be constantly in search for new opportunities for improvement. He would also be expected to be the focal point for the collection and dissemination of all information relating to energy conservation.
However, to be effective in his task the energy manager should be encouraged by top management to keep abreast of the latest developments in equipment, production processes and energy saving methods. This may be achieved by reference to technical publications, attendance at conferences, exhibitions and specialist training programmes as well as being given the facility of visiting and maintaining contact with energy suppliers, equipment manufacturers and other mills involved in energy conservation. In the majority of cases a good energy manager will more than pay for himself in the savings made for the firm.
4.3 Staff development, training and motivation
It is true to say that the enthusiastic and meaningful participation of employees is the key to virtually all successful action programmes, without whose full support all attempts to conserve energy would be rendered futile. For which reason management should examine how best to motivate their employees into becoming willing and active participants in the drive towards a reduction in energy consumption.
Motivation may be engendered by way of offering incentives to attain, and surpass, set goals; taking heed of suggestions from operators, maintenance personnel and the like and to give appropriate rewards when the implementation of their ideas yield results; taking steps to involve all personnel in the programme and for management to be seen putting it into effect and actively following the progress of all energy saving efforts.
The reasons, objectives and overall effects of energy conservation should be understood by all those working in the plant. This may be achieved by formal and informal discussion, the prominent display of information notices and posters, and the circulation of data relating to the real cost of such services as steam, power and compressed air. It is equally important that all should be aware of the targets to aim for and the resultant benefits that energy savings would bring to both the mill and its workforce.
A series of in-house courses of education and training, in the efficient operation of plant and energy conservation techniques, would bring its own rewards. Such courses could be planned in conjunction with fuel supplies and equipment manufacturers as well as interested government bodies. It is at the pre-installation and commissioning stage of plan that such instruction has been found to have the greatest effect and should be followed by regular refresher courses. It is strongly recommended that sufficient numbers of operating and maintenance manuals be obtained from the equipment suppliers at the time of plant purchase and that they be made freely available during all training sessions and for reference purposes.
4.4 Investment appraisal
Whenever energy conservation measures involve investment capital, the rate of return must be determined to analyse whether there will be a return on the investment, and if the net return exceeds the cost of obtaining the funds, whatever the source.
Yet, although energy conservation is a cost-effective investment option with potentially high real rates of return, many firms fail to consider the merits of greater energy efficiency. This may partly be due to the reasons mentioned previously, or stem from the capital budgeting procedures and investment appraisal techniques adopted, which could well indicate energy conservation as being an unprofitable investment.
In some mill's energy may be regarded as yet another overhead, where management has neither the means nor inclination to accurately apportion usage to sectors of the manufacturing process. Other mills, although realising the importance of energy as a separate cost item, may view investment in energy-savings as a low priority area in their capital investment programme, which is only funded when profits are high, and cut when business is bad.
Hence, in such instances it is understandable how such accounting procedures can well lead to management's lack of interest in energy conservation. Investment in energy conservation, by virtue of its potential returns, should be afforded as much importance as product development and plant renewal.
The manner in which an investment project is evaluated, in terms of expected returns, is important if the true worth of the project is to be fully appreciated by management. The common approach, to use the pay-back method with periods of two to three years being regarded as the acceptable norm, does not portray the true worth of the investment, which in fact will provide real returns for the lifetime of the investment.
For this reason it is recommended that the Internal Rate of Return (IRR) method be adopted as a means to provide a more realistic financial evaluation, in that it measures the net value of the project to the mill, taking into account the project's expected life and forecasts for inflation, and in particular energy price rises during that period. Therefore, in order to assess the overall financial benefits of an energy conservation investment project the correct evaluation techniques should be used.
In all instances individual projects should be evaluated on their own merits and ranked in order of decreasing returns - those that rank high, and are within the limits of the available capital, should proceed. Naturally it is the ultimate goal in any energy conservation programme for the investment to be recouped in the shortest possible time.
By adopting a well conceived strategy the programme could be self-financing, in that financial benefits gained from one phase of the programme be used to help finance the next, and so on until such a point is reached where sufficient funds are generated through energy savings to help finance large-scale investment plans. Of course Government incentive schemes, and the attractive financial packages offered by some of the larger equipement suppliers, should also be given serious consideration and taken into account when making a financial evaluation.
4.5 Strategic approach to planning
4.5.1 Seeking advice
4.5.2 Energy audit
Prior to embarking upon a full-scale energy saving programme, it is recommended that a strategic approach be taken and the programme planned in progressive stages. Each stage should be objectively analysed before and after being put into action and fine tuned accordingly, before further plans and financial resources are committed to the next stage.
Experience has shown that those companies which adopt a well conceived and planned strategy tend to gain greater and longer lasting rewards with minimal inconvenience, compared to those who approach energy conservation in a feckless manner.
Basically the strategy involves a logical, yet fundamental approach to planning, of which the key components are:
(a) the overall committment of top management to the energy conservation programme;
(b) the appointment of an energy manager in whom is vested the responsibility, authority and means to bring about effective energy savings;
(c) the undertaking of an energy audit to identify the sources and usage of energy and to highlight potential areas for energy savings;
(d) an education and training programme to develop energy conscious employees a provide them with the knowledge as to how to bring about energy savings;
(e) a programme of planned preventative maintenance ^1^/ to ensure efficient plan operation and to safeguard against costly breakdowns and plant running idle;
(f) good housekeeping ^1^/, being the first and singularly major contributor to energy savings;
^1^/ To be covered in detail in a subsequent document
(g) an established system to monitor and set targets on energy flows and usage, so as to provide management with the means to progressively lower departmental energy consumption;
(h) a phased approach to energy investment in which four different levels may be adopted i.e.:
(i) no-cost, involving good-housekeeping such as immediate attention to steam and compressed-air leaks, judicious use of lighting, switching off of idling plant, together with adopting alternative operating procedures;
(ii) low level, in which minimal costs are involved, such as lagging of pipework, attention to the maintenance needs of equipment, improvements in the manner of plant operation and training;
(iii) medium level, involving the systematic replacement of worn and obsolete equipment, reconditioning production plant and ancillary equipment so as to render them more energy efficient, attention to dryers, combustion units and materials handling plant and the investment in instruments for measurement and control;
(iv) high level of investment in such items as more efficient combustion and heat raising plant, heat recovery units, the switch from traditional fossil fuels to alternatives including mill residues and the installation of energy efficient production plant;
(i) the frequent display of promotional material in the form of pesters, energy targets and instructional notices as considered essential to foster continued interest and participation in the energy saving programme.
4.5.1 Seeking advice
Nowadays a wide variety of sources are available to those companies about to embark upon an energy conservation programme and who may wish to seek advice. During the past decade a large number of publications and government funded studies have been devoted to the subject and generally made available to industry, some of which have been referred to in the preparation of this document.
Government departments, established primarily for the purposes of encouraging industry and commerce to reduce their overall energy consumption, are to be regarded as worthwhile sources of information on technical matters, as well as being able to indicate the financial incentives available. It is likely that they can also recommend consultants who possess the expertise needed to assist management in their energy conservation efforts.
It is also recommended that advice be sought from manufacturers and trade associations, as well as research centres who, in the majority of cases, are able to readily refer to their own libraries and member companies as well as to individuals with valuable experience. As previously mentioned, suppliers of fuel and equipment are generally most helpful in providing both advice and assistance to those mills wishing to maximize the energy efficiency of their plant and fuels.
4.5.2 Energy audit
All mills benefit from a well conceived action plan, but before one can be drawn-up and implemented with any real measure of success, an energy audit should be undertaken. Whereas the larger organizations may well have in-house expertise to carry out the task, the small and medium-sized mills will need to engage the assistance of an outside consultant. However, in all cases it is strongly recommended that the audit be reviewed by specialists.
The purpose of the energy audit is primarily to identify the sources of energy, the location and manner of use and the costs involved; additionally the amount and pattern of consumption of each major and user station will become evident and those areas that require further identification shall be highlighted. In order to facilitate the collection of accurate data, both for the purposes of the audit and subsequent monitoring, basic measurement and control instruments are needed.
The sequential approach to undertaking such an audit and developing an action plan based on the information obtained, is deliberate and progressive and to be in such a manner as to allow for the systematic examination of all energy using plant and processes. Areas with energy saving potential are to be identified and corrective measures and major improvement plans embarked upon within the means of the plant. The general approach would normally take the following form:
(a) a brief preliminary survey to identify energy saving opportunities, which may be readily attended to at minimal cost;
(b) an examination of the potential savings and costs involved for each specific opportunity identified;
(c) an energy audit of all incoming and site-generated sources of heat and power, together with details of consumption;
(d) a study of the existing manufacturing process and production patterns, individual items of plant, work activities and buildings with regard to their effect on the mill's energy consumption;
(e) an analysis of energy generation and distribution, particularly heat-raising plant;
(f) comparisons to be made with other more energy efficient plant and processes currently on the market;
(g) an analysis of the mill's overall efficient use of energy relative to its production;
(h) an examination of the mill's choice of fuels, taking into account the true costs of handling, storage, and heat generating efficiency etc. when compared to alternative fuels (including mill residues);
(i) management policy and methodology, with respect to energy related procedures, to be reviewed;
(j) opportunities for improved energy savings to be recommended, together with the manner of implementation, costs involved and estimated returns on investment;
(k) a phased plan of action to be drawn up to suit the firm's and other available financial resources.
Those improvements that may be attended to immediately, with minimal cost, would obviously constitute the first phase of the improvement programme. The results would be analysed and the next phase of activities planned, involving medium cost modifications to plant and production processes in which outside assistance may be needed for detailed engineering and implementation. (Refer to Figure 11.) As each phase of the energy efficiency programme proceeds, it is critically reviewed for results, and vetted as to its worth and cost-effectiveness, before a subsequent, more capital intensive phase is embarked upon.
It must be appreciated that the energy audit is not a once-off operation, but is to be undertaken on a continual basis if a mill is to maintain optimum efficiency in its energy use. In fact the energy conservation programme as a whole must be maintained and continually developed, regardless of whether initial objectives or targets have been reached. Fuel and power savings are to be regularly monitored and a constant review is to be made of new and improved operating techniques, plant and production processes, which may benefit the mill's energy saving efforts.
Figure 11. A systematic approach to policy implementation, monitoring and targeting
<section>7</section>
5. The role of design and equipment selection
5.1 Introduction
5.2 Plant layout, building design and equipment selection
5.3 Materials handling
5.4 Log breakdown, peeling and particle reduction
5.5 Drying
5.6 Hot pressing
5.7 Primary finishing
5.8 Services
5.1 Introduction
Historically, the mechanical wood products industry developed from what were makeshift operations to the present day sophisticated plants currently being installed around the world. However, in some instances the old influence of complacency with respect to energy matters is still very much in evidence in both mill design and operation.
It is rather unfortunate that the ad-hoc addition of equipment in earlier years was rarely carried out with the advice from either equipment manufactures or plant designers; in any event, energy costs at the time were not considered of significance to warrant the degree of caution as is the case nowadays. It is the legacy of past actions that today's plant designers, managers and operators must rectify if energy is to be conserved to any significant degree.
Indeed, it is only recently that planners, design engineers, consultants and equipment manufacturers have come to recognize the important role that reduced energy costs can play in the ultimate profitability of a manufacturing unit. Gone are the days of a labour intensive industry based on comparatively cheap raw materials and energy, with a fairly low capital requirement.
Spurred by the increasing costs of raw material and labour, mills have been prompted to improve their efficiency and productivity and to meet the dictates of market competition by better product quality. This has been achieved by increased expenditure on capital equipment and by adopting a higher degree of mechanization, although, at times, at the expense of an overall increase in energy consumption. Equipment designers and manufacturers for their part, have met the demand for new and improved process technology by considerable developments in plant design, though not all in the direction of energy efficiency. The basic concept, that energy can be saved, but at cost, prevails.
The extent to which energy saving equipment is incorporated in a design largely depends on the size of the mill, the suitability and cost of the equipment, as well as the potential energy savings in terms of return on investment.. However, regardless of the ultimate benefits of incorporating such plant, it is not uncommon for a supplier to omit them from his supply package when tendering against competition. Also investors may wish to disregard the long-term savings that such equipment or energy design features would have on the overall plant operation, in favour of short-term savings, or by virtue of limited finance, or an acute shortage of foreign currency.
Yet, it is the basics that count when designing with energy in mind a good clean layout, ease of production flows, avoidance of bottlenecks, provision of sufficient buffer zones so as to minimize plant idle time, correctly sized motors, process plant that is well balanced and suited to the raw materials and product range, and close attention paid to the design and selection of service plant.
Due to the wide variations in design and energy needs of each mill within the mechanical forest industries, comment with respect to the relationship of energy and design shall be of a general nature and is restricted to the major energy consuming centres of sawntimber, plywood and particleboard production. No attempt has been made in this document to comment on the latest design technology nor to predict future trends in energy based design.
5.2 Plant layout, building design and equipment selection
5.2.1 Wood-yard and plant layout
5.2.2 Buildings
5.2.3 Equipment selection
5.2.1 Wood-yard and plant layout
The fast and efficient handling of raw materials in the receiving yard and the proper routing of the finished product is an important part of a manufacturing concept. Storage yards should be located as near to the mill as possible and correctly laid out so as to enable inventories to be easily handled. Sufficient storage space should be planned for so as to cater for the stock needed to allow the plant to run continuously with an uninterrupted supply of raw materials, with allowances for seasonal bad weather hampering supplies, etc. It has been cited that approximately 12.5 percent of delay time in most sawmills can be attributed to their running out of logs.
The wood-yard should also be designed so as to facilitate rapid and convenient separation of species and space permitting, should be stored as to the size and grade. Such segregation plays a significant role, not only in the uniformity of the final products, but in the energy consumed during handling and processing.
Although the site generally influences the type of mill building to be constructed, it is far better to consider economy of operation firstly rather than the initial cost and to have excess manufacturing area rather than too little. In designing the mill layout each item of equipment needs to be individually considered, allowing sufficient space for its operation, maintenance, inspection and rapid access to trouble spots.
5.2.2 Buildings
Depending on the climatic conditions of the country in which a mill is located, the buildings themselves may well give rise to energy losses, particularly those in which heating or air conditioning is required for worker comfort. It is not uncommon to find in buildings more than 10 to 15 years old minimal insulation, poorly designed despatch doors and ill-fitting windows, all of which contribute to lost energy.
Despatch doors should be self-closing and designed to suit the largest vehicles and loads most likely to use them. Roofing, being a major cause of heat loss, should be adequately insulated or fitted with false ceilings and the provision of down-draught fans would assist in the redistribution of accumulated hot air to the working levels below.
5.2.3 Equipment selection
Mill layout and equipment selection go hand in hand, in that the needs of the equipment with respect to the processes, flow direction, ease of operation and maintenance, etc. must be blended into the overall plan, with the ultimate objective of maximizing the productivity of each machine and minimizing handling.
On selecting equipment with energy in mind, due consideration should be given to:
(a) its relationship to other equipment in the process and to be balanced accordingly;
(b) its energy demands per unit of production must be acceptable;
(c) to be properly sized to meet production demands as well as having adequate capacity to cater for surge requirements, yet not to operate well below its rated capacity;
(d) to be robust in construction, reliable and permit ease of maintenance so as to ensure a minimum of downtime;
(e) to incorporate a correctly designed waste disposal system so as to avoid accumulation of residues which would otherwise be detrimental to both equipment and the overall plant operation.
It has been estimated that on average between 10-20 percent (94) of operating time within the mechanical wood products industry is comprised of idle time, mainly attributed to mechanical troubles, interrupted flow of raw materials, congestion, etc. which could well have been avoided at the planning and design stage. It is axiomatic that a well-balanced mill that is running with a maximum throughput, with a minimum of idling time and waste is utilizing its energy to the maximum effect and it is towards this end that the designer must select and size his materials handling and process equipment.
5.3 Materials handling
5.3.1 Log handling, washing and barking
5.3.2 Raw materials for particleboard manufacture
5.3.3 Conveying systems
5.3.4 Importance of buffer stocks
5.3.5 Mobile equipment
As may be seen from figures four, six and eight, materials handling in the mechanical wood processing industry consumes a large proportion of its overall energy requirements and in some sawmilling operation may account for up to 50 percent of their non-thermal energy consumption. The wide range of raw materials used naturally leads to an equally diverse variety of materials handling equipment from front-end loaders, chain link, belt, screw and pneumatic conveyors, etc.
Hence, it is essential that care and attention be paid to the systems' design and equipment selection in order to effect energy savings.
The degree of mechanization of raw materials handling and the production process obviously has a direct influence on the plants' energy consumption and in countries where manual labour is both readily available and relatively inexpensive, consideration should be given to labour intensive operations so as to minimize both capital expenditure and high energy costs.
5.3.1 Log handling, washing and barking
Not only should log handling equipment be designed to handle the wide variations in lengths and diameters likely to be delivered to the mill, but also to be robustly constructed in order to withstand the considerable demands of wear and tear and the inevitable surges in log supply. Additionally the plant must be flexible to allow the operator to select logs of specific size or species according to product demand. In fact it is the ability to be able to presort and supply logs to uniform diameter and species that leads to increased production and reduced energy consumption during the sawing and veneer peeling operations, by enabling the operator to select the most appropriate saws and peeling angles.
As mentioned previously, log storage should be located as near to the infeed decks as possible in order to maintain an even supply of logs for processing. Provision should also be made for buffer stocks of at least 30 minutes operating capacity, thereby ensuring the smooth operation of downsteam equipment in the event of a breakdown of handling equipment or snarl-ups causing a log shortage.
Due to the introduction of contaminants brought into the system with the wood supply, the provision of barkers, shower pipes, stone traps and magnetic separators into the design of the wood handling system should be viewed as a safeguard against wear on cutting surfaces and the possible damage to the process plant itself.
Generally, Cambial and Ring barkers are favoured in the industry and are considerably more energy efficient than hydraulic barkers Whichever barking system is chosen sufficient capacity must be incorporated to cater for surges and adequate provision made for the collection and removal of the bark, either for disposal or for fuel.
5.3.2 Raw materials for particleboard manufacture
The diversity of raw materials used for particleboard manufacture from logs, sawmill off-cuts, veneer trimmings to planer shavings demand an equally large assortment of handling equipment. However, it is essential that whatever handling system be adopted, that it permits the maximum degree of presorting. Energy consumption will increase dramatically and product quality adversely affected if there are no provisions for the control of uniformity of size, species, moisture content, flow, etc., to the reduction equipment and particle dryers.
It is equally important that the raw material stocks be adequately protected from the elements, especially in the case of the dry, smaller sized materials such as sander dust, planer shavings and veneer waste; damp material not only increases power consumption in their conveying and screening but has a marked effect on the quantity of fuel needed to dry it.
5.3.3 Conveying systems
Conveying accounts for a major portion of the electrical energy consumed in the sawmilling industry and other wood-processing plants, for which reason the correct design and selection of conveying equipment is essential if a mill's energy consumption is to be kept to a minimum. Conveying lengths are to be kept as short as possible, bends to a minimum and both the handling plant and motors to be correctly sized - to undersize conveying plant would result in production bottlenecks and the inability to handle surges, yet to oversize would result in wasted power. The provision of control devices and automated transmissionn systems do lead to energy savings and a reduction in handling systems running idle.
However, it is the choice of the conveying system which largely determines the overall power demand, and in spite of considerable advances in the energy saving designs of present-day conveying plant, the fundamental differences remain largely unaltered.
- Pneumatic conveyors consume up to 10-20 times the power required by mechanical conveyors, due to the large volumes of air needed to transport a disproportionately small amount of materials, added to which the need for dust extracting imposes additional demands on energy. Therefore, unless conveying materials over distances in excess of 300 metres, when the capital and operating costs become more economically attractive (37), or in need of flexibility of design, mechanical conveyors are to be considered the better alternative.
- Mechanical conveyors, though less expensive to operate compared to pneumatic conveyors, can prove to be high in capital cost and their use' relative to manpower, should be examined carefully when considering handling sawdust and other such residues. During recent years the energy efficiency of belt conveyors has markedly improved, due largely to the advances in belting materials incorporating woven polyester fabrics which render them virtually stretchless, with better tracking characteristics and reduced tension requirements.
- Screw conveyors, being low in power needs and maintenance, are well suited to conveying chips, particles and waste over small distances whereas chain conveyors, designed for impact loads and for use in handling bulky loads such as logs and wood waste, are best kept to distances of less than 100 metres and operated at speeds below 30 metres per minute in order to avoid excessive wear and power needs. Roller conveyors, by virtue of being gravity assisted when located on a sloping frame, have minimal energy requirements and are ideal for log decks and for handling slabs, edgings, etc.
5.3.4 Importance of buffer stocks
In order to maximize the operation of all processing plant it is considered essential that buffer storage areas be a feature of plant design and located ahead of major items of equipment, which, combined with surge areas on the downstream side, would allow a smooth and continuous flow of raw material in the event of a minor plant breakdown or operational problems, which would otherwise leave plant idling through want of material and needlessly consuming power.
5.3.5 Mobile equipment
Statistically, from three to five litres of fuel are consumed by mobile equipment for every cubic metre of finished product in the mechanical wood-based industry and consumption can be expected to double in the event of handling partial loads, inadequate maintenance and when left idle. Hence, the merits of using mobile transport inside and outside the mill, compared to other means of conveyance should be thoroughly investigated.
Fuel savings may be achieved by the careful selection of the plant most suited to the materials to be handled and the duties to be performed, as well as using diesel rather than petrol engines. Yet, in spite of the advances in the design and construction of engines, transmission systems and the like, with reported energy savings of up to 40 - 50 percent compared to traditional power units, fuel consumption is still very much determined by the quality of service, driver skills and the layout and distances of the routes used.
5.4 Log breakdown, peeling and particle reduction
5.4.1 Sawing
5.4.2 Veneer peeling
5.4.3 Peeler-log conditioning
5.4.4 Particle reduction
It has been considered appropriate, for the purposes of this document to examine the influences of design on the energy involved in the processes of sawing, veneer peeling and particle reduction as a group.
All three processes are high in power demand and involve the reduction of wood to a size and form suitable for further processing. In each case the efficiency of the operation, product quality and energy consumption per unit of product are largely determined by the characterists of the raw materials i.e. size, species, hardness, moisture content, cleanliness etc., as well as the equipment and the skill of the operators employed.
5.4.1 Sawing
Considerable progress has been made in recent years in the materials, design and construction of saws, which, combined with improved teeth geometry and wear resistance has enabled the use of higher speeds, extended blade life and sharpness which has led to a reduction in waste and energy consumption.
By incorporating flexibility of log feed to the headrigs in the design of the sawmill operation, together with the provision of a secondary primary saw, the sawyer is now able to saw according to log size and density. Additionally, the combined use of scanners, automatic saw setting, motor load meters, etc. has also resulted in better sawing control, recovery and energy efficiency. However, operator skill, good saw maintenance and the efficient removal of sawdust and debris still remain major factors in determining the power needs of the sawing operation.
Sawing power requirements are largely dependent on several interrelated factors, namely: (62)
- wood species, density, hardness, moisture content, knots, log face width;
- saw type, speed, saw diameter, style, set, number of teeth, plate thickness;
- feed speed, bite, kerf, width, gullet capacity, depth of cut, sharpness of teeth;
- operator skill, level of maintenance and cleanliness of overall operation;
all of which must be carefully taken into account at the design selection stage. Should any one of the above-mentioned fall outside acceptable standards, power consumption would be adversely affected.
5.4.2 Veneer peeling
It is in the design, selection and maintenance of the lathe knife, according to the characteristics of the logs to be peeled, that primarily influence the energy consumed during the peeling operation. The material composition, hardness and grinding bevel of the knife are a function of the predominant wood species, density, moisture content, grade and degree of conditioning. These factors, together with blade thickness determine the bevel angle, which may range between 17 - 23° (5).
The overall efficiency of veneer production may be improved by mechanical lathe charging devices, with geometric chuck centering, hydraulic clamping systems, telescopic spindles, et. all of which contribute towards a faster changing of peeler blocks and lathe operation.
5.4.3 Peeler-log conditioning
Not only does a high moisture content in the peleer log facilitate peeling and produce better quality veneer, but there are marked savings in the heat consumed during conditioning and power during the peeling operation. Therefore, in hot dry climates mill designers should incorporate facilities to either allow for a fast turn round in log supply or for the logs to be kept wet by way of storage in freshwater ponds or tanks, or by spraying the log piles with sprinklers.
Conditioning of the logs by controlled exposure to a moist and heated environment, so as to obtain a uniform moisture profile and to plasticise and soften the wood, considerably facilitate peeling, improves veneer quality and recovery and reduces power consumption. Additionally, as a result of the higher quality veneer, minimal degrade, uniform sheet thickness and moisture profile further energy savings are gained through better controlled drying, reduced pressing times and surface finishing needs.
The energy consumed in both heat and log handling will be determined by the type of conditioning system adopted, the operating temperature relative to that outside and the size and density of the logs. Hot water vats, although ten percent slower (5) in conditioning time than steam conditioning, do have the advantage of a more even heat distribution as well as the hot water transporting the logs toward the exit. Heat may be supplied in several ways - steam, dryer and press condensate, or even boiler blow down (32) by way of heat exchangers, coils located alongside the walls or bottom of the vat or directly through spurge pipes.
Drive-in conditioning chambers, being above ground, tend to be cheaper to build, and condition batches of logs in a steam heated environment. However, by virtue of their batch operation, higher heat energy is required compared to hot water vats and the chambers need to be well insulated and fitted with heat retaining curtains in order to minimize heat losses. Conditioning tunnels operate on a continuous basis whereby the logs move through heat graduated zones, separated by baffles, so that the zone nearest the exit is the coolest and thereby minimises unnecessary heat losses. (5)
5.4.4 Particle reduction
Energy consumed in particle reduction is directly related to the characteristics of the raw material, the equipment employed and the degree of reduction, particle geometry and size required. Energy consumption is also very much influenced by knife cutting angles, disc configuration, speed of rotation and the like, added to which operator skills and the level of maintenance play an essential role. As in the case of all other process plant, it is by selecting the equipment most suited to the raw material and finished product that the most efficient power to product ratio is obtained.
Irrespective of the type of reduction equipment to be used, the ability to control the wide variations in material sizes, species and moisture contents by way of designing flexibility into the materials handling systems, will be compensated by reductions in energy demand. Improved performance and power consumption may also be achieved by way of variable speed belts, screw conveyors, metering rolls and surge bins so as to regulate the flow of raw material to the equipment. It is equally important that stone traps and metal detectors be provided so as to avoid undue wear and damage to knives and refiner plates.
Chippers need to be selected according to the predominant types of wood supplied and whether they be delivered in the form of logs, slabs, trim or peeler blocks, all of which influence power requirements. Conveying systems must be designed to allow for a uniform and controlled flow of wood to be fed endwise into the chipper so as to avoid the risk of blockage in the chipper throat and to keep energy consumption within acceptable limits.
Other important factors in achieving energy efficiency are the use of correct disc speeds, number of knives and their ability to retain their sharpness. Although the use of blowing vanes fitted to the chipper disc may be seen as a way of utilising the disc energy to transport the chips, they do in fact absorb extra power and therefore necessitate the use of larger motors. It is far better to ensure that the discharge chutes are angled in the same direction as the chips' trajectory (36) and that less energy demanding bucket elevators are employed, than resort to the blowing vanes as a means of conveyance.
Rather than using synchronous motors to drive the chippers, power saving may be gained by using induction wood rotor motors with a belt drive, whereby the flywheel provides the release of energy needed to chip through logs larger than usual, and up to 15 percent slow-down (87) in designed disc speed may be tolerated before plugging occurs. However, if sawlogs, or tree lengths are the normal form of wood supply envisaged then the use of synchronous motors would be preferable.
A departure from the conventional disc chippers has been the use of drum and spiral chippers with lower knife wear and power consumption (63).
Impact mills, being of rugged construction and with minimal maintenance demands are well established as a means of reducing off-cuts, oversized chips, veneer trim, etc. to particles. Power consumption is relatively low but is influenced by the degree of reduction required, the settings of the hammers and size of perforations.
Flaker energy requirements, whether of the ring, disc or drum type, are dependent largely on raw material flow, reduction required and the speed and sharpness of the cutting knives.
Disc refiners may be of the single or double-rotating disc type, operating either at atmospheric or raised pressures and temperatures, with provision for pre-steaming, gravity or screw feeding. The choice of refining system, disc plate size and pattern, according to the raw materials and product required, are major determinants in the refiners' power demand.
Excessive power consumption and the risk of motor overload may be avoided by incorporating metering equipment in the design of the approach flow system, so as to provide a uniform flow of feed stock to the refiners.
5.5 Drying
5.5.1 Kiln drying of lumber
5.5.2 Air drying and pre-drying
5.5.3 Veneer drying
5.5.4 Particle drying
5.5.5 Heat recovery
By refering to figures five, seven and nine it may be seen that thermal energy is by far the greatest user of energy in the sawmilling, plywood and particle-board manufacturing processes, accounting for approximately 80-90 percent of the industries' energy consumption. Yet it is only recently that steps have been taken in making kilns, dryers and hot presses more energy efficient.
Although the principles involved in the removal of moisture from wood are fundamentally the same, each drying system shall be examined separately as to the way in which their design influences energy demand.
5.5.1 Kiln drying of lumber
Kiln drying is a high energy consuming process, accounting for approximately 70-90 percent of the sawmill's total energy needs, and if insufficient attention is given to the kiln's design and operation the drying process will lead to a substantial waste of energy. Kiln drying takes its energy from two main sources - electrical energy to drive the circulation fans and heat for the drying operation.
Kiln design. To accomodate the volume and provide sufficient energy to dry peak loads during adverse climatic conditions, kiln capacity needs to be carefully considered at the design stage; - an overloaded kiln demands substantially more energy and creates a production bottleneck for the rest of the sawmill.
Of the two main categories of kiln, batch kilns allow an operator a greater flexibility of control over the charges, especially when the kiln is made up of several chambers. However, progressive kilns are generally cheaper to install, do not need to be loaded and unloaded and consume less electrical energy and some 10-35 percent less thermal energy than batch kilns (26).
Kiln location. Heat losses may be minimized and transport costs reduced if the kilns are grouped together and sheltered from prevailing winds, as well as being located as near to the sawmill as possible, yet downwind so as to avoid the effects of the corrosive exhaust on the process plant.
Construction. The energy aspect of kiln design requires that the structure be both weather tight and air tight and constructed of materials that are resistant to moisture, corrosion, decay, insect attack and fire. In view of the fact that between 10-20 percent (15) of total heat consumption is normally lost through the kiln structure it is imperative that the quality and thickness of insulation used be such that heat losses are kept to a minimum. Although insulated aluminium chambers are ideal for kiln construction, their cost, compared to using wood, may be considered prohibitive in some mills.
Due to the corrosive nature of the exhaust, circulating fans, ventilation equipment, motors and fired heaters need to be corrosion resistant if the kilns are to be operated efficiently with the optimum use of drying energy.
Kiln heating may either be by indirect means, transmitted by steam, hot water or thermic oil or by direct firing, whereby the combustion gases or hot air from a source exterior to the kiln are directed into the kiln. Although direct firing has been proven to give greater heat efficiency compared to the indirect method, the need to vent the combustion gases does constitute a heat loss.
The fuels most commonly used are oil, gas or sawmill waste. In the event that sawmill residues are used and deemed to have little resale value, it is well to consider at the design stage the adoption of high temperature drying, which would greatly improve the overall energy efficiency of the kiln by way of increasing the kiln's potential capacity and reducing the amount of air needed to be circulated and as a consequence lower the demand for electricity.
Air circulation is essential to the drying process as it transmits the heat energy to the timber surfaces and carries the evaporated moisture outside through the vents. Air velocities of between 1.8 - 3.0 metres (11) per second are considered normal for conventional kilns, however, the lowest velocity that will permit the effective drying of the charge should be designed for, as power consumption increases by 30 percent relative to increase in air velocity. (26)
The provision of baffles in the design of the kiln ensures that the maximum amount of freshly heated air supply reaches all areas of the charge, without passing directly to the exhaust zone. Care must be taken to correctly locate the exhaust zone and for the dampers to be designed so as to avoid uncontrolled venting and loss of heat.
The use of micro-electronic frequency changers to provide electronic speed variation of the fans, direct drives to reduce transmission losses, reversible or 180° adjustable fans with aerofoil type blades, all contribute towards power savings.
5.5.2 Air drying and pre-drying
Given the right climatic conditions and available yard space the air drying of lumber, down to 25-30 percent moisture content prior to kiln drying, can result in energy savings of up to 30 percent (26). Also, consideration should be given to pre-drying, whereby drying to 30 percent moisture content at temperatures of some 40-45 percent (84) in shed-type pre-dryers, fitted with heaters with either natural or forced air circulation, can lead to greatly reduced kiln drying costs.
5.5.3 Veneer drying
Veneer drying is comparable in many aspects to timber drying and accounts for some 60 percent of the total energy consumed in the plywood manufacturing process and is therefore an area where considerable savings may be made at the design stage.
In the case of mechanical dryers the veneer sheet is supported on mesh belts or driven rollers and passes through a series of zones in which air velocity, temperature and humidity may be individually adjusted to achieve maximum drying and energy efficiency. Obviously the dryer must be sized so that it is kept as full as possible to ensure optimum thermal efficiency.
Drying temperatures of between 90-160°C are considered normal, but the use of higher drying temperatures are giving rise to a reduction in drying time and increased capacity. To cater for the higher range of temperatures, systems are now being designed for the use of thermic oil in indirect-heated dryers, whereas in the case of direct heating the high temperatures may be obtained merely by reducing the amount of fresh air make-up used to bring the firing temperatures down to that which its required.
Additional savings can result from kiln designs that permit a high initial heat at the green zone and then graduated towards lower temperatures prior to the veneer's exit. Temperature gradients as high as 300-170°C have been used successfully (36).
Air circulation in the older design of drying chamber is achieved by using centrifugal fans to either direct the air flow parallel to the sheet surface or across the sheet width. In the case of cross-flow ventilation the dryer may be divided into several zones so as to allow for individual control of both temperature and air velocity, thereby substantially improving drying and energy efficiency. Whereas longitudinal air flow systems normally allow only one or two separate zones, compared to the former with six to ten.
In comparison, impinging jet dryers operate on the principle of forcing hot air at high speeds to impinge upon the veneer surface. The considerable velocity of air involved and the localised turbulence generated, causes the boundary layer of the moist air to be dispersed (46), which would normally inhibit the efficient transfer of heat, and therefore gives rise to greater drying efficiency and economy.
Process controls. Mills should avail themselves of the process control systems that are currently available and being constantly upgraded. Whether semi-automated controls be selected to allow for a certain degree of operator control, or fully automated systems, the flexibility of dryer operation would greatly improve together with considerable potential savings in both heat and power consumption.
Heating systems, fresh air make-up, exhaust dampers, recirculating air fan speeds and settings, all may be automatically controlled in accordance with the conditions of the dryer and the extent to which moisture is to be removed from the lumber or veneer. In the case of veneer dryers, automatic moisture detectors help to optimize the feed speed of the veneer sheets all of which leads to better drying efficiency relative to energy input. However, in view of the expense involved, the advantages and overall savings in energy and production costs need thorough analysis before their installation is considered, assuming of course that the availability of funds and skilled maintenance personnel are not limiting factors.
5.5.4 Particle drying
The need to dry particleboard furnish to levels of three-eight percent moisture content, as required for use with liquid resins, necessitates the use of heat energy which represents some 60-65 percent of the total plant's process energy requirement. The drying process is continuous, in which the particles are normally dried in suspension by gases derived from the combustion of oil, gas or residues.
Three categories of dryer are in use today: the flash, tube and drum dryers. Although the tube and single and three-pass rotating drum dryers are currently the most commonly used, the use of flash drying and the shift from the three-pass to the two-pass dryer is leading towards improved energy efficiency in the drying process.
The two-pass dryer originated in design from the single and three-pass dryers and comprises of an inner horizontal flash tube in which the particle moisture is evaporated at high temperatures and air velocities and then passes to the outer tube, of larger volume, where the remaining moisture is removed at lower temperatures and air velocities. This arrangement permits longer retention times and an overall gain in thermal efficiency compared to its predecessors. On the other hand, flash dryers, currently using dry fine particles, require lower drying temperatures.
Uniformity of furnish supply is essential to the efficiency of the drying operation, and must be a feature of process design. Fluctuations in particle size, moisture content and feed rate, if uncontrolled, will have an adverse effect on the dryer's performance, giving rise to either over or under-dried material, excess energy demand and an inferior quality end-product.
As indicated previously, pre-sorting at the wood handling stage, the provision of variable-speed conveying, surge bins, as well as moisture sensing and control equipment before and after the dryer will afford the operator a greater degree of control over material input and the drying process.
Dryer heating is mainly by direct firing of oil, has or finely ground residues to attain air temperatures up to 870°C. Although tube dryers are designed -for indirect heating with steam, hot water or oil, which eliminates the risk of fire, the heat transfer efficiency is considerably less compared to direct firing.
Although oil and gas are the main sources of heat, due to their ease of use, the economic advantages of using sander dust and screening fines, etc., have been made possible by recent developments in burner design and is leading to conversion of old burner systems and the use of waste-based firing in new installations.
Air systems. The drying process necessitates the use of large volumes of air in both the heating and conveyance of the particles through the dryer, involving approximately 4 m^3 of air for every kilogram of water evaporated at velocities in the order of 1200-1800 m per minute, (65) at a high cost in energy.
Continual advances in dryer design are aimed at reducing the volumes of air involved, and the variation of tube volumes within the dryers enables the velocities to be graduated so as to achieve better control of drying and energy economy. However, the most significant energy savings may be made by attention to the design and selection of the fans, cyclones and ductwork-conveying lengths to be kept short, bends to a minimum and fans and cyclones to be correctly sized for the air volumes involved. The advantages of using either a positive or negative air system needs to be studied, especially as the former demands less power.
Process controls. To safeguard against over or under drying, which would result in the unnecessary waste of heat energy or the risk of fire, drying temperatures must be closely controlled in accordance with the type and moisture content of the furnish i.e. green planer shavings are usually dried at 650-750°C (65), whereas inlet temperatures of between 260-310°C would he more applicable for fairly dry furnish. This may be readily achieved by present day process controls which have the accuracy, sensitivity and quick response needed to rapidly adjust to changes in the make-up of the particle furnish.
Temperature control, speed of dryer rotation, particle feed rate, dwell time and final moisture content may now be controlled and regulated according to the particle size and moisture content entering the dryer, thus, resulting in a better control of the drying process and a more efficient use of both dryer and fuel
Consideration should also be given to the viability of providing storage space or cover to allow for the natural drying of the raw materials in order to lower the dryer's energy needs - if economically justified and climatic conditions permit.
5.5.5 Heat recovery
Heat recovery does afford the mechanical forest industries with a means to reduce its drying energy costs. However, the value of energy saved is largely dependent on the differential temperatures between exhaust and ambient temperatures, the efficiency of the recovery system and its capital and maintenance costs.
In the case of lumber drying the recovered heat would normally be used to heat the incoming fresh air supply to the kiln by way of a heat exchanger. Additionally, it may be used for pre-drying of lumber, or in the event of a multi-chamber batch kiln system, it could be recovered from one chamber using a high-temperature drying process to provide the greater part of the heat required by another chamber drying at lower temperatures.
The high temperatures involved in particle drying make heat recovery economically attractive in large-scale installation which are largely dependent on oil or gas as a fuel source. It is estimated that between 20-60 percent (14) of the thermal energy used in drying may be saved by the recirculation of the dryer's flue gases and that up to 40 percent (106) could be recycled. (Care being taken to avoid surface condensation and the risk of corrosion.) Likewise, boiler flue gases, conveyed by way of insulated ducting, may be used to indirectly heat the make-up air.
5.6 Hot pressing
5.6.1 Pre-pressing
The principles behind hot pressing in the production of plywood and particleboard are similar, in that the application of pressure brings about contact between veneer/particle and resin, and heat accelerates the curing. It is imperative that at the design stage all other items of equipment be balanced and synchronised to the capacity of- the press so as to ensure its continuous operation.
The number of press openings normally range from 5-25 for plywood and 14-18 for particleboard manufacture. In each case heat is applied to the platens by way of hot water, steam or thermic oil. The use of thermic oil, although requiring more pumping energy to achieve the degree of circulation needed to attain high platen temperatures, has enabled presses to operate at up to 315°C and thereby resulting in reductions in the pressure and pressing times normally needed to effect curing.
As loading and unloading become more mechanized, and automated in some larger mills and opening and closing times shorter, the overall pressing cycle times are being lowered and heat losses reduced. Further improvements may be made to the press's heat efficiency by the application of insulation to the platens and ail heated surfaces.
Advances in the development of resins has also led to greatly reduced press times by as much as 50-60 percent, with considerable energy savings. However, in order to effectively evacuate the vapours given off by the resins during pressing, large volumes of air are required. The energy consumed during ventilation may be reduced by designing the ventilation systems with close-fitting enclosed hoods and by only handling the quantity of air strictly needed to effectively rid the working environment of the noxious vapours.
5.6.1 Pre-pressing
Pre-pressing of both the ply and particleboard mat at low pressures, by either platen-type or continuous pre-presses, helps in the consolidation of the laid-up veneer panels and particleboard mat. Of course, a pre-press is mandatory when a caulless system is used in particleboard production.
Pre-pressing does reduce the overall hot press cycle time by facilitating loading, and as a direct result of the reduced ply and mat thickness, the width of the openings may be reduced. By the application of heat to the upper platen of the pre-press further reductions may be made to the hot-press cycle time, all of which leads to lower thermal energy requirements in pressing, though a somewhat higher power demand.
5.7 Primary finishing
Present day primary finishing consists of semi-automatic process lines incorporating trimming, sophisticated wide-belt sanders, computerised cut-to-size sawing systems combined with dust extraction and waste collection; it all represents a high energy consuming centre in the manufacture of mechanical wood products.
Also, advances in the design of wide-belt sanders, although now producing a better and faster surface finish, have done so at the expense of power - with consumption now increased to one kilowatt per centimetre of belt width. This may be partly off-set by the advances in the design of the upstream equipment, such as veneer lathes, dryers, formers and hot presses, all affording a greater degree of control on product quality and, as a consequence, resulting in less dimensional variation and degrade and therefore less finishing needs.
Semi-automated systems are now being adopted to maximize the utilization of all primary finishing plant, which, combined with strategically located surge areas or holding stations, ensures the smooth flow the materials through the finishing department with minimal interruptions due to minor breakdowns and operational problems.
Trimming saws with thinner blades, increased tension, higher speeds and with wear resistant tungsten carbide cutting edgers to be able to handle the latest resin binders, are becoming more energy efficient. The advances in automatic computerised cut-to-size sawing systems have led to considerably less trim and, as a result, less energy is absorbed in recycling large quantities of waste within the system.
Yet, the need for better environmental control and the removal of sander dust, trim, etc. has meant that the power needed to remove waste has increased over the years. So as to achieve optimum energy efficiency in waste removal, attention needs to be paid to the correct selection of exhaust fans and dust collection equipment and to the design of ductwork and cyclones, with provision for skirting and purpose designed housing to localize collection.
5.8 Services
5.8.1 Boiler plant
5.8.2 Steam and condensate system
5.8.3 Electrical power
5.8.4 Lighting
5.8.5 Compressed air
The importance of services to a mill, whether they be steam, air, water or lighting, should never be underestimated, particularly as they may have a large influence on the energy bill. Yet it is an unfortunate fact that, regardless of the expense and effort spent on the design and operation of process plant, it can be squandered by disregard to the basics of good design and lax attention paid to the operation and maintenance of service plant.
5.8.1 Boiler plant
It is a sobering thought that in the light of the current high fuel costs a boiler may consume the equivalent of its capital cost in fuel in a period of only two to three months, yet in most instances boilers are selected with overall capital cost savings in mind, rather than the long term gains in operating costs.
One cannot over-emphasise the importance of properly sizing a boiler so as to supply good quality dry steam at the correct pressure, yet cope with peak loads and maintain optimum performance in spite of fluctuations in demand. To oversize a boiler would result in its operating at a fraction of its rating, with disproportionate radiation losses and an overall drop in efficiency. Conversely, efficiency would also be affected if it must cope with peak loads well above its maximum continuous rating.
Ideally two smaller boilers are preferable to one large partially used unit, which would allow flexibility of operation to cater for load variations, as may occur due to changes in seasons or production capacity demands. However, cost invariably prohibits such a luxury in the smaller mills.
Regardless of the type of boiler or fuel used a certain amount of excess air is permissible in order that complete combustion is achieved, otherwise the unburnt fuel would constitute an energy loss. But, should the excess air surpass the exceptable level, the burners would become overloaded and heat would be absorbed and carried out of the stack at high temperatures, thus representing wasted energy which could otherwise have been used to produce steam or hot water. Hence, vigilance in both boiler operation and regular checking of the combustion efficiency is necessary.
Whereas the larger and more modern boilers are provided with automatic combustion controls, together with flue gas analyzers, the smaller and older designs may not be equipped with such facilities, whereupon the skill of the operator and the use of portable combustion testing kits (being readily available) are needed to fine tune adjustments so as to maintain the correct air to fuel ratio. However, not all fuels readily lend themselves to ease of handling and good mixing with air, for which reason it is important that their flow to the combustion chamber be well regulated and uniform so as to attain optimum control efficiency.
Regrettably, it is not uncommon to find mills with either inadequate or maladjusted boiler controls and a general lack in the level of attention and maintenance that needs to be afforded to such instruments and controls. The provision of reliable and well designed controls to regulate combustion air and meter both fuel and steam are to be regarded as essential adjuncts to a boiler.
Adequate training should be given to boiler operators and the process controls regularly serviced and maintained by suitably qualified personnel. As the boiler size and rate of fuel consumption increases, so does the need or frequent efficiency checks and improved metering of fuels, steam and hot water.
Burners, fans, dampers, brickwork and insulation, all should be subjected to regular maintenance to maximize boiler operating efficiency. Those mills which do not have staff specifically trained in boiler servicing may need to contract maintenance engineers to undertake the work.
All heat transfering surfaces are to be kept free of accumulated deposits of scale and soot, which would otherwise greatly hamper the transmission of heat and lower efficiency. Hence, both water treatment plant and soot blowing equipment should be of good design and kept in good working order.
5.8.2 Steam and condensate system
It must be appreciated that the boiler is only part of the overall heat raising and distribution system, equal importance must also be given to the steam and condensate system.
Piping should be correctly sized and laid out, with distances and bends kept to a minimum. Adequate provision is to be made for air trapping and venting, with the prompt removal and recovery of condensate from the steam system. When one considers that, in a steam system operating at seven bar, condensate contains 25 percent of the heat required to generate steam, its loss would represent a drop in steam utilization efficiency to 75 percent or less (93). Hence, it becomes obvious that condensate collection is a necessity, which also helps to reduce the costs involved in heating and treating boiler feedwater.
The capacity of the boiler feed tank must permit the maximum use of returned condensate. Not only should it hold sufficient water to allow for at least one hour's steam production at maximum rating, but is to be well lagged so as to keep heat losses to a minimum - for every 6°C increase in feed water temperature, approximately one percent of fuel is saved (93).
All steam and condensate pipework and other exposed heated surfaces are to be correctly lagged with an economic thickness of insulation. Although this may be regarded as an expensive operation initially, it should be considered a worthwhile long-term investment with pay-back periods being usually less than two years.
5.8.3 Electrical power
It is axiomatic that the judicious use of electricity will bring about the greatest savings in a mill's electrical energy. Under normal conditions motors are generally over 90 percent efficient in converting electrical energy to mechanical energy, and transformers are 95 percent efficient in converting distribution voltages to working voltages. Hence, it is by minimizing or eliminating all unnecessary use of electricity and ensuring that driven equipment and process plant are well-designed, operated and maintained that any real reductions in power consumption can be made.
In fact it is at the selection stage, that particular attention needs to be paid to the electrical drive system in order to achieve maximum performance and economy of operation. Motors are to be matched to the duties required and work environment, and correctly sized so that they run as near to full load as possible, yet allowing for spare-capacity to cater for short-term overloads. Energy efficiency ratings and power factors are to be carefully reviewed and, although energy efficient motors tend to be expensive initially, they are proving to be long-term investments.
When purchasing motors it is recommended that those with service factors of between 1.00 and 1.15 be chosen, being more rugged and better able to cope with demand surges. Generally, synchronous motors are found to be more economical than induction motors with capacitors, however, this depends on speed and voltage. In the case of larger size motors the use of higher voltages should be considered, resulting in a reduction in both size and heat losses.
Energy losses may also be reduced by selecting starting gear which is designed to give the highest possible power factor and optimum performance, and for transformers to be located as near as possible to the users of heavy loads. In certain instances the oversizing of electrical conductors can also prove to be economically advantageous by reducing energy losses.
All mills, in their own interest, should aim towards improving the overall power factor of their electrical plant and that all effort be made to keep power demand peaks as low as possible; by so doing, electricity charges can be reduced and penalties imposed by the utility companies may be avoided.
On an operational standpoint power consumption can be monitored with the aid of a recording demand meter, and, after the major user items of equipment have been identified, steps may be taken to effectively lower the demand peaks. This may be achieved by reducing consumption, staggering start-ups and re-scheduling plant operation so as to spread the load more evenly. A thorough examination should also be undertaken of all motors and driven plant to ascertain that they are all correctly matched and that speeds are not in excess of that required to maintain efficient production.
All motors and process plant should be operated as near to capacity as possible, with idlling time kept to the barest minimum. As poor housekeeping and plant maintenance adversely affects power consumption, standards must be kept high. But, above all, electrical plant must be switched off when not in use.
Low power factors may also be improved by the installation of power factor correction equipment, using synchronous motors wherever applicable and by fitting capacitors to induction motors. Should capacitors be already installed, it may prove beneficial to have them checked, as they tend to deteriorate with age.
5.8.4 Lighting
During the past five years developments in the design of lighting have been such that the new energy efficient lamps consume some 50 percent less watts, without loss in lighting levels, compared to their predecessors.
However, lighting systems are generally inefficient users of electricity, with incandescent lamps only converting ten percent into light, 20 percent for fluorescent, and even the more efficient metal halide and sodium lamps are only 24 and 33 percent efficient respectively. As electricity accounts for some 70 percent of total lighting costs over a five year period, it is essential that efficiency of design and operation is sought when selecting lighting systems, rather than initial cost.
Lighting levels must conform to established standards appropriate to the work activities and plant layout. Although it is wasteful to over illuminate, the failure to meet minimum standards will not only affect worker performance, but constitute a safety hazard. As recommended lighting levels range from 30 lumens per square metre for a stockyard, to 1500 lumens per square metre for fine benchwork, the importance of adopting the most appropriate and efficient lighting sources and fittings may be readily appreciated.
All lamps deteriorate with age and as a consequence their efficiency dramatically drops. Therefore, with energy savings in mind, capital costs should be equated against long term operational costs when choosing lighting systems. This may be illustrated by the fact that although a flourescent tube is more expensive than an incandescent lamp, it is three times more energy efficient with 12 times the life expectancy.
Of the countless designs of light fittings, reflectors and diffusers on the market, only those which will maximize a lamp's optical and energy efficiency should be purchased. The fittings should be so positioned so as to direct the light towards the area of activity and facilitate cleaning in order that their efficiency does not become marred by dirt. As fluorescent lamps are subject to a decrease in light output and efficiency when surrounding temperatures increase above 25°C, care must be taken in their location. (a 65 watt bare fluorescent lamp, with a 100 percent relative light output at 25°C, will only emit 80 percent light at 45°C and 75 percent at 55°C). (80)
When visiting wood-yards in daylight, or inside buildings where all work activity has long ceased, it is not uncommon to find all the lights left on. To overcome such human frailties, it is recommended that light switches be well labelled and conveniently located and time switches or programmed controllers, with limited manual over-ride facilities, be incorporated in the lighting system.
Yet one must not overlook the greatest potential for saving energy, and that is to make the most use of natural light; maximum use should be made of windows and skylights so as to allow as much daylight as possible to fall on the work areas. Additionally, all walls and ceilings should be painted in light colours to reflect both natural and artificial light.
5.8.5 Compressed air
Compressed air is one of the most expensive of all the services to provide and the compressor one of the single largest users of electricity. Yet it is not unusual to find in the majority of mills air leaks, poor plant selection, improperly designed piping layouts, the use of excessive line pressures, etc.
The reciprocating and rotary-vane compressors are the types most used in the forest industries. When a compressor runs at 100 percent load factors the power costs are approximately 82 percent of its total running costs, yet, when the load factor drops to 50 percent the power costs are hardly affected, at 77 percent of running costs (13). Hence, regardless of whatever compressor is chosen it must be so sized as to operate at near to full load at all times.
This may be achieved by selecting several smaller units to operate steadily at or near to the rated maximum capacity as possible, with just one unit used to handle load variations. The provision of relays to automatically shut-down a compressor if it runs for more than say five to ten minutes in an unloaded condition, will allow the other compressors to operate at a continuous full load condition.
If one considers that 15 percent more power is needed to produce air at seven bar rather than at 5.5 bar, it stands to reason that the selection of air operated equipment which function at lower pressures will prove to be cost effective. Additionally, consideration should be given to the use of smaller compressors located near to the point of end use, rather than the installation of a centralized air system, so as to reduce line losses.
Attention must be paid to the design of the air intake to the compressor so that it is located in a cool, dust and moisture free location, and kept as short and straight as possible. For every 4°C increase in air inlet temperature a compressor's energy consumption will rise by approximately one percent and for every 25 millibar of pressure lost at the inlet, two percent overall performance shall be lost. (13) It is equally important that piping layouts be correctly dimensioned and well laid out with the minimum of bends, reductions and other such restrictions to air flow, so as to keep pressure drops as low as possible.
Recent developments in heat recovery systems have let to the economical recovery of the heat generated by the air compressors for use elsewhere in the mill, with a claimed recovery of up to 80 percent of the inlet power. However, the economics of such systems very much depend on the size of the compressor plant and the amount of heat actually generated.
<section>8</section>
6. The potential use of wood residues for energy generation
6.1 Introduction
6.2 Sources of available wood residues
6.3 The fuel value of wood residues
6.4 The preparation of wood waste fuel
6.5 Applications for waste-based energy
6.6 Combustion
6.7 Cogeneration
6.1 Introduction
Unlike most other industries, the forest industries are fortunate to be able to use their waste to help meet their energy needs. In mechanical wood processing the greater part of the thermal energy requirements can be met from the available residues, in fact, the sawmilling industry has the potential to produce both a surplus of heat and electricity and therefore could support other energy deficient conversion processes in an integrated complex producing, for example, lumber, plywood and particleboard or, in the rural areas, to supplying energy for the needs of the surrounding community.
Over the years many mills have regarded wood waste as a troublesome by-product of the sawmilling operation, resulting in its being disposed of as landfill or incinerated in Wigwam burners or the like. However, both have recently become contentious environmental issues and, combined with the rising costs of energy, mill owners have been forced to seriously consider the merits of using the residues as an alternative fuel source this has also coincided with the increase in demand for the residues as furnish for paper-pulp and panel board manufacture, due to the rising cost and increased competition for solid wood.
Nowadays most wood processing plants being built in developed countries incorporate hog fuel burners in order to safeguard against certain and costly fossil fuel supply. In instances where the amount of residues produced are insufficient to meet the plant's thermal needs, purchased hog fuel and/or fuel oil are used to make-up the balance. However, little use is made of the energy potential of sawmilling residues in developing countries, this being partly due to the minimal use of kiln drying and the investment capital involved in the installation of the heat generating plant.
Although the heat produced from wood residues is less than that from oil or gas, its cost compared to fossil fuels makes it an attractive source of readily available heat or heat and power. In spite of the growing competition for the residues for other uses, its projected increase in price over the coming years will undoubtedly be less than that expected for traditional fuels. Although the handling, processing and combustion of the residues may involve a higher capital outlay, considerable developments in new and improved technology and plant design are now rendering it an economically attractive fuel source.
The most effective utilization of wood residues, particularly in the sawmilling and plywood industry, plays an important role in energy efficient production and it can often prove to be an important factor in determining whether a sawmill is to operate at a profit or loss, especially if lumber is manufactured from marginal logs. However, when contemplating the use of wood residues as an energy source, whether it only be to provide heat for kiln drying or both heat and power for use in an integrated complex, the following items will need to be examined in detail as they can influence the economic viability of the venture:
(a) present day and projected future costs of traditional energy sources and their availability;
(b) energy requirements of the plant (heat and electricity);
(c) availability and reliability of residue supplies, their cost, type, size, moisture content and proportion of contraries;
(d) the capital cost of equipment needed to collect, process and combust the wood residues;
(e) disposal cost of residues;
(f) resale value of the residues as a raw material for panel board or pulp manufacture, etc.
It is only by undertaking a professional study of the above, as well as the most appropriate type and size of plant and the best use of the surplus heat and power, that an efficient waste handling, treatment and combustion system can be designed in which the return on investment would warrant capital expenditure. Obviously it would not be logical to invest in a plant in which the capital and operating costs exceed the gains from using the residues as fuel.
Although residues may represent a free source of readily available fuel, it is a misconception to believe that it is a free source of energy. The cost of waste handling, treatment and combustion equipment, together with labour and maintenance can be a costly adjunct to a plant's operating costs and capital outlay, and may prove to be excessive for some small mills. Also, this particularly applies to on-site power generation, which, due to the high cost of steam raising and power generating plant, would not be considered an economically viable investment for most small- and medium-sized install
6.2 Sources of available wood residues
6.2.1 Forest residues
6.2.2 Mill-site generated wood waste
6.2.3 Integrated production
6.2.4 Alternative uses of residues
The residues generated from the forest products industry may be divided into two parts; that which results from harvesting and extracting logs from the forest, and generally considered of no economic use for further processing, and that which is generated by the forest industries themselves during the process of manufacturing timber, plywood, particleboard and the like (refer to Figures 1, 2 and 3), namely:
Source
Type of residue
Forest operations
Branches, needles, leaves, stumps, roots, low grade and decayed wood, slashings and sawdust;
Sawmilling
Bark, sawdust, trimmings, split wood, planer shavings, sanderdust;
Plywood production
Bark, core, sawdust, lillypads, veneer clippings and waste, panel trim, sanderdust;
Particleboard production
Bark, screening fines, panel trim, sawdust, sanderdust.
In general it may be said that of a typical tree, less than two-thirds is taken from the forest for further processing, the remainder being either left, burnt or collected as fuelwood by the local inhabitants. After processing, only 28 percent of the original tree becomes lumber, the remainder being residues, as indicated in Table 7.
Table 7. Division of a typical tree harvested for sawntimber
Tree part or product
Portion
Left in the forest:
Top, branches and foliage
Stump (excluding roots)
Sawdust
Sawmilling:
Slabs, edgings and off-cuts
Sawdust and fines
Various losses
Bark
Sawn timber
Total
Sources: (37) (144)
It is only in the last few years that, due to the economics of rapidly rising fuel and wood costs, industry in the developed countries have invested in ways and means to extract the maximum quantity of recoverable wood during logging operations. Although this document draws attention mainly to the energy value of residues produced during the manufacturing operations, consideration should be given to the potential industrial use of residues left in the forest.
6.2.1 Forest residues
It is not uncommon for some 60 percent of the total harvested tree to be left in the forest and for non-commercial species to be subjected to slash and burn, or merely felled and left to rot so as to make access easier for logging. Such practices as sawing and squaring logs in the forest, rather than at the sawmill, wastes a further eight to ten percent and 30 to 50 percent respectively (29).
Proper training and provision of appropriate tools and logging equipment can do much to improve the methods of harvesting so as to substantially reduce the excessive wastes, which could otherwise represent a higher yield of solid wood or a source of fuel.
However, although forest residues may appear to be an attractive fuel source, collection and handling costs must be taken into consideration, as well as its loss as a valuable soil nutrient. The viability of its use may be improved if collection be undertaken at the same time as log extraction, with shared equipment and management, whereby logging slash and marginal timber may be collected and chipped using portable or semi-portable chippers placed in the immediate logging areas. By ensuring that leaves, bark and thinnings are left behind, the soil's nutrients would not be depleted.
Transport costs are also a critical factor in the use of forest residues, due to the low heat values of such bulky material, for which reason distances are to be kept low so as not to incur unnecessary expense if the waste is to remain economically attractive as a fuel source. Chipping of the residues does afford some degree of compaction, also several processes are in operation which further compress the waste into more manageable forms, such as pellets, thus improving their bulk handling characteristics. However, due to the high capital and operating costs involved, densification tends to be only financially viable when the waste needs to be transported over long distances.
Whilst regarding wood as a renewable energy resource, consideration should also be given at regional or national level to encourage the collection and use of logging residues, be they branches, tops or whole-tree utilisation, to the establishment of energy plantations using quick growing species especially selected for their value as a fuel.
6.2.2 Mill-site generated wood waste
If one considers that approximately 45 to 55 percent of the log input to a sawmill or plywood plant is to become waste, it would be illogical not to maximize its use as a fuel source, if no other profitable market outlet can be found.
The actual production of residues, or waste, generated from the manufacture of wood products, differs from plant to plant and depends on several factors, from the properties of the wood to the type, operation and maintenance of the processing plant. However, mean averages apply to each type of industry, which, for developing countries have been detailed in Tables 1, 2 and 3 of Appendix VI, and summarized in Table 8.
Table 8. Proportion of residues generated in selected forest products industries ^1^/
Sawmilling ^2^/
Plywood Manu.
Particleboard Manu.
Integrated Operations
Finished product (range)
Finished product (average)
Residues/Fuel
Losses
Total
^1^/ Excluding bark
^2^/ Air-dried
All wood waste and bark, which is also commonly referred to as hog fuel due to the process of reducing the residues in size in a "hogger", has a value as a fuel, although it is produced in a wide range of sizes with varying moisture contents, as shown in Table 10, and comprises mainly of the following:
- Bark, which makes up some 10 to 22 percent of the total log volume depending on size and species, can in itself represent a serious waste disposal problem unless it can be used as a fuel or removed prior to log preparation;
- Coarse residues, such as slabs, edgings, off-cuts, veneer clippings, sawmill and particleboard trim, when reduced in size, make ideal fuel, especially when dry. They also have a resale value as pulp and particleboard furnish;
- Cores, from plywood peeler logs, are generally sold to sawmills or lumber or as pulp chips;
- Sawdust, being a product of all mechanical wood processing operations, particularly sawmilling, is generally not regarded as a prime pulping material due to its small size, although it proves to be acceptable for the manufacture of particleboard;
- Planer shavings result from dimensioning and smoothing lumber, plywood and particleboard with planers during the finishing stage. They are considered ideal for particleboard production and are particularly good for heating kilns and dryers;
- Sanderdust is produced during the abrasive sanding of lumber, plywood and particleboard during the finishing stage. Due to its size and very low moisture content it is well suited for direct firing;
- Particleboard waste, being in the order of five percent, is negligible compared to that generated in other mechanical wood-based industries, as it is largely recycled within the production process. In fact the waste from sawmilling and plywood manufacture make up a large part of particleboard furnish.
6.2.3 Integrated production
As previously indicated, the sawmilling and plywood industries each produce between 40 to 55 percent of waste from their incoming wood supply, with heat values in the range of 17 to 23 MJ/kg (dry weight), more than sufficient to meet their own energy requirements. Nonetheless, it is considered uneconomical to generate their own electricity from residues unless they have an additional sales outlet for the surplus power.
However, particleboard production produces little waste, being in the order of five to ten percent, and insufficient to cover the needs for heat, yet, would be resolved in the case of an integrated operation of all three industries - market forces permitting (25).
Sawmilling, veneer, plywood and particleboard production lend themselves quite readily to integration, with the advantages of shared waste handling processing facilities and services, and the maximum benefit derived from the use of the residues as a raw material and fuel, whereupon the surplus energy could be fully and economically used to the best advantage. But, the scale of such a complex may be beyond the means- of some developing countries.
6.2.4 Alternative uses of residues
Residues derived from the forest industries normally do have alternative outlets, as chips for pulp manufacture, raw materials for particleboard and fibreboard manufacture and as fuelwood and building materials to local inhabitants - all dependent on market location and demand. Listed below are several outlet areas.
Sawmilling
- edgings and slabs
- low cost building materials, fuelwood and pulp manufacture
- barked edging chips
- pulp manufacture and fuelwood
Plywood Manufacture
- peeler log cores
- lumber manufacture
- core chips
- pulp manufacture
- veneer chipping and chips
- fuelwood
Particleboard
- uses all the above mentioned residues as raw material for board manufacture, and the majority of its own residues are recycled within the process.
Alternative markets and the sale value of wood residues must, of course, be taken into consideration when undertaking a feasibility study of a specific manufacturing plant, so as to assess its availability for fuel and to account for its opportunity value in manufacturing cost analysis.
Apart from the use of residues as a potential fuel source to meet a plant's own energy requirements, its direct sale, or as pellets or briquettes, as fuel to other industrial users or electricity generating companies is becoming an attractive venture for some mills in developed countries. However, one must take into account its historic use in certain regions, as being a basic fuel for domestic heating and cooking in the smaller cities, villages and rural areas.
In some countries the use of wood residues as a raw material for the production of say pulp and paper and particleboard, is deemed to be more beneficial to both the local and national economic and social well-being, than its use as a fuel. (100) This being due to the value added element in the form of labour and trade derived during the various stages of processing the residues into a saleable product, whereas its impact as an alternative fuel is solely to reduce oil imports - a debatable issue.
6.3 The fuel value of wood residues
6.3.1 Heating value
6.3.2 Effect of moisture content and particle size on heat values
6.3.1 Heating value
When evaluating the properties of a combustible material with respect to its use as a fuel, the heating value, expressed in this document as gross calorific values or higher heating values, is one of the most important factors, which indicates the amount of thermal energy which may be obtained by combusting one mass unit of the material.
The heating value of wood depends very much on the species and the part of the tree being used and varies between 17 to 23 MJ/kg of bone dry wood; generally softwoods have higher caloric values than hardwoods, with an average value of 21 MJ/kg BD for resinous woods and 19.8 MJ/kg BD for other woods being used. In fact, there is very little variation in the heating values of the wood substance itself, being some 19 MJ/kg BD, as it is, in fact, the variation in resin content, with a calorific value of 40 MJ/kg BD, which accounts for the differences in values between the species. It is for this reason that bark, with a high gum and resin content, tends to have a higher value than wood.
However, although the fuel value may be fairly consistent in bone dry wood, the heating value depends on several factors, namely moisture content, particle size, type and efficiency of combustion equipment being used and the level of its operation and maintenance. Hence, in order to put the heating values of various wood residues into perspective one must take into consideration the heat content per unit of waste according to its moisture content, together with the efficiency of the energy conversion process which, as indicated in Table 9, provides a comparative analysis to be made with other alternative fuels (refer to Tables 1 and 2 of Appendix IV).
Table 9. The effect of moisture content on the net heating value of wood compared to that of other fuels
Fuel
As fired Gross calorific value
Typical burner efficiency
Useable Net heating value
(MJ/kg)
(MJ/kg)
Wood at 0% m.c ^1^/
10% m.c
20% m.c.
30% m.c.
40% m.c.
50% m.c.
Anthracite
Lignite
Heavy fuel oil
Light fuel oil
Butane
Propane
^1^/ Wet basis
Sources: (22) (61) (82)
6.3.2 Effect of moisture content and particle size on heat values
Wood at the time of logging generally has a moisture content of approximately 50 to 55 percent, although the amount varies according to species, age and the portion of the tree from which it originated, i.e. branches, trunk, etc. Further fluctuations from the mean are influenced according to the season it is cut and the manner in which it is transported to the mill site and stored; logs that are floated down stream, wet-debarked or left in conditioning ponds could have moisture contents as high as 65 to 70 percent, whereas that which is road-hauled and dry-debarked would be in order of 45 to 50 percent m.c. Spring and summer storage can bring about a moisture loss of 10 to 25 percent.
The moisture content of the manufacturing residues depend very much on at what stage of the process they are extracted and whether there has been any drying of the product before that stage. For instance, sanding dust from plywood or particleboard manufacture is taken from the plant after the driers and hot presses, where its moisture content could be as low as ten percent or less, as indicated in Table 10.
Table 10. Range of characteristics of typical wood residues
Residues
Size
Moisture content ^1^/
Ash & dirt content ^2^/
(mm)
Sanderdust
Shavings
Sawdust
Bark (hogged)
Log-yard clean-up
up to 100
Forest residuals
needles to stumps
^1^/ Wet basis
^2^/ By weight
Source: (56)
As mentioned previously, moisture content is a major determinant in the heating value of wood waste, which, from 19.8 MJ/kg at 0 percent m.c. drops to 10 MJ/kg at 50 percent m.c., as can be seen by refering to Figure 12. Although wood may be burnt at 55 percent m.c., and up to 58 percent m.c. with careful operator attention and boiler tuning, it is always better to aim for a moisture content of 50 percent or lower in order to achieve satisfactory and substained operation. When the moisture content rises to 60 percent, burning of the wood residues become difficult as its heating value drops dramatically, to the extent where, at approximately 68 percent m.c., "furnace blackout" occurs, being the point at which combustion can no longer be sustained, unless a supplementary fuel is used to maintain combustion.
A high moisture content not only lowers the as-fired heat value of wood waste, but seriously affects the overall combustion efficiency due to the large amount of energy needed to heat considerable quantities of excess air and to vapourise the moisture in the waste, which, together with the moisture formed by the combustion process itself is subsequently lost up the stack as latent heat. Hence, it stands to reason that wood waste at ten percent m.c., with an as-fired heat value of 17.8 MJ/kg and a combustion efficiency of some 78 percent is preferable to green wood at 50 percent m.c. with an as-fired heat value of 10 MJ/kg and 67 percent combustion efficiency.
Figure 12. The effect of wood residue moisture content on combustion efficiency (103)
The size and form of the wood particle is also critical in both the handling characteristics and burning efficiency of residues and plays a major role in their combustibility and the selection and operation of processing and combustion plant. Whereas fine sanderdust and wood shavings may be burnt in suspension, larger sized wood-waste, in the form of large chips, coarsely hogged waste and slabs need a longer dwell time to burn which is generally undertaken on grates.
Hence, all steps taken to reduce the moisture content and size of the residues to a minimum, pays dividends in energy generation. The provision of prepared storage, suitably protected against the elements, the use of flue gases to dry the fuel etc., all contribute towards maintaining low residual moisture and optimum combustion efficiency.
6.4 The preparation of wood waste fuel
6.4.1 Collection and handling
6.4.2 Storage
6.4.3 Size reduction and screening
6.4.4 Fuel drying
6.4.5 Densification
The handling, treatment and storage of wood waste fuel is considerably more costly and troublesome than that required for traditional fossil fuels. Hence, the importance of a well conceived and equipped woodfuel preparation system cannot be over-emphasized so as to maximize the fuel potential of a plant's residues and to minimize handling and combustion problems.
The reduction of particle size and moisture content, together with the most appropriate storage and handling systems are necessary for an efficiently operated wood waste combustion system.. The waste preparation process generally involves hogging, dewatering, screening, size reduction, bulk storage, blending and drying prior to combustion so as to ensure a reliable and consistent supply of quality fuel to the burners. An equal amount of care and attention needs to be paid to the state of the wood waste used, as would normally be the case with any other fuel. The use of waste that is decayed, too wet or containing an excessive amount of contraries is false economy, due to the difficulty in handling and storing the wet residues, undue wear-and-tear on equipment and the detrimental effect on the overall combustion efficiency.
6.4.1 Collection and handling
Waste collection and handling does not necessarily need to be either labour intensive or. involve costly and sophisticated mechanical handling plant, which could otherwise render the use of residues uneconomical. In small-scale forest industries in developing countries, the collection and handling of waste is predominantly manual, aided by a tractor or bulldozer to both convey and push the residues to a belt conveyor: system, thus avoiding the need for an enormous capital outlay and with maximized use of available labour.
The handling systems should be so designed as to afford the highest degree of flexibility to the operator and to be able to cater for the full range of sizes and moisture contents of was. e expected from outside and within the mill. It is the failure to attend to such aspects of design that invariably give rise to fundamental problems in operation.
Waste brought to the mill-site in the form of forest residues, or as purchased industrial wood waste, to supplement the plant's own wood-based fuel, may be delivered by road or rail. Methods of unloading range from the use of manual labour or a knuckle boom loader fitted with a clam-shell bucket, to live bottom vans or hydraulically elevated dump trucks, all of which are determined by economic considerations.
The manner in which mill residues are best removed and handled is again a matter of economics, availability of labour and the quantity and type of waste produced and is normally undertaken by a combination of belt. and pneumatic conveyors, front-arid loaders and trucks, with manual gathering predominating in mills with an input rapacity of 20 000 m^3/A and below.
Generally slabs, edgings, peeler cores, veneer waste and trimmings would be transported by mechanical conveyors or carried manually to a chipper and, after screening, conveyed to storage piles for use as either furnish for pulp or particleboard manufacture or as fuel. Bark, panel trim and waste from ply glue spreaders would be hogged and conveyed to the hog-fuel storage area. Sawdust and sanderdust, depending on the quantities produced, would be pneumatically extracted and conveyed to a separate storage area (preferably covered). Retrieval is normally achieved by the use of belt, drag link, flight or pneumatic conveyors, in conjunction with front-end loaders, which may also be used to build-up the piles.
In order to safeguard against damage to moving parts, stone traps and magnetic separators need to be incorporated in the handling system, ahead of the reduction plant so as to remove all stones and tramp iron. Depending on the proportion of contraries normally expected in the fuel supply and the type of burning equipment employed, air classification may need to be employed in order to remove rocks and sand from the smaller-sized fuel particles, but only if they are comparatively dry.
6.4.2 Storage
The type of wood waste storage will be largely determined by:
- the form and moisture content of the residues;
- the frequency and reliability of year-round deliveries to the mill and production of residues;
- the availability of land;
- climatic conditions;
- the need for air drying;
- the volume of wood waste fuel involved;
- the system of waste handling and treatment adopted.
Storage systems may be divided into two distinct categories, namely:
Outdoor storage, in piles on prepared concrete or gravel pads to aid drainage and reduce the entrainment of contraries, is the least expensive means of maintaining stocks. This form of storage is generally suited for stocks of 20 to 30 day's capacity of green forest residues, bark, moist wood slabs or chips. However, unless adequate preparations and precautions are taken, deterioration and fires from overheating and biological action can take place. Hence, residues should be monitored and those that do not benefit from drying with time should have a fast turnaround and be used on a first-in-first-out basis (109).
In instances where a large variety of residue sizes are involved, it is always advisable to segregate according to size, either before or after storage, and, in most cases, it is preferable to reduce the larger-sized waste in hoggers or chippers at an early stage in order to facilitate handling. Mixing of wet and dry waste should be avoided, as such a practice will reduce the efficiency of combustion; it is far better to have dual storage and feed systems in order to segregate the feed to the burners according to moisture content.
Covered storage systems, to safeguard against loss and damage due to wind and rain, is normally provided for materials which are readily wind-borne or freely absorb moisture, such as dry sawdust, planer shavings and sanderdust.
Such storage systems as open-sided buildings, hoppers, bins or silos are usually located in the near vicinity of the combustion plant, with approximately 48 hours capacity so as to sustain continuous operation without being hampered by weekends or interruptions in the flow of supply from the processing plant.
6.4.3 Size reduction and screening
Whereas sawdust, planer shavings and sanderdust may be burnt directly without the need for further processing, other forms of wood waste have to be reduced in size in order to facilitate handling, storage and metering to the combustion chamber. By achieving a uniform particle size, combustion efficiency will be improved due to the uniform and controlled fuel feed rate and the ability to regulate the air supply. Additionally, in the case of fuels with a high moisture content, the reduction process exposes a greater surface area of the particle to the heated gases, thus releasing the moisture more rapidly, thereby enhancing its heating value.
Size reduction may be carried out in several stages in a hog or attrition mill, with screening before and in between.
The hog basically comprises of a set of knives or swing hammers mounted on a rapidly rotating shaft within a robust casing. The impact of the rotating impellers on the wood waste against the breaking plate reduces it to a standard size of approximately 20 to 50 mm (100).
Screening, directly before or after the hog, separates the dirt and fines and conserves energy in the subsequent reduction stages by removing those particles of acceptable size which would otherwise be reprocessed.
Attrition mills are used to reduce residues still further in size, by passing them between a stationary and a rotating disc, each fitted with slotted or grooved segments. The particles produced may, after screening, then be burnt in direct-fired suspension burners to produce hot gases for drying lumber, plywood and particleboard furnish and other such heating requirements.
6.4.4 Fuel drying
As previously mentioned, combustion efficiency, boiler control and the operator's ability to provide a quick response to changes in steam demand become seriously impaired by a combination of high and fluctuating moisture content of incoming fuel. This situation may be improved by drying the fuel, which will also effectively increase boiler capacity and lead to better emission control.
The moisture in residues may be reduced either by mechanical pressing, air-drying or the use of hot air dryers, or a combination of all three. It is common practice for mechanical presses to be used on bark and wood waste with moisture levels in excess of 70 percent in order to reduce it to 55 to 60 percent m.c., which would then enable the waste to be mixed with dryer incoming materials to produce a combustible fuel. However, in the event that sufficient supplies of wood waste are readily available to meet the plant's energy needs and the disposal of bark does not present a serious problem to the mill, then it is not considered economically justified for it to be pressed and dried in view of the maintenance, power demand and the high capital intensive plant involved.
Air-drying of logging residues, assuming the right climatic conditions prevail, can bring about a moisture loss of some 10 to 15 percent, and the level may even drop further to 25 percent (67) should the residues be left in clear-felled spaces open to the action of wind and sun. Air-drying of mill waste, time and space permitting; is preferable under covered well-ventilated areas, especially for the smaller-sized residues such as sawdust, which is more liable to absorb rainfall and takes longer to air-dry than say mixed wood waste.
Green whole chips and mixed waste, when stored outside in piles for several months, may lose up to 10 to 25 percent (105) of their moisture content by way of the drying effect of wind, sun and spontaneous internal heating due to bacteriological action on the materials in the interior of the pile (108).
The use of fuel dryers to dry fuel to approximately 30 percent m.c. using plant such as rotary drum, flash and cascade type dryers employing waste stack gases, direct combustion of residues, steam or hot water as heating sources, undoubtedly lead to better combustion efficiency and boiler utilization. Nonetheless, the use of fuel dryers in medium-sized installations is questionable as the heat energy gained would be off-set by that which would be needed to dry the fuel, added to which one must take into consideration the high capital and operating costs involved.
6.4.5 Densification
A growing awareness has developed in recent years in the use of compacted wood waste, in the form of briquettes, pellets or "logs", as a domestic or industrial fuel.
Briquettes or logs are generally formed by forcing dry sawdust or shavings through a split cylindrical die using a hydraulic ram. The exerted pressure, of some 1 200 kg/cm^2, and the resultant heat generated bonds the wood particles into "logs".
The production of pellets involves the reduction of wood waste to the size of sawdust, which is then dried to approximately 12 percent m.c., before being extruded in specially adapted agricultural pellet mills to form pellets of some 6 to 18 mm diameter and 15 to 30 mm long, with a density in the range of 950 to 1 300 kg/m^3 ^1^/. Drying of the furnish prior to extrusion is usually undertaken in rotating drum dryers, fired by approximately 15 to 20 percent of the plant's pellet production.
^1^/ Bulk density being 480 to 640 kg/m3 (106)
Although pelleting produces a product with excellent handling and storage characteristics, with four times the energy concentration of woodfuel, thus greatly reducing transport costs and improving boiler efficiency, it has been found that high capital investment in the processing plant and operating costs only prove economically attractive if transportation distances of the fuel exceed 250 km from the source of the raw material, and is normally not warranted for site-generated fuels.
6.5 Applications for waste-based energy
A mill or integrated complex, with a readily available supply of hog-fuel, has several operations open to it as to the manner in which it may convert its waste into useable energy. However, before embarking upon a general description of the proven methods of combustion and combustion plants, a brief outline of several alternative applications for the recovered heat has been listed below. By examining Figures 5, 7 and 9 in Chapter 2, it becomes apparent which production centres will gain the most from either onsite heat or power generation or both.
The choice of the most efficient and cost-effective use of waste-based energy, and the selection of appropriate heating mediums would need to be studied on a case-by-case basis, in view of the individuality of each mill.
Heating medium
Broad outline of possible applications
Hot air
For direct drying of:
(a) lumber;
(b) plywood veneer;
(c) particleboard furnish;
Hot water and thermic oil
As an indirect means to supply heat for:
(d) log conditioning;
(e) lumber and veneer drying;
(f) glue and resin preparation;
(g) hot pressing of ply and particleboard;
(h) space heating;
Steam
May be used as a heating medium in all the above-mentioned applications, as well as:
(i) to provide transmission power to process plant through the use of a system of line-shaft and belt drives. (In the past, many sawmills were powered in this way, a large number of which are still operating successfully);
(j) to directly drive plant, such as boiler feed water pumps, induced draft fans, large air compressors, etc., by way of small steam turbines;
(k) steam which is surplus to the mill's requirements may be sold to neighbouring consumers for industrial, commercial and community use;
(l) to produce electricity by way of a turbine-generator to help meet the power demand of the integrated complex;
(m) in the case of non-integrated sawmills and plywood plants, in which their residue production far exceeds their actual heat energy needs and market demand, consideration may be given to on-site power generation to meet their own requirements, with the sale of the surplus to the public utilities.
6.6 Combustion
6.6.1 Firetube and watertube boilers
6.6.2 Pile burners
6.6.3 Suspension and cyclone burners
6.6.4 Fluidized-bed combustors
The range of combustion systems now available to the forest products industry is quite considerable, with a large choice of equipment for each category. Apart from the end use of the heat, particle size plays an important role in influencing the combustion plant. Whereas fine sanderdust and wood shavings may be burnt in suspension, larger-sized wood waste, in the form of chips, coarsely hogged residues and slabs need longer to burn which is generally undertaken on grates. The decision whether to select the combustion plant to suit the available fuel or, process the fuel to the requirements of the preferred plant, can only be made after a thorough analysis has been carried out.
Traditional methods of burning hogged fuel for steam or hot water production has been with the use of firetube and watertube boilers employing the pile burning method of combustion on a grate. The difference between standard oil or gas fired boilers and those for firing wood waste in that the slow-burning characteristics of wood, together with its high moisture content, necessitates a larger combustion chamber capacity with a high furnace so as to create low upward velocities and cater for the longer residence time needed to burn the wood fuel (16).
The necessity of a larger-sized boiler, together with the need for waste handling plant involves up to 1.5 to 4 times the investment cost of oil fired package boilers. As indicated in Table 9, combustion efficiencies of 65 to 75 percent may be expected when burning wood waste, compared to 80 percent obtained from gas or oil fired units. The difficulty of automatic firing, slow response to peak demand and the need for ash removal and disposal are other disadvantages which must be carefully weighted up when considering the use of, what may at first appear to be, a cheap fuel.
The direct firing of sanderdust and pulverized wood waste presents a somewhat simpler way in which to use the fuel's energy value to heat drying kilns, air heaters and boilers. However, there is still some hesitation in the industry to adopt the various direct-fire systems and other newer technologies, such as wood gasifiers, until they have been adequately proven, though they do hold promising prospects.
A brief description of the basic combustion systems, with the exception of gasification and pyrolysis, is given, without attempting to make any comparisons as each system has its own champions and needs to be assessed according to the circumstances of the mills. It must be pointed out, however, that the capacity ranges, technology and cost of several of the mentioned plants are inconsistent with medium-sized mills in developing countries.
6.6.1 Firetube and watertube boilers
Boilers fall into two categories, being firetube and watertube. Firetube boilers are principally used where steam pressures of not more than 20 kg/cm, (12) are required in small to medium-sized operations, and are well suited for the heat requirements of the mechanical wood-based industry. They are relatively inexpensive and operate on the principle of hot combustion gases passing through steel tubes set in a water jacket.
Watertube boilers consist of tubes welded together in such a manner as to form complete walls enclosing the combustion chamber, through which flows the water to be heated. By virtue of its construction, the watertube boiler is almost exclusively used where steam pressures above ten kg/cm2 (12) are employed, especially in providing motive power to turbine-generators.
Both types of boiler may be further sub-divided into those which arrive as a package of field-erected on-site. Package boilers are generally shop assembled units, thus allowing them to be readily shipped, installed and operated and tend to be less than 22 500 kg/hr steam capacity. Whereas all the component parts of the field-erected units are entirely assembled and welded on-site.
6.6.2 Pile burners
Pile burners, as the name implies, burn the fuel in piles either on a refractory floor or grate, and may be divided into two classes, namely:
Heaped pile burning furnaces, such as the tee-pee burners and clutch ovens, which are fed with fuel from the top of the furnace in batch form via chutes located across the grates or, continuously by way of variable screw feeders, to be burnt in a pile on a refractory floor or grate. Primary air for combustion is introduced through ports located on all four sides of each chamber and the heat transmitted to the boiler surface situated above and behind the combustion chamber.
Such furnaces may be used to burning fuels of up to 65 percent m.c., regardless of size or shape (98), although they do require a lot of attention and considerable time to build-up and burn down the pile and have low efficiencies in the order of 50 to 60 percent. In some furnaces, fuel of high moisture content may be added to the base of the pile by hydraulic rams, thus allowing the waste to burn more slowly and completely. The provision of more than one chamber permits ash to be removed in one compartment whilst the other is being fired.
Thin pile furnaces burn hogged fuel, up to 55 to 60 percent m.c., as a thin bed spread across the grate. Sloping grates, pinhole grates, travailing grates are but some of the systems currently in use enabling the fuel to progressively advance along the grate through the combustion chamber, whilst being exposed to primary air from below, to be then discharged by an assortment of removal systems as ash.
Spreader stokers, using pneumatic or mechanical spreaders, are used in the larger-sized furnaces to evenly meter and distribute hogged wood or particles, of up to 45 to 50 percent m.c., into the firing zone of the combustion chamber, allowing the finer particles to burn in suspension and for the larger-sized fuel to fall to the grate where it is burnt.
6.6.3 Suspension and cyclone burners
Suspension and cyclone burners are proven technology, having been successfully used with pulverized coal for several years and adapted for use with woodfuels.
Suspension burners, as the term suggests, burns fine wood particles in suspension, in either special combustion chambers or boiler fireboxes, in a highly turbulent environment caused by forced combustion air. In order to operate efficiently the wood particles need to be no more than 6 mm in size and a maximum moisture content of 15 percent (98). Such units are particularly well-suited for use with lumber kilns, veneer and particleboard furnish dryers and boilers.
Apart from combustion efficiencies of approximately 75 percent, they often have a quick response to swing loads with high turndown ratios, although provision must be made to safeguard against the risk of explosions due to the nature of the fine fuel particles used.
In the case of cyclone burners, pulverized wood fuel, of a maximum 3.5 mm size and 12 percent m.c., is mixed in the first stage of the burner and combusted in an external cyclone burner.
6.6.4 Fluidized-bed combustors
Fluidized-bed combustors are capable of burning untreated hog fuel, with moisture levels as high as 55 to 60 percent (100), in a turbulent mixing zone above a fluidized bed of inert silica sand. The fuel is maintained in suspension during combustion by a high velocity of air forced through the bed of sand, which results in the sand adopting free-flowing and fluidized properties.
6.7 Cogeneration
6.7.1 Restrictive regulations and penalties
6.7.2 Economic considerations
The simultaneous production of both electrical power and a useable form of thermal energy, such as steam, is termed cogeneration. This may be achieved by generating high pressure steam in a hog-fuel boiler, which would then be passed through a turbine generator for power before being used as exhaust steam in drying or process heating. Therefore, rather than just generating electricity from wood waste with a conversion efficiency of 25 to 30 percent, cogeneration raises the efficiency of energy utilization to some 75 percent (46).
The use of a condensing turbine generator with single or double automatic extraction or a back-pressure turbine generator are options available to the forest products industry, though the latter is often favoured. Although the fuel potential of the residues generated from sawmilling and plywood manufacture exceed the plants' heat and power requirements, energy self-sufficiency in electricity in an integrated operation, including particleboard production, is more difficult to attain due to the fact that there is a given ratio between the power output and the output of industrial heat generated by a back-pressure power plant (approximately 1:1.5) (25). This shortfall may be overcome by the following alternative solutions: (25) (47)
- to design a power plant in which the ratio between power and heat production meets that of the integrated complex's consumption ratio. However, this option involves both costly and sophisticated plant and therefore is not considered suitable for developing countries;
- to supplement the plant's own hog-fuel production with purchases wood and wood residues or fuel oil. Yet this option either places on increased load on existing waste treatment and combustion systems or necessitates larger plant capacity, with heat production being surplus to needs;
- to make-up the balance of the mill's power requirements by either using diesel generating sets or purchasing power from the national grid.
6.7.1 Restrictive regulations and penalties
In certain countries legislation and regulations discourage the generation of power for sale, and those mills that meet their own needs for power are often penalized by having to pay higher rates for their purchased power in the event of a shortfall or shut-down in their on-site power supply (58).
Although such regulations may well have been established to dissuade mills from investing in small unviable power plants, they do not take into account the potential for hog-fuelled back-pressure power. Hopefully, in the light of the anticipated rise in fuel costs such restrictive tariffs shall be removed.
6.7.2 Economic considerations
Although it is technically feasible to use wood waste as fuel for power generation, it is the economics that invariably prove to he the limiting factor in most cases. Whereas there are obvious benefits to be gained by burning wood residues to reduce a manufacturer's fuel oil and electricity bill, they may be off-set by the high capital costs involved, low plant efficiencies and increased manning levels. Of course the economics of wood waste energy generation becomes more attractive as traditional fuel prices increase, though the real value of the wood waste as a fuel source must take into account its available heat content, the investment and operating costs of the plant needed to handle and convert it to useable energy, before any worthwhile comparative studies can be made.
It must be noted that the capacity of most energy generation plant available to the industry, especially for cogeneration, exceeds that which can be economically utilized by most mills and integrated units. Additionally, the limited finance available to the small- and medium-scale mills tend to be a major deterrent in their contemplating cogeneration as an option worthy of consideration, regardless of the possible long-term gains.
Hence, it is for these reasons that, in spite of their self-sufficiency in self-generated fuel, it is generally not considered economically justified for the individual sawmill or plywood plant of less than 150 000 m^3/A log input capacity (34) to generate their own power, unless they be part of an integrated production unit consisting of sawmilling, plywood and particleboard manufacture, etc., with shared services.
<section>9</section>
APPENDIX I
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
A
- Annum
ave
- Average
bbl
- Barrel of oil
BD
- Bone dry (zero moisture content)
boe
- Barrel of oil equivalent
cal
- Calorie
cap
- Capacity
°C
- Temperature, degrees centigrade
CH[4]
- Methane
cm
- Centimetre
cm^2
- Square centimetre
CO
- Carbon monoxide
CO[2]
- Carbon dioxide
CV
- Calorific value
d
- Day
d/w
- Days per week
d/A
- Days per annum
FAO
- Food and Agriculture Organization
fbm
- Foot board measure of lumber
GJ
- Giga joule
GJ/A
- Giga joules per annum
GJ/m^3
- Giga joules per cubic metre
gm
- Gram
H[2]
- Hydrogen
h
- Hour
h/w
- Hours per week
J
- Joule
kg
- Kilogram
kg/hr
- Kilogram per hour
kg/m^3
- Kilogram per cubic metre
Kcal
- Kilocalorie
Kcal/kg
- Kilocalorie per kilogram
KJ
- Kilojoule
kW
- Kilowatt
kW/m^3
- Kilowatts per cubic metre
kW/MWh
- Kilowatts per Megawatt hour
kWh
- Kilowatt-hour
kWh/m^3
- Kilowatt-hour per cubic metre
l
- Litre
l/m
- Litre per minute
m
- Metres
m^3
- Cubic metres
m^3s
- Cubic metres of solid wood
m^3/A
- Cubic metres per annum
m^3/d
- Cubic metres per day
mc
- Moisture content
min
- Minutes
mm
- millimetre
m/s
- Metres per second
mt
- Metric ton or tonne
Mfbm
- Thousand board feet
MMfbm
- Million board feet
MJ
- Megajoule
MJ/kg
- Megajoule per kilogram
MJ/m^3
- Megajoule per cubic metre
mtoe
- Million tons of oil equivalent
MW
- Megawatt
MWh
- Megawatt-hour
No.
- Number
O[2]
- Oxygen
OD
- Oven dry (zero moisture content)
OECD
- Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
p
- Pence (100p = £ Sterling)
- Percent
- Pounds Sterling
£/GJ
- Pounds Sterling per gigajoule
- Plus or minus
rpm
- Revolutions per minute
s
- Second
T
- Tons
T/A
- Tons per annum
UNIDO
- United Nations Industrial Development Organization
USDA
- United States Department of Agriculture
US$
- United States Dollar
<section>a</section>
APPENDIX II
UNITS OF MEASURE AND CONVERSION FACTORS
Metric equivalents
Length:
1 cm = 0.3937 in
1 in = 2.540 cm
1 m = 3.281 ft
1 ft = 0.3048 m
1 m = 1.094 yd
1 yd = 0.9144 m
1 km = 0.621 mile
1 mile = 1.609 km
1 yd = 3 ft = 36 in
1 mile = 1760 yd = 5280 ft
Area:
1 cm^2 = 0.155 in^2
1 in^2 = 6.452 cm^2
1 m^2 = 10.76 ft^2
1 ft^2 = 0.0929 m^2
1 m^2 = 1.19599 yd^2
1 yd^2 = 0.83613 m^2
1 km^2 = 0.3861 mile^2
1 mile^2 = 2.59 km^2
1 ha = 0.003861 mile^2
1 mile^2 = 259 ha
1 ha = 2.471 acre
1 acre = 0.4047 ha
1 km^2 = 100 ha
1 mile^2 = 640 acres
Volume:
1 cm^3 = 0.061 in^3
1 in^3 = 16.39 cm^3
1 m^3 = 35.31 ft^3
1 ft^3 = 0.02832 m^3
1 litre = 61 in^3
1 in^3 = 0.01639 litre
1 litre = 0.2642 US gal
1 US gal = 3.785 litre
1 litre = 0.2200 Imp gal
1 Imp gal = 4.546 litre
1 litre = 1000 cm3
1 gas = 4 quarts
Mass:
1 kg = 2.205 lb
1 lb = 0.4536 kg
1 tonne = 1.102 US ton
1 US ton = 0.9072 tonne
1 tonne = 0.9842 Imp ton
1 Imp ton = 1.016 tonne
1 tonne = 19.684 cwt
1 cwt = 0.0508 tonne
Pressure:
1 kg/m^2 = 0.2048 lb/ft^2
1 lb/ft^2 = 4.882 kg/m^2
1 gm/cm^2 = 0.0142 lb/in^2
1 lb/in^2 = 70.31 gm/cm^2
1 atmos = 1.033 kg/cm^2
Density:
1 kg/m^3 = 0.06243 lb/ft^3
1 lb/ft^3 = 16.02 kg/m^3
Source: (39)
Forest products measures
Product and unit
Solid volume
(m3)
(ft3)
(Standard)
(board feet)
(Petrograd)
Roundwood:
1 Hoppus ft^3
1 ton of 50 hoppus ft^3
1 cunit
1 cord ^1^/
1 stere ^1^/
1 fathom ^1^/
Sawnwood:
m^3
Standard (Petrograd)
ft^3
1000 board feet (1000 super feet)
Ton of 50 ft^3
Plywood:
1 Tonne
1000 m^2 (1 mm thick)
1000 ft^2 (1/8 in thick)
(m^3)
(ft^3)
(Tonne)
(1000 lbs)
Particleboard:
m^3
1000 m^2 (1 mm thick)
1000 ft^2 (1/8 in thick)
^1^/ Stacked volume
Source: (39)
Energy conversion factors
Energy, work, heat:
1 J = 0.239 cal
1 cal = 4.187 J
1 J = 0.738 ft lb f
1 kcal = 3.968 Btu
1 J = 107 ergs
1 Btu = 1.055 kJ
1 kJ = 0.948 Btu
1 Btu = 0.293 Wh
1 MJ = 0.0095 therm
1 therm = 105 Btu
1 MJ = 0.3725 hp hour
1 therm = 105.5 MJ
1 MJ = 0.278 kWh
1 therm = 29.31 kWh
1 kWh = 3.60 MJ
1 ft lb f = 1.356 J
1 kWh = 0.0559 hp day
1 hp hour = 2545 Btu
1 kWh = 3413 Btu
1 hp hour = 2.685 MJ
1 kWh = 860 kcal
1 hp day = 17.88 kWh
Power, heat flow rate:
1 W = 0.86 kcal/h
1 Btu/h = 0.293 W
1 W = 44.25 ft lb f/min
1 kcal/h = 1.163 W
1 kW = 3412 Btu/h
1 hp = 0.746 kW
1 kW = 1.341 hp
1 hp = 42.42 Btu/min
1 kW = 56.87 Btu/min
1 hp = 33000 ft lb f/min
Calorific value, heat content:
1 MJ/kg = 238.8 kcal/kg
1 Btu/lb = 0.5556 cal/gm
1 MJ/kg = 430 Btu/lb
1 Btu/lb = 2.326 kJ/kg
1 MJ/m^3 = 26.84 Btu/ft^3
1 Btu/ft^3 = 37.26 kJ/m^3
1 cal/gm = 4.187 kJ/kg
1 Btu/Imp gal = 232.1 kJ/m^3
1 Kcal/kg = 1.80 Btu/lb
1 Btu/US gal = 278.7 kJ/m^3
Heat flux:
1 W/m^2 = 0.317 Btu/ft^2h
1 Btu/ft^2h = 3.155 W/m^2
1 kW/m^2 = 860 kcal/m^2h
1 Btu/ft^2h = 2.713 kcal/m^2h
1 kcal/m^2h = 1.163 W/m^2
Heat transfer coefficient:
1 W/m^2 °C = 0.176 Btu/ft^2h °F
1 Btu/ft^2h °F = 5.678 W/m^2 °C
1 W/m^2 °C = 0.86 kcal/m^2h °C
1 kcal/m^2h °C = 1.163 W/m^2 °C
Thermal conductivity:
1 W/m °C = 0.578 Btu/ft h °F
1 Btu/ft^2h °F = 1.73 W/m °C
1 W/m °C = 6.93 Btu in/ft^2h °F
1 Btu in/ft^2h °F = 0.144 W/m °C
Specific heat capacity:
1 kJ/kg °C = 0.239 Btu/lb °F
1 Btu/lb °F = 4.187 kJ/kg °C
1 kJ/m^3 °C = 0.0149 Btu/ft^3 °F
1 Btu/ft^3 °F = 67.07 kJ/m^3 °C
Source: (78)
Temperature:
°C = 1.8 °C + 32
Three units of energy are currently in use in industry, the therm, joule and kilowatt hour. Throughout this document the SI unit of energy, the joule, has been used and due to its being a comparatively small unit of measure, large quantities are expressed as multiples by the addition of a prefix:
K kilo (x 10^3)
M mega (x 10^6)
G giga (x 10^9)
T tera (x 10^12)
P peta (x 10^15)
e.g. MG = megajoule = J x 10^6, GJ - gigajoule J x 10^9.
Conversion factors used to obtain a common unit of energy
Btu
Joule
Kilowatt hour
Therm
(J)
(kWh)
Btu
1.055x103
0.2931x10^-3
10x10^-6
Joule
0.948x10^-3
0.2778x10^-6
9.48x10^-9
Kilowatt hour
3.412x10^3
3.6x10^6
34.12x10^-3
Therm
100x10^3
105.5x10^6
Moisture content:
Moisture content may be expressed in two ways, either on a dry weight basis or green weight (wet) basis.
The dry weight basis is preferred in the forestry and mechanical forest products industry:
whereas the wet basis is favoured in the pulp and paper industry and by those using wood as a fuel, as the water content may be related directly to its heat value.
<section>b</section>
APPENDIX III
COMPARISON OF ENERGY COSTS
Table 1. Comparison of energy costs ^1^/ (July 1985)
Energy form
Unit of supply
Average price per unit of supply
Gross calorific value per unit of supply
Average price
(pence/kWh)
(£/GJ)
Electricity
Direct
kWh
3.75p
3.6 MJ
Off-peak
kWh
1.82p
3.6 MJ
Natural gas
Therm
33.60p
105.5 MJ
Fuel oil
35 secs Scheduled
Litre
27.50p
38.1 MJ
Typical
19.00p
200 secs Scheduled
Litre
21.31p
40.4 MJ
Typical
18.00p
950 secs Scheduled
Litre
19.39p
40.6 MJ
Typical
16.00p
3500 secs Scheduled
Litre
18.53p
41.1 MJ
Typical
15.00p
Propane
Tonne
256.10p
50.0 GJ
Butane
Tonne
247.10p
49.3 GJ
Coal ^2^/
Singles
Tonne
63.20p
28.4 GJ
Smalls
Tonne
58.20p
28.1 GJ
Industrial coke
Tonne
95.80p
27.9 GJ
^1^/ Data is representative of energy supplied to industrial users in Great Britain in excess of 10 000 GJ per year
^2^/ Coal prices vary with calorific value. Those quoted are applicable for singles and smalls delivered in the Birmingham area
Source: (73)
Table 2. Comparison of energy costs ^1^/ (April 1986)
Energy form
Unit of supply
Average price per unit of supply
Gross calorific value per unit of supply
Average price
(pence/kWh)
(£/GJ)
Electricity
Direct
kWh
3.74p
3.6 MJ
Off-peak
kWh
1.80p
3.6 MJ
Natural gas
Therm
34.20p
105.5 MJ
Fuel oil
35 secs Scheduled
Litre
19.33p
38.1 MJ
Typical
12.90p
200 secs Scheduled
Litre
16.46p
40.4 MJ
Typical
11.80p
950 secs Scheduled
Litre
14.39p
40.6 MJ
Typical
9.30p
3500 secs Scheduled
Litre
13.38p
41.1 MJ
Typical
8.50p
Propane
Tonne
240.00p
50.0 GJ
Butane
Tonne
210.00p
49.3 GJ
Coal ^2^/
Singles
Tonne
66.60p
28.4 GJ
Smalls
Tonne
61.60p
28.1 GJ
Industrial coke
Tonne
95.80p
27.9 GJ
^1^/ Data is representative of energy supplied to industrial users in Great Britain consuming in excess of 10 000 GJ per year
^2^/ Coal prices vary with calorific value. Those quoted are applicable for singles and smalls - delivered in the Birmingham area
Source: (73)
<section>c</section>
APPENDIX IV
COMPARISON OF ENERGY VALUES
Table 1. Comparative heating values of various commercial fuels
Fuel ^1^/
Unit
Gross calorific value
Anthracite
MJ/kg
Hard coal
MJ/kg
Lignite
MJ/kg
Coal briguettes
MJ/kg
Coke
MJ/kg
Heavy fuel oil
MJ/kg
Middle fuel oil
MJ/kg
Light fuel oil
MJ/kg
Gas oil (diesel fuel)
MJ/kg
Kerosine
MJ/kg
Butane
MJ/kg
Propane
MJ/kg
Natural gas
MJ/m^3
Coke-oven gas
MJ/m^3
Producer gas
MJ/m^3
Wood
MJ/kg
^1^/ Moisture free
Sources: (73) (78) (101)
Table 2. Approximate heating values of wood and various wood residues
Fuel
Moisture content ^1^/
Gross calorific values ^2^/
(MJ/kg)
Heating values at typical moisture levels
Green wood
Green sawdust
Seasoned wood (air-dried)
Dry planer shavings
Dry sawdust
Wood pellets
Comparative heating values (Bone dry basis)
Range:
Dry wood (non-resinous)
Dry bark (non-resinous)
Dry wood (resinous)
Dry bark (resinous)
Dry wood (average)
Stemwood
Bark
Branches
Needles
^1^/ Wet basis
^2^/ Dependent on species
Sources: (17) (22)
<section>d</section>
APPENDIX V
ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN SAWMILLING, PLYWOOD AND PARTICLEBOARD MANUFACTURE
Table 1. Approximate proportional energy consumption in sawmilling
Process energy
Proportion of requirement
Electrical
Total Energy ^1^/
Air drying
Kiln drying
Electrical
Sorting and barking
Sawing
Chipping
Materials handling
Planing
Kiln fans
Miscellaneous
Thermal
Kiln drying
Unit energy consumption
44 kWh/m^3
70.7 kWh/m^3
1.70 GJ/m^3
TOTAL
1.96 GJ/m^3
^1^/ Applicable to kiln drying and not air drying
Sources: (100) (97) (52) (54)
N.B. Based on a standard well operated hardwood sawmill of 100 m^3/day capacity
Table 2. Approximate proportional energy consumption in the manufacture of plywood
Process energy
Proportion of electrical requirement
Proportion of total energy requirement
Unit consumption
Electrical
Sorting & barking
Peeling
Reeling & clipping
Drying
Jointing & splicing
Edge-gluing
Pressing
Trimming
Sanding
Materials handling
Miscellaneous
230 kWh/m^3
Thermal
Conditioning
0.95 GJ/m^3
Drying
3.88 GJ/m^3
Pressing
0.72 GJ/m^3
Sub-total
5.55 GJ/m^3
Total
6.38 GJ/m^3
Sources: (100) (102) (23)
N.B. Based on a standard well operated plant of 100 m^3/day capacity, producing 5 mm thick panels from hardwood
Table 3. Approximate proportional energy consumption in the manufacture of particleboard
Process energy
Proportion of electrical requirement
Proportion of total energy requirement
Unit consumption
Electrical
Particle reduction
Screening
Drying
Gluing
Forming
Pressing
Finishing
Materials handling
Miscellaneous
180 kWh/m^3
Thermal
Particle drying
2.21 GJ/m^3
Hot pressing
0.74 GJ/m^3
Sub-total
2.95 GJ/m^3
Total
3.60 GJ/m^3
Sources: (47)(102)(51)(89)
N.B. Based on a standard well operated plant of 100 m3/day capacity, producing 19 mm particleboard of 650 kg/m^3 from hardwood
<section>e</section>
APPENDIX VI
GENERATION OF WOOD RESIDUES
Table 1. Approximate proportion of residues generated in sawmilling
Proportion of solid log volume ^4^/
Log input
Bark
Net log input
Wood residues:
Slabs, edging and trimmings
Sawdust
Sub-total wood residues
Shrinkage (air drying)
Air dried lumber
Shrinkage (kiln drying)
Wood residues:
Sawdust and trim ends
Planer shavings
Sub-total wood residues 8% ^4^/
Finished kiln dried lumber
^1^/ Dependent on species
^2^/ Residues for particleboard furnish and/or fuel
^3^/ Yields in developing countries tend to be lower
^4^/ Excluding storage losses
Sources: (41) (47) (100)
Table 2. Approximate proportion of residues generated in the manufacture of plywood
Proportion of solid log volume
Log input
Bark
Net log input
Wood residues:
Log trim ^4^/
Peeler core ^2^/
Green veneer waste ^4^/
Dry veneer waste ^4^/
Trimmings ^4^/
Sanding dust ^4^/
Rejected plywood ^4^/
Total wood residues
Shrinkage
Pressing loss
Finished product
^1^/ Approximately 60% recoverable as fuel
^2^/ To sawmill or chipped for particleboard furnish or for pulp manufacture and/or fuel
^3^/ Higher on small diameter peeler logs
^4^/ Potential use as particleboard furnish and/or fuel
Sources: (21) (47) (57)
Table 3. Approximate proportion of residues generated in the manufacture of particleboard
Proportion of furnish volume
Wood waste and log input
Recycled trim waste
Total green furnish input
Shrinkage
Dry furnish
Screening fines ^1^/
Furnish prior to blending
7% solid resin added
Blended furnish
Pressing losses
Pressed board
Trim waste (recycled)
Trimmed board
Sanding dust ^1^/
Finished product
^1^/ Potential use as fuel
^2^/ Represents 90% (38) of furnish input excluding recycled trim
Sources: (38) (47)
<section>f</section>
REFERENCES
1. AROLA, R.A. 1976. Wood Fuels - How do they stack up? Energy and the Wood Products Industry. Madison, Wisconsin, Forest Products Research Society.
2. BABCOCK POWER Ltd. London, UK.
3. BABCOCK & WILCOX. 1978. Steam - Its Generation and Use. New York, USA.
4. BACHRICH, J.L. 1976. Dry Kiln Design and Woodwaste Recovery. Modern Sawmill Techniques. Vol. 6. San Francisco, USA, Miller Freeman Publications.
5. BALDWIN, R.F. 1981. Plywood Manufacturing Practices. San Francisco, USA.
6. BAUMEISTER, T. & MARKS, L.S. 1967. Eds. Standard Handbook for Mechanical Engineers. New York, USA, McGraw-Hill.
7. BLACKWELL, B. & MacCALLUM, C. Hog Fuel Drying Concepts. (Paper based on a report prepared by Sandwell & Co. Ltd. under the sponsorship of the Enfor programme of the Canadian Forestry Service.)
8. BRAUNSTEIN, H.M. et. al. 1981. Biomass Energy Systems & the Environment. New York, USA, Pergaman Press.
9. BRITISH COMPRESSED AIR SOCIETY. 1979. Guide to the Selection and Installation of Compressed Air Services. London, UK.
10. BRUBAKER III, W. & PRATT, W.E. 1975. Wood Residuals Useful for Generation of Steam. Modern Sawmill Techniques. Vol. 5. San Francisco, USA, Miller Freeman Publications.
11. BRUNNER, R. 1983. Modern Technology Aids Efficient Timber Drying. Asian Timber. November.
12. COMBUSTION ENGINEERING INC. 1951. Combustion Engineering. New York, USA.
13. COMP AIR INDUSTRIAL LTD. High Wycombe, UK.
14. COMSTOCK, G.L. 1976. Energy Requirements for Drying of Wood Products. Wood Residue as an Energy Source. Madison, Wisconsin, Forest Products Research Society.
15. CORDER, S.E. 1980. Potential for Energy Recovery for Lumber Dry Kilns. Forest Products Journal. August.
16. CORDER, S.E. 1975. Ed. Wood & Bark Residues for Energy. (Conference Proceedings 31 May 1974.) Oregon State University.
17. CORDER, S.E. 1976. Fuel Characteristics of Wood and Bark and Factors Affecting Heat Recovery. Wood Residue as an Energy Source. Madison, Wisconsin, Forest Products Research Society.
18. COXE, E.F. & AYLOR, R.L. 1980. Processing Systems for Wood Fuel. Energy Generation and Cogeneration from Wood. Madison, Wisconsin, Forest Products Research Society.
19. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY. 1980. Compressed Air & Energy Use. London, UK, HMSO.
20. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY. Economic and Statistics Department. London, UK.
21. DEPARTMENTS OF INDUSTRY AND ENERGY. H.M. Government, London, UK.
22. DOBIE, J. & WRIGHT, D.M. 1979. Metric Conversion Factors for Forest Products. Vancouver, B.C., Forintek Canada Corp.
23. DOFFINE - CONSULT GmbH. 1977. Plywood Plant Case Study (prepared for the FAO portfolio of small-scale wood-based panel plants.) Krefeld.
24. DRYDEN, I.G.C. 1975. Ed. The Efficient Use of Energy. Guildford, UK, IPC Science and Technology Press.
25. EKONO OY. 1980. Power and Heat Plants. (Study prepared for the FAO portfolio of small-scale forest industries for developing countries.) Helsinki, Finland.
26. ESPING, B. 1982. Energy Saving in Timber Drying. (Paper presented at seminar on Energy Conservation and Self-Sufficiency in the Sawmilling Industry. Bonn, United Nations Economic Commission for Europe.)
27. EVANS, G.G. 1972. Ed. Lubrication in Practice. Basingstoke, UK, Macmillan-Esso.
28. EWING, A.J. 1985. Energy Efficiency in the Pulp and Paper Industry with Emphasis on Developing Countries. Washington, D.C., USA, World Bank.
29. FAO. 1982. Appropriate Technology in Forestry. Forestry Paper No. 31. Rome, Italy.
30. FAO. 1958. Fibreboard and Particleboard. Rome, Italy.
31. FAO. 1963. Plywood and other Wood-Based Panels. Vol. 4. (Technical papers submitted to an international consultation.). Rome, Italy.
32. FAO. 1966. Plywood and other Wood-Based Panels. (Report on an international consultation.) Rome, Italy.
33. FAO. 1976. Proceedings of the World Consultation on Wood-Based Panels. New Delhi, India. Brussels, Miller Freeman Publications.
34. FAO. 1981. Small and Medium Sawmills in Developing Countries. Forestry Paper No.. 28. Rome, Italy.
35. FAO. 1982. Trends and Policies in Europe Relating to the Use of Wood for Energy. (Secretariat notes, based on national reports presented to the European Forestry Commission.) Innsbruck.
36. FAO. 1977. Wood-Based Panel Products. (Report of the FAO Committee, 5th Session.) Rome, Italy.
37. FAO. 1976. Wood Chips Production, Handling and Transport. Rome, Italy.
38. FAO. 1983. Wood Resources and their Use as Raw Materials. (Sectorial Study.) Vienna, UNIDO.
39. FAO. 1068 & 1980. Yearbook of Forest Products. Rome, Italy.
40. GARDINER ENGINEERING SERVICES, LTD. Vancouver, B.C., Canada.
41. GOODALL, P.M. 1980. Ed. The Efficient Use of Steam. Guildford, UK, IPC Science and Technology Press.
42. HALL, G.S. 1978. Energy Conservation in the Kiln Drying Industry of the United Kingdom. (Paper prepared for the seminar on Energy Aspects of the Forest Industries in Udine, Italy, November 1978. United Nations Economic Commission for Europe.)
43. HALLEWALL, H.A. 1975. Mill Layout for Maximum Efficiency. Sawmill Techniques for South East Asia. San Francisco, USA, Miller Freeman Publications.
44. HANSOM, O.P. 1982. The Comparison of Heat and Vent and Heat Pump Methods of Timber Drying. (Paper presented to the seminar on Energy Conservation and Self-Sufficiency in the Sawmilling Industry, Bonn. United Nations Economic Commission for Europe.)
45. HAWKINS, J.W. 1985. Industrial Insulation. TAPPI Journal. January.
46. HAYGREEN, J.G. & BOWYER, J.L. 1982. Forest Products and Wood Science. Iowa, Iowa State University Press.
47. HEILBORN, G.P. 1978. Energy Considerations in Connection with Setting up an Integrated Timber Complex. (Paper prepared for the seminar on Energy Aspects for the Forest Industries in Udine, Italy, November 1978. United Nations Economic Commission for Europe.)
48. HER MAJESTY'S STATIONARY OFFICE. The Efficient Use of Fuel. London, UK.
49. HOFF, E.B. 1976. Handling of Forest Product Fuels. Energy and the Wood Products Industry. Madison, Wisconsin, Forest Products Research Society.
50. INTERNATIONAL ENERGY AGENCY. 1985. Energy Balance of OECD Countries, 1982/83, Paris, France, OECD.
51. JAAKKO POYRY & CO. 1984. London, UK.
52. JAAKKO POYRY CONSULTING OY. 1980. Integration of a Thermomechanical Pulp Mill, Sawmill and Plywood Mill. (Prepared for the FAO portfolio of small-scale wood-based panel plants.) Helsinki, Finland.
53. KECH, P. 1976. Material Balances and Energy Required for Manufacture of Ten Wood Commodities. Energy and the Wood Products Industry. Madison, Wisconsin, Forest Products Research Society.
54. KOCKUMS INDUSTRI AB. 1982. Sawmill Plant. (Prepared for the FAO portfolio of small-scale wood-based panel plants.) Soderhamn, Sweden.
55. LENGEL, D.E. 1976. How to Reduce Energy Requirements in New and Old Installations. Wood Residue as an Energy Source. Madison, Wisconsin, Forest Products Research Society.
56. LEVELTON, B.H. & ASSOCIATION Ltd. 1975. Combustion Technology for the Disposal and utilization of Wood Residue. (Prepared for Environment Canada, Report EPS 3-AP-75-4.)
57. LEVELTON, B.H. & ASSOCIATION Ltd. 1981. An Evaluation of Wood Waste Energy Conversion Systems. (Prepared for Environment Canada, ENFOR project C-222.)
58. LEVELTON, B.H. & ASSOCIATION Ltd. 1982. A Review of the Options Available to the Forest Industry for Producing Electricity from Wood Residues. (Prepared for Environment Canada, ENFOR project C185.)
59. LEVELTON, B.H. 1980. Sawmill & Small-Scale Combustion Systems. Energy Generation and Cogeneration from Wood. Madison, Wisconsin, Forest Products Research Society.
60. LIGHTNER, C.R. 1975. Using Green Wood Waste to Generate Steam. Modern Sawmill Techniques. Vol. 4. San Francisco, USA, Mill Freeman Publications.
61. LIN, F. 1981. Economic Desirability of Using Wood as a Fuel for Steam Production. Forest Products Journal. Vol. 31., No. 1.
62. LUNSTRUM, S.J. 1972. Circular Sawmills and their Efficient Operation. Atlanta, Georgia, USDA, Forest Service.
63. MACDONALD, R.G. 1969. Ed. Pulp and Paper Manufacture. Vol. 1. New York, USA, McGraw-Hill Book Co.
64. MALMQUIST, L. 1978. Lumber Kiln Design and Technology for Energy Savings (Paper prepared for the seminar on Energy Aspects of the Forest Industries in Udine, Italy, November 1978. united Nations Economic Commission for Europe.)
65. MALONEY, T.M. 1977. Modern Particleboard and Dry-Process Fibreboard Manufacturing. San Francisco, Miller Freeman Publications.
66. MOSLEMI, A.A. 1974. Particleboard. Edwardsville, Southern Illinois University Press.
67. MATTSON, J.E. & NILSSON, P.O. 1981. Eds. (Proceedings of the Joint IEA/IUFRO Forestry Energy Workshop. Sweden, 2 October 1980. Garpenberg, Sweden, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences.)
68. McCOMBE, B.M. & GOTTSTEIN, J.W. 1961. The Control of Peeling Quality on Veneer Lathes. Plywood Technical Notes No. 6. Melbourne, Australia. Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization.
69. McCONNELL, C.T. 1976. Direct Fired Applications Using Dry Wood Residue. Energy and the Wood Products Industry. Madison, Wisconsin, Forest Products Research Society.
70. MOLDOW Ltd. Warwick, U.K.
71. MONTAGUE, D.E. 1971. Band and Circular Sawmills for Softwood. London, UK, HMSO.
72. MOSWAIN, G.A. 1977. Technical Developments in the Wood-Based Panel Products Industry. Wood-Based Panel Products. (Reports of the FAO Committee. 5th Session.) Rome, Italy.
73 NATIONAL INDUSTRIAL FUEL EFFICIENCY SERVICE Ltd. Altrincham, Cheshire, U.K.
74. NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION. 1976. The Feasibility of Utilizing Forest Residues for Energy & Chemicals. Washington, D.C., USA.
76. NEILD, P. 1975. Fueling Dry Kilns with Planer Shavings. Modern Sawmill Techniques. Vol. 4. San Francisco, Miller Freeman Publications.
76. NIEMINEN, J. 1978. Rotary Dryer Upgrades Bark Fuel Value. Pulp & Paper International. July.
77. NIVEN, C.J.T. 1978. Kiln Drying South East Asian Hardwoods. Sawmill Techniques for South East Asia. Vol. 4. San Francisco, USA, Miller Freeman Publications.
78. PAYNE, G.A. 1980. The Energy Managers' Handbook. Guildford, Surrey, UK, Westbury House.
79. PERRY, R.H. & CHILTON, C.H. 1973. Eds. Chemical Engineers Handbook. New York, USA, McGraw-Hill.
80. PHILIPS ELECTRONICS & ASSOCIATION Ind. Ltd. 1982. Energy Effective Lighting Manual. Croydon, UK.
81 PINGREY, D.W. 1976. Forest Products Energy Overview. Energy and the Wood Products Industry. Madison, Wisconsin, Forest Products Research Society.
82. PINGREY, D.W. & WAGGONER, N.E. 1979. Cost Effectiveness and Incentives for Cogeneration. Hardware for Energy Generation in the Forest Products Industry. Madison, Wisconsin, Forest Products Research Society.
83. PORTER, S.M. & ROBINSON, R.W. 1976. Waste Fuel Preparation System. Energy and the Wood Products Industry. Madison, Wisconsin, Forest Products Research Society.
84. PRATT, G.H. 1974. Timber Drying Manual. London, UK, Department of the Environment, HMSO.
85. RYDIN, O. 1978. Utilization of Bark and other Wood Wastes as Fuel. (Paper prepared for the seminar on Energy Aspects for the Forest Industries in Udine, Italy, November 1978. United Nations Economic Commission for Europe).
86. SANDBLOM, L.U. 1978. Experiences from Governmental Support for Energy Conservation Prospects in Industry, especially in the Forest Industry. (Paper presented at the seminar on Energy Aspects of the Forest Industries in Udine, Italy. United Nations Economic Commission for Europe.)
87. SANDWELL & CO. Ltd. 1968. Design Manual. Vancouver, B.C.
88. SHADE, R.A. 1976. Energy Conservation in the Forest Products Industry. Energy and the Wood Products Industry. Madison, Wisconsin, Forest Products Research Society.
89. SIEMPELKAMP, G. GmbH & Co. 1977. A Comparative Feasibility Study of Three Small-Scale Wood-Based Panel Mills. (Prepared for the FAO portfolio of small-scale wood-based panel plants. Krefeld.)
90. SIMPSON, D.L. 1975. Economics and Use of Wood Residues as Fuel. Modern Sawmill Techniques. vol. 4. San Francisco, Miller Freeman Publications.
91. SKAAR, C. 1977. Energy Requirements for Drying Lumber. Practical Application of Solar Energy to Wood Processing. Madison, Wisconsin, Forest Products Research Society.
92. SPIRAX SARCO Ltd. 1968. Compressed Air. Cheltenham, UK.
93. SPIRAX SARCO Ltd. 1981. Steam and Condensate Services. Cheltenham, UK.
94. STEPHENS, L.G. 1975. Constructing a mill to maximize running time. Modern Sawmill Techniques. Vol. 4. San Francisco, Miller Freeman Publications.
95. STUART EVANS, R. 1978. Energy Substitution Opportunities in the Canadian Forest Industry. (Paper presented at the seminar on Energy Aspects of the Forest Industries in Udine, Italy. United Nations Economic Commission for Europe.)
96. SULLIVAN, P. 1977. Direct-Fired wood Waste Combustion Systems. Modern Plywood Techniques. San Francisco, Miller Freeman Publications.
97. SWEDISH NATIONAL REPORT. 1982. Energy Usage in the Wood Products Industry. (Paper presented at the seminar on Energy Conservation and Self-Sufficiency in the Sawmilling Industry in Bonn. United Nations Economic Commission for Europe.)
98. THOMPSON, S.P. 1976. Fuel Preparation Systems using a Rotary Dryer. Wood Residue as an Energy Source. Madison, Wisconsin, Forest Products Research Society.
99. TURNER, D. & WETMORE, S.A. 1975. Considerations in Choosing a Lumber Sorting System. Modern Sawmill Techniques. Vol. 5. San Francisco, Miller Freeman Publications.
100. UNITED NATIONS ECONOMIC COMMISSION FOR EUROPE. 1982. Energy Conservation and Self-Sufficiency in the Sawmilling Industry. (Papers presented at the seminar in Bonn.)
101. UNITED NATIONS ECONOMIC COMMISSION FOR EUROPE. 1978. Energy Consumption in the Forest Industries of the ECE Region. (Paper presented at the seminar on Energy Aspects of the Forest Industries in Udine, Italy.)
102. UNIDO. 1983. First World-Wide Study of the Wood and Wood Processing Industries. Vienna.
103. USDA - FOREST SERVICE. 1976. The Feasibility of Utilizing Forest Residues for Energy and Chemicals. (A report to the National Science Foundation and Federal Energy Administration.) Washington, D.C., USA.
104. WALSH, J.L. et al. 1981. Wood Fuel Drying. Atlanta, Georgia, Georgia Institute of Technology.
105. WALSH, J.L. et al. 1981. Wood Fuel Storage. Atlanta, Georgia, Georgia Institute of Technology.
106. WESTPHAL, J.L. 1977. Board Plant Trends towards Self-Sustained Dryer Energy through Utilization of In-Process Sources. Proceedings of 8th Particleboard Symposium. Washington State University, USA.
107. WEYER, J. 1976. Direct Combustion Systems. Wood Residue as an Energy Source. Madison, Wisconsin, Forest Products Research Society.
108. WHITE, M.S. 1977. Solar Drying of Hogged Wood and Bark Fuels. Practical Application of Solar Energy and Wood Processing. Madison, Wisconsin, Forest Products Research Society.
109. WILLISTON, E.M. 1976. Lumber Manufacturing: The Design and Operation of Sawmills and Planer Mills. San Francisco, Miller Freeman Publications.
110. WOODFIN, R.O. Jr. 1973. Wood Losses in Plywood Production - Four Species. Forest Products Journal. 23(9): 98.
111. WORLD BANK. 1980. Energy in the Developing Countries. Washington, D.C., USA.
112. ZERBE, J.I., AROLA, R.A. & ROWELL, R.M. 1978. Opportunities for Greater Self-Sufficiency in Energy Requirements for the Forest Products Industry. Energy and Environmental Concerns in the Forest Products Industry. American Institute of Chemical Engineers 177. Vol. 74.
FAO TECHNICAL PAPERS
FAO FORESTRY PAPERS:
1. Forest utilization contracts on public land, 1977 (E* F* S*)
2. Planning of forest roads and harvesting systems. 1977 (E* F* S*)
3. World list of forestry schools, 1977 (E/F/S*)
3. Rev. 1 - World list of forestry schools, 1981 (E/F/S*)
3. Rev. 2 - World list of forestry schools, 1986 (E/F/S*)
4. World pulp and paper demand, supply and trade
Vol. 1, 1977 (E* F* S*)
Vol. 2, 1978 (E* F* S*)
5. The marketing of tropical wood in South America, 1978 (E S*)
6. National parks planning, 1978 (E* F* S***)
7 Forestry for local community development 1978 (E* F* S*)
8. Establishment techniques for forest plantations, 1978 (Ar*** C* E** F* S*)
9. Wood chips, 1978 (C* E* S*)
10. Assessment of logging costs from forest inventories in the tropics, 1978
1. Principles and methodology (E* F* S*)
2. Data collection and calculations (E* F* S*)
11. Savanna afforestation in Africa, 1978 (E* F*)
12. China: forestry support for agriculture, 1978 (E*)
13. Forest products prices, 1979 (E/F/S*)
14. Mountain forest roads and harvesting, 1979 (E*)
14. Rev. 1 - Logging and transport in steep terrain, 1985 (E*)
15. AGRIS forestry wood catalogue of information and documentation services, 1979 (E/F/S*)
16. China: integrated wood processing industries, 1979 (E* F* S***)
17. Economic analysis of forestry projects, 1979 (E* F* S*)
17. Sup. 1 - Economic analysis of forestry projects: case studies. 1979 (E* S*)
17. Sup. 2 - Economic analysis of forestry projects: readings, 1980 (E*)
18. Forest products prices 1960-1978, 1980 (E/F/S*)
19. Pulping and paper-making properties of fast-growing plantation wood species
Vol. 1. 1980 (E*)
Vol. 2. 1980 (E*)
20/1. Forest tree improvement, 1985 (E* F* S*)
20/2. A guide to forest seed handling, 1985 (E*)
21. Impact on soils of fast-growing species in lowland humid tropics. 1980 (E* F*)
22/1. Forest volume estimation and yield prediction, 1980
Vol. 1 - Volume estimation (E* F* S*)
22/2. Forest volume estimation and yield prediction, 1980
Vol. 2 - Yield prediction (E* F* S*)
23. Forest products prices 1961-1980, 1981 (E/F/S*)
24. Cable logging systems, 1981 (E*)
25. Public forestry administration in Latin America, 1981 (E*)
26. Forestry and rural development, 1981 (E* F* S*)
27. Manual of forest inventory, 1981 (E* F*)
28. Small and medium sawmills in developing countries, 1981 (E* S*)
29. World forest products, demand and supply 1990 and 2000. 1982 (E* F* S*)
30. Tropical forest resources, 1982 (E/F/S*)
31. Appropriate technology in forestry, 1982 (E*)
32. Classification and definitions of forest products, 1982 (Ar/E/F/S*)
33. Logging of mountain forests, 1982 (E*)
34. Fruit-bearing forest trees, 1982 (E* F* S*)
35. Forestry in China, 1982 (E*)
36. Basic technology in forest operations, 1982 (E* F* S*)
37. Conservation and development of tropical forest resources. 1982 (E* F* S*)
38. Forest products prices 1962-1981, 1982 (E/F/S*)
39. Frame saw manual, 1982 (E*)
40. Circular saw manual, 1983 (E*)
41. Simple technologies for charcoal making, 1983 (E* F* S*)
42. Fuelwood supplies in the developing countries, 1983 (Ar* E* F* S*)
43. Forest revenue systems in developing countries, 1983 (E*)
44/1. Food and fruit-bearing forest species, 1983 (E* F*)
44/2. Food and fruit-bearing forest species, 1984 (E* F* S*)
44/3. Food and fruit-bearing forest species, 1986 (E*)
45. Establishing pulp and paper mills, 1983 (E*)
46. Forest products prices 1963-1982, 1983 (E/F/S*)
47. Technical forestry education - design and implementation, 1984 (E*)
48. Land evaluation for forestry, 1984 (E* S*)
49. Wood extraction with oxen and agricultural tractors, 1986 (E* F* S*)
50. Changes in shifting cultivation in Africa, 1984 (E* F*)
50/1. Changes in shifting cultivation in Africa - seven case-studies, 1985 (E*)
51/1. Studies on the volume and yield or tropical forests stands
1. Dry forest formations (Ar*F*)
52/1. Cost estimating in sawmilling industries: guidelines, 1984 (E*)
52/2. Field manual on cost estimation in sawmilling industries, 1985 (E*)
53. Intensive multiple-use forest management in Kerala (India). 1984 (E*)
54. Planificación del desarrollo forestal, 1985 (S*)
55. Intensive multiple-use forest management in the tropics, 1985 (E* F* S*)
56. Breeding poplars for disease resistance, 1985 (E*)
57. Coconut wood, 1985 (E S*)
58. Sawdoctoring manual, 1985 (E*)
59. The ecological effects of eucalyptus, 1985 (E* F* S*)
60. Monitoring and evaluation of participatory forestry projects 1985 (E*)
61. Forest products prices 1965-1984, 1985 (E/F/S*)
62. World list of institutions engaged in forestry and forest products research, 1985 (E/F/S*)
63. Industrial charcoal making, 1985 (E*)
64. Tree growing by rural people, 1985 (E*)
65. Forest legislation in selected African countries, 1986 (E* F*)
66. Forestry extension organization, 1986 (E*)
67. Some medicinal forest plants of Africa and Latin America, 1986 (E*)
68. Appropriate forest industries, 1986 (E*)
69. Management of forest industries, 1986 (E*)
70. Wildland fire management terminology, 1985 (E/F/S*)
71. World compendium of forestry and forest products research institutions, 1986 (E/F/S*)
72. Wood gas as engine fuel, 1986 (E*)
73. Forest products: world outlook projections, 1986 (E*)
74. Guidelines for forestry information processing, 1986 (E*)
75. An operational guide to the monitoring and evaluation of social forestry in India, 1986 (E*)
76. Wood preservation manual, 1986 (E*)
77. Databook on endangered tree and shrub species and provenances, 1986 (E*)
78. Appropriate wood harvesting in plantation forests, 1987 (E*)
79. Small-scale forest-based processing enterprises, 1987 (E*)
80. Forestry extension methods, 1987 (E*)
81. Guidelines for forest policy formulation, 1987 (E*)
82. Forest products prices 1967-1986, 1988 (E/F/S*)
83. Trade in forest products: a study of the barriers faced b the developing countries, 1988, (E*)
84. Forest products: world outlook projections (Products and country tables), 1988 (E/F/S*)
85. Forestry extension curricula, 1988 (E*)
86. Forestry policies in Europe, 1988 (E*)
87. Small-scale harvesting operations of wood and non-wood forest products involving rural people, 1988 (E*)
88. Management of tropical moist forests in Africa, 1989 (E*)
89. Review of forest management systems of tropical Asia, 1989 (E*)
90. Forestry and food security, 1989 (E*)
91. Design manual on basic wood harvesting technology, 1989 (E*)
92. Forestry policies in Europe, 1989 (E*)
93. Energy conservation in the mechanical forest industries, 1990 (E*)
Availability: February 1990
Ar - Arabic
C - Chinese
E - English
F - French
S - Spanish
* Available
**Out of print
*** In preparation
The FAO Technical Papers can be purchased locally through the authorized FAO Sales Agents or directly from Distribution and Sales Section, FAO, Via delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
M-30/T0269E/1/1.90/1500
ISBN 92-5-102912-1
