<title>The briquetting of agricultural wastes for fuel</title>
<section>1</section>
Introduction
The realisation that deforestation and woodfuel shortages are likely to become pressing problems in many countries has turned attention to other types of biomass fuel. Agricultural residues are, in principle, one of the most important of these. They arise in large volumes and in the rural areas which are often subject to some of the worst pressures of wood shortage.
However, residues are often bulky and difficult to burn so various conversion techniques have been developed. One of the oldest of these is briquetting which has been used in Europe since the 19th century to make fuel from low-grade peat and brown coals.
The use of briquetting for conversion of agricultural residues is comparatively recent, however, and has only been taken up in developing countries in the last ten years.
The experience of briquetting agricultural residues has been mixed. Various technical problems have been encountered but the main difficulty has been the fact that, in many places, briquettes are too high in cost to compete with existing woodfuel. However, in some countries, a briquetting industry has begun to develop and find its market niche.
The world-wide experience of briquetting plants is not well-known, either in success or failure. In 1987, the Swedish International Development Agency (SIDA) financed a study of briquetting on a case study basis as well as to review technology and general economics. This report is the result of that study.
The general conclusions presented here are that briquetting plants require some particular circumstances to be successful. There have been more failures than successes throughout the world because of over-optimism about the economic competitiveness of briquetting.
However, in the right circumstances, briquetting plants can make a useful contribution to fuel supply and can be commercially successful. We hope that this report will help to guide people interested in the utilisation of agricultural residues towards the right choices of technology and location and to improve the chances of successful briquetting. We give a list of acknowledgements of people who have helped with the project in Appendix I. We would like to emphasise here the thanks due to SIDA for providing the financial support necessary for the work.
<section>2</section>
Part 1.An overview of briquetting
Chapter 1.Main issues
Chapter 2.The residue base
Chapter 3.The markets for briquettes
Chapter 4.Technical aspects of briquetting
Chapter 5.Economics of briquetting
Chapter 1.Main issues
In this part we want to address the main issues of briquetting without going into detail of later chapters. These issues are conveniently contained under four broad headings:
o the residue base
o the market for briquettes
o the technology of briquetting
o its economics.
A discussion of technology and associated matters, such as operational and capital costs and the characteristics of the briquettes made by various techniques, sometimes dominates a study of briquetting. Yet in looking at the overall picture such a concentration may be misleading
Briquetting can be regarded as an attempt to link up two large and complex worlds: that of agriculture and that of fuel supply and use. Briquetting will never have the impact of a major new fuel such as oil, which can change entire patterns of consumer behaviour in the energy world, nor will it ever become the equivalent of an important new crop in agriculture. This means that the technology of briquetting must fit in with the existing agricultural context rather than the other way round.
This is a problem faced by many attempts to utilise natural resources in a way which is less wasteful. It is often convenient to divide human needs into neat compartments and then to provide for these needs in separate ways. But the price of convenience is often waste. It is usually necessary to examine the issues involved from a number of angles, not just technological, if ways to provide sustainable resource use are to be found.
First, we look at the residue base from which briquetting draws its raw material and consider the general circumstances in which briquetting might become established drawing upon particular types of residue. Then we look at the fuel markets in which briquettes might be used and how the nature of those markets effects the briquetting process.
It is often convenient to divide human needs into neat compartments and then to provide for these needs in separate ways. But the price of convenience is often waste.
We then summarise the technology in terms of its technical features and its costs. Finally, we try to make some generalizations about the total cost of briquettes in different circurnstances and how these costs compare with alternative fuels. In Parts 2 and 4, the technology and its economics are considered in much greater detail Here we are concerned to place the technology into a wider context to give some idea as to what role briquetting might play in fuel supply in developing countries.
Chapter 2.The residue base
Biomass densification means the use of some form of mechanical pressure to reduce the volume of vegetable matter and its conversion to a solid form which is easier to handle and store than the original material. There are a number of different densification techniques, which will be discussed in some detail later on; for convenience, they will all be called "briquetting" although, as will be discussed, they may produce final products which are very different.
The briquetting of agro-residues is one of a number of ways which have been developed to solve a problem: how to put the huge volume of wastes from agriculture and agro-processing to some useful purpose. (This presupposes, of course, that disposal of agro-residues is a problem. In fact, in many places, no such problem exists and residues are already absorbed in the local economy in a useful way). We are concerned with only one aspect of briquetting: its use for fuel production. Other applications of briquetting include the production of animal feed and, in general, any reduction of material volume to reduce transport of handling costs.
In aggregate, the numbers look very attractive. There is certainly a huge volume of residues which are associated with agriculture and with wood processing and, probably, most of these are not fully utilised. One of the major world crops, rice, has about 25% of the crop in the form of husk which amounts to about 100 million tonnes of residue. On a smaller scale, world production of groundnuts is about 10 million tonnes of which about 45% is shell. In general although there are crops with both higher and lower residue yields, it is reasonable to assume that about 25% of any dry agricultural feedstock is a residue.
In general , although there are crops with both higher and lower residue yields,it is reasonable to assume that about 25% of any dry agricultural feedstok is a residue.
Barnard and Kristoferson (Barnard&Kristoferson, 1985) have surveyed the whole field of agro-residues and whilst wide variations exist between crops, they show that commonly between 1 and 2 tonnes of residue will arise from every tonne of cereal crops. Other crops produce residue ratios which are both higher and lower.
The actual volume of residues which arise in any place will depend upon the cropping patterns and yields in use. There are such big variations in these that any generalization is impossible. However, even in the most under-developed agricultural area, it is possible to produce aggregate numbers which are impressive. In Figure 1, we reproduce a calculation of Barnard and Kristoferson which shows the per capita residue production from cereal crops alone in various countries.
Table 1: Agricultural Residues in the Sudan (1978/79)
The residues concerned will have an average heat content of 12-20 GJ/tonne. This means that even in the least productive countries and including only cereal crops, it is possible, in theory, to envisage household fuel needs being satisfied very largely from residues in some form or other. As residues in rural areas arise close to the communities, the existence of such a resource-base has aroused hopes that a fuller use of agroresidues could provide a partial solution to fuelwood shortages and increasing fuel costs.
In Table 1, an estimate made for the fuel value of residues in one country, the Sudan, is shown. It can be seen from this that, in principle, the utilisation of residues could have an appreciable impact in a country which is suffering badly from fuelwood shortages.
The potential for utilisation of woodwastes is also, in principle, very great though there are no good data on the general arisings of such wastes. However, one survey has suggested that in 1979, worldwide, "about 250 million tonnes of sawdust, close to 200 million tonnes of bar and over 400 million tonnes of other wood residues were produced" (TDRI, 1983). The report also notes that about 60% of this material arose in developing countries and, whereas in the USA up to 80% of this waste was utilised, in developing countries large quantities remained unused. This comment might well be applied to other residues derived from agriculture as there are a number of factors which make the utilisation of residues easier in industrial countries. These include the presence of large combustors which can handle difficult fuels, and a greater access to investment capital and technical know-how. Additionally, fuel costs are higher in many industrial countries than in many developing
countries so there may be greater immediate incentives towards conservation.
Although these numbers are interesting in setting a general perspective, they have to be immediately and heavily qualified for any practical assessment of the likely importance of any technology based upon residues. The issue is that agro-residues (hereafter wood-wastes are included in this general term) arise as a small part of a very complex economic and social process - the growing, marketing and consumption of crops. This process is, in most parts of the world, the key underpinning to almost all activities and it has a dynamic which is likely to be particular not just to a country but to the regions within a country or even to the immediate area of a community.
Agriculture is changing in most parts of the world and the disposition of residues is likely to be incidental to the main dynamics of such change. Any method of utilising residues has to follow the trends within agriculture; it cannot hope to influence them in any significant way. New crops or varieties of crops; new processing methods at new locations; new markets and routes to market; all these things are likely to alter more or less significantly the volume and location of residues. However, in making the decision to use any new procedure, the effect on residues will be considered, if at all, as a very secondary matter The reason for this is simple: the economic value of the crop is always much greater than any possible value placed upon the residue.
However attractive a residue-conversion technology may seem in terms of its efficiency or cost-effectiveness in producing fuel, it must conform to the existing local dynamics of agriculture or it will not be adopted.
Figure 1: Per Capita Cereal Residue Production (tonnes/year)
However attractive a residue
o conversion technology may seem in terms of its efficiency or cost:
o effectiveness in producing fuel, must conform to the local dynamics of agriculture or it will not be adopted.
It is likely that many of the trends at work in agriculture in developing countries, for better or worse in the overall sphere, will act to make the introduction of new techniques for residue use more attractive. Amongst these are the greater centralisation of processing to serve urban or export markets and the use of chemical fertilisers to raise yields and decrease dependence upon organic fertilisers, themselves very often based upon residues. However, this may be offset by other changes; for example the use of high-yielding varieties with a lower ratio of residue to crop or changes in landholding away from large farms to smaller units. In all situations, the introduction of any new technology has to fit in with these trends.
An example of such a change which has occurred in most Asian countries is the shift towards mechanised rice-milling. This occurs in a number of stages away from hand-milling in the household and towards centralised large mills. In the process of centralization, the residue ricehusk becomes a waste product which cannot be utilised in the immediate environs of the mill as, once, rice-husk could be used around a rural household. Thus in India, where central rice-milling is common, rice-husk exists as a waste product in large volumes whereas in Bangladesh, where smallscale milling remains normal, rice-husk is largely utilised by households. Such patterns of change are repeated, though in different ways, for most crops. The applicability of briquetting will depend very much on the particular form of agricultural practice in the region of interest. Huge volumes of residue can be swallowed up in some forms of agriculture and never be available for reprocessing.
It is sometimes assumed that residues are wastes and therefore "free" almost by definition. In practice, it is unwise to assume that any residue is "free" in the sense that it has no alternative use of some value. This is most obvious in the case of fully commercial briquetting plants based upon processing residues or wood-wastes. It is difficult to find examples of operating briquetting plants which do not have to pay something for the residues they use. Such payments may arise because there are competing uses for the "waste" but it may also arise simply because a residue provider is unwilling to allow someone else to make a profit from their wastes without asking for a share in the form of payment for the raw material.
Some plants operate using their own internally-generated wastes, particularly wood-wastes. These residues may seem "free" particularly if there are costs associated with waste disposal. However, in a country with a developed briquette industry, such as is beginning in Brazil, an alternative use may be the sale of the waste outside the plant to independent briquettors. Thus inevitably in a monetised economy, everything which has a use acquires a monetary value.
Even when this is not true, the wastes may, in practice, have various uses in the local community despite being given no monetary value. Such situations are likely to be well understood within the community even when they are not so apparent to the outside observer. Attempts to utilise the residue without offering any compensation are unlikely to be successful. Even when compensation is made, it may be that payment is made to someone other than the person to whom the original benefit so the result may be social disruption of some kind.
In general, it is probably unwise to assume that any "waster has no alternative use without careful investigation.
The broadest classification that can be made of residues is into field residues and processing residues, that is residues which remain in the fields after harvesting and those which arise during some further processing of the crop.
Field residues
In order to analyse the conditions under which briquetting of field residues may be applicable it is convenient to start with the volume of residues produced per unit area of cultivation. Barnard and Kristoferson show the data of Fig 2 which summarises the residue production of six common crops in terms of high, medium and low yields.
It can be seen from this that, whilst highyielding maize can give as much as 11 t/hectare annually, a more likely yield in most developing countries would be 25 t/ha with rice being the highest yielder. Other crops could be added to this list, some with rather higher rates of residue production. For example, cotton grown in Nicaragua is reported to produce 4-20 tonnes/ha annually with a mean of 8 tonnes (Svenningsson 1985), though this is high in comparison with figures quoted for the Sudan of 2.1-3.6 t/ha (Biomass Technology Croup 1987). However, the broad figure of 2-5 t/ha seems acceptable for a general analysis.
Only a fraction of this would be practically recoverable though under conditions of highly mechanised harvesting with associated straw baling, the fraction could be close to one. However, mechanised baling is likely to be uncommon in developing countries and a more realistic recoverable fraction might be closer to 50%. In any practical evaluation of a field-residue briquetting plant, the likely recovery rate would be a critical factor.
The recovery rate would be lowered by alternative uses for the residue particularly informal, though important, uses by local people. These could include animal feed and bedding, direct use as fuel and various building applications in thatch or mudbricks. In addition, the ploughing in or burning of residues may play a part in promoting soil fertility. Field residues seldom have significant commercial applications; that is why they are left behind. However, these informal uses may be of great significance locally.
Soil Fertility
It is unlikely that briquetting would deny local people access to residues. The very nature of field residues makes them difficult to secure against systematic informal gathering. A more likely consequence is that where a number of other uses existed for the residues, the practical recovery rates would be low compared with theoretical yields. The impact on soil fertility, particularly trace elements, if the residues are usually burned in the fields, might be more significant and, in this situation, deleterious effects might not be immediately noticed.
It is unlikely that briquetting would: deny local people access to field residues. Their very nature makes them difficult to secure against systematic informal gathering.
The issue of soil fertility and the recycling of residues is not well understood. There seems to be little nutritional value in the direct restoration of uncomposted residues to the soil. However, they may play a part in maintaining the quality of the soil by keeping up its organic content. It is also possible that the burning of residues in the fields plays an important role in supplying trace elements. Certainly there is no generalisation which can be made; the importance of any one of these factors will depend critically upon specific local circumstances. The difficulty is that, in any specific situation, there is likely to be very little local knowledge about what impact a sudden change in residue recycling patterns would have on the soil. In principle, monitoring of agricultural yields after the change should indicate whether any adverse effects have resulted. In practice, such monitoring would be complex and expensive whilst changes could easily be hidden in the normal
fluctuations of agriculture.
Land Needs
Briquetting machines have size ranges upwards from 0.1 t/h of input material. (Nominal size ratings are usually for woodwaste; a plant using straw would be substantially aerated over such figures.) If it is assumed that the smallest machine which would be commercially sustainable on its own would be 0.5 t/h then, at a recovered residue value of 1.5 t/ha, such a plant, working 6 months in the year, would require about 600 ha of land to supply its residue.
Figure 2: Residue Yields of Major Crops (tonnes/hectare)
The technical needs of a briquetting machine are best suited to a continuous homogeneous feed though not necessarily one based upon a single residue. The problem of maintaining a standard mix of different residues might be large however and a plant would probably be best served by a single type of residue input. This means that the plant assumed above would need over 600 ha growing a single crop, most of whose residues could be devoted to briquetting.
This area of land would comprise a very large farm unit in most parts of the world apart from those devoted to cattle rearing. This means that to be feasible, a field residue plant would usually have to draw upon several farms and be confident that their cropping patterns would not switch so as to leave the plant without adequate residue supply. This means, in turn, that local agriculture should be extensively based upon a single crop. Such conditions would be met in the rice-growing areas of Asia and maize areas of Africa but might be less easy to meet elsewhere.
Field residues are bulky; baled wheat straw has been put at 90 kg/m³ (World Bank 1986) and stacked cotton residues at 55 kg/m³. Even when chipped, cotton residues only have a bulk density of 130 kg/m³ (Svenningsson 1985). By contrast, stacked wood has a bulk density above 500 kg/m³. This means that the transport of residues to a briquetting plant can become increasingly expensive as the distance from the site of the residues to the plant increases.
A survey of straw-briquetting plants in Germany (KTBL 1983) contains costs which suggest that as the distance from field to plant increases from 1 km to 10 km, the cost of the briquettes increases by between 16-22 DM/t (10-14 US$/t). Field collection and baling costs are also high: 29 DM/t for collection in a 0.5 ha field though this could drop to 11 DM/t in a big 10 ha field making use of large baling machinery.
These German costs are likely to be rather higher than would be incurred in a developing country because of comparative labour costs. However, it is unrealistic to expect residues to be transported without mechanisation in any country and the capital costs alone of the necessary equipment can be high.
In a feasibility study for a wheat-straw plant in Ethiopia (World Bank 1986), it has been estimated that, even working under near-ideal circumstances of a large statefarm producing the 5 000 tonnes/year of residue required by the project, 6 tractors, 5 trailers and 3 balers would be required to cope with residue collection and transport. The capital cost of this equipment is put at US$107 000 . This may be an overmechanised plant for other circumstances but clearly the costs are high for any plant based upon a residue supply which is at all remote from the briquetter.
...the plant assumed above would need over 600 ha growing a single crop, most of whose residues could be devoted to briquetting.
These simple sums suggest the residue context in which briquetting could be applied; a fairly large area of monoculture in which a uniform residue arises in the fields within a distance of ready transport to a central processing point. What exactly constitutes "ready transport" will, of course, vary widely but even under the most ideal circumstances it would be necessary to transport the residues a few kilometres. (A circle with area 2 000 ha has a radius of 2.52 km and this is the ideal geometric configuration.) This means that mechanical transportation is certainly required with the consequent capital costs.
A context such as this possesses many associated advantages; notably that such a large area of monoculture is likely to use chemical fertilizers, which means that soil fertility issues may be minimal, and is less likely to have a significant part of its residues used for other, informal needs. However, it is also clear that such situations are fairly rare and remote from the conditions of mixed, subsistence agriculture which characterises the rural conditions of many countries.
There are numerous examples of this type of briquetting operation based upon maize cultivation in the USA and, rather less common, on wheat straw in Europe. Until recently examples in developing countries have been rare. However, some recent projects suggest that such plants may be developed more often in the future.
In Ethiopia, there are plans to build pilot plants based upon wheat, maize and cotton residues under just such circumstances of large state farms devoted mainly to a single crop (World Bank 1986). In the Sudan, a semi-mobile briquetting plant has been installed to utilise cotton-wastes from the huge cotton-growing areas of the Gezira (the plant is mobile as wastes cannot be removed from the fields to avoid infestation), whilst in Nicaragua, a fixed plant is fed by chipped wastes from the cotton fields (Svenningsson 1985). All these are based upon conventional piston-briquetters. A more unusual plant based upon cotton-residues, using a lower cost technology and producing charcoal briquettes for the domestic market is also under investigation in the Sudan (Biomass Technology Group 1987).
It is difficult to make any clear rules about the minimum land area required, in practice, to operate a briquetting plant. In Germany, a plant has been reported operating on as little as 45 ha though using a small machine and with high residue yields. A much more common size would be 500 ha and in developing countries with lower yields, a level of 1000 ha would seem more appropriate.
The most likely sites for briquetting plants based upon field residues would be on land growing maize or cotton in single land parcels of at least 1000 ha and, for preference, rather more. Other cereals, such as wheat, might also be attractive but would require rather larger areas. It is possible that plants based upon rice-straw could be developed but the logistics of transportation in paddy-fields plus the common occurrence of multiple cropping would probably make the plant impossible to run. There are no known examples of plants based upon rice-straw.
The most likely sites for briquetting plants based upon field residues would be on land growing maize or cotton in single land parcels of at least 1000 ha and, for preference, rather more.
This land requirement is onerous though it is not necessary that the land should be under single ownership or control. In Europe, one form in which briquetting of cereal residue has developed is the purchase of a single machine by a cooperative of farmers. However, this is in a context where cooperative ownership and operation of machinery is quite well established.
No mention has been made of the equivalent to field residues in forestry, that is the branches, tops and even leaves, left behind in forest logging operations. The reason for this omission is essentially pragmatic: no briquetting operation based upon such residues has been located and it may be therefore assumed that its economic viability is very limited.
This is not to suggest that forest-residue recovery is not undertaken; in Sweden, for example, there is a considerable business in such recovery in the form of wood chips. However, the logistics of the operation with a very high degree of mechanisation in areas remote from the consumer seems to point towards the bulk use of wood-chips in large, centralised combustion-plants. The inherent moisture of forestry residues, at around 40%, is too high for immediate briquetting and forest drying is impractical. The bulk density of wood-chips, about 300 kg/m³, is quite high so there is little potential saving in transport costs available after briquetting.
Although these conditions might not be precisely reproduced in developing countries, there does not seem any evidence yet that briquetting has any role to play in the utilisation of forestry residues. This is not true of sawmill and other wood-wastes from processing; these are considered below.
Process residues
In this category, we include all residues obtained from the processing of a crop or wood including, for example, bagasse from sugar-cane, coffee husks, groundnut shells, rice husks, coir dust, sawdust, furniture wastes, in fact a very long list indeed as nearly all crops produce some kind of residue. Virtually all of these residues appear to have been briquetted, particularly if one believes the lengthy citations contained in manufacturers' brochures. In principle, these claims may well be true as the briquetting process works quite well for a wide range of feedstocks provided they are homogeneous and contain below 15% moisture. "If you can shovel it then
If you can shovel it then you can briquette it" would be a reasonably sound motto for a briquettor. "If you can shovel it then you can briquette it" would seem to be a reasonably sound motto for a briquettor.
This means that evaluation of a plant based upon process residues is, in principle, less complex than for one based on field wastes. The main problem is to establish the quantitative availability of material from a limited number of point sources, possibly only one. This is inherently simpler than to establish the potential residue yields from shifting agricultural patterns of several outside farms. Factories do not easily shift the nature of their operations.
The scale of operation of briquetting machines is quite well suited to most processing plants in developing countries. Rice-milling in Thailand, for example, is undertaken in mechanised plants which commonly process between 25 and 500 tonnes/day. The proportion of husk in this is about 25% so between 8 and 125 tonnes/day of residue will be produced. These quantities could be absorbed by single briquetting units using either one or two larger piston machines or four or five screw presses. The former set-up is used in India, the latter has been adopted in Thailand.
Similar calculations suggest that a single briquetting unit could be adequately fed by the sawdust from a few sawmills with a combined throughput of about 100 tonnes daily. This grouping of small processing units of the same kind in a single area is quite common for most of the main crops and suggests that the feed basis for briquetting may exist in a number of countries.
The relationship between one briquetting plant and one or more small agro-processing units may well be the most favourable for the establishment of briquetting. Although larger processing units may offer a super-abundance of supply for a single machine and offer visions of large multimachine briquetting operations, such schemes do not seem, in practice, to develop. (Large multi-unit plants are planned in Brazil and Argentina but based upon a number of saw-mills rather than a single processor). The reasons for this are not clear; it is always difficult to explain a negative. However, the most likely explanation is that large plants are set up with built-in methods of waste disposal, usually in their own boilers possibly using specially designed combustion equipment.
This issue of alternative uses is the one which lies at the heart of all application of briquetting to process residues. Once the residue has been centralised then a range of applications may emerge...
This situation is most obvious with respect to sugar cane processing which is probably the biggest bulk agro-processing operation commonly found in developing countries. World production of sugarcane amounts to several hundred million tonnes mostly in developing countries. As about 25-30% of cane is residue, bagasse, this amounts to a very large volume indeed of residues, larger even than rice-husk of which there was about 50 million tonnes produced in 1984. However, very little bagasse ever emerges as a waste for it is consumed internally to generate steam and power in the sugar-mill. It has been suggested that much more efficient use could be made of this bagasse by optimising its combustion and selling power externally. However, even in the most prolific producer, Brazil, no briquetting based upon bagasse has yet emerged even though surplus bagasse amounting to tens of millions of tonnes emerges and there is an established briquetting industry, based upon other residues.
Part of the reason for this lack of interest lies in the high moisture content of bagasse, about 50%, which necessitates a separate drying stage. However, this problem has been accepted in the briquetting of sawdust and presents no technical difficulty. The major reason appears to be that the scale of bagasse production encourages the installation of special combustion systems at a few larger plants able to cope with the residue directly without any intermediate treatment. In this situation, the extra costs of briquetting can only be justified on a transport-saving basis which may not be a strong enough incentive.
This issue of alternative uses is the one which lies at the heart of all applications of briquetting to process residues. Once the residue has been centralised then a range of applications may emerge both as a fuel and in other sectors which were not apparent when the crop was processed locally either manually or in small units. In effect, the transport costs of gathering, which are the main barrier to utilization of crop residues, have been absorbed by the transport of the valuable food-component of the crop.
Direct combustion is usually the one option of most relevance in the energy field whilst other uses may include animal feed-stuffs and bedding or such, at first sight unlikely, uses as additions to cement making (rice-husk) or packing for car-doors (bagasse). In all these applications, the users will compete for the residue and the briquettor may have to pay high prices for a residue once considered "free".
At the other extreme, a briquettor tied to a particular process residue from a single plant may find itself stranded if the supply of residues fails to meet expectations as the plant itself fails to find any raw material. There are a number of plants, particularly in Africa, where changes in agricultural practice or simple miscalculation have meant that the feed-plants have simply not delivered enough residues. The small value of the briquettes relative to the total value of the crop meant that the issue of providing briquetting raw-material was irrelevant to the wider agricultural changes going on.
Some reasonably successful briquetting operations have been set up attached to a single processing unit with no alternative source of supply, but they are rare. The most prolific conditions for operation, and this applies to plants based upon field residues as well, are units based upon small-scale processing of a crop or wood which is quite widely based. The obvious examples are rice-husk and wood-processing if the latter is taken to mean small sawmills and furniture plants.
Chapter 3.The markets for briquettes
Energy markets like agriculture are complex and changing entities with many national and local peculiarities. If one has to attempt to characterise the role of briquettes in these markets it would be in terms of the answers to two key questions:
* can the particular briquette be burnt satisfactorily in the combustion appliance used by a particular consumer?
* does the price at which they are sold compete with the fuels normally used?
The form of the first question is important for it suggests an implicit answer to another question: Will consumers alter their normal combustion appliances to suit briquettes? The answer to this is almost invariably: No. The reasons for this definite answer are twofold. First, in terms of quality of combustion, briquettes do not offer any significant advantages that might persuade consumers to spend money on new appliances. They are neither very convenient nor smoke-free; in contrast to electricity or LPG, both fuels for which consumers have shown themselves ready to switch appliances. They are essentially a small variation on a basic and not particularly attractive theme of solid fuels.
Some industrial consumers may be prepared to make adjustments to their boilers and domestic consumers may shift their fuel-feeding patterns if, in both cases, they can see a financial advantage. But it is difficult to envisage - and impossible to find in practice - any situation where consumers are prepared to shift to new appliances.
There is a crucial difference to testing new appliances for a fuel which has wide existing circulation and attempting to introduce new appliances for a novel: and minor fuel.
Second, the likely size of briquette supply relative to the total fuel supply even to a particular market sector is going to be small. Even the most optimistic view could hardly suppose that briquettes will ever supply more than 5-10% of, say, the total household market in any particular region of industrial demand. At these kind of penetrations with no prospect of the proportion increasing, consumers will always be aware of the need to give themselves an alternative source of fuel. This will certainly be true in the early stages of marketing briquettes whether or not, at a later stage, some consumers would have the confidence to commit themselves wholly to briquettes. Thus briquettes have to be compatible with existing appliances if they are to have any chance of achieving initial market penetration.
Of course, it is always possible to persuade some consumers to use new appliances if they are given them as part of a testing programme and then supplied with free or subsidised fuel. Such testing is a necessary part of any appliance programme, for example, to introduce more efficient wood-stoves. However, there is a crucial difference to testing new appliances for a fuel which has wide existing circulation and attempting to introduce new appliances for a novel and minor fuel.
Briquettes must therefore be compatible with existing appliances with little or no modification if they are to have any chance of successful marketing. The range of appliances can be divided, broadly, into three:
* open or semi-open cooking stoves which use wood or charcoal in households or small commercial operations;
* enclosed stoves or furnaces, based upon wood or coal, used in industry or commerce for heating water or raising steam;
* kilns of various kinds for brick or ceramic making normally burning wood.
Appliances based on oil or gas-burning are almost invariably unsuited for briquettes.
Briquettes must therefore be compatible with existing appliances with little or no modification if they are to have any chance of successful marketing.
The household market
In the household sector there is relatively little data about the acceptability of briquettes as a wood substitute. Ordinary briquettes cannot substitute for charcoal; for this various kinds of carbonised briquette have been developed which have met with variable success. Rather few projects have ever attempted to sell ordinary briquettes direct to households and virtually all of these have met with commercial failure usually connected with problems of residue supply, machine failure or price uncompetitiveness.
The only systematic market study, which we have located (Association Bois de Feu 1985), which looked at domestic consumer response to briquettes gave quite optimistic results. Briquettes were burnt on ordinary stoves mixed with fuelwood and the specially modified stoves which were distributed were not required. Indeed it was claimed that briquettes could even acquire a cachet of modernity (though it was not reported whether this would imply acceptance of a price differential making briquettes more expensive).
This result is encouraging and does refute totally negative views about the potential use of briquettes in the household sector. But a single, limited survey cannot be used to prove universal acceptability. The Niger project failed because the supply of residues proved inadequate and briquettes could not compete in price with firewood so no extended market tests were made.
The only situation where uncarbonised briquettes appear to be sold commercially to households is in Thailand where sawdust and, to a limited extent, rice-husk briquettes are sold to refugee camps. However, this is a rather negative recommendation as sales to other types of households have proved unsuccessful and the refugee camps are forbidden to use fuelwood. The reason for the failure in other sectors is largely price-based; fuelwood remains rather cheap in Thailand. Rice-husk briquettes are also disliked because of their high ash content (over 20%), something which would probably prove an insuperable barrier for this material in normal household use.
Nevertheless, technically there does not seem to be any major problem about using briquettes in the existing appliances. Certainly no new or modified appliances have been developed though it is possible that the performance of briquettes is inferior to wood were it to be available.
There have been efforts to sell carbonised briquettes to households, mainly in India but also in Thailand and some places in Africa. The Indian efforts have not been very successful, though again this was using rice-husk as the base material. Carbonised wood-briquettes are largely indistinguishable from ordinary charcoal and are quite acceptable. Test marketing of carbonised briquettes in the Sudan is claimed to have been successful.
Laboratory tests are not a good substitute for genuine consumer use as they cannot reproduce all the complexities of practical application. But, such as they are, most tests suggest that, although the combustion characteristics of briquettes are somewhat different to wood, they are not so different as to require device modification.
The issue of household acceptability of briquettes made from materials other than rice-husk must remain open as no full commercial marketing has yet been undertaken. The preliminary results of test marketing offer reasonable grounds for optimism however.
It is probable that at least the smaller diameter briquettes, in particular the hollow examples from screw-presses, would find acceptance, possibly used with wood for initial ignition and heat-raising. It would probably be more difficult to sell
The issue of household acceptability of briquettes made from materials other than rice-husk must remain open as no full commercial marketing has yet been undertaken the bigger sizes, say about 8 cm diameter, simply because the physical dimensions of household stoves are limited. Large logs would be similarly rejected. Piston briquettes can be readily split into disks but this causes losses and may not be liked by consumers.
Industrial and commercial furnaces and kilns
In the other markets, for example, industries based on wood or coal, brick-kilns, bakeries, commercial establishments such as hotels, restaurants and other places with heavy hot-water demand, the issue is rather simpler than in households. There are many examples of briquettes being burnt in various enclosed stoves and kilns with very few problems.
The only practical difficulty found is the very high ash content of rice-husk briquettes. Whilst there does not seem any other comparable material, ash-contents of 510% are quite common and ash problems might arise with other materials.
Rice-husk briquettes have been sold fairly readily in India in industrial establishments with coal-burning boilers. However Indian coal is high-ash and so industries are prepared to cope with the problem. However, even in coal-burning boilers, most sales go to particular designs of boiler, notably step furnaces, in which the rice-ash moves out of the combustion zone. Rice-ash is almost entirely silica and it can fuse together into a clogging mass if the temperature is too high. This has been a problem in marketing rice-husk briquettes in Brazil to customers used to burning wood in their boilers.
Problems of ash-fusion could occur using lower-ash materials, though this has not been reported. In general, small wood-burning boilers may run at lower temperatures than coal units and, in wood units, most types of briquettes burn very well.
In Brazil, industrial consumers are actually prepared to pay a premium over the wood price for briquettes (these are mainly wood-based) of up to 50%. This is because briquettes are of uniform size and quality, are dry, and are purchased by weight. This last is important in Brazil, and possibly elsewhere, as wood is purchased by volume from a lorry and there are constant reports of suppliers cheating by packing the interior of the load with inferior material stacked randomly.
A recent study of a Ghanaian plant has also reported (World Bank 1987) a readiness by bakeries to pay a premium price for briquettes.
In most places, the market for briquettes in industry is large enough to absorb all the present and the likely future output of briquettes. Because of this and the ready acceptability of briquettes in industrial use, it is an obvious marketing strategy to focus on this market to the exclusion of household consumers.
In Tanzania, a project set up to produce carbonised briquettes for households has taken this line of marketing and is, in practice, selling all its output, uncarbonised, to small industry and commercial users.
There may be reasons of social policy to focus on household use, something which is reflected in various projects to produce carbonised briquettes as a charcoal substitute. There are also continuing efforts to produce low-cost briquetting machines which can operate on a small scale at the village level to produce a household wood substitute. Even in this area, it is worth noting that the only semimanual briquetting plant, known to operate on a commercial basis, sells its output to local brick-kilos. This plant operates in the east of the Sudan using semi-rotted bagasse as its raw material.
It must be acknowledged that, in virtually all situations, the industrial market has proved the easiest for briquettes to penetrate.
It must be acknowledged than, in virtually all situations, the industrial market has proved the easiest for briquettes to penetrate.
Can briquettes compete?
The second question concerning the price competitiveness of briquettes can only be adequately answered by reference to specific local conditions. In general, however, the level of current wood-fuel prices in large parts of Africa, Asia and Latin America are too low to allow briquettes much competitive room. In order to compete, briquettes often have to be sold without any capital charge component and, even then, may not cover their operational costs.
The failures of briquettes to compete with fuelwood prices is repeated from Niger to Thailand and at many places en route; it is without doubt an international conclusion. To appreciate the circumstances in which briquetting may be economic, it is useful to review, briefly, the two countries, Brazil and India, where an infant briquetting business has been established.
In India, the main residue used is rice-husk which, despite its drawback of high ash content, is very widely available and can be readily briquetted without any drying or chipping. This last point means that capital costs of the total plant can be kept down, something which is aided by local manufacture of machines.
The existing fuel at which briquettes are aimed is coal, which is often of poor quality and whose supply, particularly to smaller industries, may be irregular. It is also expensive; the price varies by region: in Delhi it may cost over 80 US$/t while fuelwood was reported to be 50-70 US$/t.
The failures of briquettes to compete with fuelwood prices is repeated from Niger to Thailand and at many places en route; it is without doubt an international conclusion.
The rice-residues are not free as, over the past few years, a number of industries in rice-producing areas have converted to direct firing of husk. This means that the rice-mills have become able to charge up to 250 Rupees/tonne (20 US$/t) though a more usual price is 100150 R/t. The direct use of rice-husk close to the mills mean that the best markets for the briquettes are often rather far from the point of production. In effect, briquettors are taking advantage of the fact that the unit transport costs of briquettes are lower than those for loose rice husk.
Briquettors in India estimated that they could break even at a factory-gate price of 550-600 R/t which implies a price of about 3040 US$/t net of the cost of rice-husk. Such prices were achievable but did not allow for any large profit.
In Brazil, although some use has been made of rice-husk, most of the briquetting plants utilise wood-wastes which require preliminary chipping and, sometimes, drying. The use of wood-waste means that the throughput of machines is quite high whilst the local plant manufacturer offers very cheap machines. These two factors lower capital costs considerably.
The residues are cheaply available, perhaps 35 US$/t, where they are not actually free as there are almost no alternative uses. Most wood-waste is dumped.
The target fuel with which briquettes compete is wood used in industry, an area of fuel use which has grown considerably in the last few years as the Brazilian government has supported a major biofuel programme. The wood supply is not of consistent quality however, in particular it may contain up to 50% moisture. There is also a good deal of cheating by wood fuel suppliers.
Wood prices are regionally variable but are still not high even in the higher price areas. In Sao Paula, wood prices of 13-16 US$/t were quoted. Briquettes are sold at 25-40 US$/t; prices which at the upper end seem to offer a reasonable profit. Briquettes can be sold at a premium over wood because of their lower moisture and consistent quality.
Three conclusions emerge from the case-studies in Brazil and India despite the big national differences.
First, it is necessary to keep capital costs down to a minimum by purchasing cheap, though obviously reliable, machines and not over-engineering the rest of the plant. Capital costs are also minimised by working the machine for at least eight months in a year even with a seasonal crop like rice. Large stocks of husk may have to be kept.
Second, it helps to have a fuel against which to compete which may be of unreliable quality and suffers from irregular delivery. ibis may enable a premium to be charged for briquettes.
Third, in order to break even, a factory gate price of 30-40 US$/t not including residue costs, is required to make a small profit even if capital costs have been minimised. Additional capital cost items, such as a dryer, and any costs associated with collection, storage and handling of residues can raise this by 50-100%.
It is this conclusion which shows why, to take a single example in Nairobi, a plant which possesses a briquetting machine has reverted to burning wood as its main fuel burning wood as its main fuel It helps to have a fuel to compete
It helps to have a fuel to compete which is of unreliable quality and suffers from irregular delivery.This may enable a premium to be charged for briquettes after considerable trials with coffee-husk briquettes. Industrial fuelwood costs under 20 US$/t, at which price it is difficult to cover the operating costs of briquettes. It is not possible to charge a premium for briquettes as wood is usually of reasonable quality. Clearly the incentives for setting up a new plant are small in such circumstances.
continue
<section>3</section>
Chapter 4.Technical aspects of briquetting
History of briquetting
The compaction of loose combustible material for fuel making purposes was a technique used by most civilisations in the past, though the methods used were no more than simple bundling, baling or drying.
Industrial methods of briquetting date back to the second part of the 19th century. In 1865, a report was made on a machine used for making fuel briquettes from peat which is a recognisable predecessor of current machines. (A drawing of this machine is reproduced in Fig. 3 by courtesy of the British Institution of Mechanical Engineers.)Since then there has been widespread use of briquettes made from brown coal, peat and coal fines. There are various processes which produce artificial smokeless fuel briquettes from coal fines.
The most common technique used in this type of process is some form of roller press using only moderate pressure and a binder. This type of plant is also used to make all kinds of non-fuel briquettes from inorganic material such as metal ores. Various binders are used; one of the most common is lignin derived from paper-pulp manufacture.
Figure 3: Drawing of 1865 Peat Piston Briquetter
The briquetting of organic materials requires significantly higher pressures as additional force is needed to overcome the natural springiness of these materials. Essentially, this involves the destruction of the cell walls through some combination of pressure and heat. The need for higher pressures means that the briquetting of organic materials is inherently more costly than for inorganic fuels.
The use of various forms of organic briquetting seems to have been common both during World War I and during the '30s depression. The modern mechanical piston briquetting machine was developed in Switzerland based upon German developments in the '30s. Briquetting of sawdust and other waste material became widespread in many countries in Europe and America during World War 11 under the impact of fuel shortages. Parallel needs pushed the Japanese into refining the screw machine discussed below. After the War briquettes were largely squeezed out of the market by cheap hydrocarbon fuels.
The use of organic fuel-briquettes, mainly in industry, was revitalised during the period of high energy prices in the '70s and early '80s, especially in Scandinavia, the USA and Canada.
In Japan, briquetting seems to have been common until recently with widespread use of "Ogalite" fuel briquettes made from sawdust. The Japanese technology has spread to Taiwan and from there to other countries such as Thailand. Japanese, and later Taiwanese, briquetting has been based almost entirely upon the use of screw presses which, although originating in the USA, have been more widely adopted by Asian than European or American manufacturers. Such briquettes were widely used in Japan during the 50s as a substitute for charcoal which was then still a widespread fuel.
Piston presses
It seems quite clear that the development of the modern type of mechanical piston press started in Switzerland during World War II though based upon work done in Germany in the '30s. The Swiss developments were centred around Fred Hausmann and the Glomera press though he was not its original inventor.
Patents and licensing rights changed hands during a period when partnerships were broken up and companies went bankrupt or were bought by others. Whatever the precise situation about original invention, Hausmann undoubtedly played an important role in making the piston-press technology well-known all over the world. In many places the name Hausmann is often equal to a mechanical piston press. Thus the Brazilian industry, certainly the largest outside North America, was begun by a company in which Hausmann was a founding partner, whilst in India one of the main manufacturers began with a licence from Hausmann.
No patents governing the general design of this type of press are effective today and most of the manufacturers of mechanical piston presses identified in this study owe their designs to the original Swiss patent. The nearest current descendant of the first piston press manufacture is, by their own claim, Pawaert-SPM.
The piston press acts in a discontinuous fashion with material being fed into a cylinder which is then compressed by a piston into a slightly-tapering die. The compressed material is heated by frictional forces as it is pushed through the die. The lignins contained in all woody-cellulose materials begin to flow and act as a natural glue to bind the compressed material. When the cylinder of material exits from the die, the lignins solidify and hold it together to form cylindrical briquettes which readily break into pieces 10-30 cm long.
The diameter of the briquette is closely related to the output of the machine. A unit producing 1 t/h of briquettes will have a die 8-10 cm in diameter. This relationship is rather inflexible and may constrain potential markets for the product of bigger machines. Small stoves may not be able to burn such large pieces.
Piston-presses can be driven either by mechanical means from a massive flywheel via a crankshaft or hydraulically. The mechanical machines are usually larger, ranging in size from 0.45 to 0.3 t/h, whilst hydraulic machines normally range up to 0.25 t/h though some models are somewhat larger.
Mechanical presses generally produce hard and dense briquettes from most materials whilst hydraulic presses, which work at lower pressures, give briquettes which are less dense and are sometimes soft and friable.
Piston presses are reliable, once they have been installed properly with dies shaped correctly for the raw materials used. Problems arise if the die has not been shaped correctly or if the feeding mechanism has not been sized for the material to be used. It is normal for machines made in Europe to be designed to operate on wood wastes; the use of agroresidues normally de-rates the throughput and may require some modification to the feeder. Such an output aerating may result in a significant increase in capital charges.
Figure 4: Typical Piston Briquetting Press
It is normal for machines made in Europe to be designed to operate on wood wasted ;the use of agro-residues normally de-rate the throughput and may require some modification to the feeder. Such an output derating may result in a significant increase in capital charges.
Maintenance costs are fairly low amounting mostly to replacing the die every few hundred hours, the precise time depending upon the material. Some feedstuffs, such as rice-husk, may be particularly abrasive on dies. It is important, however, that regular maintenance is undertaken. The heavy, discontinuous action of the piston means that small imbalances and irregularities can quickly become major defects.
Piston presses with hydraulic drives, as distinct from those using mechanical drives with flywheels, are manufactured in the relatively limited geographical region of Western Europe. It is a fairly recent development of the mechanical press for use with light materials where the quality of the product is of less concem. The forces in a hydraulic machine are less violent than in a mechanical unit and they may therefore need less attention.
Typical materials suitable for hydraulic presses are paper, cardboard, manure, etc. though the hydraulic press can in some cases become an alternative to a mechanical press. Since it is normally made with lower capacity than the mechanical press, it is suitable for taking care of waste material from small wood processing industries. Briquettes from hydraulic machines are often used onsite as they may be too soft for much transportation
Screw presses
The earliest development work on screw presses was carried out in the USA in the 30's resulting in the widespread use of the PRES-TO-LOG model which was based on the conical type of extruder currently found in the Belgian Biomat design. During World War 11, a Japanese design which featured a heated die and a prolonged tapered central shaft of the screw resulting in a hollow briquette, was being developed. It was very successful and one of the manufacturers in our study claims to have sold 600 units. The design has been taken up by other manufacturers in Asia and more recently in Europe.
In the screw-presses, material is fed continuously into a screw which forces the material into a cylindrical die; this die is often heated to raise the temperature to the point where lignin flow occurred. Pressure builds up smoothly along the screw rather than discontinuously under the impact of a piston.
Figure 5: The PRES-TO-LOG Briquetter
If the die is not heated then temperatures may not rise sufficiently to cause lignin flow and a binding material may have to be added. This can be molasses, starch or some other cheap organic material. It is also possible to briquette carbonised material in a screw-press and in this, as lignins have been destroyed, a binder has to be employed. Some low-pressure piston machines may also require the use of binders though this is unusual.
If the die is heated then the temperature is normally raised to 250-300 °C, which produces a good quality briquette from virtually all organic feeds provided the initial moisture is below about 15%. The briquettes from screw machines are often of higher quality than from piston units being harder and less likely to break along natural fracture lines.
Screw presses are usually sized in the range 75-250 kg/in though larger machines are available.
The capital costs of screw machines may be a little less than piston units though because of size differences it is difficult to make direct comparisons. However, their maintenance costs are usually much higher because of the considerable wear on the screws which have to be re-built rather frequently. They also have a higher specific energy demand than piston machines.
However, maintenance costs of screw presses are usually much higher because of the considerable wear on the screws which have to be re-built rather frequently.
Figure 6: Typical Screw Briquetting Machine
Pellet presses
These operate by extruding small-diameter (10 to 30 mm) pellets through a die which has many holes. The extruding mechanism is often an eccentric roller which moves inside the large cylindrical or conical die.
Such machines were originally developed for the production of animal feedstuffs and mineral-ore pellets. They are expensive and have high through-puts of 5-20 t/h for a single unit.
The smaller product size and high capacity of these types of presses was before the 60's utilised only in the pressing of fodder pellets and similar applications. Since then a limited number of energy applications have materialized in the USA (Woodex), Canada (Bioshell) and in Europe (Sweden, France and West Germany). There have been a few applications of pellet presses in developing countries solely for energy purposes, notably Kenya, Zimbabwe and Zambia. The latter two examples are both defunct however and it is doubtful if the high capital cost and power consumption of this process makes it a viable proposition.
Manual presses
This report concentrates on equipment suitable for industrialized production of briquettes, albeit on a small scale. We are largely omitting the numerous types of hand-driven or animaldriven fuel-forming equipment found in literature and, possibly, used in some parts of the world. Several researchers have proposed schemes for developing equipment suitable for briquetting of agricultural waste on the village level (Scarab 1983). The "green fuel" scheme in Indonesia and work in Thailand by Prof Watna Stienswat is aimed at solving the problem of finding suitable technology for small-scale (<100 kg/in) operations. They operate with wet, i.e., green, material forming, rather than densifying, the material into a briquette that is then solar dried. There has also been work on manually produced briquettes undertaken in Indonesia. (Johannes, 1982)
Another interesting development has been seen in Sri Lanka in which large briquettes are formed from coir dust in a baling press between plates of corrugated steel. Lime is mixed in with the coir dust to make the briquette suitable for handling after solar drying. The method has prospects to offer a relatively inexpensive way of producing briquettes in small as well as larger plants.
It remains unclear, however, whether any manual or semi-manual densification process can ever be commercially viable even in circumstances where labour is very cheap. When allowance is made for their very low throughput, such techniques often require almost as much capital investment as the mechanical processes. The savings achieved are essentially a labour for electricity substitution rather than labour for capital.
Two semi-manual plants making briquettes from semi-rotted bagasse are known to be operational in the Sudan (Paddon, 1987) and are quite successful commercially. Their circumstances are unusual however they are based on Ethiopian refugee labour - and it might be difficult to replicate them elsewhere. However, manual processes do have the great advantage of being able to handle wet wastes which cannot be utilized mechanical processes.
Manual presses cannot be made to generate sufficient pressure to break down cell walls and they cannot, therefore, produce densified briquettes. This means that they cannot realise any significant degree of transport cost savings.
As the application of manual presses is likely to be limited to special cases, one problem with their development is that it is difficult to justify producing specific machines for the job as the initial costs are too high. In the Sudan, manual brick-making presses have been adapted for the purpose. One drawback of this is that the initial chopping, mixing and feeding operations are very dirty and arduous; the actual briquette making part of the process is the easiest.
It remains unclear however whether any manual or semi-manual idensification process can ever be commercially viable even in circumstances where labour is very cheap.
Briquette. Characteristics
Briquetting and pelletization are justified mainly by the reduction in volume of a bulky waste material. After densification, there are two main quality aspects of the product:
* (i) that it shall remain solid until it has served its function, and
* (ii) that it shall perform well as a fuel.
The first aspect, that the product should not crumble and disintegrate when handled, stored and transported, is mainly a function of the quality of the densification process for a given raw material. The second aspect is mainly related to the properties of the raw material and the shape and density of the individual briquette. In the following we will call these factors
* (i) briquette handling characteristics and
* (ii) fuel characteristics.
The distinction is not always clear and sometimes they interfere with each other. For example, improving the handling characteristics by making a more dense briquette often has a detrimental effect on its combustion behaviour
In principle, in planning a project it is possible to begin with the various demands of transportation, handling, storage and combustion and then to choose a machine which, for a given raw material, produces a briquette which possesses just the required characteristics. In practice, this is seldom possible given that commercial machines tend to have concentrated on a rather limited range of product options. This is particularly important in developing countries as most processes have been developed with other markets than agro-residue briquetting in developing countries in mind. One such example is the hydraulic piston press. It has been developed to work in small wood working industries with waste flows smaller than about 0.1 t/h and where the briquettes are intended for combustion in in-house boilers. Thus it does not matter that the briquettes produced are rather soft. However, such briquettes are likely to be unsuitable in any circumstances where the briquettes are
transported
Mechanical piston briquetters, on the other hand, make harder briquettes but they are more sensitive to foreign particles in the material flow. A nail for example is likely to destroy the die and piston top of a mechanical piston machine while it would probably pass through a hydraulic machine unnoticed.
They also produce large briquettes which may not be suitable for the proposed combustion device.
Thus, in practice, some compromise between desired characteristics and what machines are commercially available may be necessary.
Before discussing in more detail the various characteristics of briquettes, it should be pointed out that the briquette handling characteristics are not likely to cause severe problems in a project, other than in cases where there has been a plain mismatch between material, process and purpose. Combustion properties are more critical, especially when trying to introduce briquettes in the household sector, but also when they are intended for combustion in industrial boilers.
Handling characteristics
Density
Most processes are capable of producing briquettes with densities above 1 000 kg/m³, i.e. the individual briquettes will sink in water. (This is, in fact, a good if crude test for the briquette quality.) The upper limit for the density is set by the physical density of each raw material which, for ligneous material, is about 1 500 kg/m³. The density of individual pieces is termed apparent density. High pressure processes such as mechanical piston presses, pellet presses and some screw extruders, make briquettes in the 1 200 1 400 kg/m³ density range. Hydraulic piston presses make less dense briquettes, sometimes below 1 000 kg/m³.
Briquette handling characteristics are not likely to causes severe problems in a project, other that in cases where has been a plain mismatch between material, process and purpose. Combustion properties are more critical.
There is little point in trying to make even denser briquettes because combustion properties are likely to suffer. The benefits are small because the more important property of briquettes is their bulk density, that is the overall density of many pieces piled together.
The bulk density is a function of both the density of the individual briquette and its geometry. There are differences in bulk densities between large and small briquettes and pellets, but for broad calculations a factor of two between apparent and bulk density can be used (CRA 1987). This means that for briquettes with apparent densities in the 1 200 - 1 400 kg/m³ range, the resulting bulk densities are 600 - 700 kg/m³. For comparisons, the bulk density of the raw material could be as low as 40 kg/m³ for some grades of bagasse to about 150 - 200 kg/m³ for a variety of agro-residues and wood wastes. The higher bulk density of briquettes will significantly increase the distance over which it is economic to transport a residue in order to god a market for it.
In briquetting, the resulting density is affected to a significant degree by the particle size of the raw material. Finely ground material, for example sanding dust from wood plants, will make very dense briquettes but requires high pressures and temperatures to agglomerate without a binder.
The density of the product is also affected by the moisture content. Water in the raw material will prevent the compression of the briquettes and the steam that evaporates from the material due to the high temperatures will leave voids which decreases the apparent density. If the briquettes later pick up humidity from the air, the result is a swelling of the material which also decreases the density. This process can lead to the total disintegration of the briquettes.
Friability
This factor is a measurement of the briquette's resistance to mechanical action that will affect them when handled and transported. Tests can be done either in a rotating drum or by repeatedly dropping samples from a specified height. In both methods, the samples are screened (20 mm sieve) and the fraction retained is used as an index of a briquette's friability (CRA 1987).
It is difficult to give a figure for an acceptable friability index as the relationship between test results and reality has never been studied. In the work carried out by CRA some samples received an index of 0, i.e. the briquettes had disintegrated entirely after a certain time, which clearly indicates an inadequate briquette quality.
When the briquettes score higher in tests, say between 0.5 and 1.0, such results are more difficult to interpret. They do have a function though when comparing several processes in order to find the most suitable for a given material.
General observation at a number of operating plants suggests that briquettes produced by mechanical piston-presses and screw-presses are hard enough to be transported by lorry for considerable distances without degradation. No plants using such machines complained about losses due to product disintegration. One or two plants using hydraulic presses did find that the product was too soft for transportation.
Resistance to humidity
Inherent binders (lignin) and most externally added binders are water soluble. This results in one of the weakest points in briquette quality, which is that briquettes must not be subjected to water or humid air. Briquettes and pellets have to be stored under cover and they do have a limited lifetime under humid conditions. The latter problem appears to be only minor even in tropical countries. The dense, hard-surfaced briquettes produced in mechanical piston presses and screwpresses with heated dies have enough resistance to humidity to withstand the rainy season in India, Thailand and Brazil provided they are covered.
The resistance to humidity is traditionally tested in immersion tests, i.e. the briquettes are dunked in water and the elongation or swelling of the briquettes is recorded. Sometimes the time elapsed until the briquette has completely disintegrated
One of the weakest points in briquette quality is that briquettes must not be subjected to water or humid air is taken as a measurement of the quality in this respect. This time can vary from a few minutes up to hours and again it is difficult to give an acceptable value for this parameter. In tests carried out by CRA, it has been found that the rate of elongation is a more precise parameter and they suggest that a figure of less than 50% elongation per minute indicates an acceptable quality.
In other tests, briquettes are subjected to humid air for extended periods and their swelling is recorded. After a period of 21 days in an atmosphere of 20° C and 95% humidity, an elongation of less than 30% is said to be acceptable and less than 20% would be ideal (CRA 1987).
Although resistance to humidity may not be such a crucial factor when storing briquettes, provided they are shielded from direct rain, this factor may be of importance in the combustion and, especially, gasification of briquettes.
Water vapour, driven off from inherent moisture and formed in combustion, creates a saturated climate at high temperatures which is a more fundamental test of a briquette's resistance to humidity. If the briquettes disintegrate too quickly, the loose substance will either elutriate un burned through the boiler or block the airflow to the process, depending on the circumstances. There are no good data on this though it does not usually seem to be a practical problem in combustion. It is possible however that such swelling and disintegration could be a bigger problem in the gasification of briquettes.
Combustion characteristics
Calorific value
One of the most important characteristics of a fuel is its calorific value, that is the amount of energy per kg it gives off when burned. Although briquettes, as with most solid fuels, are priced by weight or volume, market forces will eventually set the price of each fuel according to its energy content. However, the production cost of briquettes is independent of their calorific value as are the transportation and handling costs. The calorific value can thus be used to calculate the competitiveness of a processed fuel in a given market situation. There is a range of other factors, such as ease of handling, burning characteristics etc., which also influence the market value but calorific value is probably the most important factor.
Figure 8: Higher Calorific Value Diagramme
For quick reference, the calorific value of wood and most agro-residues can be calculated using the following formula which although originally derived for wood can be used for most agro-residues with little alteration:
Gross (or higher) calorific value (HCV) = 20.0 x (1 - A - M) MJ/kg where A is the ash content and M the moisture content of the actual fuel.
The lower (or net) calorific value, which takes into account unrecovered energy from the water vapour from inherent moisture and from the oxidation of the hydrogen content, is sometimes used for reference purposes, especially in industrial applications. In wood and most agroresidues, the hydrogen content is about 6% by weight on a dry and ash-free basis, which means that the above formula would be changed as follows:
Lower calorific value (LCV) = 18.7 x (1 A - M) - 2.5 x M
Example: Rice husk with a moisture content of 15% and an ash content of 20% has the following calorific values according to the above formulae:
HCV = 20.0 x (1 - 0.2 - 0.15) = 13.0 MJ/kg
LCV = 18.7 x (1 - 0.2 - 0.15) - 2.5 x 0.15 = 11.8 MJ/kg
For materials with low ash contents and moisture contents between 10% and 15%, that is most briquettes from wood and agroresidues, the resulting calorific values are found in the 17 - 18 MJ/kg range (LCV: 15.4 - 16.5 MJ/kg).
Table 2 (reprinted from Barnard, 85) gives an indication of the variations of ash content and calorific value for a number of agricultural residues. There are discrepancies in the calorific values from different sources, probably due to inaccurate testing procedures. Note that the HCV of an actual fuel has to be adjusted for moisture content using the above formula.
Table 2: Calorific Value and Ash Content of Verious Fuels. (Barnard 85)
Material Ash Content % HCV MJ/kg (oven dry) (oven dry) Material Ash Content % HCV MJ/kg
Alfalfa straw 6.0 18.4 Olive pits 3.2 21.4
Almond shell 4.8 19.4 Pigeon pea stalks 2.0 18.6
Cassava stem - 18.3 Rice straw - 15.2
Coconut shell 0.8 20.1 " 19.2 15.0
Coconut husk 6.0 18.1 Rice husks - 15.3
Cotton stalks 17.2 15.8 " 16.5 15.5
Groundnut shells - 19.7 Soybean stalks - 19.4
" 4.4 20.0 Soybean stalks - 19.4
Maize stalks 6.4 18.2 Sunflower straw - 21.0
" 3.4 16.7 Walnut shells 1.1 21.1
Maize cobs 1.5 18.9 Wheat straw - 18.9
Combustion in industrial boilers
Experience shows that industrial boilers are usually the most convenient and accessible combustion plants for briquettes. Even so, the range of plants which can utilise briquettes directly are those designed for solid fuels, that is wood or coal. Oil plants can be converted to take solid fuel but only at considerable expense. This means that briquettes can only be readily marketed in the industrial sector in those countries where either coal or wood has an existing base.
The advantages which briquettes possess over the unprocessed residue in ease of handling and transport extend through to the combustion device. This means that most residues can be combusted more efficiently when briquetted even in those cases where the plant can actually handle unprocessed residue. This gain in efficiency may be enough on its own to justify briquetting though it is difficult to obtain accurate data in many circumstances.
The most common problems encountered in burning raw residues are the difficulty of actually feeding material into the plant and that, in the combustion zone, loose residues may blow around and not burn completely. Briquettes avoid both these problems.
There are no good data available on the loss of combustion efficiency in burning raw residue. In India, it was claimed that raw rice-husk showed a 20% drop in efficiency as against rice-husk briquettes, though this was not based on rigourous measurements.
The ease of feeding briquettes is usually an advantage over raw residues. However, in some cases, the raw material can be handled pneumatically (for example, rice husk and jute dust) which although expensive may be advantageous. In practice, the extent to which an industry is prepared to invest in equipment to enable raw residues to be handled and fed into the combustion plant may determine whedher or not briquetting has a role to play.
In Brazil, for example, a number of plants have installed the equipment necessary to combust baled bagasse, which is available in large quantities. There is therefore no incentive to briquette bagasse as it has an immediate outlet.
There is only limited room to generalise about the balance between converting the residue to a convenient form and converting the combustion equipment to burn residues directly. It is probable chat the bigger the plant the more likely chat plant conversion would be economic. However, the exact economics would be very sitespecific.
General experience suggests that briquettes are a good substitute for wood, possessing a consistent quality which can enable a price premium to be obtained over wood.
There are virtually no quantitative data on the combustion characteristics of briquettes in industrial plants whether boilers or various kinds of kilns. General experience suggests that they are a good substitute for wood, possessing a consistent quality which can enable a pricepremium to be obtained over wood. This is evident in Brazil where wood is often sold in variable qualities and quantities. It is also claimed that wood-based briquettes in Ghana are sold at higher prices than wood (World Bank 1987).
It is not dear whether such a premium extends to high-ash residues such as rice-husk. It might be expected that these would have more problems in substituting for wood. However, briquettes based on residues such as coffee-husk and groundnut shells appear to be virtually interchangeable with wood.
The substitution of briquettes for coal may be more problematic though the only source for comparisons at present is India where the usual residue, rice-husk, has an unusually high ash content In this case, briquettes can be burnt satisfactorily only in a limited range of coal appliances, for example step-furnaces. In other types, for example moving grates, the rice-husk briquettes can fall between gratebars before they are completely combusted.
It is also possible that in some coal appliances there could be problems with ash-slagging but no data are known to exist about this.
Combustion in household stoves
It appears that, in practice, briquettes are usually burnt in industry` However, much of the recent interest has been in using briquettes in households in countries where wood shortages and deforestation are problems. In this section, the suitability of briquettes in household stoves is discussed, though based on some very limited data.
Reports of laboratory work carried out in Europe tends to give a rather positive picture of the behaviour of briquettes in household stoves. Tests done at TNO in the Netherlands (Krist-Spit 1985) of six different briquette types in five stoves showed that the substitution of briquettes for woodfuel or charcoal would probably not be restricted by the combustion properties of the briquettes. Some differences between briquettes were observed, however. The Thai bucket stoves performed particularly well and showed thermal efficiencies between 33% and 46%.
They found that the combustion behaviour of briquettes is comparable to wood rather than charcoal The briquettes burn with somewhat higher flames and a little more smoke than charcoal However, the test report states that briquettes from rice-husks and mimosa, if the briquette diameter is small could be competitive to charcoal.
The TNO tests clearly showed that large diameter briquettes, especially when made from raw materials with high ash contents, such as rice-husk and water hyacinth, are unsuitable for domestic cooking purposes because the heat-rate is insufficient and they are difficult to ignite. This is not necessarily a problem of briquettes as such. Large diameter wood logs, comparable to the 8-10 cm diameter briquettes from large piston-presses, are seldom burnt uncut in household stoves.
In the experiments carried out at CRA in Gembloux (CRA 1987), briquettes were subjected to combustion tests in which the elongation during combustion was measured as well as the rate of weight loss. The times during which the combustion resulted in smoke, flames and glow were observed. The overall conclusions of this work can be summarized as follows: hard, dense briquettes swell very little or not at all during combustion, they have a slow rate of weight loss (i.e. they last a long while) and they burn without flames for a longer period as welt thus resembling the performance of charcoal.
For softer briquettes, the opposite is the case, i.e. they swell quickly and by doing so they start to crack up which increases the rate of mass loss and shortens the total combustion period. Such behaviour is particularly characteristic of hydraulic-piston briquettes.
Some of the materials, especially rubber wood, gave off a lot of smoke during the combustion tests which indicates that such briquettes are probably unsuitable for cooking stoves.
This data all comes from laboratory tests which are useful for basic analysis but may not cover all the factors which make a product acceptable in practice.
There are little good data about the potential acceptance of briquettes in household stoves in practice. Some limited market studies in Niger suggest that the laboratory-based results were sound and that briquettes are acceptable to domestic consumers. Recently, in the Sudan, several thousand tonnes of groundnut-shell briquettes, made in a large piston machine, were sold to domestic customers. They were reported as being quite happy with the combustion properties even though they often had to break up the briquettes.
Both the Niger and the Sudanese experience was that piston briquettes can be used in households though possibly in combination with wood fuel. This is corroborated by some limited experience from a plant located in Kigali, Ruanda.
In Thailand, there has been considerable experience of selling screw-briquettes to households made from both rice-husk and from wood residues. The rice-husk product seems problematic because of its ash content but can be burnt whilst wood-based briquettes are quite satisfactory. The problem of acceptability lay with price not quality.
There is also some experience in the use of charcoal-briquettes made by binding charred residue with molasses. The results are contradictory, something which may be related to the different cooking situations in which the briquettes were used.
In India, great problems were found in persuading households or small tea-shops to burn molasses-bound briquettes. There were complaints about smells and about the speed of burning when compared with charcoal or coal-briquettes.
In Sudan, on the other hand, some market research carried out on molasses-bound charcoal briquettes made from cotton stalks were said to be an acceptable charcoal substitute. The high ash content of the Indian briquettes may have been an inhibiting factor but this cannot account for the smell problem.
Gasification of briquettes
The gasification process places higher quality demands on the briquettes than does combustion. The fuel bed is thicker, adding to the weight load on the briquettes at the bottom while residence times are longer, during which the briquettes are subjected to humidity at elevated temperature. In a gasification plant mounted on a vehicle, the vibrations will add additional stresses on the fuel and increase the risk of blocking the gas flow.
There are a number of important potential advantages of using briquettes instead of for example chipped wood for gasification: the briquettes are drier, increasing the efficiency of the process and increasing the calorific value of the produced gas; the bulk density is higher, increasing the residence time in the gasifier and the gas conversion rate and, finally, the size of the briquettes can be chosen to fit together with the size of the gasifier and the gasifier grate.
In tests carried out by CRA, seven gasifiers, both mobile and stationary, were operated with briquettes made from different materials. The overall results were very good, though the high silica content in the rice-husk briquettes caused sintering and blockage of the gas flow.
In general it appears that briquettes could be used to provide a consistent feedstock to most gasification systems. However, very little data based on practical experiences are available.
Chapter 5.Economics of briquetting
The costs of briquetting depend upon a number of operating costs, including labour, maintenance, power, raw material cost and transport, and various other sundry charges, as well as a capital cost component.
Almost all the cost categories discussed above depend to a more or less significant degree either on accounting conventions (this is particularly relevant for the calculation of capital charges) or on-site or country specific factors. We have analysed capital charges using the assumption of a 10% interest charge on a 10-year loan, numbers which fit broadly the kind of loans made to plants which were visited.
Operating costs were analysed on the basis of actual plant experience, design studies and manufacturers' data. However, no allowance has been made for the cost of raw materials over and above transport charges. The country studies make it clear that where briquetting has become commercially viable to a degree there is a tendency for residues to acquire a market price where previously they were free.
The cost ranges derived for a large piston machine are:
US $/t
Capital charge 9-12
Labour 3-5
Maintenance 3-8
Electricity 3-7
Raw material transport 1-4
Other at least 1
A simple addition of the least and greatest costs would suggest that a piston-machine briquetting plant would have total factory costs in the range 20-36 US$/t of product.
It would however be misleading to adopt costs in the lower part of this range except under the most favourable circumstances; these might be the use of dry wood-waste drawn from the immediate locality in a country where labour costs and power prices are low and where fairly low-cost machinery is available. A possible location meeting these criteria is Brazil; there a company planning to set up a number of large briquetting plants in the interior has suggested that total costs would be about 26 US$/t including some payment for wood-wastes. This must represent very much the bottom end of the cost range.
In other, less favourably situated countries, it is much more likely that total costs would be towards the upper part of the range. It should be emphasised that these do not include any allowance for residues being priced nor for any profit element.
It would be expected that the unit costs for screw presses would be somewhat higher than for piston machines. They do not appear to offer any significant advantages in investment costs and in some cost categories, notably maintenance and power, they are likely to be more expensive. They also appear to have higher unit labour costs though this is probably a factor relating to scale of production rather than any intrinsic feature of screw presses.
The higher intrinsic costs of the screw machines may however be offset by the fact that their small production levels, and indeed small physical size, means that they can be, literally, squeezed into low-cost situations. These would typically be a small wood-plant able to site a machine right by the waste pile in a building which needs little or no modification.
One user in Kenya who has put a small screw press into such a favourable situation (except that it utilises residue from a nearby sawmill) has assessed total in house costs at about 21 US$/t including depreciation and finance. This includes no allowance for raw material transport costs and may underestimate power and maintenance costs. If these are corrected then it is likely that true factory costs are more like 25 US$/t.
In general, therefore, it would be wise to assume that total costs for briquette production are in excess of 30 US$/t and may be above 35 US$/t if some allowance is made for the cost of raw materials. Only in the most favourable circumstances would costs drop to 25 US$/t.
These numbers are in accordance with the situations in both Brazil and India, the two developing countries where briquetting has managed to establish some kind of commercial basis. In Brazil, it seems possible to survive by selling briquettes somewhere above 30 US$/t whilst in India a marketed price in excess of 40 US$/t is required. In both cases, these prices produce bare commercial survival rather than large profits. In India, it is common to pay up to 15 US$/t for rice-husk; in Brazil, wood-wastes are usually cheaper if charged at all.
These broad cost levels refer only to plants based upon factory residues. The costs for any field-residue plant will be much higher.
The economic viability of briquetting plants depends crucially on whether or not these factory costs are comparable or less than the prices of the main competitive fuel, usually wood but sometimes coal.
It is clear that in many countries the price of fuelwood is well below these levels to an extent that effectively rules out briquettes as commercial propositions. This is often true even if it is assumed that industrial consumers are prepared to pay a premium for briquettes as they are of consistent and reliable quality. Such premiums depend very much on the reliability of the local wood supply. In Kenya, no premium appears to be obtained while in Brazil it may be as much as 40%.
There are exceptions to this. It is reported (World Bank 1986) that fuelwood prices in Addis Ababa reached 83 US$/t in 1985; even allowing for a retail markup this allows considerable scope for briquettes to undercut fuelwood. However, industrial fuelwood prices in, for example, Kenya do not exceed 20 US$/t, a level which briquettes cannot hope to reach. Similar low fuelwood prices in Thailand have effectively destroyed the local briquetting industry despite very low investment costs and good raw material availability.
It is probably true that in most countries, the current level of fuel prices is too low to justify briquetting. Nevertheless the examples of Brazil and India show that it is quite possible for fuel prices to rise to levels where briquetting is viable. Such a rise can, moreover, take place quite rapidly: the fuelwood price in Addis Ababa was reported to be only 9 US$/t in 1973. It is likely that the price of fuelwood in the Sudan has now also reached the point where briquetting is competitive.
The key policy issue in many countries with respect to briquetting must be the judgement as to the extent to which it is worth supporting briquetting activities, in spite of their immediate lack of profits, in expectation that fuel prices will rise in the future. There is no general answer possible to this. There are many countries where fuelwood prices seem set to remain relatively low for the foreseeable future. Indeed in some countries there is genuine optimism about the possibility of stabilising prices indefinitely by the development of fuelwood plantations.
However, there are also countries where it seems likely that deforestation must cause a rise in prices in the not too distant future. In such circumstances briquetting of agro-residues can have a legitimate economic role without any need for subsidy.
<section>4</section>
Part 2.Briquetting technology
Chapter 6.An overview of the densification process
Chapter 7.Mechanical piston presses
Chapter 8.Hydraulic piston presses
Chapter 9.Screw presses
Chapter 10.Pellet presses
Chapter 11.Auxiliary equipment
Chapter 6.An overview of the densification process
Densification essentially involves two parts; the compaction under pressure of loose material to reduce its volume and to agglomerate the material so that the product remains in the compressed state. The resulting solid is called a briquette if, roughly, it has a diameter greater than 30 mm. Smaller sizes are normally termed pellets though the distinction is arbitrary. The process of producing pellets is also different from the typical briquetting processes; a more detailed description will be given later in this section.
If the material is compacted with low to moderate pressure (0.2-5 MPa), then the space between particles is reduced. Increasing the pressure will, at a certain stage particular to each material, collapse the cell walls of the cellulose constituent; thus approaching the physical, or dry mass, density of the material. The pressures required to achieve such high densities are typically 100 MPa plus. This process of compaction is entirely related to the pressure exerted on the material and its physical characteristics.
The reduction of material density is the reason for undertaking briquetting as it determines both the savings in transport and handling costs and any improvement in combustion efficiency over the original material. The ultimate density of a briquette will depend to some extent on a range of factors including, most importantly, the nature of the original material and the machine used and its operating condition as well as other minor factors. However, the ultimate apparent density of a briquette from nearly all materials is to a rough approximation constant; it will normally vary between 1 200-1 400 kg/m³ for high pressure processes. Lower densities can result from densification in presses using hydraulic pistons or during the start-up period of mechanical piston presses (which can last several minutes) whilst even higher densities are sometimes achieved in pellet presses. The ultimate limit is for most materials between 1 4501 500 kg/m³. The relation between compression
pressure, briquetting process and the resulting density of the briquette is illustrated in figure 9 (Bossel, 1984).
The apparent density of briquette will be higher than its bulk or packing density as the briquettes will not pack perfectly. The usual reduction would be a factor of roughly 2 depending on the size and shape of the briquette; that is bulk densities of 600-700 kg/m³ are usual, sometimes a little less.
The bulk density of the original material may be difficult to define accurately, particularly in the case of materials like straw which are very easy to compress even manually. The lowest bulk densities are around 40 kg/m³ for loose straw and bagasse up to the highest levels of 250 kg/m³ for some wood residues. Thus gains in bulk densities of 2-10 times can be expected from densification. Since the material also will have to be dried in order to facilitate briquetting, the resulting increase in energy content per volume unit can be large compared to the raw materials.
A binding agent is necessary to prevent the compressed material from springing back and eventually returning to its original form. This agent can either be added to the process or, when compressing ligneous material, be part of the material itself in the form of lignin. Lignin, or sulphuric lignin, is a constituent in most agricultural residues. It can be defined as a thermo plastic polymer, which begins to soften at temperatures above 100°C and is flowing at higher temperatures. The softening of lignin and its subsequent cooling while the material is still under pressure, is the key factor in high pressure briquetting. It is a physico-chemical process related largely to the temperature reached in the briquetting process and the amount of lignin in the original material. The temperature in many machines is closely related to the pressure though in some, external heat is applied. There are thus two immediate ways of classifying briquetting processes:
Gains in bulk densities of 210 times can be expected when briquetting biomass.
1) High, intermediate or low pressure: this distinction is, in principle, dependent on the material used but the following rough classification may be adopted:
Figure 9: The Relation between Pressure and Density
Low pressure up to 5 MPa
Intermediate pressure 5-100 MPa
High pressure above 100 MPa
2) Whether or not an external binding agent must be added to agglomerate the compressed material. Usually high pressure processes will release sufficient lignin to agglomerate the briquette though this may not be true for all for all materials. Intermediate pressure machines may or may not require binders, depending upon the material whilst low-pressure machines invariably require binders.
A further classification is based upon the technology used to compress the biomass. This includes:
FIGURE A) Piston presses
In these, pressure is applied discontinuously by the action of a piston on material packed into a cylinder. They may have a mechanical coupling and fly wheel or utilise hydraulic action on the piston.
In these, pressure is applied continuously by passing the material through a screw with diminishing volume. There are cylindrical screws with or without external heating of the die and conical screws. Units with twin screws are also made.
In these, rollers run over a perforated surface and the material is pushed into a hole each time a roller pass over. The dies are either made out of rings or disks though other configurations are possible.
The above list is by no means comprehensive and there exist several other types of briquetting presses, especially in the low-pressure and low-capacity range.
Various types of roller-presses are also utilised to form briquettes, especially in making charcoal briquettes, from carbonized material. A binding agent must be employed in these and the process is more one of agglomeration than densification as there is only a limited reduction of volume.
FIGURE B) Screw extruders
FIGURE C) Pellet presses
FIGURE D) The roller-presses
Chapter 7.Mechanical piston presses
Main features
A reciprocating piston pushes the material into a tapered die where it is compacted and adheres against the material remaining in the die from the previous stroke. A controlled expansion and cooling of the continuous briquette is allowed in a section following the actual die. The briquette leaving this section is still relatively warm and fragile and needs a further length of cooling track before it can be broken into pieces of the desired length.
Figure 10: Piston Briquetter
In mechanical systems, the piston gets its reciprocating action by being mounted eccentrically on a crank-shaft with a flywheel. The shaft, piston rod and the guide for the rod are held in an oil-bath. The moving parts are mounted within a very sturdy frame capable of absorbing the very high forces acting during the compression stroke.
The most common drive of the flywheel is an electric motor geared down through a belt coupling. A direct-drive system using an internal-combustion or steam engine is possible and would not change the basic design of the briquetting machine.
Pressure build-up
The piston top is normally shaped with a protruding half-spherical section in order to get better adherence of the newly compressed material to that formed in the previous stroke. The most common type of briquette press features a cylindric piston and die with a diameter ranging from 40125 mm. The die tapers somewhat towards the middle and then increases again before the end. The exact form of the taper varies between machines and biomass feedstock and is a key factor in determining the functioning of the process and the resulting briquette quality.
The tapering of the dies can, in several designs, be adjusted during operation by means of narrowing a slot in the cylinder. This is achieved by either screw or hydraulic action.
One manufacturer (Krupp) uses a rectangular ram section. This allows for adjustment by narrowing the height or the width of the die.
The optimum tapering, and thus pressure, depends on the material to be compressed.
It can sometimes be enough to choose a nonadjustable die when the material is well defined and known to the operator. Changes in material composition, for example its moisture content, is a reason why it is useful to the operator to be able to adjust the compression continuously. However, in many operating plants in developing countries, machines with fixed dies are used. The main India and Brazilian manufactures produce only fixed die machines though most European suppliers have some die control. In adjustable systems, it is up to the individual machine operator to find the correct setting of the die as no automatic control systems has yet been introduced on the market. Developments are under way towards such automatic systems.
The use of proper taper for a given material feed is an important part of machine operation. It is clear that the attempt to do this on a trial and error basis rather than with the help of the manufacturer has often been a source of poor plant performance in developing countries. The closer liaison possible between user and manufacturer is a reason why domestically produced machines often show better performance than imported.
The pressure in the compression section is in the order of 110 to 140 MPa. This pressure, together with the frictional heat from the die walls, is in most cases enough to bring the material temperature up to levels where the lignin is becoming fluid and can act as a binder to produce a stable briquette. In fact, heat needs to be extracted from the process to prevent overheating. This is done by water-cooling the die.
The closer liason between user and manufacturer is a reason why domestically produced machines often show better performance than imported.
Machine capacity
The capacity of a piston press is defined by the volume of material that can be fed in front of the piston before each stroke and the number of strokes per unit of time. Capacity by weight is then dependent on the density of the material before compression. Thus although the nature of the original material does not markedly alter the physical characteristics of the briquette, it does have a major impact upon the practical output of a machine.
The feed mechanism is crucial and most manufacturers feature a proprietary design. By means of screws or other devices, they try to pre-compress the material in order to get as efficient filling as possible. This is particularly important when using materials whose bulk density is low and which need efficient feeding to achieve reasonable output. Substantial aerating of the "name plate" capacity may occur for agro-residues as most manufacturers rate their machines on a saw-dust feed, one of the denser raw materials.
The feed mechanism can, if badly mismatched with the feedstock, cause serious problems in machine operation. If undersized, voids may occur in front of the piston causing damage to the mechanism. The feeder itself may also jam if it is oversized and tries to move too much material into the piston space.
The need to have an efficient feed-mechanism suitable for a particular residue is the main reason why it is important to buy designs which have actual operating experience with that residue. Most machines can produce some briquettes of acceptable quality with virtually any residue. However the continuous production of briquettes at a reasonable capacity may not be so easy.
The design parameters of piston machines such as flywheel size and speed, crankshaft size and piston stroke length, are highly constrained by material and operating factors. In practice, the output of a machine is closely related its die diameter, as shown in Fig. 12 which contains data drawn from a large number of manufacturers specifications. Part of the variability of Fig. 12 is accounted for by the different bulk densities of the raw material assumed by manufacturers so the relationship for a standard material would be even closer.
Figure 12 shows that for estimating purposes an approximation of 18.5 kg/h/cm² can be assumed achievable during sustained operation of a mechanical piston press when the raw material is wood. With other raw materials of lower bulk density, the actual production capacity can be much less. One manufacturer offers the data shown in Table 3 for the variations between materials.
There is a shortage of data about the capacities of machines when used with different raw materials which reflects the limited experience which has been obtained outside of various wood-wastes. Table 3 shows an estimate, derived from manufacturers data, of how less dense materials have a lower capacity index relative to wood.
It is likely that consumer acceptance of briquettes is partly related to their size. A household user, for example, cooking on a open fire would be unlikely to accept a 10 cm diameter briquette any more than a 10 cm piece of wood. Briquettes can be split or broken but this may not be accepted by the consumer and, with soft briquettes, may lead to crumbling. Industrial customers may, on the other hand, be happy to accept large whole briquettes as these conform to their usual wood sizes. This means that in designing plants to receive certain residue volumes, some attention has to be paid to the intended market in deciding, for example, on the number of machines to be used.
Fig 12: Capacity versus Area of Mechanical Piston Presses
Table 3: Production Capacity Variation between Materials
Raw material Bulk density kg/m³ Capacity index Energy Index
Wood 150 100 100
Shavings 100-110 80 95
Groundnut shells 120-130 90 100
Capital investments in machinery
Most of the models represented in this study are manufactured in high-cost countries such as Switzerland, West Germany, Sweden and Denmark and are equipped for customers in these countries. This means, in plain language, that they are relatively expensive.
A range of manufacturers estimates for single machines has been obtained, though for fewer examples, and this data, shown in Figure 13 allows for a rough assumption of 1 500 US$/cm² (in 1987 prices). This, together with the capacity estimate above, results in a cost/capacity figure for preliminary estimates of 85 US$/kg/h which is consistent with the figures by other researchers (Kbinsky 1986).
Naturally there are technical differences between the models which ought to reflect the variations in costs between them. However, the 85 US$/kg/h represents the average ex-works price for a European press when applied to wood waste, with appropriate adjustment for aerating using other materials.
Prices quoted by manufacturers in developing countries, in particular, are much lower. The Brazilian manufacturer, Biomax, has a published price-list with machines costing only 3038 US$/kg/h for sizes between 450 and 2 200 kg/in. The price reduction appears to be achieved by a combination of machine simplification and lower labour costs. The main Indian manufacturer, Ameteep, also offer machines at prices lower than European manufacturers though less spectacularly than Biomax.
Figure 13: Cost of Piston Briquetters versus Die Area
The cost reduction achieved by machine simplification are not easy to define but they seem to relate, essentially, to the construction of a unit which requires rather more operator attention than European machines which are often left unattended for several hours. The die size is usually fixed, which means that there is less flexibility in feed variations. However as most plants work with a single feed it is not clear how restrictive this is in practice.
As few plants in developing countries ever need an unattended operation, it is clear that there is likely to be considerable scope for manufacturers to produce cheaper machines for this particular market. However, at the moment the small size of this market and its fragmented nature means that there is very little incentive to do this.
The cost of a basic mechanical piston press can be assumed to 85 US$/kg/h for preliminary estimates.
Maintenance and spare parts
Being robust heavily-built machines, piston presses have long technical lives and they need limited daily service. The main wear parts are the die, piston-head and tapered cylinder. The service lives given by manufacturers for these pars are in the order of 500 to 1000 hours which may be true for clean, non-abrasive materials such as newly chipped wood. Most other materials are less friendly, resulting in shorter service lives of the wear parts.
The prices given by European manufacturers for individual spare parts are given in the Table 4.
This data is not consistent since the various manufacturers have different designs in which each individual piece has different service life. The die itself is subjected to most wear and has often to be exchanged twice as often as the other parts.
Average costs estimates for maintenance offered by the manufacturers also vary widely. One source gives the following figures for cost par annum as a percentage of original investment:
Table 4: Costs of Spare Parts for Piston Machines
Diameter of the die (mm)
Part US$
Die 130 217 190 525
Cylinder 230 250 500 1 315
Piston 120 105 550 985
Sawdust: 2%
Groundnut shells: 3%
Straw: 5%
Another manufacturer offers the estimate of 3.3 US$/ton product for wood-waste. When briquetting groundnut shells the wear part costs increases to 5.3. $/ton and with waste paper it can go up to 7.9 US$/ton.
Field data of maintenance costs in the case of piston presses have been reported by Overseas Development Natural Resources Institute (ODORI 19887). These confirm the general anticipation that, when operating with an abrasive raw material such as rice husks, the wear of the die piston becomes a severe problem. The service life is reduced to about 70 hours and even if reboring and build-up welding is possible, spare parts will have to be bought several times a year. This became problematic in one of the Indian projects, using a European manufactured press, due to the high prices of the spares and foreign exchange problems plus costs for shipping and import duties.
In the case of locally manufactured machines and spare parts. these problems are not as severe. The price for a 90 mm replacement die is reported to be 2 0003 000 rupees (160-240 US$) which is broadly the same prices reported by European manufacturers but can be paid in local currency and is easily available. One Indian plant has resorted to making its own replacement dies at a local engineering plant following problems with obtaining spare parts. This suggests that the technical problems are not large though the plant owner in this case is a qualified engineer.
An Indian project operating with a mixture of coffee husks and groundnut shells is reported to change die 3 times a year which is equivalent to a service life in the order of 1 300 hours, though intermediate reboring of the die takes place every 200 hours. The resulting maintenance costs (ODNRI 87) are 88 rupees per ton (7 US$/t) for rice husks and 31 R/ton (2.5 US$/t) for the mixture of coffee husks and groundnut shells.
Both manufactures data and operational experience suggest therefore that maintenance costs are likely to be in the range of 3-8 US$/tonne of product with the higher values referring to more abrasive residues such as rice-husks.
Energy costs
Energy costs in briquetting are made up of three separate effects: the losses in the machine moving parts (which are effectively negligible in this context), the frictional losses between the material particles when compressed and the frictional losses between the material and the walls of the press.
The frictional losses between the material particles are essentially constant for a given ultimate density and material and, given that most briquettes have much the same density, is probably roughly constant for all briquettes. Material differences will occur but should not be large.
The major variable element is undoubtedly friction between the briquette-material and the machine and here the larger the diameter the less will be the unit energy losses as the surface areas increase by a lower factor than the die volume.
The standard piston-press is equipped with an electric 3-phase motor which drives the flywheel via a V-belt (sometimes a flat belt). Motor capacity is designed with a safety margin for the promised output. Manufacturers claim that actual power consumption is 60-80% of the installed power of the main drive. To this figure should be added the power consumption of the feeder which for most models lies in a 10-20% range of the main drive motor .Thus for calculations one can assume that the main drive and feeder motor consume power equivalent to the rating of the main motor. This power rate is plotted against the die-area in Figure 14 for a standard woodresidue feed.
This shows a wider spread of data than in the case of capacity vs area (Fig 12) which is not surprising since the manufacturers obviously have the choice of installing as much power as they feel necessary to give an adequate safety margin. It is still possible to derive a curve-fit that could be used for preliminary studies. We suggest the following estimates which are valid for wood-waste"
P(kW) =4*(A)^2/3
where A is the diameter in cm²
This corresponds to:
P(kW) =0.58*(Q)^2/3
Q is capacity in kg/in
When the rate of production (or the diameter) is known it is possible, using this relation, to calculate the energy consumption per ton of output. For example, it takes 58 kWh to produce 1 ton in a 1 000 kg/in machine whilst at 500 kg/in output the same quantity demands 73 kWh. There is thus an overall saving in moving to higher throughputs and to larger briquettes. These formulas are not verified in laboratory tests and should not be used for designing briquetting plants. They can however serve in economic feasibility calculations and when checking if a given data is of the right order of magnitude.
Figure 14: Power Requirements of Mechanical Piston Presses
The variations in energy requirements between different materials can be quite large. One manufacturer gives the estimates presented in Table 5.
Differences in material moisture content can cause even higher variations in energy requirements than those between materials. The drier the material, the higher is the friction loss. This factor limits the lower end of the moisture content range acceptable in presses. With dry materials it can be necessary to condition the material with water or steam prior to the densification, though this is more often seen in pelleting operations.
A complete and fully automated plant will contain a number of electric-motors for disintegrating the raw material and product handling and transportation. The energy demand for these drives will have to be evaluated from case to case. In many overseas plants the handling will be done by hand although there may still be needs for material treatment such as chipping.
Raw material quality demands
The mechanical piston press was developed and has found most widespread use for the briquetting of dry woodwaste. A typical user is a European sawmill or joinery feeding shavings, planings, sawdust or bark to be briquetted either for internal use in solid-fuel boiler or for sale to nearby customers.
Because of the high pressure build-up, the piston press can only density dry material. If it is moist, the steam generated during the compression, will at best crack the surface of the briquette when the pressure is released after the cooling cylinder. At worst a sudden increase of the moisture content of the feed can cause a steam explosion within the cylinder which will expel the briquette violently and damage the machine. An accident in Turkey where the whole machine had to be replaced due to the briquetting of excessively wet material has been reported. (ODNRI 1987)
The moisture limit in most cases is 15% though some material with up to 20% can be densified in a piston press. The ideal operating region in respect of moisture content is 8-12%. With drier material the friction and thus energy demand increases and the lower limit is about 5%.
Table 5: Variations in Energy Needs for Different Materials
Material Capacity kg/h Energy need kW Product density kg/m³
Model A 
Wood 600 32 1200
Groundnut 
shells 500 17 1100
Straw 500 25 1000
Model B 
Wood 1500 45 1200
Groundnuts 1500 40 1100
These moisture limitations means that before briquetting wet material, it has to be dried. The capital cost of a drier can often double the plant investment required as well as increasing the operating costs.
Another quality aspect is the size of the raw material. Ideally the material should contain both long and short fibres with the maximum particle size depending on material and diameter of the die. Larger machines can accommodate large particle sizes in the range of 8-10 mm with allowance of up to 15 mm for a die diameter of 125 mm.
As has already been discussed, different materials result in fairly large variations in capacity, energy consumption and maintenance costs. In terms of briquette quality however, most ligno-cellulose material within the above moisture and fraction limits can be briquetted with acceptable results in a mechanical piston press. It is the most versatile process available and its use is largely limited by the investment costs.
The main quality problem with piston briquettes is that the material is built up in the form of thin disks corresponding to the volume of residue compacted in each piston stroke. These disks form the natural line of cleavage across the briquette and, if the material does not adhere adequately, the briquette can break up into these smaller disks.
The mechanical piston press can only densify material only densify material with less than 15 % moisture consent.
This is not necessarily a disadvantage. Indeed it may be the best way for large diameter briquettes to be broken up into pieces suitable for household use. This is also the practice in industrial application in Sweden, where the broken briquettes are better suited for automated transportation equipment.
However, if the briquettes are too soft, such splitting can be the first stage of complete disintegration.
Materials known to have been used as raw material in commercial or demonstration projects with mechanical piston presses are listed in Table 6.
Table 6: Materials Used in Mechanical Piston Presses
Bagasse Groundnut shells Straw Cotton stalks
Cotton waste Cacao shells Tobacco waste Pineapple waste
Maize waste Rice husks Wood waste Sawdust and shavings
Bark Peat Olive bagasse Skins of grapes
Metal Waste Sunflower pits Cork Waste Brown coal
Hemp waste Coal dust Pencil waste Lignin
The normal procedure when studying the detailed feasibility of briquetting project is to send samples of the product to potential vendors who will carry out test pressings. The outcome of these tests will tell both parties something of the product quality they can expect in full scale operation and give a lower limit of the capacity of the machine. As discussed above, material tests should cover not only briquette quality but the ability of the feed mechanism to cope with adequate throughput of residue.
Such testing will not say very much about service life of wear parts and the vendors will, for materials not very well known to them, be unlikely to give any guarantees with respect to maintenance costs.
continue
<section>5</section>
Chapter 8.Hydraulic piston presses
Main features
The principle of operation is basically the same as with the mechanical piston press. The difference is that the energy to the piston is transmitted from an electric motor via a high pressure hydraulic oil system. In this way, the machine can be made very compact and light, since the forces are balanced-out in the press-cylinder and not through the frame. The material is fed in front of the press cylinder by a feeding cylinder (a so called press-dog) which often pre-compacts the material with several strokes before the main cylinder is pressurized. The whole operation is controlled by a programme which can be altered depending on the input material and desired product quality. The speed of the press cylinder is much slower with hydraulic press action than with mechanical which results in markedly lower outputs.
The briquetting pressures are considerably lower with hydraulic presses than with mechanical systems. The reason is the limitations in pressure in the hydraulic system, which is normally limited to 30 MPa. The piston head can exert a higher pressure when it is of a smaller diameter than the hydraulic cylinder, but the gearing up of pressure in commercial applications is modest. The resulting product densities will normally be less than 1 000 kg/m³ and durability and shock resistance will naturally suffer compared to the mechanical press.
Capacity
Capacity data do not show the consistency of the data for the mechanical press. For a given diameter, a manufacturer can specify a range of output depending on the size of the installed motor. With a couple of exceptions, most manufacturers have models with rated capacities in the range of 40 to -135 kg/in, though units can be obtained up to 800 kg/in output. It is this ability to operate at low output levels which is the main attraction of hydraulic piston machines. Essentially they extend the mechanical piston press output down to the levels of the screw press.
Capital investment
It might be expected, on general grounds, that hydraulic units would be cheaper than mechanical presses, given the lower stresses and pressures to which the machines are subject. Comparisons are difficult as the size ranges are rather different but where they overlap it appears that in practice, prices are on an equal level. The machine costs reported by Kubinsky (Kubinsky 1986) also show specific prices in the 100 to 200 US$/kg/h range which makes them as expensive as the mechanical presses for the same sizes.
Raw material quality demands
The use of a lower briquetting pressure means that the hydraulic press can tolerate somewhat hither moisture contents compared to the mechanical press. Figures between 15 and 35 % are given by manufacturers. However, even if the moisture tolerance differs between the raw materials, it seem doubtful that it is possible to successfully produce durable briquettes with raw-material moisture much higher than 20 %.
It is also likely that even if higher moisture contents can tee tolerated in the press, organic material would have to be dried after briquetting if long storage times are planned.
General discussion
Only one project with a hydraulic piston press in developing countries has been identified operating in Kenya on a mixture of coffee husk and sawdust. The experience there is that operation has been riddled with trouble and that the machine required frequent service. Spare parts were originally imported but since this proved too expensive they are now manufactured locally.
These problems maybe a function of particular circumstance but the briquettes produced in the plant were certainly soft and of poorer quality than those from a screw press also installed. In general the product made in hydraulic presses have significantly lower densities than those made in mechanical presses, making it doubtful that they are suitable in developing country projects where the briquettes need to endure long transportation and storage times. They can possibly be considered when looking for a small briquetting machine which makes briquettes for in-house use, though the screw-presses are highly competitive in this size range.
Chapter 9.Screw presses
Overview
These machines operate by continuously forcing material into a die with a feeder screw. Pressure is built up along the screw rather than in a single zone as in the piston machines. Three types of screw presses are found on the market. They are: conical screw presses; cylindrical screw presses with heated dies and ditto without externally heated dies.
Only one manufacturer is currently marketing the conical screw press, Biomass Development Europe (BMD) in Belgium. Cylindrical screw presses are manufactured by 3 manufacturers included in our study while 9 companies have been identified which manufacture the heated die type of extrudes, originally of Japanese design.
ATS in Switzerland manufacture a twin type of screw extruder with a patented design allowing for the direct densification of moist materials. Drying takes place internally in the machine from the frictional heat developed in the process. A system of funnels allows the generated steam to escape from the material and the process can accept raw materials with moisture contents up to 35 %. The energy for the drying will have to be supplied through the mechanical power drive which means that the electric motors are oversized when compared to processes densifying dry material. No presses of this design have so far found utilization in developing countries. In our view, the higher energy costs for drying with electricity compared to fuel or solar drying, plus the difficulties envisioned in installing the large motor drives in weak electricity grids, will make such application unlikely.
Figure 16: screw press with heated die
Conical screw presses
Although this is originally an American design, the only current manufacture appears to be BMD in Europe. They manufacture one model with a claimed capacity of 600 to 1000 kg/in. It features a screw with a compression die-head of a patented design. It is reinforced with hard metal inlays to resist the very high wear experienced with this type of extrudes, especially when briquetting abrasive materials. The die is either a single hole matrix with a diameter of 95 mm or a multiple 28 mm matrix. The briquetting pressure is 60 to 100 MPa and the claimed density of the product is 1 200 -1 400 kg/m³.
The machine is equipped with a 74/100 kW 2-speed motor. Assuming a total of 100 kW for a production rate of 1000 kg/in one arrives at a specific energy consumption of 0.10 kW/kg/h. The manufacturer claims that the actual average energy demand is 0.055-0.075 kW/kg/h. A piston press with the same output demand 0.058kW/kg/h according to the formula derived above.
The price of the machine is US$ 130 000 which corresponds to 130 US$/kg/h using the higher capacity given by the manufacturer.
The mixing and mechanical working of the material in the conical screw press is undoubtedly beneficial to the quality of the product. Continuous operation also aids quality as the briquettes produced do not have the natural cleavage lines as is the case with piston briquettes. This is generally true for all types of screw presses.
The main disadvantage is the severe wear of the die head and die which results in high maintenance costs. The die head of the BMD unit was originally made in hardened steel which gave acceptable results when briquetting wood. Trials with groundnut shells showed alarmingly high wear which led to the redesign of the diehead using carbide inlays. The costs foor the snare parts are:
US$
Die head 1 300
Conical Screw 3 100
Die 1 600
Cone 2 300
Cylinder head 3 400
Figure 17: Conical Screw Press
The service life of the die head is said to be:
* With groundnut shells 100h
* With rice husks (estimated) 300h
Total costs for wear parts when briquetting groundnut shells are said to be 13.8 US$/t. This is two to three times the cost level given for piston presses briquetting the same material. The most serious part of that is that the die head, having to be imported from the manufacturer since the manufacture with carbide inlays requires a special workshop.
The experience with this model, apart from the apparently widespread use of its predecessor in USA, is restricted to two projects, one operating on groundnut shells in USA and another in France operating with wood as raw material. There are some ambitious plans to operate BMD machines in Brazil and Argentina in large multi-unit plants based on saw-mill residues.
Screw extruders without die heating
In this category we have included one European and one Asian manufacturer. Kusters Venlo-Holland of the Netherlands have developed a multiple hole matrix screw extruder for densifying chicken manure. It is a low-pressure process and the manufacturer gives a lower limit of the moisture content at 30 %. The manure is compressed to reduce its volume by half and the product is air dried after compression to be used as a boiler fuel.
The capacity of the machine is 300 kg/in (wet basis) and the price of the unit is US$47 300. The rated power of the installed motor is 22/30 kW. No data is available for maintenance costs.
A similar, though very much simplified machine, is the model developed by Prof Watna Stienswat of Kasetsart University in Thailand and manufactured by Sai Kampangsaen Motors. It is a screw extruder for wet materials (40-50%) with a capacity of 4 ton/day (wet basis) or 500 kg/in. It features a 5 kW motor driving a screw which is rotating with 800 rpm. The cost of the machine is US$730 and a replacement screw costs US$73.
The screw need new threads welded on after about 65 ton of produced briquettes at a cost of US$8. The manufacturer claims to have sold 40 units in two years time and the buyers are said to be farmers and hobby briquette producers. It is handfed and works best with slightly decayed bagasse. The product is very soft and must be placed by hand on the trays used for airdrying. The machine is of limited applicability but, in the right circumstances, may be a low-cost route to briquetting.
Screw extruders with heated dies
This type of extruder has found a number of applications and is manufactured not only in Japan, where it was originally developed, but also in Taiwan, Thailand, Austria and now also in Luxembourg, thanks to technical development work by CRA of Belgium.
The main features of this type of press is a screw which feeds the material from a feeding funnel, compacts it and presses it into a die of a square, hexagonal or octagonal cross-section. The briquettes have a characteristic hole through the centre from the central screw drive. The die is heated, most commonly by an electric resistance heater wired around the die. One press, Wacon of Taiwan, operates with both a 2kW preheater mounted on the chute below the feeding bin plus a 4 kW heated die.
The process can be controlled by altering the temperature. The normal operating temperature is in the order of 250 - 300 °C. The central hole of the briquette will act as a chimney for the steam generated due to the high temperatures in the process. An exhaust is normally mounted above the exit hole from the mould where the briquettes are cut into suitable lengths. A reduction in moisture content is thus achieved during the formation of the briquettes by a couple of percentage points.
The pressure is relatively high which, combined with the high temperatures, limits the moisture content of the raw material to be used. The actual maximum depends of the raw material but is in the order of 15 - 20 %. When briquetting a wet material such as saw-dust, the Japanese manufacturers include a suspension dryer in the system, which brings the moisture content down to 10 %. The resulting product will have a final moisture content of 7 %.
Most models produce a briquette with a diameter of 55 mm and an inner hole diameter of 15 to 25 mm. Variations of the outside diameters between 40 and 75 mm can be found. A common capacity given by the manufacturers of a 55 mm machine is 180 kg/h for wood material and 150 kg/in for rice husk. Variations exist due to differences in screw design and speed.
The energy demand is consistent with these variations in capacity, ranging from 10 kW for a 75 kg/in machine to 15 kW for a 150 kg/in, both based on rice-husk briquettes. To this should be added the 3 to 6 kW of electricity that is used for heating the mould. Assuming the total of 18 kW for a 150 kg/in machine, this results in a specific energy demand of 0.12 kWh/kg. A mechanical piston press would theoretically (such small machines are not made) have about the same energy demand. This level of power consumption is confirmed by the operational results of a plant in Ghana which operates four 150 kg/in screw-presses. Here, the reported power consumption is 0.11 kWh/kg (World Bank 1987).
Both Shimanda and PINI+KAY market machines with larger outputs in the range of 400-800 kg/in. They are equipped with 45 kW motors and PINI+KAY specifies an electric heater of 6 kW. Using an average figure of 600 kg/in and 50 KW the specific consumption is 0.083 kWh/kg for this size of screw press which can be compared with the corresponding figure of 0.069 kWh/kg for a mechanical piston press. The difference is not significant and is not verified in experiments.
Thus although one would expect screw presses to have higher power consumption than piston units, the practical differences do not appear to be large. Screw extruders produce good quality briquettes. The high maintenance costs are a drawback.
The capital cost of the screw presses varies widely with the country of origin. The specific prices range from 20-40 US$/kg/h for a Thai machine to 155 US$/kg/h for a Japanese screw extruder with similar features and output. Though there are large differences between manufacturers capabilities in fulfilling and following up an international contract for delivering such machines, especially when it involves setting up a whole fuel making plant, the figures show that it is possible to manufacture functional machines in a developing country, at least for the local market, at prices well below European or Japanese prices.
An estimate of the total cost for a 2 400 t/a rice husk briquetting plant in Thailand is of the order of 30 000 US$. This sum can be compared with one manufacturers estimate of the equipment cost for a 1 600 t/a briquetting plant delivered from Japan to Africa. Including a rotary drier, two briquetters, sieves, conveyors and spares for 3 years operation, the CIF price came to US$193 000.
The same large differences can be found when looking at maintenance costs, but going in the opposite direction. A Thai briquette factory has one welder for each of the three shifts constantly welding new threads on the screws. The screws need building-up and redressing every 100 hours whilst the dies will have to be rebored every 500 hours and exchanged every 1 000 hours. The Thai manufacturers own estimate of the maintenance cost is equivalent to 14 US$/t, which is the most expensive single item in the production. (Some element of depreciation cost may have been built into this aggregate figure).
On the other end of the scale, the Japanese manufacturer in the above mentioned example estimated that the spare parts necessary for 3 years operation comes to the equivalent of 1.5 US$/t. In the Kenyan project included in our case studies, the maintenance costs for a Taiwanese screw extruder operating on sawdust is given as the equivalent of 4.2 US$/t. This cost is regarded as being excessive by the operators of the plant and a reason for taking it out of service.
The statistical data is limited but it appears that the operation or screw extruders generally results in somewhat higher maintenance costs than with piston presses, when briquetting the same raw material. This means that economic operation in developing countries is, to a higher degree than for piston presses, dependent on local manufacturers of spare parts and availability of skilled service engineers.
The screw extruders produce good quality briquettes which can be handled, transported and stored without any major problems. One example of this is a Thai producer, who, with equipment manufactured by himself, partly from used car parts, makes solid briquettes from rice husks that can withstand a 650 km truck ride to the consumers.
Screw extruders were originally developed and used for briquetting sawdust. The field data verifies that this type of machine also work well when briquetting rice husks, apart from the high wear problems. The African case involved the briquetting of coffee husks in a screw extruder which resulted in reasonable quality of the product when the husk was mixed with sawdust. The following is a list of material which manufacturers claim their machine are not have been briquetting.
Wood chips Saw dust
Rice husk Groundnut shells
Bagasse Cornstalks
Sugar cane tops Wheat husks
Coffee husks Bark
Coir dust Papermill sludge
Based on claims by manufacturers on the number of machines produced (one reports over 600 units sold) and reported use in Asia, screw extruders probably outnumber piston presses if counting the existing units on the market. They can be manufactured at lower costs than piston presses and at a less advanced engineering level. The main drawback seems to be the high maintenance cost, especially when operating on abrasive materials.
Chapter 10.Pellet presses
Overview
Pellets are the result of a process which is closely related to the briquetting processes described above. The main difference is that the dies have smaller diameters (usually up to approx. 30 mm) and each machine has a number of dies arranged as holes bored in a thick steel disk or ring. The material is forced into the dies by means of rollers (normally two or three) moving over the surface on which the raw material is distributed.
The pressure is built up by the compression of this layer of material as the roller moves perpendicular to the centreline of the dies. Thus the main force applied results in shear stresses in the material which often is favourable to the final quality of the pellets. The velocity of compression is also markedly slower when compared to piston presses which means that air locked into the material is given ample time to escape and that the length of the die (i.e. the thickness of the disk or ring) can be made shorter while still allowing for sufficient retention time under pressure.
The pellets will still be hot when leaving the dies, where they are cut to lengths normally about one or two times the diameter. Successful operation demands that a rather elaborate cooling system is arranged after the densification process.
Main features
There are two main types of pellet presses: flat and ring types.
The flat die type have a circular perforated disk on which two or more rollers rotate with speeds of about 2-3 m/s which means that each individual hole is overrun by a roller several times per second. The disks have diameters ranging from about 300 mm up to 1 500 mm. The rollers have corresponding widths of 75-200 mm resulting in track surfaces (the active area under the rolls) of about 500 to 7 500 cm².
The ring die press features a rotating perforated ring on which rollers (normally two or three) press on to the inner perimeter. Inner diameters of the rings vary from about 250 mm up to 1 000 mm with track surfaces from 500 to 6 000 cm².
Figure 15: Flat Die Type Pellet Press
Machine capacity and energy demand
The capacity of pellet presses is not restricted by the density of the raw material to the same degree as for piston presses. For material with very low density the flat die press performs better since the opening between rolls is larger for the same active surface area. What control the output of the machine is the power from the drive motor which means that there are large differences in machine capacity when materials with different frictional characteristics are densified.
Normally capacities given are valid for densification of animal feed which is much less energy consuming than wood waste, straw and similar raw materials used for fuel production. Often the capacity with the latter materials is a factor of 4 lower than for animal feed production. With this in mind, the output range for ring or flat die presses on the market is likely to be from about 200 kg/in up to 8 ton/in.
In pellet presses, the energy consumption is expressed as drive motor power per active surface area. Normally this surface load is in the 0.03 - 0.07 kW/cm² range.
Power consumption is by manufacturers said to fall within the range of 15 - 40 kWh/ton. We have no field data to verify these figures. One can assume that animal feed production results in power consumption at the lower end of the range while wood waste for example would demand 40 kWh/ton or more. Other waste materials, such as straw or husks, are likely to be even more energy consuming, in line with what is said about piston and screw briquetters. A theoretical comparison with piston presses is difficult since there are two factors, the smaller size of the individual holes and the lower pressing velocity, which counteract.
A common feature in pellet plants is to condition the raw material, often with steam, which decreases the energy consumption. The moisture content of the raw material corresponding to a need for conditioning is not known but is believed to be quite low, or about 5-7- %. Conditioning is also carried out to improve the digestibility of pellets used for fodder. Binders are added which increases the strength of the pellets (and thus chewing time) as well as making the raw material suitable as animal feed.
Capital and operational costs
The rather limited data for this type of press suggests capital costs per unit in the 20-40 US$/kg/h range. This would be for unit sizes from 6 down to 1 t/h when densifying wood waste. Wear of the dies is probably of the same order as for piston briquetters, i.e. a die lasts less than 1 000 hours. Manufacturers data indicate a maintenance cost of 5 US$/t valid for wood waste.
Use of pellet machines
The main application for pellet machines is to produce animal feed from various types of agricultural wastes. Only a very limited number of plants have been set up to produce fuel pellets. In such cases, the motive for choosing a pellet machine has been the large capacity needed and, to some extent, the better handling characteristics of pellets in automated transport systems. To our knowledge, all fuel pellets projects in industrial countries use woodwaste as the main feed.
Some limited experience has been gained with pellet machines for the production of fuel in Africa. It is doubtful that there would be many applications in developing countries given the large output of such a plant. However in cases where an output in excess of 1-2 ton/in is required and where a good market can be identified, pellet presses could be considered
No data is available on the combustion characteristics of pellets. However, given the differences between wood and such small pellets, an industrial market would seem most likely target. One plant in Kenya has been set up to provide fuel for a large wood-burning boiler.
Chapter 11.Auxiliary equipment
Only in a few cases will the briquetting press be the only equipment needed to set up a briquetting plant. Examples of such basic installations are the rice-husk screw briquetters in Thailand where raw material is fed by hand into the machine and collected by hand after pressing.
From this starting point, the complexity of briquetting plants increases up to the fully automated woodwaste briquetting plants found in Europe in which the raw material is fed by a tractor into a hopper from where it is crushed, screened, stored, dryed, stored again, fed into the presses and transported to the product storage in a fully automatic process, supervised by a couple of operators.
It would be far too complex to go into details about the features of each of the equipment types that can be found in densification plants. The following text is a brief description of a few common types and their applications.
Storage
Storage of raw material in developing country projects is likely to be in the form of open storage piles. This demands only a large enough open area adjacent to the process plant. For materials which will have to dried before briquetting there is normally no need to cover the pile in the rainy season. When processing dry material, some kind of coverage is necessary in order to enable operation in periods of heavy raining. For smaller operations, tarpaulins and sheds will offer some storage but the cost of adequate protection in buildings and silos, is likely to be prohibitive except for very large plants.
If a drier is included in the process, a storage bin must be installed for intermediate storage of dried material before briquetting. There are numerous different designs of storage bins with mechanical reclamation of the stored material. They are likely to be quite site specific, taking into account the material flow patterns and the physical characteristics of the stored material.
The briquetted end product will always have to be stored under cover as the briquettes will crumble and disintegrate if rained upon. Storage buildings are quite common but sheds and tarpaulins can offer enough cover, if the briquettes are hard-surfaced.
Handling
Handling normally makes up the largest group of equipment in large, automated plants. The understanding of the best application for each type of conveyor will ensure a cost effective and trouble free conveying system.
Belt conveyors are the most common for transporting the raw material between unit processes. Chain conveyors are normally used for severe operating conditions, or unregulated loading situations. Vibrating conveyors are normally used for feeding hammer mills and chippers, but can also be used for metering and screening the raw material
Bucket elevators are restricted to conveying material with limited particle sizes and are normally not used unless the short distance pre vents the use of inclining elevators to overcome large height differences.
Pneumatic conveyors can be utilised for conveying dry fine material such as bagasse and rice husks The cost of operating such systems is often prohibitive in developing countries, at least in fuel briquetting projects.
The briquetted product can be handled by several of the above unit processes. One simple solution, possible for the hardling of briquettes feaving a mechanical piston press, is to avoid breaking the briquettes and instead letting the machine push the material all the way to the product storage. Turns, even U-turns, are possible since the material is still warm and rather soft.
Comminution
The need for comminution is individual to each raw material Many residues can be briquetted without any preparation at all but for others can the necessary size reduction tee quite costly and sometimes prohibitive. For woody materials such as cotton stalks, a chipper can be used for the fist size reduction. It is necessary to prevent dirt and stones from entering the chipper together with the material or the knifes will get dull quickly
The most common size reduction equipment in briquetting plants are hammer mills. They crush the material into coarse or fine fractions, depending on the type of mill.
Classification
Unless the raw material is guarantied to be clean and contain no oversize particles, there must be a screening operation built into the process In this, oversize material is removed and normally sent back into the hammer mill. Mechanical piston presses and pellet presses are especially sensitive to large particles entering the press. A screen and a metal remover is therefore recommended as minimum auxiliary in such plants.
The different types of screens: disc screens, shaker rolls, drum screens etc have different application depending on the type of material and the quality demand on the product.
Drying
Mechanical dewatering is normally possible only when the moisture content is very high and typically over 50%. Presses are normally very expensive to install and to operate and are unlikely to be used in developing country fuel briquetting projects.
Thermal drying is common and is achieved by bunting some of the product in a hot air furnace. The drying takes place either in a rotary drum or in a cyclone Dryers are normally the most expensive type of auxiliary equipment, both to install and to operate.
The following two cases are included to give an impression of the type of equipment that could be found in operating plants, and their related costs.
Table 7: Capital Costs; Case A
1 Chipper 37kW 31 800 US$
1 15m³ Silo with dosing screw 29 000
1 60 mm Briquetting machine with 2 sets of wear parts 65 400
Packing 2 400
Total FOB price 128 700 US$
Capacity (18.5 kg/h/rm²): 510kg/h
Table 8: Capital Costs; Case B
1 Vibrating conveyor 
1 Metal detector 
1 Chipper 
1 Magnetic drum separator 
1 Drag link conveyor Height: 10 m Inclin.: 60°
1 Wet material silo 58 m³ with 8 m feed screw
1 Drum dryer In: 3 200 kg/in at 50% Out: 1 820kg/h at 12% 
Of this the dryer use: 320 kg/in 
Balance for briquetting: 1 500 kg/in
1 Rechipper 10 m³/h 75 kW 
1 Drag link conveyor Height: 10 m Inclin.: 45°
1 Dry material silo 58 m³ with 8 m feed screw 
1 Intermediate feed bin 1.5 m³ 
2 Briquette presses 75 mm 60 kW
Total price ex works 715 300 US$
Capacity (18.5kg/h/cm²) 1 590 kg/in
<section>6</section>
Part 3.Country reviews
Chapter 12.Introduction to country reviews
Chapter 13.Briquetting in Africa
Chapter 14.Briquetting in Brazil
Chapter 15.Briquetting in India
Chapter 16.Briquetting in Sri Lanka
Chapter 17.Briquetting in Thailand
Chapter 12.Introduction to country reviews
The briquetting of agro-residues is of relatively origin in developing countries. The technique was adapted for organic wastes about 50 years ago in industrial countries, having been first developed to briquette low-grade coal, but interest waned in the 60s. It has only been revived in the 80s on any significant scale in most developing countries. This has meant that there is a lack of any systematic information about how briquetting plants have performed in practical operation. The success or failure of briquetting is very dependent upon the agricultural and fuel context in which it is applied so there is only a limited amount of help which can be obtained from technical appraisal or from the experience of plants in industrialized countries.
There is a great shortage of information upon the practical performance of such plants. They are small-scale, often remote, and operated by people who have relatively little opportunity to communicate their experience to the wider world. The central objective of this study was to search out operating plants and to prepare case studies about their experience.
It is not a practical proposition to visit every country in the world in search of briquetting plants. After a considerable amount of letter-writing and discussion with other workers, it was decided to focus on four countries and one region; India, Thailand, Sri Lanka, Brazil and East Africa.
Each of these countries has had some history of operating briquetting plants with varying degrees of success ranging from modest prosperity to, for the moment, complete failure. The countries to a large extent chose themselves because of this. The experience of briquetting in Africa has, so far, been largely confined to a set of isolated projects which have had rather little interaction with each other. In order to provide a rather more systematic framework it was therefore decided to look at a regional experience in Africa rather than that of a specific country. The two countries in the general region with the widest experience of briquetting are Kenya and the Sudan so some emphasis will be given to these two countries.
In each case, we have tried to use a similar form of presenting information so that it is possible to make comparisons. However each country is very different so the emphasis within each case-study is different.
Chapter 13.Briquetting in Africa
Introduction
Africa is too large a region to be described adequately by any single generalisation about its energy context or the availability of agricultural residues. Nevertheless in reviewing the status of briquetting plants in different parts of the world there is a striking resemblance between the apparent situation in African countries which is quite distinct to that seen in countries in Asia and South America. It is possible to devote a chapter to Briquetting in Africa" whereas "briquetting in Asia" would not be a useful heading.
This conclusion is based upon a considerable amount of secondary material about briquetting plants in Africa as well as visits made to a number of countries in east and southern Africa. This illustrates one of the paradoxes of the situation; that much of the attention of reports about briquetting has been derived from plants in Africa which have been, by and large, unsuccessful either technically or commercially (and sometimes both) whereas very little has been written about countries where the technique has had at least limited success. By itself, this situation reflects one of the problems with briquetting plants in Africa; they are conceived of as "projects undertaken by development agencies rather than businesses and, as projects, they are extensively reviewed.
The African case-studies are centred on Kenya and the Sudan, countries where there are operational plants of various kinds. Two of these in Kenya were visited and the prospects for another discussed with the project consultants. In the Sudan, extensive discussions were held with those responsible for plant operations and two pilot plants were visited.
In addition, information was collected about biomass densification operations in Zimbabwe, Tanzania and Ethiopia in the course of visits to these countries.
Information about francophone countries in west and central Africa was obtained by discussions with agencies and consultants who had worked on briquetting in these countries. Additional data about briquetting in Ethiopia was obtained from a previous SIDA study (SwedFarm 1986) and a large feasibility study undertaken by the joint UNDP/World Bank ESMAP programme. (World Bank 1987) We were helped by other consultants with data about Tanzanian units. Other information came from the authors of a report recently published by the British Overseas Development Administration. (ODNRI 1987)
Energy background
There a big differences in the energy situations of the range of countries mentioned above. However, there a few common aspects which are important for the development of briquetting.
First, all the countries considered are heavily biased towards wood consumption, particularly in the household sector. Demand for wood and wood products, particularly charcoal which is the fuel of choice in many urban areas, is often growing and deforestation is an actual or potential problem.
The supply of a substitute for fuelwood in the household sector has emerged as a policy priority in many countries and in the funding agencies which support many energy projects. This policy has assumed a priority status even where current fuelwood prices are quite low. This has led to a somewhat paradoxical situation in a number of countries as projects are being initially supported despite the fact that they are clearly not economic at present prices but are then, sometimes, being judged on the basis of these prices.
Second, except in southern Africa, oil and, possibly, natural gas are the main fossil fuels available and form the basis of most fuel supplies to medium to large industries. Coal is only used to a significant extent in Zimbabwe of all the countries discussed here. In Zimbabwe, and the other southern African states where coal is abundant, its main use is in industry. There is very little household use of coal although efforts to encourage this are being made.
The result of these two factors is that almost all briquetting projects in Africa have been concerned with the supply of a substitute household fuel. Exceptions are two of the Kenyan plants discussed here and defunct plants in Zimbabwe and Zambia.
Availability of residues
There is very little data available about crop residues in Africa. The survey by Barnard and Kristoferson provides some data about existing use of residues for fuel which is mainly negative in the sense that usually only marginal uses had been found. No general data on unused residue arisings is given. This suggests a conclusion confirmed by subsequent visits; that agricultural residues have, until recently, not aroused much interest as fuels in most African countries. There is however some evidence from countries where deforestation is a major problem that the use of residues is increasing. An example is Lesotho. However no systematic data on this trend appears to be available.
Estimates made for specific countries suggest that often quite large residue volumes may be surplus to existing needs. In Ethiopia, a World Bank survey (World Bank 1987) suggested that "at least 3 300 000 tonnes of surplus coffee, cotton, wheat and maize residues are produced annually though not all are economically accessible." Even the much reduced figure of those residues which arise from centralised state-farms, put at about 600 000 tonnes, is large enough to make a significant contribution to the Ethiopian energy economy.
In the Sudan, it has been estimated that 2.4 t/ha of surplus cotton stalks are available after the consumption by local households has been subtracted. More than 370 000 ha are planted with cotton; the volume of residues theoretically available could supply about 5% of total Sudanese fuelwood needs.
In both these cases, the residues considered did not arise from a basic food staple grown for auto-consumption but from crops usually grown in medium or large agricultural units as a cash crop often for export. All the briquetting projects that have been identified in Africa are based upon a similar residue base. The residues derive from localised origins, such as groundnut or coffee mills or extensive cotton growth, rather from a widespread crop (such as rice in India or Thailand or, less obviously, coir in Sri Lanka) or wood residues (as in Brazil).
The main staple crops in Africa, with the possible exception of maize, do not produce a large and centralised volume of residues suitable for briquetting such as rice-husk in Asia. Only one case has been located, in Ethiopia, where it is proposed to briquette maize residues and the feasibility of this has not been established. The cost estimates produced are high because of the need to collect and transport field residues even in the favourable circumstance of a centralised state-farm.
Nevertheless, the volumes of residues indicated by the above figures for two countries not chosen for their obvious agricultural endowment suggest that significant volumes of surplus residues do exist in most African countries though they may need to be identified and their point of arising established.
History of briquetting
The history of residue briquetting in Africa is largely one of single projects in various countries which have usually not been successful. There is no case identified of a set of briquetting plants based upon similar technology and expanding into a market sector. Nor is there much evidence of any learning process though in the recent period, for example in Ethiopia and the Sudan, there is some sign of a more careful and monitored approach.
The first interest in briquetting seems to have started in the late 70s when a number of European companies tried to sell machines in various countries. (A few briquetting machines may have been installed in the early 50s but these have vanished without apparent trace.) There appear to have been some individual successes but there is no clear evidence of any of these machines still operating. Some of the first machines were sold to briquette groundnut shells in west Africa; two Hausmann presses were installed in 1979 at the shelling plant at Dosso, about 140km south-east of Niamey in Niger, and in 1981, a machine was commissioned at the Kaur plant in the Gambia following various market studies and technical tests carried out in Denmark.
Neither of these plants has been successful; the reason in the Gambia appears to be uncompetitiveness in the market whilst the Dosso plant suffered not only from marketing problems but from a shortfall of shells from the processing plant. A description of the complexities of the Gambian situation has been recently published. Although dogged by persistent problems including non-availability of spareparts, it has established that briquettes are marketable to households. (Khartoum Workshop 1988)
In Malawi, a number of screw briquetters were purchased from Taiwan by the Wood Industries Corporation in 1981 and installed at sawmills in Blantyre, Zomba and Dedza. The plants produce briquettes from sawdust at a price which cannot compete with wood. The plants at Zomba and Dedza are reported to be inoperative whilst the Blantyre plant operates only sporadically.
In Zimbabwe, a pelletising machine, based on a cattle-feed unit, was installed at a groundnut shelling plant outside Harare in 1984. It operated successfully in technical terms though the roller die was expensive to maintain and replace but the product was difficult to sell except as a low-cost industrial fuel substituting for coal. The plant is currently used to supply pellets to the animal feed and fertiliser industries in which role it may be successful (Bennett, 1988).
In Zambia, another pelletising plant was set up to process sunflower husks as a feed for a coal-fired boiler. It is reported (ODORI 1987) that the resultant material was too variable for proper steam control and that extensive boiler modifications would be required to utilise the material. It is possible now that the husks will be used raw in another boiler; in any case the machinery in not used.
A plant based upon a small Spänex machine was opened in Rwanda in 1982 by a cooperative set up to provide employment for the handicapped. There were initial technical problems in operating the plant but the main difficulty was that the small scale of production made it very difficult to establish continuity in the market as only about 50 households were being supplied at any one time. Production stopped in 1984 although it may have recommenced recently. Another plant in Rwanda is based upon papyrus. Its activities have recently been described. (Martin, 1988) Although dogged by problems, including lack of spare parts, it established that papyrus briquettes are marketable to households.
In Ethiopia, one of the few private plants known to exist in Africa was started in mid-1985 in Addis Ababa. A low-pressure piston machine supplied by Eco-Briquette was bought by private individuals after they had obtained information about similar plants in India. The raw-material is saw-dust (60%) plus some coffee parchment and cotton-seed husk. The briquettes are sold mainly to middle-class hotels in Addis which have installed woodburning stoves of some sophistication.
The machinery is reported to function reliably but has the draw-back of requiring a binder material which must be imported from abroad. There are difficulties in obtaining a foreign exchange allocation for this and the binder cost a significant part of the operating costs of the plant. Nevertheless, in 1988, the owners were hoping to expand their production to about 3 thousand tonnes annually if they could obtain sufficient raw material.
A major programme of briquetting is planned for Ethiopia based upon various agro-residues from state-farms. These have not yet begun operations.
There is an operational plant in Tanzania at Moshi based upon a screw-briquetter supplied by the Orion Coal Company. This plant uses sawdust and has a capacity of about 1 800 tonnes annually. The original plan was to carbonise the product and sell as a competitive fuel to charcoal. However, all the product is purchased by local institutions who burn the briquettes direct.
There is no apparent problem in selling but at a price which only covers operating costs; no capital recovery element is included - which is perhaps as well as the plant is reported to have cost at least US$200 000.
Another plant based upon coffee-husks, which again intends to carbonise the briquettes, is built but not yet commissioned by the Coffee Marketing Board at Moshi.
In the Sudan a number of units have been installed in the past two years which are now working. A piston unit has been operating on groundnut shells in a location some distance south-west of Khartoum and it will be joined by another unit when a new building has been completed. Another, semi-mobile unit was designed to work on cotton-stalks in the Gezira project but failed to overcome operational problems. It is now installed at a groundnut factory near Khartoum where it appears to be operating successfully.
In addition to these high-pressure units, there has also been some successful application of low-pressure compaction to large quantities of bagasse which exist at Kashma El Girba and New Halfa in the Eastern Zone.
These use low-pressure TERSTARAM presses made in Belgium which give a compaction pressure of about 6-8 MPa, about 20 times less than the high-pressure briquetters. The briquettes, which are more appropriately called blocks, are made by mixing bagasse with waste molasses and then compressing. The blocks are air-dried for three days before bagging. The bagasse is taken from large stockpiles which exist close to the plant.
There is a ready market for the blocks from brick-works and from the domestic sector and there are plans to build a further three plants each with an annual output of about 1 500 tonnes. The region where they are made is one of great wood shortage and, because of an influx of refugees, there is great pressure for alternative fuels
Finally, there is a proposal put forward after some careful market research and product testing for the utilisation of cotton-stalks by carbonization followed by roller-briquetting. It is not known yet whether this approach will be developed.
In Kenya, two plants have been installed, the earliest in 1983, which utilise coffee husks for the production of briquettes and pellets for industrial boilers whilst there is also a unit which produces charcoal from coffee-husks and then makes this into briquettes using molasses as a binder. The industrial plants used a piston and a screw briquetter and a large pelletising plant whilst the char-briquette plant used a screw extrusion press.
There is a plant in Ghana operating successfully on wood residues based upon two Taiwanese screw-presses. The plant is fully commercial and sells its output to bakeries. At Diourbel in Senegal, there is reported to be a plant which produces pellets made from groundnut shells which are said to be sold for fuel. The main use of the pelletising plant is however to manufacture cattle feed.
Case studies
Plant origins
Nearly all the plants mentioned above were financed by development agencies with the exception of the private operations in Ethiopia and Ghana, the units in Zambia and Malawi and the two, industrial units in Kenya.
The Kenyan plants were set up on the initiative of companies which are both members of the same industrial group though operated separately. The original impetus to set up the plants came in the early 80s following the large oil-price increases when there was a concerted effort to reduce dependence upon imported oil by moving to local fuels and to reduce overall fuel consumption. The primary motive was financial both because of immediate gains and because oil supplies were perceived as likely to become irregular as well as more expensive.
The first move was into the use of firewood followed by attempts to find a firewood substitute. It is possible that the second phase was partly motivated by considerations of national policy; firewood was and is relatively cheap but deforestation was seen as a national problem which it was not good to exacerbate.
The installation of a plant, based upon a large pelletising machine, at another company in the group was based upon a desire to move out of oil into a local fuel. The decision to do this was probably strategic rather than based upon prospects of quick financial returns as the machine involved is very expensive.
The third Kenyan operation comes from a quite different direction, that of searching for ways to provide a substitute in household use for charcoal which is the dominant urban and pert-urban fuel. Its origins were in various studies made of fuelwood supply and use and the perception that there was likely to be a fuelwood crisis if demand was not reduced. The project is externally funded and should be seen as a pilot-plant to investigate the potential for the future rather than a commercial operation.
The Kenyan plants are somewhat atypical of other African briquetting operations in that their origins are internal to the country even though, in the third case, external funding is involved. In other countries, briquetting plants seem to have suffered from a lack of internal dynamic which has meant that when problems have arisen the plant has been either abandoned or remained idle for long periods.
The Sudanese plants are much more typical of other African projects in that each one was funded as a separate project by various development agencies. Both the Energy Research Council and the National Energy Administration have had on-going programmes examining briquetting. The overall impetus to each project has been the growing problem of wood shortages in the Sudan and the increasing price of fuelwood and charcoal.
Equipment used
There are two generalisations possible about the equipment used in African plants; the first is that almost no generalisation is possible for virtually every kind of unit has been tried once though usually only once.
This does in fact cover a serious problem for, in many cases, equipment has been used which is barely appropriate for the task and which has been adopted for reasons outside the needs of the situation. There are three broad reasons for this.
First, there is no doubt that in some cases, the requirements of national funding agencies to buy plant from their own domestic manufacturers has led to the use of machines which are not the best suited to the conditions. It would be invidious to quote examples and it should be emphasised that in a number of cases the equipment provided by tied-aid has proved quite adequate. But even in situations where the plant is effectively free to the user, it is clearly wrong, to use an actual example, to provide equipment whose operational power costs per unit of product are greater than the price of coal or fuelwood in local markets. It is also wrong to supply plant whose maintenance needs cannot be supplied locally and which require frequent visits by overseas engineers if the plant is to be kept going.
Second, there is a clear "guinea-pig" character to many of the plants in Africa; that is they have been installed as pilot-plants to test new techniques or types of product. There is nothing wrong in principle with this; new ideas, particularly ones which are a break with existing practices in Europe or the U.S.A., have to tried out in practical operation. However, such plants have to be installed as test-beds and given appropriate support and monitoring, neither of which have always been forthcoming It is also important that expectations should not be raised too high otherwise failure may produce demoralization.
In a sense, these two issues are mirrors of each other; in the first, existing, rather sophisticated plant is unloaded on to users who cannot utilise it and in the second, untried "appropriate" technology is presented as a proven technique.
The third problem is simply lack of good information by plant buyers about the range of alternative products. This is a common problem not confined to briquetting machinery but it has led to the installation of plant which could probably be improved on. It is difficult, for example, to believe that it was the best choice to buy a machine for use in Ethiopia which depended upon an imported binder particularly when the raw-material, sawdust, can easily be briquetted by binderless techniques.
The second generalisation is that this diversity of machines have one common feature - they are often extraordinarily expensive.
For example, the Tanzanian plant based upon sawdust is estimated to have cost about US$200 000 in foreign exchange for equipment to produce up to 1 600 tonnes of briquettes annually. A Taiwanese screw-press which, operated under a similar regime to the Tanzanian plant, could probably produce about 600 tonnes annually was imported into Kenya in 1986 for under US$6 000.
Similarly, in the studies undertaken by the World Bank for a project to install briquetting plants in Ethiopia, the cost of a 750 kg/hr piston briquetter is put at US$86 000 whilst a similar capacity screw machine is put at US$63 000. In Brazil, the 1987 price of a machine with 1 100 kg/hr capacity, is US$39 000 whilst the piston briquetter, of about 500 kg/hr capacity, imported privately into Ethiopia cost US$33 000 in 1983.
In some cases there is no doubt a hefty premium being paid for plant installation costs, for spares and for a variety of extra equipment costs. However, it is very difficult to construct any good economic reason for briquetting plants when faced with such huge initial capital costs.
The performance record of the plants has been patchy with numerous reports of breakdowns and high maintenance costs. The main cause of these appears to be inadequate time spent in setting up the machine and problems with variability of the feed. This latter may derive from the fact that African plants, as noted, often work on a rather singular raw-material mixture which may not have been met previously by the manufacturer. There is therefore a need to adjust some of plant parameters rather systematically at the startup of the plant to achieve optimum conditions. If this stage is omitted, as it often is when foreign engineers are employed to install the machine, then the plant can suffer persistent problems.
The two Kenyan plants visited did not suffer badly from commissioning and maintenance problems as both were installed inside factories with a considerable degree of onsite technical support. In the Sudan, the semi-mobile unit suffered many operational problems, in part because it was badly sized in certain of its components and partly because the conditions under which it was required to operate were too extreme.
These are both common problems. The sizing of plants for unusual residues (in this case cotton-stalks) requires greater care than manufacturers or consultants often give it. The initial feed mechanisms, in particular for piston machines, need to be matched to the piston for each type of residue. Some manufacturers with experience mainly in wood wastes do not do this properly. European manufacturers are also sometimes too optimistic about their plants performing well in adverse conditions. Moving a plant from field to field in northern Europe is simply not comparable with an equivalent operation in the Sudan
The various projects which hope to market char briquettes were all at a pilot plant stage using equipment specially made up for the project. The Sudanese plant, in particular, is hoping to move to a commercial stage but at least one or two years of field trials will be required first.
Residues used
The two residues most frequently encountered were coffee husks and ground nut shells. In Kenya, all the plants used coffee residues. The use of sawdust and cotton stalks has also been reported and there have been experiments with the use of papyrus reed in both Rwanda and western Kenya.
As noted above, neither of these crops are staples though groundnuts are widely grown throughout Africa. Although their residues may often be sufficient to feed two or three plants it is difficult to see briquetting being other than a marginal activity based upon coffee and groundnuts alone. It is therefore interesting to note that the proposed Ethiopian plants will use residues from wheat and maize straw; the latter in particular could provide a large and widely spread resource base is successful. In Ethiopia, it has been estimated that 3.0 tonnes/ha of straw and 0.6 tonnes/ha of cob are available and, at present, unused.
Groundnuts provide a good feed for briquetting either in piston machines or pelletising plant. The brief operation of the Harare groundnut pelletising plant was stopped because of the economics of production not because of poor-quality pellets. In general, it seems as if groundnut plants are always located at the shelling plant and that the residue is free. Its only alternative use is direct combustion in an industrial boiler.
The two piston machines now operating in the Sudan both use groundnut shells and report good results.
The experience in briquetting coffee-husk is mixed. Two types of residue are obtained from coffee; the husk, which is obtained from the cherry after it is picked and which can be either wet or dry depending upon the way the coffee is processed, and coffee parchment which is obtained from the green bean at the final processing mill. The latter is a relatively small part of the crop, about 4%, but arises in a dry form at a central location convenient for processing. The husk is a much larger part of the total crop, about 23% of the initial crop before drying. This residue is usually available in a less centralised form and may be wet if a washing process is used rather than sundrying.
In Kenya, both types of residue were available, dry, in Nairobi and the preferred feed was husk, that is the complete outer berry, for the piston briquetting machine whilst the pelletising plant was designed to run on coffee parchment. The briquettes obtained from a mixture of coffee husk and saw-dust were rather soft and had a high ash content whilst it was found difficult to make satisfactory briquettes or pellets at all from 100% parchment. Coffee husk could be used on its own to make satisfactory briquettes.
The feed mainly used was a husk/sawdust mixture in one plant and a husk/parchment mixture in the other.
This conclusion about the relative utility of husk and parchment does not appear to be borne out by the results of the test briquetting programme for the proposed Ethiopian plants in which coffee husk gave the least satisfactory briquette of all the residues examined on virtually all the combustion and handling tests used whilst coffee parchment gave reasonable results. It is difficult to know whether these variations arose because of the use of different briquetting processes or because of variation in the residues. In any event, the briquetting of coffee residues clearly needs to be preceded by a specific testing programme.
The coffee residues used in Kenya were all purchased from the Coffee Growers Association for up to 270/- per tonne (about 16 US$/tonne) in mid-87 though this price seems to vary both seasonally and between purchasers. The higher price is a sharp increase from the 105/- used in the original financial assessments by one of the plants. The rise seems to have been imposed by the Growers Association once they saw a market develop rather than because of any competitive use. There is some use of coffee husk as a soil mulch but this accounts for only a small part of the residues produced. The Association has a local monopoly of coffee residue.
There were no problems with moisture content of coffee residues; in fact at the pelletising plant, steam-conditioning was used as the original material was too dry. A similar technique was employed at the groundnut pelletising plant in Harare; the use of too-dry material there had given rise to the jamming of the die - a serious problem in a pelletising die with its numerous small holes.
The other component of the feed at one Kenyan plant was sawdust and this was purchased from a nearby saw-mill for about 60/- per tonne (about 3 US$/tonne) whilst wood-shavings cost 125/- per tonne. The sawdust was often wet and had to be dried.
Markets
The main generalisation that can be made about briquetting in Africa is that it has often proved difficult to sell briquettes against the competitive price of wood or charcoal.
In Niger, the wholesale price of briquettes in 1985 was 18 FCFA/kg and the retail price was 22 FCFA/kg; the retail price of wood was 10 FCFA/kg. In the Gambia in 1981/82, the estimated retail price of briquettes was 1.88 bututs/1 000 kcal whilst the price of charcoal was 1.53 bututs/1 000 kcal.
In Kenya, in 1987, the price of firewood bought in bulk was quoted as 325/- per tonne whilst the cost of briquettes produced on a piston-machine was calculated to be 413/- per tonne. In Tanzania, briquettes were being sold at Tsh 3/kg as against a charcoal price of Tsh 5/kg but this briquette-price covered only plant operating costs and was based upon a free sawdust feed.
The pilot-plant in Kenya producing carbonised coffee-briquettes was unable to compete in the Kenyan charcoal market though it was reported that a similar plant being set up in Uganda was able to sell its product as the local charcoal supply situation was very stretched. A similar situation appears to exist in the Sudan where fuel-supply to refugee camps is very strained.
In Ethiopia, a careful study of the economics of briquettes (World Ban* 1987) concluded that under the most favourable circumstances with a plant located in Addis Ababa and a dry, centralized residue, the full production cost of briquettes from coffee parchment would be nearly 38 US$/tonne ax-factory, assuming that the residues were free, whilst the retail price of firewood in Addis had moved up to 83 US$/tonne. Under these circumstances, briquettes could compete with firewood but, in less favoured locations using more difficult residues, the delivered cost to Addis Ababa rose to 98 US$/tonne for coffee-pulp, 114 US$/tonne for cotton stalks, 115 US$/tonne for wheat straw and 140 US$/tonne for maize residue.
It should be noted that the only plant actually operational in Ethiopia is reported to produce at operating costs of 140 birr/T in 1986 or about 68 US$/tonne using a mixed feed input which cost about 45 US$/tonne. This excluded maintenance and marketing costs and any capital charge. The owners suggested that a market price of about 170 US$/tonne was required to meet all charges; the market price actually obtained in 1986 was 126 US$/tonne but this is reported to have increased in the past year or so. The plant now seems to be operating at a profit.
The primary marketing problem for briquettes in Africa is their high price relative to wood and charcoal. It is not clear whether this poor competitiveness arises mainly from the very high capital cost of the plants or the low price of wood; probably the balance between the two varies between countries. In Kenya, the main problem is undoubtedly the fact that wood prices remain low, apparently well under 1 US$/GJ in heat terms. At such prices, virtually no alternative fuel can be justified except on long-term strategic grounds. At the other extreme, the prices quoted above for Ethiopia seem to have a very heavy capital cost component. Thus the annualised capital charge for cotton-stalk briquettes was calculated to be 34 US$/tonne out of a total ex-factory production cost of 82 US$/tonne.
The persistent problem of lack of price competitiveness has obscured the issue of customer acceptability of the product.
The target market usually aimed for in African briquetting projects has been households burning either wood or charcoal. As noted above, the choice of this market has been largely conditioned by initial policy perceptions rather than any actual consideration of the markets for which briquettes are suitable. However only very small quantities of briquettes ever appear to have been sold to households. It is noticeable that the only truly commercial operations which have been identified, those in Ethiopia and Ghana, sold their products to "middle-class" hotels burning firewood or to brick kilns.
It is also interesting that the Tanzanian project, originally set up to produce charred briquettes for the household market, is actually selling "raw" briquettes to institutions who readily take all their output. Other instances could be quoted of plants which began by targeting the domestic sector but eventually sold their product to industry.
The only systematic consumer survey of household acceptability to be undertaken appears to have been one undertaken by Bois de Feu (Association Bois de Feu, 1985), a French agency, using mainly the groundnut briquettes produced at Dosso. In this, briquettes were distributed free to 70 families with a survey worker checking on consumption weekly.
This survey revealed that most of the cooks quickly found out that the best way of using the briquettes was by mixing them half and half with firewood as they have different but complementary burning characteristics. This result from the field confirms many of the combustion tests carried out in laboratories. Under mixed fuel conditions, it was found that the special stoves which Bois de Feu distributed to families were not required.
The study showed that briquettes could be sold to the household sector and could even acquire a cachet of "modernity" but only if they were competitive in price and were supplied on a consistent basis. This is confirmed by the Rwanda plant; households took the briquettes when they were available but the inconsistent supply situation meant that no market base was ever built up.
In Ethiopia, the owner of the small private plant has described (Kekeba, 1988) how the initial marketing of his product required a lengthy programme of market testing and sales promotion. This plant is one of the few which has gone out actively to seek customers. The results have been, overall, favourable though some initial resistance had to be overcome about possible health problems when used by households.
In Kenya, the plants visited both burnt their products in their own boilers which had been converted from oil-burning.
Some combustion problems were reported from husk/sawdust briquettes because of ash problems. The briquettes were also rather soft and tended to crumble. (This seems to be a common problem with coffee-based briquettes). The pellets were said to be a good fuel.
In the Sudan, the Renewable Energy Project of the Energy Research Council has been doing various kinds of household market survey on the products of low pressure and carbonised briquettes. The results have generally been favourable though the samples have been small. In addition, it has been found that the products of the two piston machines find a ready market in both small industry and households.
A final, optimistic conclusion to what is an otherwise often depressing review of African briquetting It seems that briquettes of all types can find a market niche when they are produced regularly enough at prices not too far out of line with the competition. It may be that the easiest area to exploit is the substitution of wood in small boilers in hotels, institutions and small industry. However, there is some evidence that briquettes can be acceptable in households without the use of special stoves provided the consumer has sufficient time to work out the best use of the briquettes.
Local manufacturers
There are no existing manufacturers of plant in any African country. However, a mechanical engineering company in Zimbabwe, Airflo Ltd. is sufficiently interested in the area to have built a test machine for possible future manufacture. It is a hydraulic-piston machine and although it is in a fairly unfinished state, the test-rig has successfully briquetted sawdust and some agro-residues. It is not clear whether the company will move to market a machine; there is no briquetting at present undertaken in Zimbabwe so they would probably have to set up their own briquette production unit to spark interest. However, they were confident that they could produce a working machine for a price which undercut European manufacturers by at least 50%
It is doubtful if many other African countries could emulate this as their mechanical engineering sector is not developed sufficiently. However, a number of projects (and the consultants associated with them) seem to underestimate the potential for local maintenance and the provision of spare parts. An interesting description (Martin, 1988) of a project in Rwanda, carried through on a very limited budget, suggests that local maintenance of a piston machine is possible using the correct type of welding rod to build up the piston head. This is certainly possible for screw machines as demonstrated in the Ghanaian plant. Yet too many other plants in Africa seem to assume that the smallest technical problem requires a new spare part from Europe or Japan using foreign exchange which is often unavailable.
There is no doubt that much more attention should be paid to the issue of local maintenance in future projects. It is of particular importance that the components of the system should be simplified as far as is compatible with good operation.
continue
<section>7</section>
Chapter 14.Briquetting in Brazil
Background
Brazil, like India, has a very large and diverse energy economy with substantial regional differences as well as rural/urban splits. Since the mid-'70s, Brazil has adopted a broadly consistent set of energy policies which have the objective of increasing the use of indigenous fuels. This objective, common to many countries, has been given a specifically Brazilian bias by a very strong commitment to the development of biofuels as we'd as to hydroelectric power. Although the heavy capital investment of some of these programmes is now prompting a change of emphasis, the underlying policy has been firmly put in place.
This policy has resulted in changes in the energy economy which are probably more far-reaching than in any other country. The only comparable experience has been the determination of France to transform its power sector by the use of nuclear power. The changes made have been all the more remarkable by being undertaken at a period of rapid economic growth in which the demand for energy was increasing rapidly.
In the period 1976-86, total primary energy consumption grew from 109 mtoe to 177 mtoe and, in the same period, imported fuel - mainly crude oil - dropped from 43 mtoe to 36 mtoe. This drop in oil imports was partly brought about by increasing Brazilian oil production but there were also huge increases in indigenous hydropower (24 mtoe in 1976 to 53 mtoe in 1986) and in the use of alcohol car-fuel based on sugar-cane (7.2 mtoe in 1976 to 20.4 mtoe in 1986).
Another, and less well-known shift, was a big increase in the use of wood as a fuel even in large industrial units. Recorded firewood use increased, from 27 mtoe to 31 mtoe, and unrecorded firewood may have increased still further. Much of the increase in firewood was due to a growth in bulk charcoal production to provide the growing steel industry with a substitute for imported metallurgical coke. Charcoal production increased from 2.9 mtoe in 1976 to 6.6 mtoe in 1986. The massive increase in alcohol production also produced a flourishing growth in the use of sugar-cane residue (bagasse) as a fuel; from 5.3 mtoe in 1976 to 11.7 mtoe in 1986.
Much of the dynamic for this change has come from the public sector but most of the new production facilities for biofuels are in the private sector as is the supply of fuelwood. There has been a parallel strand of policy to reducing oil imports, that is a reliance upon Brazilian technology so that most of the new energy facilities are built and operated by Brazilian-based companies.
Agriculture residues
Brazil grows nearly all crops in significant quantities; the main ones with significant residues and their production in 1986 were as follows:
million tonnes
Cotton 2.3
Rice 10.4
Coffee 2.0
Sugar cane 23.8
Coconut 0.6
Corn 20.5
There is clearly a large potential residue base dominated by the huge production of bagasse whose disposal is a significant secondary industry by itself.
The form of agriculture is varied with small and medium-sized farms in the southern states and much larger estates in the north together with small-scale peasant agriculture.
There has not been any central policy towards the use of agro-residues as fuel except in the case of bagasse where the producers' cooperative, COPERSUGAR, has looked at ways to dispose of surplus bagasse. Most (up to 90%) appears to be used, probably rather inefficiently, in the sugar-mills and alcohol plants but this still leaves some 4.5 million tonnes to be disposed of.
Development of briquetting
The first briquetting machines in Brazil seem to have been installed by a company called HANSA, a Brazilian company set up to manufacture the Hausmann type machines in a joint venture with European manufacturers. The first machines sold were to rice-mills; overall, the company sold about 100 machines before going bankrupt in 1985. The reasons for the bankruptcy are said to have been under-capitalisation in the difficult business conditions of that year when there was a financial squeeze to reduce inflation and cope with the external debt problem.
Two other Brazilian companies have sold machines; there do not seem to have been any non-Brazilian entries, possibly because of the strong bias in favour of Brazilian technology.
One of these companies, Morbach, now seems moribund, at least in this product area, but the other, BIOMAX, continues to operate successfully. It was set up in 1984, essentially as a split from HANSA, and has since sold 45 units with another 5 or 6 on order.
The initial bias towards rice-mills has now swung to their installation in wood factories and sawmills with occasional sales to other agro-residue producers such as coffee mills.
The bulk of the 200 or so machines installed in Brazil since 1980 are said to be still operational, a claim made by BIOMAX who make some efforts to buy back machines if they are not used and resell them.
All the machines installed appear to be conventional mechanical-piston units. No use is made at present of screw machines nor of any plant requiring binders. There are plans to open up plants using the Belgian Biomat machines; these are discussed below.
The main concentration of machines is in the southern states, particularly Rio Grande del Sul, Santa Caterina, Rio de Janeiro, Sao Paulo and Parana. The huge forest-covered states of the north have hardly any machines though BIOMAX has recently sold two units to a sawmill in Manaus in the Amazon area. This regional coverage may, in part, reflect the commercial bases of the plant manufacturers, which were all in the far south in Rio Grande del Sul, rather than the actual pattern of residue availability.
Case studies
Origin of plants
Three kinds of briquetting operation exist or are planned in Brazil; they are, in a sense, natural developments from each other.
The first, and much the most common, operation is the installation of one or two briquetting machines at the point of arising of the residue, usually wood-waste or sawdust, less commonly rice-husks. The machines are operated by the plant owners who also sell the briquettes to nearby factories.
The motivation for setting up these plants appears to have been a combination of solving a waste-disposal problem and making some additional revenue. The former issue does seem to have been irksome rather than pressing, but the ease of marketing briquettes seems to have persuaded many firms to move from dumping their waste.
In fact, the revenue from marketing briquettes is a small part of their total sales and they seem less than dynamic in maximising their potential profit. This has led to the development of a second type of operation, who are essentially briquette producers rather than waste-disposal units of much larger companies.
It is not known how many of these companies exist in Brazil, certainly three were identified and two were either visited or interviewed on the telephone. These companies market briquettes made in one of four ways. They may buy residues from various sources and transport them to their own machines; they may own and operate a machine adjacent to a residue source and, in effect, act as their on-site waste-disposal service; they may purchase briquettes made by another plant and resell them; they may operate an on-site plant owned by the factory and sell the products with the factory owners levying a fee for use of their machine and for supply of wastes.
An operation of this kind works on fairly small profit margins; their principal concern is to maximise the throughput of all the machines they operate. The owners of these companies are entrepreneurs sometimes with wide horizons. Since completing the interviews for this report in 1988, we have been contacted by two Brazilian companies interested in selling briquettes in Europe.
The third type of plant is, as yet, only a planning exercise though the people concerned were confident that two or three projects will be under way in 1990.
The broad idea of this third type is to set up a large briquetting plant with 10-20 machines in an area which produces a lot of residues but has little or no fuel consumers. A typical area would be Parana state in Brazil which has a large number of sawmills and is about 600 km from the big markets of Sao Paula. The residue on which they are concentrating is wood, though they have an interest in other agro-residues. The size of the plants would be 50-100 000 tonnes of briquettes annually. These plants would be set up as turn-key operations funded by the machine manufacturer and, possibly, the regional government. At the moment, three projects are being discussed in Brazil and two in Argentina.
The economics of plants like these is very dependent upon residue costs and market prices and these can vary widely. In broad terms, they were expecting to pay 23 US$/tonne for sawdust, about 2528 US$/tonne in conversion costs and to sell the briquettes for about 80 US$/tonne in Sao Paulo.
The types of operational plant discussed here are all privately-funded operations with no form of state subsidy. There may be some regional government participation in the large briquetting projects but they would be expected to operate on a fully commercial basis.
Type machine
All the plants visited use mechanical piston machines made either by BIOMAX or HANSA. No problems were reported in their functioning; the machines appeared to operate reliably for at least two shifts per day. In one machine, some faulty welds had appeared in the feed hacker but these did not pose any fundamental problem.
It was normal for the fuel to be passed through a chipping mill (a hacker) before going to the feed silo. The main issue with preparing the feed stock seemed to be avoiding tramp metal such as nails or bolts which could occur in the residues from wood processing. The machine appeared to be reasonably resilient to such metal. It was reported that nails and small sheet metal clippings up to about one centimetre would pass through into the briquettes.
Residues used
The only plant visited which used an agroresidue was at a rice-mill. All the other plants used wood wastes, that is a mixture of sawdust and small wood chippings and offcuts.
The rice-husk plant had not proved successful because of marketing problems. The high ash content of the briquettes had proved a barrier to sales. In recent months the plant had operated intermittently using wood wastes from plants in the area.
The other plants visited were all wood processors not sawmills, as the states of Rio Grande del Sul and Sao Paulo which were visited do not have large forestry industries. They do have a large number of furniture and other kinds of wood factory and these were the main centres of briquetting.
The wood residues contained some pieces up to ten centimetres or more wide and the feed had to be passed through a hacker to reduce the fuel size to below about one centimetre. No problems of moisture content were found.
The plants with in-house machines did not price their residues but external agents had to purchase wood-wastes. There is not any systematic alternative market for their wastes so the prices charged seem to vary greatly from place to place.
One plant in Rio Grande del Sul was buying sawdust from a cellulose maker, which gave a rather wet residue, for US$10 for a 3.5-tonne truck load. In Sao Paulo state, wood chippings and offcuts cost about 5 US$/tonne when literally pushed out of the factory door into the machine space whilst the project-planners for the large up-country plants believed that they could buy sawdust for 23 US$/tonne. None of these situations could be considered as representing prices formed in a competitive market. They seemed to represent some view of a fair price by the waste producer.
Various agro-residues had been tried for briquetting but, up to now, had not proved popular. Only rice-husks had been tried in any quantity and ash problems had inhibited the marketing of the briquettes.
The failure of briquetting to spread into more general agro-residue was not entirely clear. Some had alternative uses. Coffee husk was said to be used as a soil conditioner whilst rice-husks were used for bedding chickens. However, the most obvious area of failure is bagasse which is available in huge quantities but for which briquetting is not used. As noted above, most bagasse is consumed in the mills and alcohol plants but Brazilian sugar-cane production is so huge that several million tonnes of bagasse remain unused after direct sugar-processing use.
The main sugar-producers association, COPERSUGAR, had tried to briquette bagasse, using a HANSA machine, but with only limited success. The main problems were, first, that the high residual moisture content (up to 50%) meant that the drying costs required for briquetting made the economics doubtful. In addition, the voluminous nature of the feedstock caused the output of the machine to be much less than its rating - only 300 kg/in was obtained from a machine claimed to produce 1 200 kg/in from wood-waste. Even at this rate, the screw-feeder tended to jam.
It is possible that both these problems could be overcome but, for the moment, utilisation of bagasse has proceeded in other, divergent directions.
It is consumed in large quantities without treatment or loosely baled. Brazilian lorries are very large and it was reported that 25 tonnes of bagasse could be carried without resort to compression. A number of factories, notably in the food sector, had installed special boilers to burn raw bagasse, partly in suspension and partly on a grate. In Sao Paulo, for example, the large Nestle factory has a boiler designed by the Swiss company, Voight.
Some trials by COPERSUGAR on baling bagasse using cotton-baling machinery had proved successful, raising the density from about 120 kg/m³ to about 370 kg/m³. Various improvements had been made to assist the drying of the bales by natural heat to about 20%. A company, Bagaten, has been set up to market the bales in the Sao Paulo area.
This level of bulk density approaches that of briquettes so any potential transport savings for briquettes as against bales would be small. The key problem for bales is undoubtedly finding a combustor that will take them. The very large quantities of bagasse available appears to have prompted enough companies to make the necessary capital investment.
The second approach has been to find outlets for bagasse in higher-value markets, notably paper production and animal feed. In this latter market, the bagasse is pelletised, a process in which COPERSUGAR have found no technical problems. The power costs of pelletising make it unattractive for fuel production but animal feed is a higher price outlet and can justify the cost.
A rather more unusual market is the sales by Bagaten of baled bagasse to Germany for use as a packing in car doors.
However, despite these various bagasse uses, there is still a surplus, particularly outside Sao Paulo state. For example, 400 thousand tonnes of waste were reported to arise around Campos in Rio de Janeiro state. This surplus is likely to increase if sugar and alcohol mills convert to gas to cut air pollution or if they install more efficient boiler plant. In principle, they require far less bagasse than they actually consume.
It is possible that briquetting could still find applications in bagasse. The one trial carried out does not seem to exhaust the possibilities and the transport costs for both raw and baled bagasse seem to limit their use to about 150 km from production.
Markets
All the markets for briquettes were in factories with wood-burning boilers. There are a large number of such installations and some have modern boilers installed after the 1974 oil-price rises. They may consume large volumes of wood; one plant was mentioned which took 15,000 tonnes weekly, and there is no problem in finding outlets.
Wood-based briquettes burn well in such boilers. In fact, the only problem is that they may burn too fiercely if derived, as in one plant, from the best tropical hardwood. Rice-based briquettes have an ash problem, both in disposal and in the fact that the ash is reported to form a hard shell which inhibits combustion.
There are a number of difficulties with wood supply to industry, not so much in its availability but in the unregulated nature of the trade. A good deal of it is said to be 'illegal', which means cut against deforestation laws or traded without payment of taxes rather than cut from land without the landowner's permission. This gives wood supply a problematic character; it contains unknown amounts of moisture and is often sold by volume straight from the lorry. This latter practice gives rise to constant cheating with irregular packing in the inside of the load.
Briquettes can be sold as a uniform and reliable fuel, sold by weight and of necessity containing only a small amount of moisture. It was claimed that because of this, briquettes could command a price premium over fuelwood.
There was considerable variation in the prices quoted for both briquettes and wood. One reason for this is regional variation but a more likely factor is the failure of some operations, particularly chose for whom briquettes were of small commercial interest, to re-price their product very often. Inflation in Brazil is currency in double figures per month so such failures can rapidly lead to price distortions. It was noticeable that the briquetters who made a living solely out of the single product were much more aware of the need to adjust prices. They used either an oil-price index or one related to a notional fixed price currency whose value relative to the cruzado is published each month.
In general wood-based briquettes were sold well above the tonnage price of fuelwood; factors of about 50% were not uncommon. This premium was based upon the different moisture contents and on the consistent quality of briquettes. Prices of between US$24 and US$40/tonne were being charged. The lowest prices were in the south where wood prices seemed to be lower. Comparative prices quoted were:
State US$/tonne
Parana 6.5
Rio Grande del Sul 8.5
Sao Paula 13-16
With these prices as markers, a selling price of 27 US$/tonne was quoted. Another source in Rio Grande del Sul quoted a selling price of 37 US$/tonne for briquettes compared with a wood price of 10 US$/m³.
In general, pricing was undertaken above wood and below oil, though, in recent months, some prices suggested that the oil price had fallen below the wood price in Sao Paula.
The pricing situation can be summarised as somewhat confusing, a reaction shared by some Brazilians who find the need to be constantly repricing their goods rather a chore. However, it did seem that there was a reasonable premium to be obtained selling wood briquettes though less so with a rice-husk product.
Conclusions
Briquetting in Brazil has found a commercial niche in which to operate albeit a small one. Three factors have contributed to this. First, the switch to biofuels of various types has opened a big potential market in the industrial sector for a consistent wood fuel substitute. Second, there is a dynamic domestic plant-manufacturer who sells reliable machines at low prices and is available for installation and commissioning. Third, there is a big supply of a convenient raw material, wood wastes, which have little alternative use as they are inconvenient to transport.
These advantages make Brazil probably the most propitious country in the world in which to undertake briquetting. In the future, the spread of briquetting into larger plants located in the primary wood producing regions and into other raw materials will demonstrate whether or not it has a future as other than a small speciality fuel.
Chapter 15.Briquetting in India
This section is based upon a visit made to India in June, 1987 during which time three briquetting plants and one manufacturer were visited. We also attended a Workshop on Biomass Conversion Technologies held at the Engineering Staff College in Hyderabad. Thanks are due to all the people who helped with this visit; they are too many to list by name.
Energy context
India is a country with a very large and diverse energy economy encompassing reliance upon crude biomass combustion, particularly in rural households, as well as advanced power-generation and hydrocarbon utilisation. The size and diversity of the country make generalizations difficult as well as potentially misleading. However there are four general factors which make India a very interesting country for analysing the use of agro-residue briquetting.
First, it already has a very great reliance upon solid fuels of various kinds. This is generally true of rural households and small industry, which burn not only firewood but also crude agro-residues and dung-cake. In addition to this, there is considerable use of fuelwood in urban areas and, in industry, the main fuel is coal, often high-ash coal. There is some use made of coal in the household sector, usually in the form of smokeless briquettes but the most important households fuels, apart from biomass, are kerosene or gas. Thus, in principle, there already exist a range of existing markets in which briquettes could be sold as direct substitutes in existing appliances.
Second, its major indigenous fossil fuel is coal; liquid and gaseous hydrocarbons are found only in limited quantities. There is therefore little prospect of any cheap indigenous fuel such as natural gas or LPG emerging as the major fuel of choice in households and industry. Indian economic policy has always placed great emphasis upon self-sufficiency so, although this has changed somewhat in recent years, there is only limited scope for increased hydrocarbon use outside the transport sector. Indian coal is abundant, though often of poor quality with a high ash content. However production bottlenecks and the increasing demands of the power industry has meant that it has often been in short supply to industrial users.
Third, it has a very large agricultural industry which includes a big commercial sector processing crops for sale. This means that agro-residues are likely to arise in sufficient quantities to provide the basis for briquetting at all possible scales of production from village to industrial levels. Commercial forestry is confined to a few, rather remote areas so the utilisation of wood residues may not be so favourable. However, in recent years there has been some investment in plantation fuelwood forests which may, in the future, provide a source of wood residues.
Fourth, it has a well-developed mechanical engineering industry which is capable of the design as well as manufacture of briquetting plant of all types. Domestic industry is highly protected so briquetting machinery manufacturers are able to dominate the market.
All this means that briquetting should have a sound basis from which to develop.
Availability of residue
There is little doubt that a very large volume of agro-residues arise in India; one estimate is that 200 million tonnes come from all sources. A considerable amount of this is wasted - the same source suggests that 40 million tonnes is burnt in the fields but much is already utilised. Barnard and Kristoferson in their survey of world agro-residue use, (Barnard and Kristoferson, 1985) estimate that 40 million tonnes are burnt in India directly for fuel. This may be compared with their figure of 133 million tonnes of fuelwood and 73 million tonnes of dungcake used as fuel. Residues are clearly already used to a considerable degree, largely by the rural poor.
Apart from these global estimates, there is little good information about how and where crop residues arise and are used. However, discussions in various parts of India with biomass users suggest that the pattern of production and use has changed quite sharply in the past few years. This is particularly true of rice-husk, which is a major residue arising in all parts of the country, but is also relevant to other types of residues such as groundnut shells.
Until the end of the 70s, agro-residues were utilised, if at all, by the rural poor burning residues collected locally usually at little or no cost. It was reported to us that rice-mills at this time regarded husk essentially as a waste and were happy for it to be taken free of charge.
The big rises in fuel prices following the 1979, oil-price rises, stimulated the interest of industrial concerns in the use of low-cost residues in their boilers. The greater use of high-yielding rice varieties also appears to have increased the use of centralised rice-milling which, in turn, increased the interest of industrial fuel users looking for relatively large volumes of residue. The result of this has been that rice-husk, together with other residues, is no longer a free waste but is a marketable commodity.
As recently as 1984, the price of rice-husk was below 100 R/tonne (7.7 US$/tonne) in most places and could be as low as 25 it/tonne; it is now commonly above 200 it/tonne with some seasonal variation. At one briquetting plant visited in southern India, the price of husk had doubled in the past year. At these prices, it was reported that husk, as well as other residues, were readily available throughout most of the year.
This commercialisation of residues in India has two broad consequences for the briquetting industry.
First, and most obviously, briquetting cannot be regarded as a way of utilising wastes which would otherwise be burnt or dumped. It is one of a number of potential channels of utilisation in which it competes with regard to the ultimate value of the product it produces. The very fact that the residues are purchased at rather high prices means that the product cannot be cheap and cannot therefore be regarded as a way of providing fuel to the rural poor dispossessed of free fuelwood or agro-residues. The converse of this is that briquetting in such a situation does not deprive the poor of a crude waste which they would otherwise utilise directly; removal of wastes from the sphere of local auto-collection and consumption has already proceeded to a considerable extent.
Second, the fact that residues already command a high price for other fuel uses means that briquettes have to find particular market niches in order to compete with direct combustion. In particular it throws great emphasis upon the transport costs of raw as compared with briquetted material.
In summary; agro-residues are plentifully available in India - at a price.
Background
Interest in briquetting appears to have emerged at the end of the 70s. One of the major manufacturers of piston-presses began production under licence in 1982 following survey work conducted in the previous few years. The main Indian design, the pyrolysis method developed at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), was also brought to the market at about this time. The briquettes produced by the two systems are quite different and they are aimed, in principle, at different markets; the IIT process for the household sector and the other type for the industrial market.
There appears to have been a small boom in such plants, particularly based upon the pyrolysis technology, with several dozen plants set up in the first half of the 80s. Many of these plants were small-scale entrepreneurial endeavours and few survived their early problems. These problems are discussed in more detail below but they concerned both the technology and the markets for the briquettes. It is not clear how many plants were set up as no statistics were collected, though in mid-1985, it was possible to list 23 plants based upon the IIT technology alone as well as 10 manufacturers of various types of plant. By mid-1987, only 2 of the plants were known to operate though at least 2 manufacturers were said to be still in business.
This initial burst of enterprise appears to have been based upon very over-sold prospects of quick profits. By 1987, the number of plants were considerably reduced but, as will be discussed below, those remaining considered their prospects to be reasonably good. Plants in Bombay and Pondicherry based upon piston machines were reported to be expanding from their initial size and one or two new plants were opening.
Case studies
In mid-1987, we visited 3 briquetting plants and obtained detailed information about their activities. This section summarises this information and also comments upon it in the general context of Indian briquetting. We concentrate on the following issues:
* the circumstances under which the plants were set up;
* the equipment used and its general success;
* the agro-residues used;
* the markets for the product;
Plant origins
Two of the plants were in northern India in Uttar Pradesh, one of the main rice areas, whilst the third was located near to Hyderabad in southern India. The main residue in each case was rice-husk though various additional residues had been investigated.
Each was founded under much the same circumstances: an individual interested in finding a new business activity saw briquetting machines in operation at a trade fair or exhibition and set up a plant using their own private resources. In two cases, the founder had an engineering background, in the other, he was a practicing lawyer.
All those concerned can best be described as enthusiastic entrepreneurs; people who wanted to make a business success of the plants but who also had a particular interest in the use of wastes to make a socially valuable product. It is clear that such enthusiasm was necessary to see them through the initial difficulties.
In all cases, the investment finance was private; either their own resources or a commercial loan from a bank. No government support or subsidy was available; indeed it a source of complaint that even the normal tax reliefs granted to new business had proved difficult to obtain The loans were made at normal commercial rates; one plant quoted a level of 13.5 %.
The plants were located in a variety of locations; from a semi-urban area to one about 3 kilometres from a town but close to a group of rice-mills to a fully rural plant about 30 kilometres from Hyderabad.
Equipment used
Two types of technology were in use at the three plants and a third was being evaluated at one plant. Two plants used mechanical piston units bought from Indian manufacturers whilst the third used the pyrolysis technology developed in an Indian research institute. A screw-press device with a heated die was being tested at the plant near Hyderabad; it was based upon a design developed by the plant owner.
The piston machines had quite different initial operating performance; one plant reported no problems in startup whilst the other had taken over a year to obtain satisfactory performance. This appeared to be directly related to the relationship with the manufacturer who, in one case, had offered considerable help in commissioning whilst in the other, the owner had been left effectively to his own devices.
This may have been a function of distance; in the best case, the manufacturer's plant was within a days drive, in the other, it was rather distant.
It was also likely that the different startup problems were related to the care of the initial installation. It is clear that attention has to be paid to the provision of good level foundations in a properly laid-out building. It is also important that the manufacturer should have direct experience of the residue concerned and should be able to provide initial assistance with matters such as die size and the quality of the residue used. The machines used in India are of a simple, fixed die-size design so the initial sizing is critical to success.
The plant which had experienced start-up problems had been left very much on its own. After surmounting the initial problems, the owner appeared to have set up a virtually self-supporting operation as he had arranged for replacement dies to be machined in a local plant to his own specifications. This is an interesting example of how briquetting technology can be adapted to particular local circumstances but it is not a good recipe for initial commercial success.
The two plants described above each used a standard piston briquetter. The plant based on pyrolysis technology had experienced a large number of technical problems, particularly in the pyrolysis and dryer stages. The process first chars rice-husk using heat generated by combusting the gases given of in the pyrolysis process. There had been corrosion from these gases and the accompanying liquids which necessitated replacement of some parts with a different material whilst the dryer (based upon waste-heat from the pyrolyser) was under-sized. Sun-drying of the product was used as an alternative.
The briquetting part of the process, which compacted carbonised rice-husk with a molasses binder, worked satisfactorily. it was essentially a multiple-hole extrusion press with very little pressure developed. The owner had received little support from the manufacturer and had made many of his own modifications including having replacement extruder made locally. In general, the process seemed to have been brought to the market before it was adequately engineered and tested.
Residues used
In each case, the only biomass used in significant quantities was rice-husk; in the two plants in Uttar Pradesh it was the only residue, except for some small quantities of sawdust in one plant. The Hyderabad plant received other residues in small quantities including some waste rice-husk from a brass plant where husk is used for polishing the metal goods. (This must set a record for efficient use of wastes; the use of waste waste). Other residues included some from an oil-mill and "anything else" that could be found.
The Uttar Pradesh plants were both located in major rice-growing areas by towns with a concentration of rice-mills. These mostly had a milling capacity of upwards of 100 tonnes/day so there was no great problem in finding material for a briquetting plant consuming, at most, 10-15 tonnes/day. It was reported that husk was freely available at a price which was seasonable variable from about 150-180 R/tonne at harvest to as much as 250/260 R/tonne.
The Hyderabad plant was not in a particularly high-yielding agricultural area and bought residues from a much wider range, sometimes more than 100 km. However, although the operator was forced to look around much more for residues, rice-husk still formed the basic input. It was reported to us that there were large and expanding briquetting plants in Pondicherry and Bombay which used a wider range of residues, possible because they were based near large cities. The great concentration on rice-husk was still striking, however, particularly as rice-husk, because of its high ash content, is far from an ideal residue. It is possible that other residues might be available for use. One plant had made briquettes using a mixture of husk and sawdust which burnt well but the sawdust was in short supply.
Markets
The markets for the three plants split neatly into two depending upon the briquetting process used.
The piston-machines produced large (up to 9 cm diameter) briquettes which could only be burnt effectively in industrial or large commercial boilers. Their market was as a coal replacement in industrial boilers plus a small market in establishments such as large schools.
Marketing was not a straightforward matter of price competition however as the high ash content of rice-husk meant that only certain types of combustion chamber were suitable. The fixed-grate type of furnace tended to become clogged with ash and the most ready sale was to step-furnaces in which the ash was pushed down through the combustion zone. This difficulty arose despite the fact that the competitive fuel in these boilers is coal which, in India, often has a high ash content. The type of ash from rice-husk is, however prone to setting into a hard crust which may lead to combustion problems.
In Brazil, it was reported that the difficulty of burning rice-husk briquettes in wood-burning boilers had led, in at least one case, to its abandonment as a briquetting residue. The problem is not so extreme in India as high-ash coal is the target fuel, but it does restrict the range of possible appliances.
The reason for the steady rise in the price of rice-husk has been the adoption of husk for direct combustion in some industrial plants. This has probably required some investment in changing the combustion system or entailed a loss of efficiency but, given the fact of such demand, it has proved difficult for briquettes to compete directly with such use. The price required to make a return on investment is at least 550-600 it/tonne and rice-husk even at 250 R/tonne looks a better fuel for those units which can consume it. (Briquettes with sawdust can command a higher price, about 900 it/tonne but the residue is much more expensive and in short supply).
This has meant that the Uttar Pradesh piston-plant sends most of its output of 4000 tonnes/year as far away as Agra and Delhi, a distance of 200-300 km. at a transport cost of 100-120 it/tonne. In Delhi, it was reported that wood cost 700-900 it/tonne and coal, 1 000-1 400 it/tonne whilst rice-husk was not available in any quantity.
In essence therefore, the Uttar Pradesh plant is taking residue from an area with rather little industry but a lot of agriculture to one which is the reverse; the profit lies in the lower transport cost and greater handleability of briquettes with respect to the residue and the higher cost of fuel in the target area. This marketing approach was not without costs; the plant had a partner in Delhi whose job was marketing the product.
The Hydererabad plant appeared to have less of a problem competing with the direct combustion of rice-husk, perhaps because the area did not have a great husk surplus but it still had to search around for suitable combustion appliances. Again, the product was transported to customers over distances sometimes greater than 100 km.
The second plant in Uttar Pradesh used the very different pyrolysis technology based upon a design developed at IIT in Delhi.
This process carbonises rice-husk by heating in the absence of air to produce a char. The char is then mixed with a binder, usually molasses, (some clay is also added, to improve the combustion properties) and then passed through a pressure extrusion process to produce slightly damp cylindrical briquettes. These have to be dried before use; the plant has a dryer installed which uses waste gases from the pyrolysis unit. This is under-sized and air-drying is used to supplement the mechanical dryer. Strictly speaking it is doubtful whether any significant "densification" occurs in the extrusion stage. Certainly there is no chemical action analogous to the lignin release which occurs in the production of briquettes from an untreated residue. However, the product is conventionally called a briquette.
The market envisaged for this process appears to have always been the household sector. Char-based briquettes have been seen as smokeless replacement for wood or charcoal burning in the home. In practice, pure rice-char briquettes have proved extremely difficult to market. A number of objections were raised by domestic customers including the too-rapid burning time (45 minutes) compared with charcoal or smokeless coal briquettes, a sweet smell of molasses, and, in the cases of small commercial premises such as teashops, the key fact that coal costs the same and burns better.
As a result of these complaints and despite active marketing, the pure rice briquettes are no longer marketed to urban consumers in the medium-sized town (Bareilly) where the plant is located. Sales are made to households in the hill areas. Here there is a need for a winter heating fuel and the briquettes are used as a charcoal substitute in room-heaters. Some sales were also made to small industries such as camphor burning but the ash content proved a drawback.
The plant-owner has attempted to improve the quality of the briquettes by producing a version made with 50% rice-char and 50% coal-breeze. This latter, a fine coal dust, is obtained from a steelworks in the region. Coal breeze is expensive, 800 it/tonne, but its use in briquettes enables a marketable product to be made which is sold to retailers for 950 it/tonne as against 850 R/tonne for the pure rice-char product.
Pure coal-breeze briquettes are also made in a simple pressing machine in which molasses are also used as a binder. The resulting briquettes are ovoids and readily saleable at 1100 R/tonne to teashops and small restaurants as a semi-smokeless fuel. There is almost certainly a greater profit margin in pure coal briquettes which require very little investment or operating costs. The raw material is limited however and the owner is committed to the production of rice-based fuel in which, quite rightly, he sees a much greater potential.
The dilemma of marketing this product is clear. The target market is very large but composed of a large number of individual consumers who are not likely to obtain all their fuel in the form of briquettes nor to change either their cooking-appliances or expectations of the fuel. The product is not cheap. The plant is labour intensive employing 9 men per shift, which adds about 170 it/tonne to the costs of the briquettes, whilst the raw material costs up to 250 it/tonne. It is therefore difficult to compete by cutting prices very much in comparison with other fuels whilst the product offers no great advantage over coal or wood.
One market niche has been found, the hill households, and the owner is searching for others. But whilst the main product is confined to a coal/rice mixture which offers barely any price markup over the raw material cost of the coal, it is clear that the commercial future of the plant will be difficult.
The owner accepts this; his continued commitment to the plant seems to be as much a consequence of his social belief in the future of such fuels than any hardheaded commercial judgement.
Plant manufacturers
There have been a number of Indian manufacturers of briquetting plant of various kinds though it is not clear how many of them have ever been- or are now active. One manufacturer was visited; Ameteep Engineering, which produces conventional piston machines originally built under licence from Hausmann though this has now lapsed.
The firm has been reasonably successful selling 6 machines since production started in 1983 with 3 more on order in mid-87. This is however only a very small part of their total business, the manufacture of power presses and shears for the metal industry, and certainly is a smaller number than their original hopes.
The technical features of the machine are basically of conventional form though it has had a number of modifications for Indian conditions. These were described as essentially involving simplification of the original design, echoing other comments made elsewhere that European and North American machines tend to be over-engineered for developing countries. It is not entirely clear what this means but appears to relate to the perceived need in Western designs for the machine to run unattended for long periods. It is also not clear too what extent such engineering practice contributes to the high cost of the Western plant. Certainly Ameteep claim to be able to produce at substantially below quoted European prices.
The machines seen in operation worked well and the only customer of Ameteep interviewed said that the after-sales service provided was good with help given to training plant engineers and in commissioning the machine.
Ameteep acted purely as manufacturers; they have no ambition to set up briquetting plants themselves and they rely heavily on the entrepreneurial aspirations of others. They have developed the machine design, starting from the Hausmann licence, entirely on their own resources, illustrating once again the very independent way in which residue briquetting has developed in India. Unlike the European and American situations where considerable subsidies of various kinds have been given to both machinery producers and development plants, there is no evidence of any subsidy or development funding being made available in India.
continue
<section>8</section>
Chapter 16.Briquetting in Sri Lanka
Energy context
Sri Lankas's main indigenous energy resources are hydro power and fuel wood. Both are limited but not yet depleted, i.e. there is still a potential for harnessing more of the about 2 000 MW hydro power potential of which about half is now in operation or under construction. The Mahaweli programme is a major scheme for the generation of hydro power and control of water supply. Clearances of forests for hydro power projects and rural development programmes have created a surge in the supply of fuel wood, which has mainly been absorbed by an expanding industrial sector.
The resulting deforestation is a severe problem, clearly showing that the use of this type of fuel is unsustainable (Sousson 1985) or would result in a complete depletion of Sri Lanka's forests within a few decades. In order to avert such a situation, numerous tree planting programmes have been started but these have not yet reached the level where they can balance the present rate of cutting.
The total usage of bioenergy is estimated to be 8.6 million tonnes per annum, or 71 % of Sri Lanka's total energy balance. About half of the biomass is fuelwood, the rest being crop wastes (mainly from coconut and rubberwood plantations). Electricity contributes to 9% of the total, while imported oil make up the balance. Most of the industrial fuelwood is consumed for drying purposes in the tea, rubber and coconut processing industries, in the brick and tile industry and in bakeries . It can not be readily substituted for by electricity. Oil will have to be imported and substitution of oil for fuelwood in this sector is likely to create such balance of payments problems that it would severely hamper the industrial production in the country.
Thus Sri Lanka gives the impression of a country with a potentially difficult energy equation, which has not yet given rise to severe energy supply problems. All the signs indicate that there will be a crisis within a timeframe of one or two decades.
Use of fuelwood within the household sector, though taking 85% of the total biomass requirement, is only to a minor degree responsible for the looming fuelwood crisis. It appears that most of the rural population gathers its own fuel from trees planted around homesteads and fields and from wastes arising in coconut and rubber wood plantations. Studies show that there is easy access to these resources, reflected by the much higher per capita fuel consumption by the rural population compared to the urban situation where a major portion of the fuel to the urban situation where a major portion of the fuel wood has to be bought for cash. This fact could be seen as a positive factor, indicating a large potential for fuelwood conservation in the household sector.
In this context it is clear that industrial energy conservation is the most essential remedy to meet an upcoming crisis. It is also in the industrial sector, where the fuel supply is on a commercial basis, that the chances of introducing fuels based on agro-residues are greatest. So far the efforts in this direction have been very modest in Sri Lanka and the ensuing results discouraging, largely because of the continuing low level of fuelwood prices.
Availability of residues
In the parts of Sri Lanka where coconut and rubberwood plantations are dominant, wastes from these crops make important contributions to the regional energy supply. It has been estimated that rubberwood and coconut wastes on an overall basis contributes to 47 % of the total biomass use in the country (Nanana-akkara 1987). The residues are burnt both in industries for drying, as in the desiccated coconut plants, and for steam raising as well as in household stoves. The coconut shells make excellent fuels, especially when carbonised. Development work in Sri Lanka is aimed at increasing the versatility of these kind of residues through gasification.
Looking at coconuts, the only waste still unexploited is the coir dust, which is the residue remaining after the husks have been converted into fibre. An estimated 60% of the husk ends up as coir dust on large wasteheaps adjacent to the fibre mills. Coir dust will have to be dried from its moisture content of about 85% either prior to briquetting or afterwards in the case of a low pressure process.
The total production of crop residues on Sri Lanka is 3.9 million tonnes (Bamard 1985). We have not found a breakdown of these figures into the various crop wastes. From one source (Samarakoon 1987) we have the following figures of residues available for briquetting:
tonnes
Coir dust 500 000
Paddy husk 320 000
Rice straw 400 000
Bagasse 20 000
A residue such as rice husk will have to be densified before use outside of the rice-mills can be made possible. It is likely the patterns of India and Thailand will be repeated in Sri Lanka which would mean that there exist a surplus of rice husk but it will not be available free of charge. As rice is grown in roughly the same geographical regions as coconuts, where there are other, more convenient, fuel sources available, the prospects for a large number of rice husk briquetting projects on Sri Lanka look rather faint.
Bagasse is to some extent used within the sugar industries already today. It would be quite easy to create a surplus, if the resulting fuel briquettes could find an outlet at prices that would pay for the costs. Experience from other parts of the world suggests that this is not likely to happen, at least at current energy price levels.
Possibly the most economic residue on Sri Lanka would be sawdust, which is to a large extent unexploited and often pollutes the rivers where the sawmills are located. There is no known data about the arisings of sawdust in the Sri Lankan wood industry, nor its potentials for fuel purposes. Drawing some parallels with other countries, particularly Thailand, sawdust briquettes are normally accepted as industrial boiler and furnace fuels and in some situations even as household fuel.
In particular, charcoal made from sawdust briquettes is a high value product which in several cases is sold at prices that makes the production profitable. In Sri Lanka, charcoal is today not a very common fuel, except for some minor use in urban households and restaurants. With increased living standards it is possible that charcoal use will spread, increasing the pressure in the diminishing resources of natural wood. Production of charcoal out of residues could be one way to ameliorate the effects of such a development.
History of briquetting
It seems fair to say that the development of briquetting in Sri Lanka has been somewhat patchy. Several European manufacturers report selling machines to Sri Lanka over the past decade and it is known that some Taiwanese units were also purchased. No record of their operations currently exist however and it may be assumed that they are now defunct. As far as we know, there were no ongoing briquetting operation of any kind in mid 1987 and no solid plans existed for such operations either.
Several organisations have been doing development work in this field. The most extensive work seems to have been done by the Ceylon Tobacco Company (CTC) through its subsidiary CTC Services Ltd. They have mainly been interested in coir dust briquetting but have also studied the briquetting of rice husk, tobacco dust and saw dust.
Using a Japanese screw extruder (Shimada) they have done experimental briquetting of all the above mentioned materials with good results (Lecamvasam 1987) in that the resulting briquettes were of reasonable quality, which is in line with our general view that most screw extruders and mechanical piston machines produce briquettes with acceptable characteristics. The technical problems encountered were related to the high moisture content of coir dust and saw dust and the high silica content of the rice husk.
The development stopped when CTC same to the conclusion that large scale operation would not be economically feasible, mainly because of logistical problems of gathering the raw material and the low cost of competing fuels.
The last activity in the briquetting field by CTC was the operation of the Kadirana pilot plant for low density briquettes using the process developed by Mr Samarakoon. This project is discussed in more detail below.
A case study
During our visit to Sri Lanka in mid-1987 we met together with representatives from the Ministry of Energy, CTC Services and Mr Samarakoon to discuss the process developed by Samarakoon and tested in the Kadirana coconut fibre mill by CTC. Operation of this pilot plant had discontinued a short while before our visit. The reasons given for this decision were organisational rather than technical. As the process according for the people involved worked well and profitable, it is worth describing here.
Coir dust from the daily production of a mill, or from its waste heap, is mixed with a binder in the proportion of 1:100 by weight. The binder used in the trials was lime. A rotary mixer ensures a good blending of the two material before the mix is introduced in the press. In the pilot plant, the press was an old tobacco baling press in which the material was spread in layers between trays of corrugated metal measuring 16 × 16" (400 × 400mm). The press was filled with 13 such layers and when hydraulic force was employed, water was pressed out of the material through holes in the side of the matrix, thus decreasing the initial moisture content of about 85% down to 60%. The resulting briquette, 16 × 16" and about 3 cm thick, was reported to drop to about 25% in 10-15 days. The production rate with this setup was about 1 ton of product per day. It had three press matrixes in rotation and the total drying surface was about 10 000 m².
The resulting briquettes weighs about 2 kg if the moisture content is 20 %. It has a density of about 400 kg/m³ and seems to be withstand normal handling and storage without deterioration. Though it is not brittle, it can be broken by hand into logs along surface indentations thus providing for the stoking of small boilers and stoves.
Though the individual briquette is far less dense than those resulting from high pressure processes, the form of the briquette makes it suitable for stacking, which results in reasonable storage volumes.
During the operation of the pilot plant, which went along for two years ending in September, 1987, briquettes were delivered on a commercial basis to 7 customers (5 desiccated coconut industries, 1 oil mill and 1 tile manufacturer). They were reported to be satisfied with the briquettes except for the tile manufacturer who could not produce tiles of the desired quality.
The average price received from these customers were 800 its/tonne (US$29 ). This is a premium over the normal fuel wood price to industry which lies in the 300-500 its/tonne range (US$11-18 ). Higher fuel wood prices exist. For example, a special hardwood called weera is trucked in to the desiccated coconut industries which burns this wood in its drying furnaces. The cost was reported to be 1 200 its/tonne (US$43).
Table 9: Costs of Full Scale Low-Pressure Briquetting Plant
Rs
Investment 125,000 Rs: Annuity 17% 21 250
Raw materials: Coir dust NIL
Lime: 1% and 700 its/tonne 2 800
Electricity: 8 kWh/tonne at 1.80 Rs/kWh 5 750
Personnel: 75 000
Insurance, taxes etc 25 000
Total costs 129 800
Annual production 400 tonnes 325 its/tonne
The production cost for the coir-dust briquettes in the Kadiran plant was reported to be 450 its/tonne, i.e. it left a margin for transportation costs and profits of about 350 its/tonne. No exact breakdown of this production cost can be given but we have made the estimate shown in Table 9 based on information given by the operators:
Although the coir dust in this calculation is assumed to be free of charge, this is not the real case. In the Kadirana plant, this cost was paid in the form of a charge for land rental with an annual amount of 50 000 Rs. This brings the real production cost up to the 450 its/tonne (US$16 ) reported by the operators.
The process is patented by Mr Samarakoon and at the time of our visit it was unclear whether there were going to be any commercial applications in Sri Lanka. Undoubtedly the process offers a low-cost alternative to the more traditional briquetting methods covered in this report.
As a matter of fact, given the low fuelwood prices in Sri Lanka, it is unlikely that any such high-pressure process could produce briquettes at prices competitive with the current fuelwood supplies. As pointed out earlier, sawdust charcoal briquettes would be the likely starting point for the development of residue briquetting in the country, perhaps parallelled with some low-pressure coir-dust briquetting.
Chapter 17.Briquetting in Thailand
Energy context
The energy scene in Thailand can be divided in two parts: the rural part which encompasses most of the country and 70% of the total population of 50 million and the urban and industrialized part which is mainly concentrated in Bangkok and its immediate surroundings.
Gas and oil from offshore finds can support a share of the energy demands in the urban area and from industry but imported oil still accounts for the major share of the country's energy balance (UNDP/World Bank 1985). Electric power based on these fuels and from lignite will also become dominant in this area. Charcoal will remain the major cooking fuel for the urban poor however, as well as in restaurants and small food industry for the foreseeable future.
For the rural population, wood and charcoal are the main fuels and, at least in parts of the country, deforestation has made them in short supply. The underlying reason for the deforestation is not the cutting of wood for fuel but clearing of land for plantations and the use of wood for the sawmill industry. In the part of Thailand where the scarcity is most acute, which are parts of the Central Plains and much of the north-east, gathering of fuelwood is a cumbersome task and a cause for severe hardship among the population.
Table 10: Energy Consumption in Thailand, 1983 ('000 toe)
Rural Urban Total
Traditional 
Fuelwood 2 971.7 15.0 2 986.7
Charcoal 2 219.7 280.2 2 499.9
Agricultural residues 526.9 - 526.9
Bagasse 1 205.0 - 1 205.0
Subtotal 6 923.3 295.2 7 218.5
Modern 
Petroleum products 2 259.4 6 938.2 9 197.6
Electricity - 190.5 1 236.8 1 427.3
Lignite/Coal 38.2 41.6 179.8
Subtotal 2 488.1 8 316.6 10 804.7
Total 9 411.4 8 611.8 18 023.2
Source: World Bank 85
However, despite the problem of deforestation, in the monetized fuelwood sectors, market prices of fuelwood are still quite low. They are at a level (0.3 - 0.5 Baht/kg or 12 - 20 US$/tonne) where it is very difficult for manufactured fuels to compete, whatever the cost of the raw material and the process.
Land-owners are encouraged to plant fast growing tree species such as eucalyptus on land previously cleared for farming purposes. Though the planting of eucalyptus is not without controversy in Thailand, it is increasing. Such fuelwood plantations may help to solve the country's shortage of indigenous paper and charcoal and, possibly, become a fuel source for the electrification of the rural parts.
One special problem has been created through the inflow of refugees from neighbouring countries. In the refugee camps along the Kampuchean border, cutting of wood is prohibited. Thus they constitute the main market for the suppliers of saw-dust and rice-husk briquettes still active in Thailand.
Availability of resources
Thailand has a good base for the production of a variety of crops. Rice is dominant but with high production figures also for cassava, sugar cane, maize, sorghum and soybeans. Coconuts are grown on the Malacca peninsula and groundnuts can also be viewed as a potential raw material supplier for fuel production. The wood industry, though [united in size, constitutes a largely untapped source of material for briquetting.
Table 11: Arisings and Energy Content of Major Residues
Residue Arisings ('000 tonnes) Yield (t/ha) Energy content ( × 10^15J)
Cassava stalks 7 115.20 5.76 39.84
Coconut husks 355.08 0.91 4.62
Coconut shells 161.40 0.41 2.91
Cotton stalks 244.00 2.13 1.37
Groundnut stalks 363.25 2.98 2.03
Maize stalks 6 004.60 3.58 33.62
Mungbean stalks 703.25 1.45 3.94
Rice straw 25 318.50 2.63 212.66
Rice husks 4 219.75 0.44 58.23
Sorghum stalks 827.05 3.37 4.63
Soybean stalks 340.20 2.73 1.90
Bagasse 5 857.68 10.04 82.00
Sawdust and shavings 0.77
Total 448.52
Source: Bhattacharya 1985
Rice-husk yields at the rice-mills vary within the range 20-30 % of paddy rice depending on milling efficiency and rice quality. The total production of rice-husk in Thailand for the crop season 82/83 was estimated to be 4.2 million tonnes. Output of rice mills vary widely; one survey (Bhattacharya 1985) included rice mills ranging from 24 tonnes/day to 500 tonnes/day. Seven out of eight rice-mills in this survey used rice- husks for the generation of steam through direct firing.
However, there is still a surplus of rice-husks even after steam generation, which in favourable cases can be sold to brick manufacturers for combustion and poultry farms for bedding at prices in the range of 3.7 to 9.3 US$/tonne. This does not dispose of total arisings and the disposal of rice-husks (and rice-husk ash) creates a problem. It seems common that, in rural areas, villagers can bring home rice-husks free.
Thailand produced in 1982 about 2.3 million tonnes of sawn timber, yielding sawdust at an average rate of 10% of the input. Though sawdust is wet, which means that is has to go through an expensive drying process before it can be briquetted and the total waste production is low compared to rice-husk, it is a popular material for briquetting as customers prefer the product, especially when carbonized after briquetting. Uncarbonized sawdust briquettes can still only be marketed in the refugee camps, where they are favoured before rice-husk briquettes. The charcoal briquettes, or tube charcoal as the fuel is termed, is sold at a premium price over wood charcoal, due to its higher density and heat value, and its even quality.
Sawdust can to some extent be sold to customers such as papermills and (allegedly) fish farms at prices ranging from 5 to 20 US$/tonne. Similarly to rice-husks, internal use and sales to other customers of sawdust account for only a minor portion of the total production. A surplus which has no alternative use other than for fuel making is thus at hand.
Rice-husks and sawdust are the only materials known to be used as raw materials for fuel briquettes of any quantity. A number of low-pressure extruders have been sold for the production of "green-fuel briquettes using leaves, bagasse and other wet materials but the quantities produced are probably insignificant.
History of briquetting
A factory in the Pathum Thani province imported a set of four briquetting machines and a rotary dryer from Taiwan around 1978 in order to produce sawdust briquettes. This event appears to mark the beginning of briquetting in Thailand (Bhattacharya 1985).
The number of factories increased sharply in the beginning of the 80's, following the influx of refugees from Kampuchea. The refugee camps provided a captive market for the briquettes which stimulated a number of entrepreneurs to start up production. Although the first briquetters utilized were Taiwanese of the heated die extruder type, a number of Thai manufacturers soon established themselves on the market. US. Machine was the most successful of these local manufacturers.
It is reported that V.S. Machine has delivered 200 units over the past nine years. This is an impressive market share of the about 300 machines which have been distributed in Thailand according to one estimate (Bhattacharya 1985).
The other Thai manufacturers are: T.I.S.T.R (a government research organization) which have made and distributed about a dozen machines, and S.P. Energy, which so far have only manufactured the 6 machines used in the company's own briquette production. All these manufacturers are making copies of the Taiwanese design first introduced in the country. The initial intensive sales of briquetting machines, typically to rice-mill and saw-mill owners who saw a way to get rid of some of their waste products and make a profit at the same time, quickly slowed down. Many bought several machines each, up to a dozen in one example, but most were soon left idle or in some cases, never commissioned. Often the plant owners had made the purchase at a trade fair without proper investigations of markets and production cost. To illustrate this one can look at the 200 machines originally installed by US. Machines of which only 20 are reported to be still in operation (Reines 1987).
Of all the machines installed in rice-mills (the total number of mills which have had briquetters is unknown but believed to be several dozens) only two producers remains on the open market. We visited one of these producers, S.P. Energy which still manages to produce rice-husk briquettes at prices competitive enough to be able to sell to the refugee camps. (The briquettes sell for about 4 Baht/kg at this artificial market and the price ex works in Bangkok, 600 km away is about 1.25 Baht. This should be compared to the common wood fuel price of 0.5 Baht/kg.)
Producers of saw-dust briquettes have fared better than rice-mill owners and there are still seven plants making briquettes both for the refugee camps and the open market (Bhattacharya 1988). Uncarbonized briquettes cannot be sold on the open market any more and therefore they go solely to the refugee camps. (A few temples are reported to buy some uncarbonized briquettes although the volumes appears to be insignificant).
Biocoal
The method of carbonizing sawdust briquettes seems unique to Thailand and was developed there by briquette producers shortly after the introduction of briquetting equipment in the country. The history and experience of biocoal in Thailand has been thoroughly investigated by Bhattacharya et al. at the Asian Institute of Technology in Bangkok (Bhattacharya 1988).
Biocoal was introduced as it was clear that uncarbonized briquettes had to compete with fuelwood at price levels which were impossible to achieve by the briquette producers. It fumed out that the carbonized briquettes were excellent substitutes for wood charcoal and could be produced at competitive prices. This development took place around 1982. In 1986 and 1987, new producers appeared on the fuel scene, but these were mainly aiming for the export markets. They produce biocoal from sawdust and export most of their output to South Korea and Hong Kong. Material unworthy of export is sold on local markets and is especially popular among street food vendors.
One of the largest independent producers of carbonized saw-dust briquettes has 12 V.S. machines and employs 22 people. It has a production target of 50 tonnes per month. The cost of sawdust is reported to be between 0.03 to 0.04 Baht per kg delivered (1.2 - 1.6 US$/t). To this should be added an assumed briquetting cost of about 1 Baht/kg (estimates range between 0.8 to 1.5 Baht/kg). For each kg of product charcoal, 3 kg of briquettes are used in the carbonization kilns. This results in a rough product cost of 3.2 Baht/kg (130 US$/t).
The selling price for this type of charcoal is between 4.6 and 5.5 Baht/kg depending on the quality. This probably gives a large enough margin for transport costs, dealer commissions and a reasonable profit for the manufacturer .The interesting thing about the above example though is that the plant is not set up primarily to produce charcoal briquettes to the local markets but to export boxed charcoal briquettes to Japan, Korea and countries in the Middle East. The likely use of the charcoal briquettes in these countries is for barbecuing though no price data is available.
A 1 kg three-colour box with sawdust charcoal was reported to cost 18 Baht/kg in central grocery stores in Bangkok. This example gives an idea of where the briquetting market is heading in Thailand, a country where briquetting has been widely tried and tested. It is no longer a means for solving a critical fuel problem for the rural poor but a business proposition amongst others for earning export incomes. Future developments for briquetting in Thailand seems at the moment to be rather doubtful. Sales of new machines are dropping to a tenth of its peak value and new business venturers can buy almost unused machinery on the second-hand market. The government is not particularly interested in the issue and there is currently no national programme for the increased use of agricultural wastes through briquetting
The official view is that some residues can contribute to the national energy balance, particularly rice-husks, but the economy of briquetting projects is doubtful and has to be looked at on a case by case basis (Rutanaprakam 1987).
As briquettes cannot compete with fuelwood which is available at prices ranging between 0.3 and 0.5 Baht/kg (whereas briquette production costs are at least on the 1 Baht/kg level) the question is whether depletion of the natural fuelwood resources will mean a fast increase in these comparatively low prices. Local experts doubt this for two reasons. One is that land cleared for agricultural crops has not been profitable and there is a trend to replant these areas with fast-growing tree species, a development encouraged by the government. Secondly, tree-planting on a village level can yield sufficient amounts of fuelwood within a short time, something believed to take place if and when farmers feel a real shortage of wood (Chomcham 1987).
Wood energy plantations are likely to produce some substitutes for industrial use of coal, gas and oil but then most likely in the form of chips. Briquetting this wood would mean an unecessary increase of the price which undoubtedly will have to be much higher than the 0.5 Baht/kg level for fuel wood in order for the plantations to become profitable.
What remains is the potential market for carbonized briquettes in urban areas, particularly Bangkok. It is clear that the "tube charcoal", as carbonized saw-dust briquettes are called, can successfully compete with ordinary charcoal on this market but that the potential is limited by the availability of sawdust within reasonable transportation distances.
The export opportunities for this type of fuel looks promising but this may be a side-track of the question of a global fuel-wood shortage in developing countries. The last market for uncarbonized briquettes, made from saw-dust and in one case, of rice-husks, is the refugee camps. As the situation in Kampuchea becomes normalized, this market will gradually disappear and the first fuel to be phased out is going to be the rice-husk briquettes, a fact well understood by the producer SP-Energy
Thailand stands out as a country where briquetting of agricultural wastes has been tried on a large scale, found to be too expensive, and has died out except for providing fuel for a few specialized market segments.
A Case Study
During a visit in Thailand in mid-1987, we visited S.P. Energy the last remaining rice-husk briquette manufacturer. The following is a general description of the background of the company and how it is run. The plant is owned by Mr Sayan, who functions as its general manager, together with his brother and sister. Mr Sayan has a degree in diesel technology from a university in USA and his brother has an engineering examination from a Bangkok university
In 1980 they were introduced to briquetting on a small business promotion scheme and decided to start a briquetting operation using the waste from their uncle's rice-mill.
After a very brief study of a Taiwanese screw briquetting machine they built a duplicate using, amongst other things, used auto parts for the drive and gear mechanism. During the years they have made modifications to their machines when extending the plant and replacing worn out machines but in principle they still operate with the same type of machine. In all they have now made 6 or 7 machines, all for their own use. In spite of the unorthodox origins, the machines appear to work well and produce briquettes of good quality
The rice-mill is now leased out for operation but the lease includes the free use of rice-husks which they carry in baskets from the rice-mill to their own storage pile. The pile is shielded from direct rain by plastic covers but moisture in the rice husks is one of the problems in the operation. Normally they can produce briquettes from rice-husk with up to 15% but under certain conditions they can accept up to 20% moisture.
The end of the rainy season provides for the most difficult operating conditions, both in respect to the moisture content of the raw material as well as its availability. They have bought rice-husks from other rice-mills at such times and for this reason they also keep a truck for transportation.
S.P Energy operates continuously with 2 machine operators per shift plus 1 welder There is a foreman during the dayshift plus one extra hand for unspecified duties. At the times when they operate all 6 machines during the night shift, a foreman is needed for overseeing the operation and helping out with any problems which arise.
The welder's job is to rebuild the wom screws of the presses which wear out rapidly. He does this continuously throughout the day.
The workforce get their food and lodging at the factory provided for by the plant owner as part of their salary They are employed all around the year and get one free transportation to their home villages in the north each year.
The company sells the entire production to middlemen who, in a chain containing several links, supply the briquettes to the refugee camps along the Kampuchean border 600700 km from Bangkok. Mr Sayan claims not to have a long term contract and complained that this fact prevented him from planning his production and storage needs ahead. He sold his product ex works for 125 Baht/kg and he was aware of the much higher price his briquettes fetched at the final point of consumption. This price is, according to one source, said to be 4 Baht/kg.
Transportation cost accounts for only a part of the difference between the price paid to S.P Energy and what the briquettes fetch in the refugee camps. The cost of a truck for taking the briquettes to its market is about 3 000 Baht. Even if the load is only some 6 tonnes, this would mean a transport cost of about 0.5 Baht per kg
Mr Sayan sees no future in his briquetting operation. He has seen his competitors dose down one by one leaving him the only supplier of rice husk briquettes with only one outlet, an outlet he thinks will remain only for another couple of years. His plans for the future involves going into fish farming which he regards as much more promising than briquetting.
<section>9</section>
Part: 4.The economics of briquetting
Chapter 18.Introduction to the economics of briquetting
Chapter 19.Capital costs
Chapter 20.Operating costs of briquetting
Chapter 21.Total costs of briquetting
Chapter 18.Introduction to the economics of briquetting
The financial costs of briquetting are very dependent upon the nature of the project, in particular upon the raw materials used and the plant location. The object of this section is to provide an indication of what range of costs can be expected for both operating and capital costs and what is the resulting unit product cost. Whether or not briquetting is economic in any given location will depend critically upon how these unit costs relate to the price of the likely substitute fuels. Such prices vary so widely that it is impossible to generalise about the likely economic benefits of briquetting. It is hoped that the costs set out here will enable some preliminary decisions to be made as to the likely role of briquetting in particular circumstances.
The first two sections deal with capital and operating costs whilst the final section looks at the total unit costs of briquetting.
Chapter 19.Capital costs
The capital cost of a plant is not always easy to establish on a consistent basis.
In different circumstances there may be different conventions about what is included in capital cost: for example, estimates made by funding agencies tend to include a fairly generous amount for initial spare parts whilst commercially funded plants often include spares as part of operational costs.
Another major source of variation is whether the plant is a stand-alone operation or whether it is part of an existing plant. In the latter case, it is often possible to utilise existing buildings and to eliminate a significant element of capital cost. It is not unusual in plants with dedicated new buildings for these together with site civil works to equal the cost of new machinery.
Probably the biggest variation in plant capital costs, however, comes from the raw material to be used and the form in which it is collected. There are three reasons for this.
First, the nature of the residue may be such as to significantly lower the rated output of the briquetting machine. Normally machines are rated according to their output using wood-wastes and if less dense residues are used then the actual throughput may be less by as much as 50%. In one Indian plant visited, the machine used was capable of delivering 1.5 tonnes/hour fed with sawdust but only 1.0 tonnes/hour using rice-husk. As the cost of a briquetter seems to be almost linearly dependent upon rated output, the unit capital costs associated with a wood residue are likely to be lower than for most agro-residues.
Secondly, the form of the initial feed may require more or less rigorous treatment before it is fed to the briquetter as such. Some wastes, for example sawdust, often need to be dried to reduce their moisture to the 15% or so tolerated in most machines. The cost of a drier can easily equal or even exceed the cost of the briquetter itself. For example, the Brazilian manufacturer, Biomax, which makes both presses and driers, quotes a list price ex-factory of US$39 000 for a 1.1 tonnes/hour piston press, US$11 000 for associated conveyance and silos, and US$52 000 for a dryer plus heater of l tonnes/hour capacity. It is likely that in this case the cost of the briquetter is unusually low but the dryer is clearly a big additional cost.
Other ancillary equipment may include various types of chipper or shredder to reduce the size of the residue. This will be required for various forms of wood-waste other than sawdust and for certain types of agro-residue such as cotton stalks.
Thirdly, there is a very big difference between field-residues such as cotton-stalks or straw and factory-residues such as sawdust or coffee-husk if the cost of the equipment to collect the residue is included in the initial capital cost. This is not always the case; the straw-briquetting operations which have been set up particularly in Germany, often assume that existing tractors and trailers are available to collect the straw from the field.
If this is not the case then the capital costs of collection equipment are likely to be large. In a recent study of the costs of a wheat-straw briquetting plant in Ethiopia (World Bank 1986), it was estimated that 3 straw-balers, 5 trailers and 6 tractors would be needed to move 5 000 tonnes/annum of straw. The estimated cost was US$107 500 before transport to Ethiopia.
Finally, it should be noted that one important aspect of capital cost is what may be called the engineering and design standards of the plant.
This is difficult to define but easy enough to appreciate when making a site visit. Many, though by no means all, of the commercial plants visited were cramped, very dusty and sometimes dangerous with unguarded fly-wheels and rudimentary wiring. Such plants are often the ones which are squeezed into residue-producing plants to utilise existing buildings. Naturally, the capital costs of such plants are lower than plants which have firm floors, proper electrical fittings and are reasonably spacious.
This aspect is not necessarily related to the use made of labour rather than machinery to convey and store the residues and product. However, it is likely that in a plant where little or no use is made of mechanical handling, there will be a need to have spacious buildings to avoid problems of dust and dangerous overcrowding. In one of the Indian plants visited, this meant that the capital cost of the new buildings used was almost equal to the cost of the machinery. Thus savings made on ancillary handling equipment in favour of human labour may be partially illusory if reason able working conditions are to be maintained.
Nevertheless, it is probable that some of the development-agency funded projects are over-designed relative to privately funded projects with too great an emphasis placed upon mechanical handling, storage and bagging.
In order to put some numbers on these general comments, Table 12 shows the capital costs of six plants in various countries. Three of these are design studies (Plants A,B,E) which contain rather detailed cost breakdowns whilst three are of actual plants (C,D,F) for which rather less detailed breakdowns were available.
Table 12 shows the estimated capital cost per tonne of output for each plant assuming that it is required to pay back the initial capital sum with interest in a 10 year period. Three interest rates are shown: 7%, 10% and 15%. A number of other conventions could be used for the capital charge but they would make little difference to the results.
It can be seen that the plant with the lowest capital cost is Plant C based upon a unit at a wood-working factory in Brazil. This may be regarded as an extreme case; the raw material is dense and needs only chipping to provide an acceptable feed whilst the cost of a piston-briquetter in Brazil is much lower than anywhere else. The cost of buildings was minimal, amounting to little more than some covered space alongside the factory building. The products were removed daily to local customers so little on-site storage was required. The only equipment required in addition to the briquettes was a chipper and some simple pneumatic conveyance to a feed silo. The capital cost of 4.3 US$/tonne at 10% interest can be regarded as very much a minimum for any operation.
The four plants D,E,F,A are interesting as despite being for different materials at different sizes and in different countries, they show very much the same level of capital costs. It should be borne in mind that the figures in Table 12 have been put into a common currency and therefore may suffer from the usual problems of multi-currency comparisons.
Plant D is based upon an actual operation in Kenya where a small screw briquetter has been installed in an existing plant to feed an on-site wood boiler. The only equipment needed additional to the press was some modifications to an existing dryer. The amounts shown for spares and engineering and installation are notional as the expenses were not specifically itemised.
Plant E is a design study (World Bank 1987) for a new sawdust-based plant in Ghana using 6 Taiwanese screw-presses which would be supplied with a dryer. The additional equipment includes a lorry to collect raw materials and a fork-lift vehicle onsite.
Plant F is an actual Indian plant using rice-husk feed. The material requires no preparation and, as all handling is manual, there are no additional equipment costs. This low level of equipment costs is probably one reason why rice-husk briquetting has managed to retain some commercial viability in India despite its apparent disadvantages of high inherent ash content and raw material costs.
The plant required completely new buildings and these were provided, at this plant, on a generous scale. In other Indian plants, old buildings are used with a substantial cost-saving.
Plant A is a design study (World Bank 1986) for a plant using coffee-parchment sited at an existing plant in Addis Ababa which is planned to move in a short time. It is rather highly engineered with pneumatic conveyance throughout and a large intermediate storage silo. At the new site, the building costs are estimated at over US$57 000. Coffee parchment requires no preliminary treatment before feeding to the briquetter so the additional equipment costs shown are all for handling and storage.
The final plant, B. is a design study (World Bank 1986) for an operation based upon straw collected from the fields in Ethiopia. The very large additional costs required for this kind of unit are obvious with the capital charge at 10% rising to nearly US$32/tonne. The extra equipment needs arise not only from the field collection equipment but from the bale breaker, hammer-mill and associated conveyance equipment.
These investment costs, although high, are not out of line with the capital costs reported for straw-briquetting in Europe. One plant (KTBL 1983) of 1 000 tonnes/annum throughput is quoted as costing US$150 000 in 1983, the equivalent of about US$900 000 when adjusted to the 500 tonnes/annum throughput of the proposed Ethiopian plant in 1986 prices. Another plant of only 375 tonnes/annum throughput is quoted as costing US$90 000 for equipment plus US$35 000 for storage equipment; the equivalent of about US$1.7 million when adjusted to 5 000 tonnes throughput. Although these German costs are difficult to compare directly on a consistent basis, they suggest that the briquetting of field residues is a very expensive operation which can only be justified in a context of high fuel prices. Straw briquetting is also justified in Europe because of environmental constraints on the burning of straw in open fields.
It seems reasonable to suggest on the basis of these figures that for centralised residues in most situations, a capital cost of 9-12 US$/tonne at an interest rate of 10% is reasonable. In circumstances where the provision of new buildings can be cut to the very minimum this might be reduced a little. Higher interest rates, and in most developing countries commercial loans would be somewhat higher, would add to this figure. A 15% rate would raise the level to about 11-14 US$/tonne.
Table 12: Comparisons of Capital Costs
(all in '000 US$)
PLANT A B C D E F
Raw material Coffee Straw Wood Sawdust Sawdust Rice
Site preparation 
and buildings 57.3 92.2 5.0 0.0 58.2 110.0
Briquetting machine 149.0 206.4 39.0 9.7 58.0 112.5
Other equipment 45.6 405.6 44.1 4.5 56.0 0.0
Spares 0.0 19.4 74.0 1.0 1.0 0.0
Transport and delivery 16.3 54.1 4.5 0.0 12.3 0.0
Engineering and 
installation 29.2 149.2 5.0 1.0 52.0 2.2
Total 316.8 891.5 106.6 16.2 243.5 224.7
Annual output 5 000 5 000 4 000 300 3 500 4 000
('000 tonnes)
Capital cost assuming a 10-year finance period
(US$ per tonne)
Notes:
Plant A based upon World Bank coatings for a plant in Ethiopia at an existing coffee plant using 1 piston and 1 screw machine
Plant B based upon World Bank coatings for a plant in Ethiopia at at new site using 2 piston machines
Plant C based upon list-prices for a Brazilian plant at a wood-factory using 1 Brazilian piston machine
Plant D based upon a Kenyan unit at an existing factory using 1 screw machine and a modified existing dryer
Plant E based on World Bank coatings for a plant in Ghana using 6 Taiwanese screw machines with dryers included.
Plant F based upon an actual Indian plant using 1 Indian piston-press with no ancillary equipment located in new buildings.
Chapter 20.Operating costs of briquetting
Labour Costs
The labour costs of a briquetting plant are very dependent upon plant design; the scope of the operation, in particular whether there is any significant residue collection activity; the wage rates of the various categories of labour employed; and the extent to which the unit is integrated with a larger factory which can supply some labour needs on a part-time basis.
There is a tremendous variation possible between plants depending upon the balance of all these factors. It is, for example, quite possible to run a briquetter unattended for long periods, even overnight. This is common practice in Sweden where high wages place a considerable premium on labour reduction and where a wood-waste plant can only be profitable if left to operate automatically. Naturally, such operation increases the capital cost greatly and is not considered here as an appropriate mode in any developing country. However, without going to such extremes, it is possible to observe wide differences in the labour use in different operating plants.
The least direct labour use can be seen in plants which are in-house operations, that is plants contained in larger factories either to briquette their own waste or to produce briquettes for their own boilers.
In these situations, the labour costs of administration, loading and maintenance may be wholly or partly absorbed in the general activities of the factory. Thus in one Kenyan plant, only one unskilled worker was paid to work directly on briquetting; other labour costs were contained in costs for plant overheads or maintenance. Even so, the attributed labour cost was still quite high amounting to rather more than 5 US$/tonne of product.
The size of plant seems to play a significant part in determining labour costs with larger operations having unit labour costs up to 50% less than those of small plants. In India, a small plant based upon the carbonising technology appeared to have costs of about 8 US$/tonne without taking into account any salary to the owner/manager. At a single piston-press plant, labour costs were 3 US$/tonne including payments to 4 managerial staff (2 involved in selling the product), 15 unskilled workers employed seasonally and 4 skilled workers employed full-time.
An operational plant in the Sudan, working one-shift per day, employs 10 people including 2 operators and 1 trained engineer. The remainder are unskilled loaders, packers and guards. The smaller number of people employed as compared with the Indian plant may be related to the greater labour need of moving rice-husk as compared with groundnut shells. However, there is normally a wide variation found in the numbers of unskilled workers employed at such plants.
The total wages bill in the Sudanese plant was calculated as being S£13.4/tonne of product which was 12% of the total production cost. Although the Sudanese exchange rate has charged too fast in recent years for comparisons to be reliable, this is equivalent to 1.2-5.5 US$/tonne of product depending upon whether a current or the historic rate is used. No managerial wages were included in this Sudanese estimate nor anything for maintenance engineers. One might expect a somewhat higher wage cost if these were to be included.
As a general rule, one would expect the labour costs for a large plant (that is one producing in excess of 3-4 000 tonnes annually) to be in the range 3-5 US$/tonne provided the residues were centralised at the plant. If they had to be collected from the fields then labour costs would rise sharply. There are no data available on actual operational plants but a study made for a proposed Ethiopian plant (World Bank 1986), based on maize residues, proposed to employ over 250 people on collection and storage of the residues. The very low labour costs in Ethiopia kept the labour component down but, even so, total labour costs for the plant rose to 16.7 US$/tonne.
There is a strong trade-off to be made between labour and investment in mechanisation for any field-residue collection but it must be expected that, under any regime of mechanisation, labour costs would exceed 10 US$/tonne. In German plants based on straw, with high labour costs and correspondingly high levels of mechanisation, the labour cost can exceed 30 US$/tonne of product.
Despite the wide variations in labour cost, briquetting as such is not labour intensive relative to the unit capital costs and the cost of maintenance, power and other consumables. Labour costs seldom exceed 15% of the total and are usually much less. Even in the maize-residue plant, mentioned above, the estimated labour cost was only 15.4% of the total estimated factory costs including an annualised capital charge.
Maintenance
The maintenance of briquetting machines can be quite onerous particularly for screw presses and for piston presses operating on abrasive materials such as rice-husk. The actual assignation of maintenance costs varies according to the internal accounting practices of plants and to how maintenance is undertaken.
In some operations, in particular those using screw presses, an operative may be employed virtually fulltime on building up worn screws. Such work, though effectively continuous maintenance, may be registered as a labour cost. Even in such cases, however, the cost of welding rods may be high.
An analysis of the various plants visited as well as design studies and manufacturers' data suggests that the maintenance costs of piston presses are likely to be in the range 3-8 US$/tonne, whilst for screw machines, the equivalent range is 512 US$/tonne. This latter figure is wide partly because of the differences in treating maintenance costs but also because there are clearly variations between machines.
It is apparent that maintenance costs can be a significant element of briquette production costs and one that is often underestimated in planning plants. It is a factor which may place a continuing reliance on imported spare-parts possibly leading to delays in production if adequate allowance is not made in advance.
Power Costs
Most of the plants discussed here are powered by electricity from a mains supply. There is no reason why plants in remote areas should not use diesel generators (as does the Sudanese plant quoted above) or use direct drive from diesel or steam engines.
Analysis of available data suggests that for a practical plant, including some allowance for power-driven conveyance equipment, power consumption will fall in the range 50-80 kWh/tonne of product for piston presses and 100-120 kWh/tonne for screw presses. The unit power consumption of screw presses is quoted for small machines of about 150 kg/hour capacity and lower figures are quoted by the manufacturers of larger machines. These may be an accurate representation of the power savings available as machines get larger. However, there are relatively few of such large screw presses installed and good operational data are sparse.
Power prices vary considerably between countries; a range of 5-8 cents/kWh probably covers most places though in, for example, Brazil, power prices are much lower.
At such prices, the power costs of briquetting could vary between 2.5 US$/tonne and 6.4 US$/tonne for piston machines whilst small screw machines would have higher unit costs of up to about 9 US$/tonne.
The diesel-powered Sudanese plant consumed fuel which cost 19.2 S£/tonne of product or 7.6 US$/tonne at the exchange rate then prevailing. As diesel prices move closely with the exchange rate this is probably a reasonable dollar estimate of the real fuel cost. This suggests that diesel powered plants will have costs at or somewhat above those for electrically powered units.
It is common for the operators of plants located inside factories to have no clear idea of their power costs as electricity bills may be spread across other power-consuming units. The costs of power use do not seem to be regarded as a commercial problem warranting any attention and most plants put their unit power costs in the range of 2-5 US$/tonne. Some plants, particularly in Brazil, give even lower estimates but Brazilian electricity is very cheap.
Raw Materials
The price paid for residues, if any, is very much a site-specific issue and must be regarded as an add-on unit cost relevant to a particular project. However, even if the residue is nominally free, it is common for a transport cost to be incurred in bringing the residue to the briquetting plant. In the case of units sited at the residue production point this is avoided but for other situations the transport cost may be a significant part of operational costs.
As with maintenance, transport costs may be added into general labour costs if fulltime drivers are employed. A more common situation is to hire appropriate transport as a single briquetting plant needs to be rather large to warrant a dedicated lorry and driver.
In India, the cost of bringing rice-husk from local mills by bullock-cart was reported to be a little more than 1 US$/tonne whilst the cost of fetching wood-residues and sawdust in Brazil varied between 3 and 6 US$/tonne depending upon the distance moved. The latter figure corresponds to quite large transport distances and would be an unusually high level.
Other Costs
These include taxes, if appropriate, insurance, selling costs, consumables such as lubricating oil, packaging if needed and so on. It would be unusual if these dropped below 1 US$/tonne for any plant.
Chapter 21.Total costs of briquetting
Almost all the cost categories discussed above depend to a more or less significant degree either on accounting conventions (this is particularly relevant for the calculation of capital charges) or on site or country-specific factors. In addition no allowance has been made for the cost of raw materials over and above transport charges. The country studies make it clear that where briquetting has become commercially viable to a degree there is a tendency for residues to acquire a market price where previously they were free.
The cost ranges derived above for a large piston machine are:
US$/tonne
Capital charge 9-12
Labour 3-5
Maintenance 3-8
Electricity 3-7
Raw materials 1-4
Other at least 1
A simple addition of the least and greatest costs would suggest that a piston-machine briquetting plant would have total factory costs in the range 20-36 US$/tonne of product. It would however be misleading to adopt costs in the lower part of this range except under the most favourable circumstances; these might be the use of dry wood-waste drawn from the immediate locality in a country where labour costs and power prices are low and where fairly low-cost machinery is available.
A possible location meeting these criteria is Brazil; there a company planning to set up a number of large briquetting plants in the interior has suggested that total costs would be about 26 US$/tonne including some payment for wood-wastes. This must represent very much the bottom end of the cost range.
In other, less favourably situated countries, it is much more likely that total costs would be towards the upper part of the range. It should be emphasised that these do not include any allowance for residues being priced nor for any profit element.
It would be expected that the unit costs for screw presses would be somewhat higher than for piston machines. They do not appear to offer any significant advantages in investment costs and in some cost categories, notably maintenance and power, they are likely to be more expensive. They also appear to have higher unit labour costs though this is probably a factor relating to scale of production rather than any intrinsic feature of screw presses.
The higher intrinsic costs of the screw machines may however be offset by the fact that their small production levels, and indeed small physical size, means that they can be, literally, squeezed into low-cost situations. These would typically be a small wood-plant able to site a machine right by the waste pile in a building which needs little or no modification.
One Kenyan user who has put a small screw press into such a favourable situation (except that it utilises residue from a nearby sawmill) has assessed total factory costs at about 21 US$/tonne including depreciation and finance. This includes no allowance for raw material transport costs and may underestimate power and maintenance costs. If these are corrected then it is likely that true factory costs are more like 25 US$/tonne.
In general therefore, it would be wise to assume that total costs for briquette production are in excess of 30 US$/tonne and may be above 35 US$/tonne except in particularly favoured circumstances.
These numbers are in accordance with the situations in both Brazil and India, the two developing countries where briquetting has managed to establish some kind of commercial basis. In Brazil, it seems possible to survive by marketing briquettes somewhere above 30 US$/tonne whilst in India a marketed price in excess of 40 US$/tonne is required. In both cases, these prices produce bare commercial survival rather than large profits. In India, it is common to pay up to 15 US$/tonne for rice-husk; in Brazil, wood-wastes are usually cheaper if charged at all.
These broad cost levels refer only to plants based upon factory residues. The costs for any field residue plant will be much higher.
It is clear that in many countries, the price of fuelwood is well below these levels to an extent that effectively rules out briquettes as commercial propositions. This is often true even if it is assumed that industrial consumers are prepared to pay a premium for briquettes as they are of consistent and reliable quality.
There are exceptions to this. It is reported (World Bank 1986) that fuelwood prices in Addis Ababa reached 83 US$/tonne in 1985; even allowing for a retail markup this allows considerable scope for briquettes to undercut fuelwood. However, industrial fuelwood prices in, for example, Kenya do not exceed 20 US$/tonne, a level which briquettes cannot hope to reach. Similar low fuelwood prices in Thailand have effectively destroyed the local briquetting industry despite very low investment costs and good raw material availability.
It is probably true that in most countries, the current level of fuel prices is too low to justify briquetting. Nevertheless the examples of Brazil and India show that it is quite possible for fuel prices to rise to levels where briquetting is viable. Such a rise can, moreover, take place quite rapidly: the fuelwood price in Addis Ababa was reported to be only 9 US$/tonne in 1973.
The key policy issue in many countries with respect to briquetting must be the judgement as to the extent to which it is worth supporting briquetting activities, in spite of their immediate lack of profits, in expectation that fuel prices will rise in the future. There is no general answer possible to this. There are many countries where fuelwood prices seem set to remain relatively low for the foreseeable future. Indeed in some countries there is genuine optimism about the possibility of stabilising prices indefinitely by the development of fuelwood plantations.
However there are also countries where it seems likely that deforestation must cause a rise in prices in the not too distant future. In such circumstances briquetting of agro-residues can have a legitimate economic role without any need for subsidies.
<section>a</section>
Appendices
Appendix I.Acknowledgements
Appendix II.Bibliography and references
Appendix III.List of manufacturers
Appendix I.Acknowledgements
In preparing this report we have had to rely upon help and information from a great many people. Some of these have supplied us with reports or unpublished data, which we have tried to reference as clearly as possible. Others have assisted us in arranging country visits or in responding with written information about the briquetting situation in their country. We have made specific reference to some of these people in the country reports but in all they are too great in number to acknowledge.
The following individuals have participated in the study with specialized studies or assistance in reviewing the various drafts:
Mr Adrian Atkinson, UK, provided material on the situation in South America.
Dr Francois Nectoux, Earth Resources Research, UK, helped with information about the situation in francophone Africa.
Mr Robert Schuster, ETU, Sweden, set up the database of manufacturers.
Messrs Gerald Leach*, IIED, UK; Gerald Foley*, Panos Institute, UK; Geoffrey Barnard, Panos Institute, UK, Bjorn Kjellstrom*, The Beijer Institute, Sweden all provided valuable information as well as advice during the cource of the study.
The persons marked with * participated together with Mrs Karin Wohlin, SIDA; Mr Aapo Sääsk, Scarab; Mr Vinay Chand, Coconut Industry Services; Mr Nils Richter, DANIDA; Mr Yves Schenkel, CRA; Mr lan McChesney, ITDG and Mr Alec Hollingdale, ODNRI in a seminar arranged for the discussion of a preliminary draft of this report.
Dr. M. Mendis and Dr. C. Feinstein of the World Bank gave us some unpublished drafts and information concerning projects in which they have been involved. Mr. J. Tatom, USA, gave us data on briquetting projects in the Sudan for which he has been a consultant.
All these and many others have contributed to the good things in this report and are due our thanks. They are not, of course, responsible for any mistakes or omissions.
Finally we should acknowledge the financial support of the Swedish International Development Agency (SIDA) who provided funds essentially for the benefit of all workers in this field.
Appendix II.Bibliography and references
Agency for International Development
Bioenergy from Crop Residues
Washington D.C.
Association Bois de Feu, Louvel, R.
Utilisation Domestique de Briquette au Niger,
Resultats d'un Projet Pilote
Barnard, G. and Kristoferson, L.
Agricultural Residues as Fuel in the Third World
Earthscan Energy Information Programme,
Technical Report No.4
I.l.E.D. and the Beijer Institute, London
Barnard, G.
The Use of Agricultural Residue As Fuel
AMBIO Volume XIV Number 4-5
Bennet, K
Product and Price. Physical Characteristics and Marketing of Fuel Briquettes
Proceedings from An International Workshop on Biomass Fuel Briquetting in Developing Countries
Cowiconsult, Copenhagen
Bhattacharya, S.C. et al.
Densified Biomass in Thailand: Potential, Status and Problems
Biomass 8 (1985) 255-266
Bhattacharya, S.C. et al.
Densification of Biomass Residues in Asia
Bioenergy 84, Volume III
Elsevier Applied Science Publishers
Bhattacharya, S.C. et al.
State of the Art for Biocoal Technology
AIT - GTZ Biocoal Project
AIT, Bangkok
Bhattacharya, S.C. et al Briquetting in Thailand.
Experiences and Present Status Proceedings from An International Workshop on Biomass Fuel Briquetting in Developing Countries Cowiconsult, Copenhagen
Biomass Technology Group
Feasibility Study on Semi-Centralised Charcoal
Briqueffe; Production from Cotton Stalks in the Republic of Sudan
FOS: SD/87/023
University of Twente, Netherlands
Bossel, U.
Production and Marketing of Briquettised and
Pelletised Solid Biomass Fuels
Bioenergy 84 Volume I
Elsevier Applied Science Publishers
Brandt H.J.
Biomass Densification; Part 1: Densification in Thailand -A Pre-Feasibility Study
University of Twente, The Netherlands
Brandt, H.J.
Health Impacts of Burning Ricehusk Briquettes in Traditional Stoves
University of Twente, The Netherlands
Chantavorapap, S. Wood Energy Development in Thailand
Report to the Project Steering Committee Meeting; FAO; Regional Wood Energy Programme in Asia, Bangkok
Choudhurl, S.
Briquetting of Organic Residues
Proceedings of Bio-Energy Society Convention and Symposium, Delhi
Chomcharn, A.
FAO Regional Wood Energy Program, Bangkok
Private communication
CRA (Centre de Recherches Agronomiques de l'Etat Gembloux)
Critical Analyses of the Methods for Upgrading Ligneous Raw Materials into Useful Fuels by means of Dry Processes
Final Report; Volumes I - III Commission of the European Communities
CRA (Centre de Rescherches Agronomiques de l'Etat Gembloux)
La Densification de la Biomass
Commission des Communuates Europeennes
Faidley, G.W. and Moutappa, FJ.
The Future Supply of Bioenergy in Developing
Countries
Bioenergy 84, Volume V
Elsevier Applied Science Publishers
Frank, G.
Compaction of Biomass by Extrusion Presses
Bioenergy 84, Volume III
Elsevier Applied Science Publishers
French, D.
The Economics of Bioenergy in Developing Countries
Bioenergy 84, Volume V
Elsevier Applied Science Publishers
Hall, D.O. and de Gruut, PJ.
Introduction: The Biomass Framework
Biomass, ed. D.O. Hall & PJ. de Gruut
John Wiley, London
Intermediate Technology Development
Group
Low Energy Briquetting
Rugby
Intermediate Technology Development
Group
Small Scale Briquetting
Rugby
Johannes, H.
Directions for Manufacturing Biobriquets and Hybrid Stoves
Renewable Energy Journal, Vol 4, No 1
Kekeba, H.
Experiences from Ethio Fuel Briquette Factory
Proceedings from An International Workshop on Biomass Fuel Briquetting in Developing Countries Cowiconsult, Copenhagen
Kjellstrom, B.
Characteristics of Some Types of Agricultural
Residues for use as Fuel in Down Draft Gasifers;
A Literature Survey
The Beijer Institute, Stockholm
Krist-Spit, C.E. and Wentink, G.
The Applicability of Briquettes from Biomass
Residues in Asian Domestic Cooking Stoves
TNO, Ref 85-065, Apeldoorn
Kristoferson, L.A. and Bokalders, V.
Renewable Energy Technologies; Their Applications in Developing Countries
Pergamon Press, Oxford
KTBL (Kuratorium for Technik und Bauwesen in der Landwirtschaft)
Brikettierung von Stroh zur Warmeerzeugung Darrnstadt
Kubinsky, EJ. Densifying Wood Waste: A Machinery Comparison
World Wood June
Lecamwasam, D.C.D
Ceylon Glass Co
Private communication
Louvel, R
Marketing Briquettes
ITDG Forestry and Biomass Panel Forum
Meeting
Rugby
Mandley, E.
Briquettors
Bogma Maskin AB
Martin, J.
Rwanda Papyrus Briquetting Project
Proceedings from An International Workshop on Biomass Fuel Briquetting in Developing Countries
Cowiconsult, Copenhagen
Mendis, M.
A Technical and Economic Cross-Evaluation of Biomass Residue Densification Systems
Proceedings from An International Workshop on Biomass Fuel Briquetting in Developing Countries
Cowiconsult, Copenhagen
Nanayakkara, V.R.
Wood Energy Development in Sri Lanka
Report to the Project Steering Committee Meeting; FAO; Regional Wood Energy Development Programme in Asia
Bangkok
ODNRI, (Overseas Development Natural Resources Institute)
Field Survey of Biomass Compaction Equipment Culham
Paddon, A.R
Bagasse Fuel Blocks
FAO/ Republic of Sudan Forestry Administration
ECP/SUD/033/NE7 1987
Pitakarnnoop, N. Industrial Solid Fuels from Waste
Materials
Paper presented at the ASEAN Conference on Energy from Biomass Penang
Rawlins, W.H.M et al.
Briquetting 'Surplus' Sugarcane Bagasse to a Materials Suitable for Export as a Pulp and Paper Feedstock
CSIRO (Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Org.)
Division of Chemical Technology, Technical Paper No 11 Australia
Reines, RG.
Notes on Producers of Uncarbonized and Carbonized
BiomassBriquettes and Manufacturers of Briquetting Machines in. Thailand
Unpublished
Rutanaprakarn, O.
National Energy Administration, Bangkok
Private communication
Samarakoon, M.J.
Polgahawela, Sri Lanka
Private communication
Scarab
Briquetting of Agro Waste in Villages
SIDA, Stockholm
Soussan, J. and O'Keefe, P.
Sri Lanka: Energy, Development and Resource
Use
AMBIO Volume XIV Number 45
Stienswat, W. et al Green Fuel Densification Technics and Multipurpose Small Scale Densifying Machines
Kasertsart University, Bangkok
Svenningeson, P J.
Cotton Stalks as an Energy Source for
Nicaragua
AMBIO Volume XIV Number 45
Sweco; Andersson, B
Power from Sugar Cane Bagasse
SIDA, Stockholm
Swedfarm AB
A Pilot Straw Briquetting Project Pre-feasibility
Study
Final Report
SIDA, Stockholm
TDRI (Tropical Development and Research Institute)
A Profile of the Briquetting of Agricultural and Forestry Residues G181
UNDP/World Bank Sri Lanka: Issues and Options in the Energy Sector Report No. 3794CE 1982
UNDP/World Bank
Thailand: Issues and Options in the Energy Sector Report No.5793-TH
UNSO (United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office)
Fuel Briquette Production and the Promotion of Improved Cooking Stoves for Household Use
Project Presentation Document UNSO/SUD/83/804
UNSO (United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office)
Improving the Production of Fuel Briquettes in Kaur Plant and the Use of Agricultural Waste Products for Fuel
Project Presentation Document
UNSO/DES/GAM/8V006
World Bank
The Commercial Potential of Agricultural
Residue Fuels: Case Studies on Cereals, Coffee,
Cotton and the Coconut Crops
Energy Department Paper No 26
World Bank
Sawmill Residues Utilisation in Ghana
ESMAP Report 074/87
World Bank
Agricultural Residues Briquetting Pilot Projects for Substitute Fuels in Ethiopia
ESMAP Report 062/86
Young, P.
Sawdust Briguettes and Stoves
ITDG Forestry and Biomass Panel Forum Meeting
Rugby
Appendix III.List of manufacturers
Note:
The following list of manufacturers has been compiled for the service of workers in the field wanting contacts with companies able of delivering briquetting equipment. The list is based on replies to an inquiry mailed in mid 1987 to 173 addresses gathered from various sources. In 20 cases our letters were returned stamped R.T.S. and only in a couple of cases did we later manage to find the company's address. We have assumed that in most of the other cases the companies have seized to exist.
We received negative replies from 18 companies, most of them giving the reason that they had stopped commercial activities in the briquetting field. We have also excluded from the list another 7 companies that are either retailers or manufacturers of auxiliary equipment.
A reminder was mailed in January 1988 to those who had by then not replied at all.
The inquiry consisted of a rather detailed questionnaire asking for information about the equipment produced and the company's experience in especially developing countries. We managed to get satisfactory answers to these questions in only a handful of cases and with few exceptions these were answers delivered in conjunction with visits to companies. We visited in all 14 companies:
Amandus Kahl West Germany
Hansa West Germany
BHS (Spanex) West Germany
Usine de Wecker Luxembourg
BMD Belgium
Destech Denmark
Bogma Sweden
ATS Switzerland
Pawert/SPM Switzerland
TISTR Thailand
Sal Kampsaeng Motors Thailand
S.P. Energy Thailand
Biomax Brazil
Ameteep India
During the course of the study we came to realize that the information we asked for was generally regarded as proprietary business information which the companies were unwilling to give away. We have therefore avoided publishing that information that did come to the project from the cooperating companies in any identifiable way. However, we are thankful to these companies without whom a major part of the technical section in this report would have been much less detailed and accurate.
The 50 companies included in the list are companies that have responded to our inquiry indicating that they are active in the briquetting field. In a very limited number of cases we have also included companies that did not respond to our inquiry but where we have received reliable information that they are active under the addresses given here.
Since a majority of the replies from manufacturing companies only contained brochures and not complete answers to our questionnaires, we decided to limit the company information to addresses and their type of equipment and their capacity ranges.
Among the about 90 companies to which we had addresses but who did not respond at all there must be several who would qualify to be in our list. But as we feel that we have done what we could to contact these companies, we hereby decline any responsibility for the possible harm that could result from such omissions. Neither can SEBRA, SIDA or the publisher take responsibility for any harm or inconvenience that could result from mistakes we may have made when compiling the data from the companies.
Adelmann GmbH Environmental Engineering Division Postfach 11 50 D8782 Karlstadt West Germany
Phone: +49 93 53 7903 0 Telex: 689 724
Equipment type: Mech. piston Capacity range: 0.1-0.5 t/h
Amandus Kahl Nachf. PO Box 12 46 D-2057 Reinbek bei Hamburg West Germany
Phone: +49 40 7 27 71-0 Telex: 217 875 kahl d Telefax: +49 40 7 27 71 100
Equipment type: Disk die Capacity range: 0.1-10.0 t/h
Ameteep Machine Tools Pvt. Ltd 5th Floor, Surya Kiran, Kasturba Gandhi Marg New Delhi-110 001 India
Phone: +91 3313872
Telex: ND 2101
Equipment type: Mech. piston Capacity range: 0.1-3.0 t/h
ATS AG CH-8548 Ellikon an der Thur Switzerland
Phone: +41 54 55 22 31 Telex: 76519 ats ch Telefax: +41 54 55 22 35
Equipment type: Heated screw Capacity range: 0.7-2.2 t/h
Benson Granulier-Technik Carl-Zeiss-Strasse 8 D-2085 Quickborn West Germany
Phone: +49 4106 733 93 Telex:
Equipment type: Disk die Capacity range: -20 t/h
BEPEX GmbH
Postfach 9
D-7105 Leingarten
West Germany
Phone: +49 7131 4 00 82 Telex: 728738 Telefax: 49 7131 4 03 607
Equipment type: Roll Capacity range: N.A.
BHS Luft- und Umwelttechnik GmbH & Co. KG Spanex Otto-Brenner-Strasse D-3418 Uslar 1 West Germany
Phone: +49 55 71304 0 Telex: 965710 Telefax: +49 55 71304 111
Equipment type: Mech. piston and hydr. piston Capacity range: .05-0.55 t/h
Biomass Development Europe SA Rue Van Hoorde, 34 B-1030 Bruxelles Belgium
Phone: +32 2 242 02 95 Telex: 61 134 bulman b Telefax: +32 2 242 28 85
Equipment type: Con. screw Capacity range: 0.6-1.0 t/h
Biomax Indústria de Maquinas Ltda Rua Constelacao, 46, Villa Tereza, CEP 93000 Sao Leopoldo RS Brazil
Phone: +55 512 92 5742
Telex: 511219 xpsl br
Equipment type: Mech. piston Capacity range: 0.25-2.7 t/h
Bogma Maskin AB
Box 71
S-523 01 Ulricehamn
Sweden
Phone: +46 321 120 10 Telex: 36033 bogma s Telefax: +46 321 113 40
Equipment type: Mech. piston Capacity range: 0.75-1.0 t/h
Buhler-Miag GmbH
Postfach 3369
D-3300 Braunschweig
West Germany
Phone: +49 531 59 41
Telex: 952 700-0 bm d
Telefax: +49 531 594 2254
Equipment type: Ring-die
Capacity range: 3.0-15.0 t/h
California Pellet Mill Company
PO Box 6806
San Francisco, CA 94101
USA
Phone: + 1 415 431 3800
Equipment type: Ring-die
Capacity range: NA
CeCoCo
Chuo Boeki Goshi Kaisha
PO Box 8
Ibaraki,Osaka 567
Japan
Phone: +81 726 22 2441
Telex: J 65910 cecoco
Telefax: +81 726 27 9580
Equipment type: Heated screw
Capacity range: 0.12-0.17 t/h
C.F Nielsens Maskinfabrik A/S
9574 Baelum
Denmark
Phone: +45 8 33 74 00
Equipment type: Mech. piston
Capacity range: 0.4-0.9 t/h
Destech A/S
PO Box 127
DK-9400 Norresundby
Denmark
Phone: +45 8 17 52 00
Telex: 69615 destec dk
Telefax: +45 8 17 51 16
Equipment type: Mech. piston
Capacity range: 0.9-2.0 t/h
GHE Bavaria Maschinen GmbH
D-8701 Eibelstadt-Wünburg West Germany
Phone: +49 9303 351
Telex: 68789
Equipment type: Mech. piston Capacity range: 0.1-3.0 t/h
Guaranty Performance Co., Inc. PO Box 748 Independence, KS 67301 USA
Phone: +1 316 331 0020 Telex: 437014 guaranty inpe
Equipment type: N.A.
Capacity range: N.A.
Hansa Anlagenbau GmbH & Co KC Postfach
D-2200 Elmshorn West Germany
Phone: +49 4121 730 61
Telex: 218340 hansa d
Telefax: +49 4121 73625
Equipment type: Mech. piston Capacity range: 0.22-2.0 t/h
Holzmag Trading AG/Ltd Postfach
CH-4023 Baselsel-Freilager Switzerland
Phone: +41 61 50 09 66
Telex: 964 639 hong ch
Telefax: +41 61 50 34 54
Equipment type: Hydr. piston Capacity range: 100 kg/in
Kashtwabara Engineering Co Ltd
Yamato-Machi 1-23
Kashiwazaki-Shi Niigata-Ken Japan
Phone: +81 2572 4-1234
Equipment type: Screw&Roll
Capacity range: 0.3-0.4(Screw)&0.72-3.2(Roll) t/h
Krupp Industrietechnik GmbH
Werk Buckau Wolf
Postfach 100460
D-4048 Grevenbroich 1
West Germany
Phone: +49 218160 20
Telex: 8517280 ki d
Telefax: +49 2181 60 22 03
Equipment type: Mech. piston
Capacity range: 0.5-12.0 t/h
Kusters Venlo-Holland B.V.
Environment Technology
Postbus 315
5900 AH Venlo
The Netherlands
Phone: +31 077 540341
Telex: 58139
Equipment type: Screw
Capacity range: 3.0-4.0
Lupton Engineering Corp.
12 F-1, Chung Nan Bldg. E. 7 Tung-Feng St
Taipei
Taiwan
Phone: +886 2 702 9586
Telex: 20246 Daniel Tapei
Telefax: +886 2 702 7125
Equipment type: Heated screw
Capacity range: 0.12-0.36 t/h
Maatschappij Bronneberg Helmond B.V.
PO. Box 556
NL-5700 AN Helmond
The Netherlands
Phone: +31 4920 43445
Telex: 51070 broma nl
Equipment type: Hydr. piston
Capacity range: -4.5 m³/h (infeed)
Maschinenfabrik Koppern GmbH&Co.KG
Postfach 800653
D-4320 Hattingen 1
West Germany
Phone: +49 2324 207 0
Telex: 8229965 koep d
Telefax: +49 2324 207 207
Equipment type: Roll Capacity range: N.A.
Maskinfabrik ACTA A/S
PO Box 271
DK-5100 Odense C
Denmark
Phone: +45 9 15 04 00
Telex: 9-29 18 15
Telefax: +45 9 15 35 57
Equipment type: Hydr. piston
Capacity range: 0.15-0.5 t/h
Miike Iron Works Company Ltd.
Shimoyasui, Shinichi-cho
Ashina-gun,, Hiroshima-pref.,729-31
Japan
Phone: +81 847 52 2537
Telex: -
Telefax: +81 847 52 33 16
Equipment type: Heated screw Ring-die Capacity range: 0.5 t/h (screw)3.5-5.5 t/h (Ringdie)
Nestro Lufttechnik GmbH
Schmachtenberger Strasse 7
D-8761 R llbach
West Germany
Phone: +49 9372 3044
Telex: 689207
Equipment type: Hydr. piston
Capacity range: 0.025-0.135 t/h
Orion Coal Company Limited
Shimada
2 Maruyama-Nakamachi,Maizuru
Kyoto-Fu
Japan
Phone: +81 773 62 2717
Telex: -
Telefax: +81 773 64 6397
Equipment type: Screw
Capacity range: 0.15-0.65 t/h
Pawert-SPM AG
Eidgenossenweg 14 a
CH-4052 Basel
Switzerland
Phone: +41 6142 00 80
Telex: 963225 pspm ch
Equipment type: Mech. piston
Capacity range: 0.15-4.6 t/h
PINI+KAY Maschinenbau GmbH
Singrienergasse 4 - 6
A-1120 Wien XII Austria
Phone: +43 222 83 64 24 Telex: 112 696
Equipment type: Heated screw Capacity range: 0.4-0.8 t/h
Promill BP 109 F-28104 Dreux Cedex France
Phone: +33 37 43 20 74 Telex: 760 732 f
Equipment type: Ring-die Capacity range: N A.
S.P Energy
53 M.6 Ladkrabang
Bangkok 105 20
Thailand
Phone: +66 328 8212 Telex:
Equipment type: Heated screw Capacity range: 0.08 t/h
Sahut, Conreur & Cie BP 27 F 59590 Raismes France
Phone: +33 27 46 90 44 Telex: 110 847 f Telefax: +33 27 29 97 65
Equipment type: Roll Capacity range:
Sai Kampang Saen Motors 356-359 Malaiman Rd. Kampangsacn, Nakornpathom 73140 Thailand
Phone: +66 34 351140 Telex:
Equipment type: Green fuel screw Capacity range: 0.5 t/h (wet basis)
Simon-Barron Ltd.
Bristol Road
Gloucester GL2 6BY
Great Britain
Phone: +44 452 306 511
Telex: 43231simbar g
Telefax: +44 452 300 164
Equipment type: Ring-die
Capacity range: 1.0-7.5 t/h
SPM Group, Inc.
1019 East Easter Way
Littleton, Colorado 80122
USA
Phone: +1 303 798 5949 Telex:
Equipment type: Mech. piston
Capacity range: 0.2-5.6 t/h
Sprout-Bauer Inc.
Process Equipment Division
Sherman Street
Muncy, PA 17756
USA
Phone: +1 717 546 1521
Telex: 841411
Equipment type: Ring-die Capacity range: N. A.
Surface S.A.
Division Sacmé Mirbo
B.P 14
Z.I. 86110 Mirebeau
France
Phone: +33 49 50 4171
Telex: 790459
Equipment type: Hydr. piston
Capacity range: 0.025-0.12 t/h
Thailand Institute of Scientific and Technological
Research
Energy Technology Department
196 Phanonyothin Road, Bang Khen
Bangkok 109 00
Thailand
Phone: +66 1 579 6517
Equipment type: Heated screw
Capacity range: 0.3-0.4 t/h
Thetford International Mundford Road Thetford, Norfolk IP24 lHP Great Britain
Phone: +44 842 62861 Telex: 817432 Telefax: +44 842 62926
Equipment type: Hydr. piston Capacity range: 0.12 t/h
Ulrich Walter Maschinenbau GmbH Postfach 10 02 49 D-4020 Mettmann West Germany
Phone: +49 2104 14 03 0 Telex: 8 581230 Telefax: +49 2104 12 05 4
Equipment type: Ring-die Capacity range: N.A.
Usine de Wecker S.a.r.l. L-6703 WECKER Luxembourg
Phone: +352 7 10 02 Telex: 2237 WECKR LU Telefax: 352 7 1367
Equipment type: Heated screw Capacity range: 0.2-0.45 t/h
V.S. Machine Factory 90/20 Ladprao Soi 1 Road Bangkok 10900 Thailand
Phone: +66 1 513 3643 Telex:
Equipment type: Heated screw Capacity range:
Valmac S.P.A. Gruppo A Costa 1-36 040 Valdastico (VI) Italy
Phone: +39 445 745 388 Telex: 481328 valmac i
Equipment type: Mech. piston Capacity range: 0.38-2.2 t/h
van Aarsen Machinefabriek BV
P.O. Box 5010
NL-6097 ZG Panheel
The Netherlands
Phone: +31 4747 9444
Telex: 36839 aarse nl
Equipment type: Ring die
Capacity range: 2.5-30 t/h
Ventec Ltd.
Bluebridge Industrial Estate
Halstead, Essex C09 2EX
Great Britain
Phone: +44 787 473794
Telex: 987821
Telefax: +44 787 474 270
Equipment type: Hydr. piston
Capacity range: 0.5 t/h
Visser Internat. Trade & Eng. B.V.
P.O. Box 5103
3295 ZG 's-Gravendeel
The Netherlands
Phone: +31 1853 2644
Telex: 29475
Telefax: +31 1853 4649
Equipment type: Hydr. piston
Capacity range: 0.4-1.0 t/h
WACON Industrial Corp.
PO. Box 9-58
Taipei
Taiwan
Phone: +886 2 707 6664
Telex: 28995 wacoin
Telefax: +886 2 709 2404
Equipment type: Heated screw
Capacity range: 0.11 t/h
Warren and Baerg Mfg., Inc.
39950 Road 108
Dinuba, CA 93618
USA
Phone: + 1 209 591 6790
Telex: -
Telefax: + 1 209 591 5728
Equipment type: Ring-die
Capacity range: 5.0-10.0 t/h
