<title>A new approach to energy planning for sustainable rural development</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
The concept of sustainable development is especially relevant when applied to the growing energy needs of more than three billion people living in the rural areas of Africa, Asia and Latin America.
Over the last five years, FAO, both as part of its Regular Programme, and in collaboration with the ESCAP/UNDP Regional Energy Development Programme, REDP, has developed a systematic approach to energy problems in rural areas. The new approach, as presented in this document, draws on the accumulated knowledge of experts and of national and regional institutions. It proposes what it considers to be an enduring foundation for national operational programmes to bring about sustainable rural development through planned energy inputs.
An integrated approach for energy planning for sustainable rural development is presented and the framework within which this approach can be implemented is discussed. Guidelines are proposed for a comprehensive integrated rural energy planning programme which is intended to make the integrated approach and the framework operational in developing countries.
Consultations were held with governmental and other experts in the rural energy field to review national efforts in such fields as energy planning, technology development, institutional responsibilities and implementation strategies. The FAO/ESCAP/UNDP Regional Workshop on a Comprehensive Approach to Energy Assessment and Planning for Rural and Agricultural Development held in China in September 1989 constituted an important part of these consultations.
The approach set out in this document stresses that energy planning, without effective mechanisms to convert its findings into implementable projects, becomes an academic exercise. National energy policies which do not converge with the interests of the smallest rural communities can only be theoretical. Mature rural technologies such as small diesel engines, solar dryers, wind generators, small hydropower schemes, biomass gasifiers or rural electrification programmes, can only be successfully implemented if they fulfill identified and assessed energy requirements for rural and agricultural activities and if they are supported by technical, financial and policy measures.
In drawing up this approach, an attempt has been made to create a bridge between the energy sector authorities and those authorities dealing with agriculture and rural development. Such a bridge already exists between the energy sector and the industrial, transport and commercial sectors. It has been established as a result of a long process. The industrial sector knows how to assess and negotiate its energy requirements, as do the other sectors. Trained personnel effectively discuss with energy authorities the energy needs related to industrial plans and programmes. The agricultural sector, however, lags behind in this respect. A major reason for this is that problems are aggravated by the dispersed, relatively small - scale nature of energy needs in the rural sector and because, contrary to other sectors where clear and powerful counterparts exist, this sector is composed of many, often poor potential energy users. Yet, energy is a lever which can raise agricultural and
agro-industrial productivity thereby improving the level and quality of life of rural populations. The new approach discussed here is an intent to break a hitherto vicious circle.
This document has been prepared with the assistance of Dr. S. K. Chopra, Adviser to the National Planning Commission, Government of India, in his capacity as Consultant to FAO.
Thanks are due to the members of the Energy Working Group of FAO who assisted in the revision of the document, and FAO is grateful to ESCAP and UNDP for entrusting it with its formulation and publication.
<section>2</section>
Introduction
1. Sustainable development is now becoming the guiding theme of many of the development programmes of national governments and international agencies. The UN General Assembly has called upon the governing bodies in the UN System to "review their policies, programmes, budgets and activities aimed at contributing to sustainable development".
2. FAO, as the specialized agency of the UN concerned with food, agriculture and overall rural development, has always been concerned with matters now defined as part of "sustainable development" (1). Energy and environment activities cut through the work of many FAO Departments. An Inter-departmental Working Group on Environment and Energy was established by FAO in 1969 to act as the focal point for these activities, to facilitate coordination between energy and environment, and to promote the concept of sustainable development (2).
3. While sustainable development concerns all activities in the energy sector and their close relationship with environment and development, as brought out in the Report on Energy to the World Commission on Environment and Development, this concept is, perhaps, nowhere more relevant than in meeting the growing energy needs for subsistence and production, of the more than three billion people living in the rural areas of the developing countries (3).
4. More than 75% of the energy needs of the rural areas in Africa, Asia and Latin America are met by "non-commercial" energy sources: firewood, cow dung and agricultural waste. The continuing and widespread use of "non-commercial energy" sources, as a result of the low economic power of the growing population and its dependence on rapidly diminishing supplies of firewood (and in its absence, on manure and agricultural waste), has become a major cause for large-scale environmental problems including deforestation, soil erosion, loss in soil fertility, etc., in several developing countries (4).
5. The transition from the growing use of non-commercial energy sources, which results in the rapid degradation of the environment, to more efficient commercial energy forms, has been seriously hampered by the oil price adjustments of the 1970s, the subsequent shortages of all forms of commercial energy, and the continuing uncertainty of the availability of petroleum-based fuels. While the contribution of non-commercial energy, as a proportion of the total energy consumed in many developing countries, has become less, the absolute consumption of non-commercial energy has continued to increase and therefore the social costs of meeting rural energy needs has been increasing rapidly over the last few decades (5).
6. The rural areas in the developing countries have thus been caught up in a vicious cycle of poverty and under-development, due to the scarcity of efficient commercial energy forms together with the poor economic situation of the rural people. The economic situation of the rural people could be increased through the promotion of new economic activities in the rural areas, and by increasing agricultural and non-agricultural income-generating activities. However, these activities require, as a basic input, the utilization of efficient energy sources and technologies including petroleum-based fossil fuels, electricity, and renewable energy technologies whenever these are technologically feasible and cost-effective.
7. Programmes for New and Renewable Sources of Energy (NRSE) have been promoted by FAO, as well as by other UN agencies, especially following the UN Conference on NRSE in Nairobi in 1981. However, during the past decade the combined impact of these NRSE programmes in meeting rural energy needs has been marginal. The technologies for harnessing renewable energy sources, including solar, wind and biomass, continue to be often way beyond the reach of the people in the rural areas in the developing countries, and their dissemination requires major government budgetary support and investments (6).
8. Technology development efforts for reducing costs and improving the efficiency of renewable energy technologies, especially in the industrialized countries, have received a major setback due to the fall in oil prices. Most developing countries have, for a variety of reasons, made limited progress in developing indigenous cost-effective NRSE for meeting any significant proportion of their energy needs. Moreover, the few renewable energy programmes that have reached the operational stage in the rural areas, for example, the improved woodstove and biogas programmes, do not directly increase income and productivity, and the rural people continue with their subsistence level existence, dependent on firewood and agricultural and animal wastes, in order to meet their basic needs.
9. In view of the continued importance of fuelwood as a major rural energy source, FAO, in coordination With other UN agencies, has initiated several programmes to augment the fuelwood supply in the rural areas of the developing countries, for example, through its Tropical Forestry Action Plan (8). Several developing countries have launched social forestry programmes with their own resources, and with the assistance of various bilateral and multilateral agencies. However, these social forestry and fuelwood programmes have made a limited impact in meeting the fuelwood and fodder needs of the rural people, especially the rural poor, as assessed during recent studies. Fuelwood is increasingly finding its way into the markets of urban and semi - urban areas due to the general scarcity and relatively high prices of commercial energy. Rural people are either unable to afford fuelwood, or have to utilize it to increase their income, with the result that rural energy problems have
often remained untackled, despite the large-scale sale investments made in social forestry and fuelwood programmes (9).
10. As stated above, rural incomes can be increased by sustainable economic activities which require commercial energy such as electricity, oil, gas and coal as a basic input. However, commercial energy supply, which has been scarce since the 1970's, has now received a further set-back because of the worldwide concern for the environmental damage caused by the utilization of fossil fuels.
11. The global concern for the increase in air pollution, acidification of the environment and climatic changes due to the use of fossil fuels, the destruction of forests caused by hydro-projects, and the widespread fear for the safety aspects of nuclear energy, is contributing towards the slowing down of support from multilateral and bilateral agencies for commercial energy production programmes (10). The effects of environmental awareness are already being observed by the blocking of ongoing power projects by environmental agencies and groups in some major developing countries (11). Many developing countries fear that the environmental factor may further widen the gap between the developing and industrialized countries in the consumption of commercial energy (12).
12. In this situation of overall scarcity of the energy required for sustainable development, the rural areas of the developing countries are the worst affected. This scarcity is further aggravated by the steady depletion of fossil fuels, their increasing costs, and the uncertainty of their availability; the growing awareness of the environmental hazards of producing energy from fossil fuels; the lack of progress in the development and commercialization of cost-effective new and renewable energy sources; and, the limited role of fuelwood programmes.
13. Therefore, while the overall energy supply for developing countries needs to be increased, the rural energy situation in these countries needs to be specifically and urgently tackled through conscious and deliberate interventions by national governments and international agencies in order to increase the energy supply from all types of energy resources. These interventions would have to be carried out through systematic assessment and planning, taking into account the constraints in supply and the requirements for different end-uses. The planning goals would include, not only provision for the basic needs of cooking, heating and lighting of the rural poor, and the creation of sustainable economic activities to eliminate the economic stagnation of the rural areas, but also the prevention of the growing degradation of the environment caused by the unchecked consumption of "non-commercial" energy resources.
14. Sustainable development of the rural areas would thus be possible when energy needs are integrated with environmental Concerns at the local and global levels, and for this purpose an integrated planning framework would be necessary. FAO's own energy activities and other related programmes in energy, environment and planning, have also brought out the need for developing such a framework for integrated- rural energy planning and assessment in order to meet the energy requirements for sustainable agriculture and rural development, with the lowest possible cost to the economy and the environment (13).
15. The design and development of such an integrated approach for rural energy planning, and the framework to make this approach operational in its member developing countries, has been undertaken as a major activity of FAO's Energy and Environment Programme over the past few years. For this purpose, FAO collaborated in the preparation of studies and surveys to assess the work being done on energy assessment and planning for agriculture and rural development in its member countries. A study commissioned by FAO on "Rural Energy Planning in China and other developing countries" was published in 1985 (14). Subsequently, another study on "Integrated Rural Energy Planning Programme in India" was found to be especially advanced and relevant to FAO's activity in this field (15). Based on this Programme, and related experiences in other countries, a report on "Energy Planning for Agriculture and Rural Development" was prepared in October 1987 (16) and was discussed during an Expert
Consultation convened by FAO/ESCAP/UNDP in Rome in April 1988 (17).
16. The deliberations of the Expert Consultation and several other studies, were utilized in the preparation of a Discussion Paper on "Energy Assessment and Planning for Agriculture and Rural Development (with special reference to Asian countries)". This served as the theme paper for an FAO/ESCAP/UNDP sponsored Regional Workshop on "Energy Assessment and Planning for Rural and Agriculture Development" held in Beijing, China in September 1989 (18). The discussions in this Workshop, in which representatives from thirteen Asian countries participated, confirmed this proposed approach.
17. The theme paper for the China Workshop was also discussed by FAO with various Latin American and African countries, and the proposed approach was also found to be relevant to them. They also provided various suggestions for its implementation in their respective situations and regional expert groups are presently discussing documentation prepared in this field (19).
18. Based on these inputs, as well as other recent studies on energy-environment interactions and sustainable development, a new approach for integrated rural energy planning for the accelerated and sustainable development of rural areas within the constraints of resources and environment, has been developed and presented in this document. The central feature of the new approach is the preparation and implementation of area-based decentralized energy plans for meeting energy needs for subsistence and development at the least cost to the economy and the environment, and linking the micro-level plans with national economic planning and development programmes, including those for the energy, agriculture and rural development sectors.
19. This document presents a brief account of the work of FAO in the design and development of the new integrated approach for energy planning for sustainable agriculture and rural development. The document has been prepared as follows: the justification and conceptual content of the integrated approach is discussed in Chapter I; the framework, including the methodology for preparing and implementing area-based integrated rural energy plans has been presented in Chapter II; Chapter III discusses the implementation of the framework, including the problems and constraints in implementation, and the strategies and mechanisms for overcoming them; Chapter IV gives the outline of a national level phased programme for setting up the proposed framework in developing countries; the concluding chapter briefly outlines the resource requirements and benefits of the proposed integrated rural energy planning programme for accelerated and sustainable development of rural areas in the
developing countries.
<section>3</section>
Chapter I - The new integrated approach: Justification and conceptual content
20. The major objectives of FAO include raising the level of nutrition and standards of living of the people in its member countries, increasing production and distribution of food and agricultural products, and improving the conditions of the rural people, through programmes of sustainable agricultural and rural development. Energy is a vital input in the fulfillment of all these objectives. Energy has also become a critical input, and a major constraint in sustainable agriculture and rural development, since the first oil price adjustment in the early 1970s, which brought in its wake shortages of all forms of commercial energy in most developing countries. Commercial energy shortages, combined with the "other energy crisis", caused by the continued dependence of the rural people, on the rapidly dwindling non-commercial biomass resources of firewood, crop waste end: manure have hit the rural areas in the developing countries the hardest.
21. The "rural energy crisis" has been receiving increasing attention from development policy makers because it affects the very survival of the vast majority of the world's population, who live in the rural areas of the developing countries, and is also deeply inter-linked with the whole concept of sustainable development (20). The linkages between rural energy and sustainable development, however, need to be understood in the overall context of the energy situation in the developing countries.
22. Energy scenarios in the developing countries vary widely. However, there are certain features common to most of these countries which can be taken into account in developing an integrated approach for energy planning for the sustainable development of their rural areas. These common features include:
- Total energy, in all forms, used in the economy, as well as per capita energy consumption, is much lower in the developing countries than in industrialized countries. This shows the need to augment energy production from all sources as a first priority in meeting development needs for subsistence and production in the developing countries (21). It also reflects the need for more efficient energy utilization in industrialized countries.
- A major proportion of the total "commercial energy" is consumed in the urban and industrial sectors, and for transportation, with agriculture and the rural sector getting a relatively small share of the available commercial energy.
- A major proportion of the total energy consumed in many developing countries continues to be provided by "noncommercial" energy sources - firewood, manure draught and pack animals and agricultural wastes which are mostly utilized in the rural areas.
- Energy is not only scarce in the developing countries, but it is used inefficiently both in urban and rural areas, with the result that the per unit consumption of energy is much higher than the per unit increase in national gross domestic product. Energy elasticity with respect to gross domestic product is much higher than unity in the developing countries, as compared to less than unity in the industrialized countries (22).
23. The above features bring out the sharp disparities between the energy consumption of developing and industrialized countries, as well as between the rural and urban areas within the developing countries. These areas require urgent interventions which have to be undertaken through integrated energy planning mechanisms which specifically take into account energy requirements for sustainable agriculture and rural development.
24. Recognizing the critical role of energy for sustaining their economic growth, most developing countries have set up institutional mechanisms for energy sector policies and planning. However, energy sector planning in the developing countries, in its present form does not specifically meet the energy requirements for sustainable agriculture and rural development, except perhaps on a very aggregate, country-wide basis. The result is that there is often a lack of energy in the rural sector, as compared with the high energy consuming urban and industrial sectors.
25. Agriculture, for example, which contributes to the major proportion of national income and provides employment for more than half the workforce, usually gets 5 to 10% of the total commercial energy in these countries. The growth of other non-agricultural income-generating activities (such as agro and other rural industries) which have potential for providing employment to the growing labour force, and stem large scale rural/urban migration, is often seriously constrained due to the scarcity of commercial energy for rural development (23).
26. Rural economies in the developing countries, which support more than 70% of the world's population, are thus characterized by an intensity of energy consumption which is significantly lower when compared to that for urban areas. Moreover, energy in rural areas is used mainly for household consumption (as compared to urban areas, where the main consumers of energy are industry and transport). These household energy needs are met by "non-commercial" energy sources which are secured by private efforts at almost zero private cost. Non-commercial energy forms are outside the planning process and, even if awareness exists in conserving their resource base, the rural people often have no other alternative for their survival. Thus, economic and fiscal sanctions, and legal and administrative measures, make little impact in controlling the damage that is being caused to the environment by the continuing, widespread and often unsustainable use of these resources.
27. The rural energy consumption pattern, and its impact on the environment, has been the subject of several studies by many national and international agencies in the recent past. While the broad features of the rural energy consumption pattern in most developing countries may be similar, there is a marked variation in the specific end-uses and energy forms used from region to region, and from micro-region to micro-region, representing different agro-climatic and eco-systems within a country. This brings out the need for carrying out energy assessment and planning for sustainable agriculture and rural development, not only at the national or macro levels, but also at the decentralized and micro-levels (24).
28. Such micro-level area-based integrated planning would also have to take into account socio-cultural and economic variables, their relationship to the existing and desired patterns of energy consumption, environmental constraints in the micro-region, and, above all, the needs and priorities of the rural people as they see them (25).
29. Furthermore, as noted above, the economic situation of the rural people can be increased through promotion of economic activities and increasing the productivity of existing agricultural and non-agricultural activities which, in turn, require commercial energy as a critical input. A close relationship thus exists between the prevention of the destruction of the environment due to indiscriminate use of non-commercial energy sources, and utilization of commercial energy for improving productivity, creating employment and increasing income in rural areas.
30. Area-based micro-level integrated planning for meeting rural energy needs for subsistence and development, would therefore have to include, not only renewable energy resources which may be tapped locally, but also various commercial energy sources, including electricity, petroleum products, and coal, required for productive agricultural and non-agricultural activities for the economic development of the rural region. These commercial sources of energy often have to come from outside the rural region, or even from outside the country, and their production, procurement and distribution is usually planned and regulated at the national and provincial levels.
31. The proposed integrated approach for rural energy planning, therefore, while being area-based, with a micro-focus, and prepared with the active involvement of the potential rural beneficiaries, needs to be closely integrated with energy supply and demand and the economic situation at the national and provincial level. Such an integrated approach will ensure the equitable distribution of energy and bring about a reduction in the existing sharp rural/urban imbalances in energy consumption, and, within a rural micro-region, between the rural rich and the rural poor (26).
32. Moreover, this integrated approach for rural energy planning would also reconcile environmental considerations at the local level with national and global concerns. Finally, the integrated approach will provide the basis for coordinating the programmes at the micro-level - including those for technology transfer, research and development inputs, especially for developing low cost energy options for the low income groups in rural areas, education, extension and training programmes for rural beneficiaries, and people's participation (27).
33. In summary, the multi-dimensional and complex rural "other energy crisis" needs a comprehensive, integrated approach for tackling it. This integrated approach involves the preparation of micro-level area-based integrated rural energy plans, through which the most cost-effective mixture of different energy sources - commercial, non-commercial, renewable and nonrenewable - for meeting the diverse energy needs for subsistence and production of the different income groups in the rural area, are determined. The approach needs to take into account various technical, socio-economic and cultural constraints, including the people's needs and priorities, and coordination and integration of environmental concerns at local, regional and global levels, with existing and proposed development programmes in the micro region. The integrated area-based energy plans have to be linked with the total economy and energy sectors of the country in order to ensure the integration of energy with
employment and environment as part of the total Development process.
34. The linking of micro-planning for energy with other sectors of development at the micro-level on the one hand, and with the energy sector, environmental concerns and the economic development programmes and plans at the provincial and national level, on the other, is a complex process which involves overcoming a large number of institutional and sectoral barriers and constraints. The proposed new integrated approach, therefore, requires a new framework for planning to make it operational. The design and components of this framework are discussed in the next chapter.
<section>4</section>
Chapter II - The framework: Methodology and design for integrated energy planning for sustainable agriculture and rural development
35. The comprehensive multi-dimensional, integrated approach required for providing planned inputs of energy for the sustainable development of the rural areas of the developing countries at the least cost to the economy and environment, as proposed in the previous chapter, requires a framework in which energy is linked to economic plans, programmes and policies at the national level, on the one hand, and with the area-based, sustainable agricultural and rural development programmes at the grass roots and micro-level, on the other hand.
36. The conceptual linkages between micro-level energy planning for sustainable agriculture and rural development, and macro-level planning for energy, and for the total economy, as part of the framework, is given in the flow chart 1. The central feature of this framework, as noted above, is the preparation of area-based micro-level energy plans. The steps in preparing these area-based plans are as follows:
(a) Selection of the area.
(b) Assessment of energy consumption patterns in the region.
(c) Energy demand projections over a selected planning horizon.
(d) Assessment of energy supply resources originating from within and outside the micro-region.
(e) Techno-economic assessment of energy conversion technologies.
(f) Assessment of delivered cost and prices of energy alternatives over the planning horizon.
(g) Preparation of the area-based integrated rural energy plan for the micro-region, taking into account constraints in the availability of energy resources and technologies, the environmental impact of these resources and technologies, and the socio-cultural, agro-climatic and ecological characteristics of the micro-region.
FLOW CHART 1
37. The steps in the preparation of the area-based integrated rural energy plan are briefly discussed below:
i) Selection of the area
The unit of micro-level planning has to be decided after taking into account the broad economic and administrative set-up of the country. The size of the micro-planning unit has to be large enough to bring out the inter-relationship between development programmes and energy requirements for subsistence and production, and to justify the building up of a decentralized data base for the planning process. A village may be too small a planning unit in most countries because this unit would require a very large and disaggregated data base for the whole country; a collection or cluster of an appropriate number of villages, which also coincides with a local administrative unit, such as a block or municipal county, may be more suitable, especially if this micro-region also has specific ecological characteristics (28).
ii) Energy Surveys
Rural energy surveys provide the data from which the existing pattern of energy consumption for different end-uses for domestic consumption and productive activities are determined, and also an initial assessment of available energy resources and technologies are made. Several rural energy studies have been carried out in many developing countries by national and international agencies and groups, which provide the detailed methodology for such surveys. The survey formats, however, have to be modified to suit the specific situation of the country or, sometimes, of the micro-region being surveyed. The needs, priorities and socio-cultural preferences of the intended rural beneficiaries have to be assessed during these surveys. The Participatory Action Research Programme, sponsored by FAO, has developed useful methodology for such surveys, which can be appropriately modified and utilized for the specific country situation (29).
iii) Energy Demand Projections
Demand projections for energy have to be worked out for subsistence needs (i.e. cooking, heating and lighting) and for the economic development needs (including agricultural and non-agricultural productive activities) of the micro-region. Subsistence-level needs may be projected by taking into account existing consumption patterns, substitution possibilities and using norms, such as per capita energy consumption assumptions and increase of population growth for the region, as well as changes in consumption patterns as a result of increase in income and improvements in standards of living. Projections for energy requirements for economic development is, however, a complex exercise in which the needs and priorities of the rural beneficiaries have to be considered together with the existing and proposed development activities and programmes and other ongoing and proposed programmes for rural development programmes Energy requirements for agricultural production over the
selected planning period have to take into account existing and proposed cropping patterns, level of farm mechanization, irrigation requirements, pre and post-harvesting operations as well as fertilizer requirements. The methodology for energy demand projections is in the developmental stages, though several working formats and models are now available Computer software packages for energy demand projections are also now available and are reported to have been utilized in some developing countries (30).
iv) Energy Supply Assessment
Assessment of all available energy resources over the planning horizon, including commercial sources of energy - wood, electricity, petroleum products, coal-based products (which may come from outside the area), non-commercial energy resources, which include traditional biomass resources - firewood, agricultural residues, manure and animal power, and the renewable energy resources - solar and wind energies, water (including streams and canal dropping), etc. - have to be made through separate detailed surveys and studies.
v) Energy Conversion Technologies
Energy conversion technologies for each resource, and for matching different end-uses, have to be assessed along with the availability of the corresponding energy resource options for different periods of the planning horizon. This assessment should include conversion efficiencies, performance criteria, operational features and other appropriate technical characteristics of each technology option. Only those technologies which are commercially available, or would become commercially available during the planning horizon, should be considered. While making the assessment of energy technologies, related inputs required to make the technology operational, including marketing and installation arrangements, repair and maintenance services, financing packages etc., may also be assessed to determine whether it would be viable to operate the technology in the micro-region in the time period under consideration. Some guidelines for technology assessment features have been given in
Reference 31.
vi) Energy Costs and Prices Including Environmental Impact
The delivered cost, including the capital cost of resources and technology, based on assumptions of the life cycle for the option, and the interest rate used in the country's planning exercises, plus the annual operating and maintenance costs, as well as the cost of transportation and distribution, have to be worked out for each energy option. The administrative prices, as well as the financial and social costs for each option to (a) the user, (b) the area or micro-region, and (c) the country have also to he worked out, for different phases of the planning horizon. Environmental impact costs, where these can be quantified (e.g. cost of incorporating environmental safeguards in a particular energy option, for example petrol engines to control emissions), should be incorporated in the costs. The cost to the economy may include, where possible, the quantification or assessment of the environmental impact of the option. Where such quantification is not possible, some
classification of the different options may be made in regard to their environmental implications, including the trade-offs between the impact of the option on the local environment and the global and regional environment (32).
vii) Energy Plan
An integrated rural energy plan is prepared on the basis of the above data for the micro-region. The plan should provide the energy resources and technologies needed to meet the different types of energy demand for subsistence and production activities for the different income groups in the micro-region, over the duration of the planning horizon, and at the least cost to the overall economy and the environment. Specific targets for the different commercial and renewable energy options including electricity, kerosene, wood, diesel, LPG, soft coke, solar heating equipment, wind pumps, biogas, etc., are worked out on the basis of this plan. A computer programming model may be used for preparing such micro-level optimal plans. Alternatively, a computer simulation model may be used for processing data and preparing alternative plans for different areas. However, if computing capabilities are not readily available, data from the surveys, and for the compilation of integrated
rural energy plans can be processed manually, and steps may be taken for developing computer software packages suitable for the specific situation of the country with appropriate technical assistance (33).
38. The above steps provide the methodological outline for preparing area-based optimal rural energy plans. The final operational plan may differ from the optimal plan, because it would has to incorporate non-quantifiable variables to capture various socio-economic, cultural, and ecological considerations. Appropriate national policy objectives may be suitably incorporated in the exercise of preparing the final plan, for example by favouring those options which promote policy goals such as employment generation, improving the balance of payments, reducing the incremental capital output ratio, protection of the environment, etc. The final plan should thus provide feasible targets for different energy options which would most effectively meet the energy needs of a rural micro-region for subsistence and development, given the constraints of physical and financial resources, technology systems, and non-quantifiable socio-economic, cultural and environmental parameters.
39. The micro-level area-based plans, when implemented, will provide feed-back on the performance of different energy resources and technologies, and the response of the beneficiaries to the plan targets, which should be taken into account for mid-course corrections at the local and national level. As explained above, the micro-level plans provide the framework for linking energy supply programmes with operational programmes for agriculture and rural development. Micro-level planning and implementation exercises also provide grassroots data on energy requirements and programmes, which have to be compiled (as explained in the flow chart) at the provincial or state and national levels, for the preparation of comprehensive state-level and national plans for the rural energy sector. Resource allocations for the different rural energy programmes, and policy guidelines for the rural energy sector, may then be based on the feedback from this micro-level rural energy planning and
implementation exercise, instead of the present practice of top down planning and policy making.
40. Thus the framework provides for a change in the focus from the central and the national level, to the decentralized micro-level in the formulation and implementation of programmes, including targets based on grassroots assessment and the active involvement of the prospective beneficiaries. The framework combines bottom up with top down planning, but, with the provision that the planning process originates and crystallizes at the micro-level, and policy directions are based on local, provincial and national considerations (34). The framework can, however, be made operational only after taking into account the existing set-up in the country, in regard to the implementation and institutional infrastructure under which energy and development programmes for rural areas and for the rest of the economy are now being carried out. This is discussed in the next Chapter.
<section>5</section>
Chapter III - The framework: Implementation
A. Problems and constraints
B. Mechanisms for overcoming problems and constraints
A. Problems and constraints
41. The framework for energy planning for agriculture and rural development discussed in the last chapter can become operational only after overcoming a large number of barriers, problems and constraints, which come in the way of the integration of energy supply programmes with the energy development needs at the local provincial and national levels" These problems and constraints include, among others, lack of mechanisms at the local level to carry out energy planning and assessment with the involvement of the potential beneficiaries; lack of coordination between development programmes and energy supply inputs, which are usually provided as targets imposed from above; absence of coordination in the R&D and technology development efforts with operational programmes; lack of trained manpower; lack of coordination between planning, project formulation and implementation (35). These, and related issues, have been briefly discussed in the following paragraphs.
i) Sectoral and institutional barriers in coordination and "top-down" flow of targets
The existing approach for planning and implementing energy programmes in developing countries, is typically top-down and sectoral. A separate Ministry, Department, or Agency, is usually responsible for the supply of the different energy resources and programmes for rural areas: for example, Forestry for fuelwood; Electric power for rural electrification; petroleum for kerosene, diesel and petrol; Renewable Sources of Energy for solar, wind, biogas, etc. These Ministries/Departments/Agencies prepare and implement their own plans and programmes through a "line" system which sometimes reach the district and lower grassroots level. The targets for these programmes are also imposed from the top-down (for example, pumpsets to be energized; villages to be electrified; hectares for afforestation; biogas plants to be installed; improved stoves to be promoted, etc.) through "uniform" directives which go down to "inadequately trained" employees in these departments, or to the
district or other administrative agencies at the grassroots level. Local circumstances are seldom, if at all, taken into account when deciding targets. Moreover, the targets for the different rural energy programmes and options do not usually have any relationship to one another, nor take into account the substitution and complementarily effects of the different energy options.
ii) Lack of coordination between energy demand and supply
Little coordination exists at any level, macro or micro, between the demand for energy for various agricultural and rural development activities and programmes, and the different energy supply programmes. Rural Development and Agriculture Departments, for example, which are concerned with the development of the agricultural sector and rural areas, do not usually include energy requirements in their programmes, except perhaps for fuelwood or electricity. This, too, is usually done on an ad hoc basis, without adequately quantifying the requirements on the basis of systematic regular assessments. As a result of such a sectoral, ad hoc approach, many developing countries are funding major programmes for social forestry, rural electrification, renewable sources of energy, biogas, etc. Each of these programmes are planned and implemented separately. These programmes are consuming a significant proportion of the scarce resources even though the impact at the local level on
improving agricultural productivity and bringing about sustainable rural development is marginal, and in any case, hardly commensurate with the large-scale investments being mace.
iii) Lack of people's participation
Lack of impact of the existing energy supply programmes for rural areas in developing countries is also largely the result of the fact that these programmes have been designed without taking into account the situation at the grassroots level especially the needs and priorities of rural people, as they see them. The assessment of people's needs can, however, only be possible through in-depth micro-level studies and surveys carried out with the active involvement of the rural people, for which few mechanisms are available at present.
iv) Equity and rural energy programmes
Existing rural energy supply programmes often bypass the rural poor because they are unable to interpret their needs and priorities. Even the programmes which are specifically meant for the rural poor, e.g. improved woodstove programmes, either do not reach them, or are rejected by them because the initial design of the programme did not take into account their needs and priorities. Without proper assessment and planning at the grassroots level, these new programmes for the provision of energy resources and technologies in rural areas, such as biogas, fuelwood, and electrification programmes, often end up exacerbating rural inequalities by mainly benefitting the rural rich and adding to the energy problems of the rural poor (37).
v) Absence of coordinated R&D inputs and technology development and manufacturing efforts
The R&D and industrial set up in developing countries, seldom promote the development of equipment, products and technologies for alleviating the problems of the rural people. When such efforts are made (as for example in the case of alternative energy technologies), it is often on the basis of a superficial assessment of the vast "market potential" in the rural areas which could be "profitably" tapped, with subsidies being provided from government and donor agencies at the national or international level. The result is that such attempts usually end up as dismal failures, and the blame is then placed on the lack of receptivity of the rural people instead of on the lack of proper local assessment and planning and of linkages with rural development programmes.
vi) Lack of adequate involvement of financial institutions
Financial institutions in developing countries are also frequently out of touch with the real needs and aspirations of the rural beneficiaries, especially the rural poor. Although many developing countries have established programmes for the provision of credit and soft loans for rural and agricultural development, these programmes, including those for energy, are mainly target-oriented, with the poor remaining outside the mainstream because they are unable to provide the required guarantees. Financial packages for rural energy programmes have also to be taken up as part of the comprehensive planning approach if they are to make the desired impact.
vii) Lack of coordination between Government and voluntary organizations
Government officials in rural areas frequently do not have training or knowledge of energy planning and technology assessment or do not have the motivation to carry out such energy assessment and planning by reaching out to the people. Voluntary action groups and non-governmental organizations, because of their local presence and commitment to rural development, can fill this gap by bringing together the people and the programmes meant for them. However, voluntary agencies and NGOs frequently do not join hands with the Government machinery within the framework of a common programme. Without a suitable coordination mechanism, the work of the NGOs is often restricted to sporadic demonstration projects, which makes a limited impact on improving rural living conditions through sustainable rural development.
viii) Trained manpower as agents of change
Energy is a derived demand which covers all the activities of subsistence and production in the rural socio-economic setting, but its importance is not directly perceived by the rural beneficiaries, who seldom rate it high in their priorities. Grassroots planning should make the rural people recognise the importance of energy and its relationship to their lives and their environment. Trained planners, who can easily communicate with the rural people and have the professional skills to prepare and implement rural energy plans, are, however, seldom available. Lack of trained manpower (which would combine a commitment to rural development with professional skills in energy assessment and planning) has often been found to be a major constraint in developing and implementing rural energy planning in the developing countries which have taken up such programmes, for example India and China (39). Training programmes have to be designed and organized for the different levels of
personnel and for the rural beneficiaries, and would be effective if they were taken up as part of a comprehensive programme for rural energy planning (39).
ix) Lack of integration between planning and project formulation and implementation
Rural energy planning only becomes meaningful to rural people if it is closely integrated with field implementation of rural development programmes, so that they can see projects and activities through which energy technologies and supplies are made available to them to meet their real needs and aspirations. Rural energy plans must therefore result in the formulation and implementation of integrated rural energy projects which are area-based, and which have the necessary components for the promotion of new and conventional energy resources and technologies through appropriate demonstration and extension, as well as for the provision of financial incentives that would bridge the gap (even partially at least) between social and private costs (e.g. use of "frees' firewood versus paying for an improved woodstove). The design and components of such area-based integrated rural energy programmes and projects have to be prepared and coordinated with other rural development and
agricultural programmes, so that rural energy becomes a part of, and is derived from, rural development programmes (40).
42. In summary, the framework for rural energy planning can become operational and effective only after the problems and constraints which range across all aspects of implementation, especially mechanisms to ensure people's participation, and the institutional set up and coordination mechanisms at the national, provincial and grassroots levels, are designed and developed.
B. Mechanisms for overcoming problems and constraints
43. As a first step, in order to tackle the problems and constraints discussed above, an assessment of the existing national institutional set-up, implementation arrangements and the ongoing rural energy programmes should be carried out. After this information is available, new implementation arrangements would have to be designed and developed, with the following broad design features:
- An institutional mechanism, for example a project cell for grassroots planning and implementation of integrated rural energy project programmes.
- A national planning and policy making group to provide policy guidance and technical and financial support to the project programmes at the micro-level, preferably in an existing institution, department, or Ministry, e.g., the Ministry of Planning or Energy.
- A planning unit at the national level which would be responsible for preparing national level rural energy plans based on data and feedback from the micro-level plans, and for providing allocations for different programmes on the basis of these plans.
- Coordination mechanisms at the national, state and district levels to ensure the provision of various inputs and technical support to the programmes at the micro-level by the R&D, academic, scientific and technological, and industrial infrastructure at the country and the provincial/district levels.
- Coordination mechanisms at the grassroots level which would ensure the active participation of non-governmental institutions and individuals, catalizing people's participation of the intended beneficiaries and their elected and non-elected representatives, so as to make the rural energy programme truly a people's programme.
Tasks at Micro & Macro-levels
44. The new implementation arrangements for the framework, incorporating the above design features, will have to carry out specific tasks at the different levels and hierarchies of the country's administrative structure at the national, provincial, district or county, village level, etc. For the purpose of general guidelines, the tasks that need to be carried out by the implementation set-up may be divided into two broad categories, at the micro and macro-levels:
i) Implementation tasks at the micro-level
The tasks to be undertaken by the institutional arrangement for the programme at the micro-level would include: preparation of area-based plans and projects; organization of people's participation; evaluation and assessment of technologies; feedback to R&D organizations and manufacturers on the operation, maintenance and performance of technologies; assessment of financial support and incentive requirements for different energy resources and technologies for the different classes of beneficiaries; coordination and organization of the supply of energy resources and technologies that come from outside the micro-region.
ii) Implementation tasks at the macro-level
Implementation tasks at the national level would include: policy directions, including those for pricing, financial incentives and subsidies for the programme; preparation of comprehensive national and state plans for rural energy, including investment requirements and allocations for the various rural energy programmes on the basis of the data inputs and feedback provided from the micro-level; allocation of material and financial resources to the micro-regions on the basis of the short-term and medium-term plans; demand projections and assessment of supply requirements for the long-term; organization of the involvement and participation of various national, provincial/State and local institutions in the public and private sectors in the organization of national and provincial training programmes and development of manpower resources; coordination with other countries and bilateral and multilateral agencies and organizing international cooperation and support for
appropriate areas of the programme.
Element of the implementation arrangement
45. In keeping with the above design features of the implementation arrangements for the framework, and the identified tasks to be undertaken as part of these arrangements at the micro and macro-levels, the operational, and institutional mechanisms for the proposed framework may now be developed.
46. The composition of the implementation arrangements will naturally vary according to the situation in each country. As noted earlier, an assessment of the existing institutional infrastructure at the different levels in the country needs to be carried out to determine how existing institutions and their ongoing arrangements may be modified and adapted to suit the design features and tasks required for the new proposed mechanisms. As far as possible existing institutions should be strengthened, instead of building new institutions.
47. Therefore, while the final institutional arrangements would depend on the institutional infrastructure and resource endowments of the country, the elements of the new implementation arrangements that may be common to most developing countries may include:
1. A national high-level political inter-ministerial body to coordinate the rural energy programmes in the different ministries, departments and agencies, and to provide overall political direction and support to the programme.
2. A policy and planning rural energy unit in the National Planning Ministry or Planning Commission/Planning Body, or the Ministry of Energy. This unit would prepare comprehensive rural energy plans, and provide the allocation of resources to various energy supply activities and programmes at the national, provincial and state and micro-levels, on the basis of these plans.
3. A nodal agency or cell unit in a central ministry or department, that would coordinate implementation of the programmes at the national level, for providing resources and financial inputs, as well as technical assistance and policy support. This central ministry may typically be Agriculture and Rural Development, though in some cases, depending on the specific situation in the county, the nodal Ministry may be the Planning Ministry itself or the Energy Ministry.
4. Rural energy units in major energy supply departments at the national level including, for example, the Department of Electrical Power, Petroleum, Forestry and Renewable Energy Sources.
5. At the next level, that is the provincial or state level, the coordination of the programmes may be carried out by a policy planning body, similar to the one at the national level. Implementation may be organized by a rural energy unit located in a department or ministry dealing with agricultural and rural development in the provincial or state government administration. A rural energy planning unit may be formed in the state planning department and also in the most important energy supply department of the province, typically the electricity or power department.
6. Finally, at the micro-level, a cell or agency may be created as part of the administrative structure which would function as a planning and project cell for that area (covering at least a cluster of villages, or an administrative unit such as a block, taluka, municipality or a county). This cell should be staffed with professional manpower capable of organizing large-scale people's participation, and with some expertise in energy planning and project preparation and assessment of technologies and their operation.
7. Coordination mechanisms through the creation of local bodies or institutions/committees under the coordination of either the executive head of the county, or the elected leader/head of the local elected body whichever is more appropriate. This is to include representation from local institutions, banks, non-governmental organizations, academic groups, environment groups, elected representatives of the people, and local leaders and opinion makers. This group would oversee and guide the work of the project cell or agency at the micro-level.
48. If decentralized institutions or statutory local bodies exist for planning and implementing development programmes as in the case of the Asian and Latin American countries, the rural energy planning unit at the micro-level may be appropriately affiliated to, or housed in such statutory bodies (41).
49. The elements of the implementation arrangements described above are given in flow chart 2. The creation or organization of the proposed implementation arrangements may involve several institutional changes and structural alterations in the existing administrative structure. It would therefore be appropriate if the proposed arrangements are built up in phases as part of a national programme, which is developed systematically through pilot exercises and projects. The next chapter discusses the contents of such a phased programme.
FLOW CHART 2 - Implementation Elements of the Arrangements and Related Aspects for setting up the framework in a developing country
<section>6</section>
Chapter IV - Guidelines for launching an integrated rural energy planning programme
50. The need, design and implementation of a framework, which has as basic feature the preparation and implementation of area-based integrated rural energy plans and projects, has been discussed in the previous chapters. Since a large number of problems and constraints have to be overcome in order to make the framework operational, and large numbers of institutions, departments and agencies are involved, this task can be taken up in stages as part of a comprehensive and systematic integrated rural energy planning programme.
51. The broad outline for such a programme, which through micro-level pilot exercises is built up into a national-level operational programme, is described in the following paragraphs. This phased programme, although developed on the basis of the experience in India and other countries, is flexible enough to enable it to be appropriately adapted to the specific situation in any developing country. The programme may be developed in four phases, as discussed below. The phases of the programme need not be sequential, and there can be some overlapping, with one or more phases being combined where necessary.
Phase I - Awareness building
52. The first phase may focus on awareness building at policy making, planning and implementation levels, on the need for adopting an integrated approach for energy planning and sustainable agriculture and rural development. The various government departments and agencies concerned, semi-government and private sector organizations, including research and development organizations, and industry representatives, banking community, and voluntary organizations, etc., have to be actively involved.
53. A task force may be formed at the national level under the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (or the Planning or Energy Ministry, depending on the Ministry which would be most effective in piloting and developing this complex interdisciplinary programme). The task force, or steering committee may consist of high-level representatives of the different ministries, government departments concerned, and representatives from the major institutions dealing with various aspects of rural energy. Its main role would be to guide the preparation of a National Approach Paper on Rural Energy for the country by a suitable group of professionals.
54. The Approach Paper would work out the magnitude and seriousness of the energy problem in the rural areas of the country, taking into account the energy requirements for rural development in the agricultural and non-agricultural sectors, for a planning horizon of, say, the next 10 - 20 years. The paper would discuss the existing and proposed energy supply programmes and work out the gaps between rural energy demand and supply for the horizon of the study. The paper would then discuss the need, design and development of a framework of integrated rural energy planning for agriculture and rural development, suitable to the institutional and administrative infrastructure of the country, for tackling the rural energy problems at the least possible cost with regard to the economy and the environment.
55. The preparation of the Approach Paper as a government document within the country, utilizing its capabilities, would also serve in order to build awareness, and provide the foundation for coordination between departments and agencies in preparing and implementing a national integrated rural energy planning programme (42).
Phase II - Design and preparation of pilot projects
56. In the second phase, preparation of one or two pilot projects, using the proposed approach for area-based integrated rural energy planning, has to be taken up. The criteria for selecting the size of the micro-planning unit for setting up the pilot projects would depend on the size and geographic features of the country. In a small country only a pilot project may be necessary in the vicinity of the country's capital, in order to make monitoring easier and to provide a demonstration model. Subsequently, one or more pilot projects may be taken up in interior areas which are worse off economically and suffer from serious energy and environmental problems.
57. The planning and implementation of these training pilot projects would serve as demonstration projects and would provide the experience necessary on the planning methodology and techno-economic performance of energy technologies. They would also provide the feedback for the institutional mechanisms at different levels, in order to bring about coordination and integration. The preparation of the pilot projects in this phase would include: the selection of a micro-region; preparation of an integrated area-based rural energy plan; determination of targets for different energy options based on the plan; and preparation of a project document to meet these targets. Specifically, the project should provide energy to meet the basic needs of the rural poor; increase agricultural production; utilize local resources; generate employment opportunities; and protect the environment. (43).
Phase III - Implementation of the pilot protects
58. In this phase of the programme, the actual implementation of the micro-level pilot project is taken up. The implementation of the project may include components for: demonstration, education and extension, with the involvement of the non-governmental organizations and people's representatives to organize people's participation; decisions on the level of financial incentives and subsidies, as part of the micro-level project for achieving targets; setting up a project cell consisting of project officers and technical support staff for project preparation and implementation; and, manpower development and training, including training of village- level employees and rural beneficiaries.
59. A monitoring and evaluation system may also be set up in this phase at the national, provincial and district levels in order to monitor the pilot projects and provide policy and techno-economic guidance, as well as inputs through the different departments and agencies concerned in planning and implementing the micro-level project. Data from the micro-level project can he compiled in order to build a data bank for the preparation of national, provincial and district rural energy plans. Environment assessment of the micro-projects can be carried out as part of this evaluation system. For this purpose, suitable environmental guidelines would have to be developed in coordination with the National Environmental Agency (if it exists) and the rural energy planning units at national, provincial and local levels, which take into account local, as well as national and global environmental concerns.
Phase IV - Programme development, replication and expansion
60. The planning and implementation of the pilot project/projects (Phases II and III) may be covered within a year or so. The implementation (Phase III) may continue longer, but the lessons learned from the pilot projects in this period can be utilized to build and expand the programme in different eco-regions of the country. The structure of the institutional mechanism to be organized at the micro- and country-levels would emerge from the experience gained in the preparation and implementation of these pilot projects.
61. A national level man-power development and training programme can now be organized at different levels to develop the professional capabilities of the project staff, government and non-government officials, together with others directly or indirectly involved in the programme. Existing institutions at the provincial level could be utilized for this purpose and a new training/R&D organization could be set-up at the national level (44).
62. A programme to develop manufacturing capabilities in the country for energy technologies for rural development, as well as for servicing, repairs and maintenance of these devices, can also be organized on a systematic basis during this phase. The manufacturing and industrial sector representatives and bodies, as well as other technical and R&D institutions, including non-governmental organizations, need to be actively involved in the task of developing indigenous industrial capabilities for rural energy technologies.
63. A computer modelling system for the rural energy sector can also be introduced in this phase. The energy data base for the rural areas of the country can be built up by using a mainframe computer at the national and provincial levels, and micro-processors at the micro-level. This computer modelling system provides the linkage between micro-level planning and implementation and macro-level (national and provincial) planning and policy-making. Computer packages are now available which can be utilized for national level planning to capture the energy-economy inter-actions. The utilization of computers in rural energy planning, and the development of computer-based systems and capabilities has been discussed in detail in Reference 45.
64. In summary, the proposed framework can be made operational in the following phases as part of a national integrated rural energy planning programme:
- Establishment of a high level inter-ministerial task force under whose supervision an Approach Paper for Rural Energy for the country is prepared. This phase may extend up to six months.
- Preparation of micro-level pilot projects in one or more selected areas and preparation of area-based integrated rural energy plans and project documents for these areas.
- Implementation of the pilot projects and development of a suitable institutional mechanism at the country level and in the selected areas to implement and monitor the projects. The two phases for preparation and implementation of the pilot projects may extend from one to two years.
- Extension of the pilot integrated rural energy projects to other micro-regions in a phased manner, setting up regular institutional arrangements for planning, implementation and monitoring of the integrated rural energy planning programme; organizing man-power development and a training programme for professionals and others involved in the programme at different levels; introduction of the computer modelling system for the rural energy sector. This phase would eventually result in a regular operational programme (46).
65. The integrated rural energy planning programme described above is therefore developed in phases, by building awareness and local capabilities, by providing demonstration and firsthand experience in the design and implementation of integrated rural energy planning projects, by utilizing and developing local expertise, and thus laying a long lasting enduring foundation for a regular operational programme in the country to bring about sustainable agriculture and rural development through planned inputs of energy.
<section>7</section>
Chapter V - Conclusion
66. FAO, in keeping with its mandate to promote sustainable development, has undertaken the exercise of developing a new framework for energy planning for sustainable agriculture and rural development, which involves preparation and implementation of decentralized area-based integrated rural energy plans. These plans, and the projects based on them: provide for all types of energy resources, commercial, non-commercial, and renewable, for the subsistence and productive needs of a rural micro-region at the least cost to the economy and to the local and global environment.
67. The planning and implementation of decentralized and micro-level integrated rural energy plans and projects which, although prepared with the active participation of the local rural beneficiaries, will have to be undertaken as part of a comprehensive national effort, in which the institutional and administrative infrastructure at the national, provincial, district and grassroots level are actively involved in the effective preparation and implementation of these plans and projects.
68. For this purpose, institutional mechanisms and coordination arrangements need to be developed or organized at different levels - including grassroots planning and implementation for rural energy planning and projects; provincial level units and agencies; national level policy guidance and planning; and an inter-ministerial steering group to provide political and economic support to the programme.
69. The development and organization of these implementation arrangements can be effectively carried out as part of a phased national programme involving awareness building, setting up a few pilot projects to gain field experience on the institutional arrangements and feed back from rural beneficiaries on the performance of technologies and other inputs.
70. The programme can gradually be increased to cover more micro-regions, and to include: activities for manpower development and for training field and executive staff, as well as planning and policy-making professionals, etc.; development of manufacturing and repair and maintenance capabilities for rural energy technologies; utilization of computers to link micro-level and macro-level planning for cost effective investment decision-making; organization of people's participation with the help and involvement of non-governmental and voluntary organizations; and, utilization of environmental and sustainability criteria in all aspects of the programme.
71. The resource requirements for launching such a national integrated rural energy planning programme would initially be mainly to set-up the institutional mechanisms, develop planning and project formulation capabilities, and to provide training facilities in the country. The training facilities could be common to several countries in a particular region and regional training and R&D activities could be established for this purpose under regional and international cooperation programmes
72. The implementation of the micro-level projects, taken-up as part of the programme, would require inputs from on-going rural energy supply programmes such as those for fuelwood, rural electrification, renewable energy sources, oil and gas, coal, etc. New activities could also be taken-up for promoting new energy technologies, and for providing back-up for R&D inputs, technical services and extension.
73. The resource requirements for institution building and supply inputs for energy resources and technologies would vary from country to country, and would have to be worked out for each specific situation. However, based on available data and experience, the expected benefits of the programme in terms of building up capabilities for tackling the problems of economic stagnation and the large-scale environmental damages that are now being caused by the rural energy crisis, would far exceed the cost of preparing and implementing the programme.
74. FAO, in keeping with the high priority it gives to sustainable agricultural and rural development through planned inputs of energy, would provide technical assistance to developing countries to examine the approach discussed in this document and to organize and launch integrated rural energy planning programmes.
<section>8</section>
References
INTRODUCTION
1. "Aspects of FAO's Policies, Programmes, Budget and Activities Contributing to Sustainable Development" Report of the Director General. FAO, presented to the FAO Council, FAO, Rome, November 1988. Also, see Ch. 2 on Sustainable Development and Natural Resources Management in The State of Food and Agriculture, FAO, Rome, 1989.
2. The IDWG on Environment and Energy was formed in FAO in 1969. The energy activities of the Energy and Environment Centre which works under the guidance of the IDWG are described in an FAO Report, March-April 1990. Recently (in February 1990) a Steering Committee for Environment and Sustainable Development has been formed in FAO to guide the work of the IDWG.
3. Energy 2000. A Global Strategy for Sustainable Development; Report to the World Commission on Environment and Development. See Chapter II, on "The Strategic Choices". The World Commission on Environment and Development, in its final report, has also emphasized the close relationship between energy, environment and development. However, the Commission has clarified that sustainable development is dependent up on the implementation of energy strategies which incorporate environmental needs while at the same time providing for social and economic growth. The Commission has also highlighted the urgency for the satisfaction of the basic material needs for the poorest parts of the world population and has, in that context noted that "living standards that go beyond the basic minimum are sustainable only if consumption standards everywhere have regard for long time sustainability. Yet, many of us live beyond the world's ecological means, for instance in our pattern of energy
use...sustainable development requires the promotion of values that encourage consumption standards that are within the bounds of the ecological possible and to which all can reasonably aspire". Thus a key element of sustainability the field of energy, according to the Commission, implies provision of "sufficient growth of energy supplies to meet the needs of the rural people in the developing countries". See also Page 31 on Energy 2000, cited above for a discussion on the fuelwood crisis.
4. Environmental problems caused by the use of non-commercial energy see FAO and Environment, 1983. Also see Chapter page 4 in Household Energy in South Asia, by Gerald Leach. Elsevier Applied Science, 1988.
In fact, developing countries have been able to meet their energy requirements for their fast-growing populations on an extremely modest basis; mainly because the ecological degradation caused by the use of these non-commercial energy sources has provided the cushion. Thus energy is closely linked to environment because of these "non-commercial" fuels. For more discussion on energy and the environment see Primary Resources & Energy in the Third World, 1988, by John Soussan, Routledge, London & New York, (Chapter 5). Also see, Energy and Environment in the Third World, Peter Pearson (Ed.), Dept. of Economics, University of Surrey, UK, 1989.
5. The data on the non-commercial energy consumption in the Asian countries is given in the proceedings of the FAO/ESCAP/UNDP Regional Workshop on a Comprehensive Approach to Energy Assessment and Planning for Rural and Agricultural Development, held in Beijing, China, from 24 - 30 September 1989, currently under publication by FAO, (1990). Also see Ref. 16, Ch. I. The term "noncommercial" energy is used for agriculture and animal wastes, animal power and firewood which is not monetized. But fuelwood that is sold as part of the market system is now being classified as "commercial" energy.
6. Proceedings of the China Workshop, in Ref. 5, give details of the renewable energy programmes in the developing countries of the Asian Region. Also see, Renewable Energy Sources in Developing Countries: success and failures in technology, transfer and diffusion, Federico M. Butera, ENEA, Rome, September, 1989. Also see papers presented at the fifth session of the ACC Inter-Agency Group in New and Renewable Energy Sources, United Nations, New York, March-April 1990.
7. For details see Technological Aspects of Rural Energy Planning by Professor Qiu Da Xiong, Tsinghu University, China, and Implementation Aspects of Rural Energy Planning by Shreshta & Bajracharya, ICIMOD, Nepal, included in the proceedings of the workshop cited at Ref. 5.
8. Tropical Forestry Action Plan, FAO, Rome, 1985. Also, Report of the Committee on Forest Development in the Tropics, Tropical Forestry Action Plan, FAO, Rome 1985.
9. See Chapter IV, in the Tropical Forestry Action Plan, (ref. 9) and also Chapter VI and Leach, Household Energy in South Asia, Ref. 4. Also Evaluation of Social Forestry Programmes in India, Programme Evaluation Organization, Government of India, 1988. For a discussion on the relationship between fuelwood and population growth in Sub-Saharan Africa, see Population Growth. Wood Fuel, and Resource Problems in Sub-Saharan Africa, Industry and Energy Department, Report No. 26, World Bank, 1990. FAO has also compiled and analysed data on fuelwood consumption in African countries to bring out the trends in transition from fuelwood to other energy sources in the Report on Wood-based Energy and Substitution among Fuels in Africa: model framework and base data from Eleven Country Reports, Forestry Department, FAO, Rome, July 1987.
10. See Report on Towards Sustainable Energy Development, Nordic UN project, 1989. This report brings out the response of the UN system and development banks to the recommendations of the World Commission on Environment and Development in their energy sector operations. Also see Report on the Inter-relationships between Environment and Energy Policies, prepared by the Economic and Social Council of UN, Economic Commission of Europe, 1989, which brings out the perceptions of the donor countries on environmental implications of production of energy from fossil fuels.
11. The "Tehri Dam" project and the "Narmada" project in India are examples of how environmental agencies and groups are blocking ongoing major power projects eats as a result of increased environmental awareness. Similar examples are available for other Asian and Latin American countries. There is, however, a lack of consensus between industrialized and developing countries on how strongly environmental issues should be integrated into the multilateral system of lending for energy issues. Developing countries are, in fact, expressing strong and growing concern at what they see "as a highly unfair and biased focus on their environmental problems, while little is done to address major environmental challenges in the industrialized countries". Page 6 in the Report on "Towards Sustainable Energy Development" cited in Ref. 10.
12. There is a discrepancy of 1 to 100 in the consumption of commercial energy between, for example, the African and Latin American countries. See World Energy Atlas prepared by CNRS, France, 1989. Also see Towards Sustainable Energy Development, Ref. 11, Chapter I, and Ref. 3, Chapter I.
13. FAO's Activities in the areas of NRSE, irrigation programmes, fuel wood programmes and multilevel planning have brought out the need for integrated energy assessment and planning. See Report on Expert Consultation on Energy Assessment and Planning, FAO, 1988. See also Towards Sustainable Energy Development (Ref. 10) which states "A wider and more integrated approach to energy and environment is needed. National energy planning capacity is to be developed by institutional building and infrastructure development".
14. Rural Energy Planning in China and other Asian Countries, D. Bajracharya (Ed.), FAO Report, 1985.
15. Integrated Rural Energy Planning Programme in India, Planning Commission Government of India, New Delhi, 1987. Also see discussion on this programme, the FAO Report on Energy Planning for Agriculture and Rural Development, by S.K. Chopra, FAO, October 1987.
16. For details see Energy Planning for Agriculture and Rural Development given in Ref. 15.
17. See Final Report on the Expert Consultation on Energy Assessment and Planning for Agriculture and Rural Development, FAO, Rome, 1988.
18. Energy Planning for Agricultural and Rural Development (with special reference to Asian countries), S.K. Chopra, FAO, Rome 1989.
19. See proceeding of the FAO meeting on Rural Energy Planning in Latin American countries, AGRE Report, FAO, 1990.
Chapter I
20. See Ref. 3 Energy Report on Energy to the World Commission on Environment and Development. Also see Final Report of the Expert Consultation of FAO on this subject, Ref. 17.
21. See Ref. 3 and Ref. 13, World Energy Atlas, CNRS, France, giving disparities between energy consumption in industrialized and developing countries. The World Commission on Environment and Development has also recommended that increase in per capita energy consumption in developing countries needs to be given the highest priority (Ref. 3).
22. Energy elasticity is less than unity in the 'industrialized countries. The effect of energy conservation programmes in reducing energy consumption in these countries has been attributed to the low energy elasticity in these countries. The developing countries, on the other hand, have limited scope for reducing energy consumption per unit of economic out put because of the present structure of their economies. Nevertheless, energy is often inefficiently used in their industrial and agricultural sectors. For discussion on the reasons for high energy elasticity with respect to GDP in India, see Mid-term Appraisal Document of the Seventh Plan, Government of India, 1987. A similar situation exists in different degrees, in other developing countries in Asia and Latin America.
23. Agriculture here includes forestry and fisheries, as per the FAO definition. Agricultural production accounts for only 4.5% of the total commercial energy use in developing countries. The limited use of commercial energy in developing country agriculture holds down productivity of this land and of labour. See Agriculture: Toward 2000, 1985, Chapter 4, Sustainable Guidelines in Production, FAO, Rome, 1988.
24. See Implementation Aspects of Rural Energy Planning by Shreshta and Bajracharya, Ref. 7 and Ref. 18
25. For a discussion on the people's participation in rural energy programmes planning, see Reports on the Participatory Action Programme sponsored by FAO, Economic and Social Planning Department 1986. Also see Ref. 7, Implementation Aspects of Rural Energy Planning.
26. Disparities in energy consumption within a rural region are as glaring as those between rural and urban regions in a developing country, and between developing and industrialized countries. For more discussions on energy and equity see also Ref. 14 & 15. As stated in the Seventh Plan Document Government of India, 1985 "it is not enough merely to produce energy but also to ensure that the energy so produced is equitably distributed and utilized".
27. A discussion on the linkages of different components of rural development programmes with energy supply programmes, and energy/environment inter-actions are given in the proceedings of the China Workshop given in Ref. 5. Also see Institutional Aspects of Rural Energy Planning by Tata Energy Research Institute, India, March 1989, included in Ref. 5.
Chapter II
28. The size of the planning unit for micro-level rural energy planning will depend on the situation in the country concerned. For example, in India, the block on taluka has been taken as the unit for rural energy planning, while in China it is the municipal county. This issue was discussed in Considerable detail in the China Workshop. See Ref. 5 for details.
29. See Ref. 25 and also Implementation Aspects of Rural Energy Planning (Ref. 7).
30. See Ref. 16 which has a chapter on the role of computer models in rural energy planning. Also see Methodological Aspects of Rural Energy Planning, A Computer-based Appraisal by Paul Raskin, Beijer Institute, Boston, USA, 1989, and Micro-computers: Applications for Energy Planning in Developing Countries, United Nations. New York, 1985.
31. See, for example, Technological Aspects of Rural Energy Planning by Prof. Qiu Da Xiong, (Ref. 7) Chapter II of this report describes the components of energy technology systems for different end-uses and can be utilized to provide guidelines for assessment of technologies as part of the programme. This subject was also discussed in detail in the China Workshop. The country papers in the proceedings of the Workshop (Ref. 5) bring out the various components of the technological systems that should be taken into account for rural energy technologies.
32. See for example, Energy and the Environment. Integration. Evaluation and Measurement, C. W. Hope and J. D. Parker, University of Cambridge, Management Studies Group, Department of Engineering, Cambridge, May 1989, for a discussion on the various methodological approaches for integrating energy with environmental issues. Also see Ecology and Development in the Third World, Avijit Gupta, Routledge, London, 1988, for a discussion on the broad conceptual framework for environment assessment of development programmes in the developing countries. In this context, the trade-offs between local environmental implications versus global environmental concerns may be examined in qualitative and, if possible, in quantitative terms in the micro-level energy plan. For example, the use of kerosene or coal (whose production is carried out outside the micro-region and is a threat to global environment) to replace firewood to check local deforestation. Another useful reference on
methodologies for quantification of environmental assessment is "Environmental Accounting for Sustainable Development" ed. Y.J. Ahmad et al., based on UNEP-World Bank Symposium, World Bank, 1989.
33. See report for the Integrated Rural Energy Planning Programme in India, Planning Commission Government of India, 1987. Also see report of China's County Level Comprehensive Energy Project in Zunhua Country, Hebei Province, presented in China Workshop, Ref. 5, 1989.
34. The framework combines top down with bottom up planning so as to ensure that rural areas get their due share of commercial energy and also utilize locally available renewable resources to the extent possible. The issue of linking rural energy pricing with pricing of agricultural produce may also be considered as part of this framework, depending on the specific institutional mechanisms existing in the county. For more discussions on linking on micro level planning, see Institutional Aspects of Rural Energy Planning, Tata Energy Research Institute, Ref. 5.
Chapter III
35. See reference 34 for a discussion on institutional constraints in India. A similar situation exists in most other Asian and Latin American countries, although the African situation may not be as complex. However, the problem of sectoral barriers and top down planning is common to most developing countries. For more discussion on the institutional aspects of Rural Energy Planning, see Ref. 34. Also see Energy Planning Asian and Pacific Experiences, K.V. Ramani (Ed.), APDC, Malaysia, 1987; and Institutionalizing Rural Energy Planning, W.H. Hulscher, University of Twente, Netherlands, 1986.
36. Lack Of people's participation in rural energy programmes was a major issue of discussion in the China Workshop see Ref. 5. Also see Implementation Aspects on Rural Energy planning by Shreshta and Bajracharya, Ref. 27.
37. Programmes such as biogas and rural electrification have often ended up ii, exacerbating rural inequalities. Also see Ref. 18 and Ref. 29.
38. The failure of technologies imposed by the commercial organizations from the developing and the industrialized countries especially on the rural poor, was discussed in the China Workshop. See Ref. 5.
39. The lack of trained manpower was found to be a major constraint in the development of the integrated rural energy planning programme in India. See, for example, Chapter II, Section on Rural Energy, Seventh Plan Document, Planning Commission, Government of India, 1985.
40. See Ref. 5, Proceedings of the China Workshop, 1989. It was the consensus in the China Workshop that rural energy should be part of rural development programmes which would require a basic change in the present supply side approach for rural energy to a development driven demand side approach.
41. There has been an increasing trend towards decentralized government in Asian and Latin American countries and this should give an impetus to decentralized rural energy planning programmes. In Nepal for example, the Panchayat can take the responsibility for the rural energy planning implementation. In India, decentralized planning and development is being given a new impetus in the Eighth Plan (1990-1995). The decentralized bodies at the district, block and village levels can assume responsibility for integrated rural energy planning and projects.
Chapter IV
42. The contents of the Approach Paper for the country may be decided by the inter-ministerial group. FAO can provide technical assistance in the design of the contents and the preparation of the Approach Paper. For more details see IREP programme documents on Rural Energy Division, Planning Commission, Government of India, 1987, 1989 and Ref. 16.
43. The components of the project have to be decided on the basis of the specific situation in the country for which FAO may provide technical assistance. Guidelines can be obtained from similar projects prepared in China, and under the IREP programme in India, Ref. 16.
44. The China Centre for Rural Energy, Research and Training (CCRERT) near Beijing provides an example of a national level training and R&D centre for rural energy planning. The Centre for Integrated Rural Energy Planning (CIREP) set-up recently near New Delhi is another example. Also see Ref. 5 for more discussion on (CCRERT) and Ref. 42. Publications of Rural Energy Division, Planning Commission, Government of India.
45. See Ref. 18, Chapter on computer modelling. Also see P. Raskin, Methodological Aspects of Rural Energy Planning. Ref. 30, and Chapter on Computer Modelling for Rural Energy Sector, Training Manual for IREP, Rural Energy Division, Planning Commission, Government of India, New Delhi, 1987.
46. Details of how an Integrated Rural Energy Planning Programme was conceived and developed into a regular operational programme through the four phases discussed here, may be seen in the Section on Rural Energy, Chapter II, Seventh Plan Document, Government of India, 1985 and also the Report on the IREP Programme, Planning Commission, Government of India, 1987. Also see Ref. 16, 18 and 42.
<section>9</section>
FAO technical papers
FAO environment and energy papers
1. Natural resources and the human environment for food and agriculture, 1980 (E* F* S*)
2. Environmental impact assessment and agricultural development, 1982 (E* F*)
3. Management and utilization of mangroves in Asia and the Pacific, 1982 (E*)
4. Mangrove management in Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia, 1985 (E*)
5. Rural energy planning in China and other developing countries of Asia, 1985 (E*)
6. Natural resources and the human environment for food and agriculture in Africa, 1986 (E* F*)
7. Report on natural resources for food and agriculture in the Asia and Pacific Region, 1986 (E*)
8. Report on natural resources for food and agriculture in Latin America and The Caribbean, 1986 (E* S*)
9. Environmental guidelines for resettlement projects in the humid tropics, 1988 (E*)
10. Solar drying of fish and paddy, 1989 (E*)
11. The briquetting of agricultural wastes for fuel, 1990 (E*)
12. A new approach to energy planning for sustainable rural development, 1990 (E*)
FAO CONSERVATION GUIDES
1. Guidelines for watershed management, 1977 (E* F*)
2. Hydrological techniques for upstream conservation. 1976 (E* F*)
3. Conservation in arid and semi-arid zones, 1977 (Ar* E* F*)
4. Special readings in conservation techniques, 1977 (E* F* S*)
5. Avalanche control, 1985 (E* F*)
6. Torrent control terminology, 1981 (E/F/S*)
7. Environmental impact on forestry, 1982 (E* S*)
8. Management of upland watersheds: participation of the mountain communities. 1983 (E* F* S*)
9. Operations manual for protected area systems. 1984 (E* F* S*)
10. Sand dune stabilization, shelterbelts and afforestation in dry zones, 1985 (E*)
11. Management of vicua: its contribution to rural development in the High Andes of Peru, 1985 (E* S*)
12. Incentives for community involvement in conservation programmes, 1987 (E* S*)
13/1. FAO watershed management field manual - Vegetation and soil treatment measures, 1985 (E* S*)
13/2. Watershed management field manual - Gully control, 1986 (E*)
13/3. Watershed management field manual - Slope treatment measures and practices, 1988 (E*)
13/4. Watershed management field manual - Landslide prevention measures, 1988 (E*)
13/5. Watershed management field manual - Road design and construction in sensitive watersheds, 1989 (E*)
13/6. Watershed management field manual - Watershed survey and planning, 1990 (E*)
14. Strategies, approaches and systems in integrated watershed management, 1986 (E*)
15. Brise-vent et rideaux abris avec rfrence particulire aux zones sches, 1986 (F*)
16. Guidelines for economic appraisal of watershed management projects, 1987 (E*)
17. National parks planning: a manual with annotated examples, 1988 (A*)
18. Manuel de fixation des dunes, 1988 (F*)
19. Non-Timber uses of selected arid zone trees and Shrubs in Africa. 1988 (E*)
20. And zone forestry - A guide for field technicians, 1989 (E*)
21. Role of forestry in combating desertification, 1989 (E*)
22. The management of crocodiles in captivity, 1989 (E*)
Availability: September 1990
Ar - Arabic
E - English
F - French
S - Spanish
* Available
** Out of print
*** In preparation
The FAO Technical Papers can be purchased locally through FAO Sales Agents or directly from Distribution and Sales Section, FAO, Via delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
