<title>Keeping the land alive Soil erosion: its causes and cures</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
The first Soils Bulletin was issued in 1965 and now, eighteen years later, the landmark of No. 50 has been reached. The technical subjects have covered a wide spectrum of soil science with the intention of bringing knowledge to anyone interested in developing the resources of their country for the benefit of mankind. In the early days, much of the material concerned surveys and inventories, later came methods of classification and evaluation and, more recently, the stress has been on conservation and good management of natural resources by using organic materials and erosion control measures.
The purpose of this Soils Bulletin is to convince the leaders of all countries, and the developing countries in particular, of the urgent need to reduce soil erosion and to persuade them to adopt and support practical programmes of soil conservation. The underlying messages are: to avoid erosion by using the land in accordance with its capabilities; to apply measures to heal the land where erosion has already taken place; and to employ a combination of these approaches with modern soil management techniques to improve the productivity of the l and.
Erosion is especially severe in many developing countries, which can ill afford further loss in productive capacity. A large body of knowledge and expertise already exists in the field of soil conservation. Many practices have been developed for application to cropland, rangeland, and forest land. The aim of practically all conservation systems is to permit a satisfactory level of production while keeping erosion as low as possible.
Depending on political, social, and economic conditions in each country, there are a number of workable approaches to soil conservation that should be undertaken promptly. Typically, these programmes require legislative and institutional changes; an agency devoted to soil conservation; a trained, highly motivated field staff, and technical and financial assistance to farmers and graziers.
Also needed is more accurate information about the soils of each country and their proper management, as well as improved agronomic systems that combine resource protection with acceptable yields. Shifting cultivation is a special problem requiring additional research, as is the growing threat of desertification in semi-arid zones. Research findings need to be communicated to growers in a form they can understand and apply.
A number of kinds of assistance are available to developing countries today that want to develop and implement soil conservation programmes. The help may be bilateral, from donor countries or multilateral, as provided by international agencies such as the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. FAO is prepared to assist with research or directly with the creation and improvement of soil conservation programmes. It is hoped that these combined efforts will help bring a halt to the growing degradation of the world' s soil resources.
Cartoon by Bill Garner, reproduced by courtesy of The Commercial Appeal, Memphis, Tennessee, USA
<section>2</section>
1. How soil is destroyed
Soil is a complex mixture
Soil teems with life
Only a fraction of land is arable
Erosion destroyed civilizations
The worst threat is erosion
Bad farming encourages soil loss
Rainfall energy varies
Why some soils erode easily
Organic soils soak up water
"Invisible" erosion takes toll
Gullies climb uphill
How erosion reduces yields
Eroding soil affects water resources
Windblown soil endangers land
Poor management degrades soil
Soils degrade through waterlogging and loss of nutrients
Some countries poison soils
Why should the leaders of countries today commit their governments and their people to the hard work and expense of a national programme of soil conservation?
The answer is that soil takes many years to create, but it can be destroyed in almost no time at all. With the loss of soil goes man's ability to grow food crops and graze animals, to produce fibre and forests. It is not enough to describe the soil as a country's greatest source of wealth; it is more than that; it is a country's life. And in one country after another today, the soil is washing or blowing away.
Soil is a complex mixture
Soil covers most of the land surface of the earth in a thin layer, ranging from a few centimetres to several metres deep. It is composed of rock and mineral particles of many sizes mixed with water, air, and living things, both plant and animal, and their remains.
As man measures time, soil formation is extremely slow. Where the climate is moist and warm, it takes thousands of years to form just a few centimetres of soil. In cold or dry climates, it takes even longer, or soil may not form at all. While soil is technically a renewable resource, its slow rate of formation makes it practically irreplaceable.
Soil is a dynamic mixture, forever changing as water comes and goes and plants and animals live and die. Wind, water, ice, and gravity move soil particles about, sometimes slowly, sometimes rapidly. But even though a soil changes, the layers of soil stay much the same during one human lifetime unless they are moved or scraped, or ploughed by man.
Soil teems with life
All soil is full of life, and good soils are teeming with it. Plants and animals help keep the soil fertile. Plant roots tunnel through the soil and break it up, and decaying plants form humus. Burrowing animals mix the soil; the excrete of animals contribute nutrients and improve soil structure.
Besides the soil's more obvious inhabitants, which include rodents, insects, mites, slugs and snails, spiders, and earthworms, there are countless microscopic residents, some helpful to man and his crops, some harmful.
Good soils seem to hold the greatest populations of bacteria. Almost without exception, bacteria are involved in basic enzyme transformations that make possible the growth of higher plants, including our food crops. From man's point of view, bacteria may well be the most valuable of the life forms in soil.
Chemical reactions occur in the soil as a result of exchange of positive ions, or cations. More exchanges take place in clay soils than in any other type. These chemical reactions are also essential to plant growth and development and are a good index of soil fertility.
Only a fraction of land is arable
Man's chief interest in soil is for agriculture, but not all soils are suitable for farming. The total land area of the world exceeds 13 billion hectares, but less than half can be used for agriculture, including grazing. A much smaller fraction - about 1.4 billion hectares - is presently suitable for growing crops. The rest of the land is either too wet or too dry, too shallow or too rocky. Some is toxic or deficient in the nutrients that plants require and some is permanently frozen .
Europe, Central America, and North America have the highest proportion of soils suitable for farming, although a number of the more developed countries seem intent on paving over much of their best farmland with roads and buildings. The lowest proportions of arable soils are in North and Central Asia, South America, and Australia. The single most serious drawback to farming additional land is lack of water.
Erosion destroyed civilizations
Civilizations began where farming was most productive. When farm productivity declined, usually as a result of soil mismanagement, civilizations also declined - and occasionally vanished entirely.
Of the three requisites for a thriving civilization: fertile soil, a dependable water supply and relatively level land with reasonable rainfall which would not cause erosion, it is likely that the third factor was most important, and evidence is mounting that soil degradation has toppled civilizations as surely as military conquest. In countries bordering the Mediterranean, deforestation of slopes and the erosion that followed has created man-made deserts of once productive land. Ancient Romans ate well on produce from North African regions that are desert today.
A recent study of the collapse in Guatemala around 900 AD of the 1700 year-old Mayan civilization suggests that it fell apart for similar reasons. Researchers have found evidence that population growth among the Mayans was followed by cutting trees on mountainsides to expand areas for farming. The soil erosion that resulted from growing crops on steeper and steeper slopes lowered soil productivity - both in the hills and in the valleys - to a point where the populations could no longer survive in that area. Today only empty ruins remain.
The same process of soil degradation which destroyed civilizations in the past are still at work today.
Firstly, billions of tons of soil are being physically lost each year through accelerated erosion from the action of water and wind and by undesirable changes in soil structure.
Secondly, many soils are being degraded by increases in their salt content, by waterlogging, or by pollution through the indiscriminate application of chemical and industrial wastes.
Thirdly, many soils are losing the minerals and organic matter that make them fertile, and in most cases, these materials are not being replaced nearly as fast as they are being depleted.
Finally, millions of hectares of good farmland are being lost each year to nonfarm purposes; they are being flooded for reservoirs or paved over for highways, airports, and parking lots. The result of all this mismanagement will be less productive agricultural land at a time when world population is growing and expectations are rising among people everywhere for a better life.
The worst threat is erosion
The most serious form of soil degradation is from accelerated erosion. Erosion is the washing or blowing away of surface soil, sometimes down to bedrock. While some erosion takes place without the influence of man, the soil is lost so slowly that it is usually replaced through natural processes of decay and regeneration. Soil loss and soil creation of new soil stay in balance.
What keeps soil in a natural state from eroding is vegetation. Undisturbed by man, soil is usually covered by a canopy of shrubs and trees, by dead and decaying leaves or by a thick mat of grass. Whatever the vegetation, it protects the soil when the rain falls or the wind blows. The leaves and branches of trees and the cushion of grass absorb the force of raindrops, and root systems of plants hold the soil together. Even in drought, the roots of native grasses, which extend several metres into the ground, help tie down the soil and keep it from blowing away.
With its covering of vegetation stripped away, however, soil is as vulnerable to damage as a tortoise without its shell. Whether the plant cover is disturbed by cultivation, grazing, burning, or bulldozing, once the soil is laid bare to the erosive action of wind and water, the slow rate of natural erosion is greatly accelerated. Losses of soil take place much faster than new soil can be created, and a kind of deficit spending begins with the topsoil.
Bad farming encourages soil loss
Unfortunately, many bad farming and forestry operations encourage erosion. Erosion accelerates when sloping land is ploughed and when grass is removed from semi-arid land to begin dryland farming. It accelerates when cattle, sheep and goats are allowed to overgraze and when hillside forests are felled or cut indiscriminately. While there are isolated instances of deserts being reclaimed by irrigation or of new forests being planted, man, in the majority of instances, degrades the soil when he begins agricultural operations.
And his highest risk operations are conducted on cropland, which is particularly prone to the hazards of soil erosion, especially if farming systems leave the land bare for part of the year, exposed to wind and water.
The mechanics of soil erosion are fairly well understood today by conservationists and by many farmers. Erosion from water proceeds in three steps: (1) soil particles are loosened by the bomb-like impact of raindrops or the scouring action of runoff water; (2 ) the detached particles are moved down the slopes by flowing water; and (3) the soil particles are deposited at new locations, either on top of other soil at the bottom of the slope or in ponds or waterways. The soil washed downhill is usually the most fertile, containing most of the nutrients and organic matter required for normal plant growth.
All other things being equal, the steeper the slope, the greater the soil erosion. Erosion is also more severe on long slopes than on short ones; the velocity of the water flow increases on long, unobstructed downhill stretches. Soil loss may be half again as great when the slope length is doubled.
Also significant is the shape of the slope. A convex or bulging slope loses more soil than a uniform slope. A concave or dish-shaped slope loses less. Many erodible soils also seal off the surface pores of the soil as they travel downhill with the runoff water. This action further decreases the amount of water that can be absorbed by the soil and increases the water's velocity, causing even more erosion.
Rainfall energy varies
Still another factor in soil erosion from water is the erosivity of the rain its intensity and duration. In many parts of Europe, where rains are relatively gentle, erosion is rarely severe. In most tropical countries and in parts of the United States, however, rains are much more intense and occasionally torrential. Much more rain falls per hour, and as rainfall intensity increases, the size of individual raindrops also increases. A tropical raindrop strikes unprotected soil with more force than raindrops in Europe, dislodging more soil. The flow of water down a slope is also greater, and the net result is more soil eroded and moved downhill.
Time is also a factor in erosion. A hard continuous rain will dislodge more soil than several brief showers, particularly when the soils are relatively impermeable.
Season is a factor, too. The monsoon rain in the Indian subcontinent keeps farmers from planting many soils, and the bare fields are subject to serious soil erosion. In the Corn Belt of the USA, spring rains are usually the heaviest of the year, striking the soil before seed can be planted or when seedlings can be easily washed out.
Why some soils erode easily
Another factor in water erosion is the character of the soil itself. Some soils tend to erode easily from the action of rain and runoff; others are remarkably resistant, even in heavy downpours. The susceptibility of different kinds of soils to erosion under cultivation varies widely. Perhaps the most important factor is the relative ability of the soil to absorb rainfall rapidly. Certain soils of the tropics absorb rainfall so rapidly that there is little erosion, even on steep slopes.
On the other hand, some erodible tropical soils require very little energy to disintegrate under the impact of raindrops. One reason for the instability of many tropical soils is the predominance of coarse particles, which are easily detached by the pounding action of the rain. The finer particles are then washed off the field with the runoff water.
A number of the world's most erodible soils have a topsoil layer that is from 10 to 40 centimetres deep, underlain by a layer of subsoil that is barely permeable by water. After the upper layer of soil becomes saturated by rain, it begins to flow downhill, even on gentle slopes.
What makes one soil subject to erosion and another relatively impervious is a complex matter. There is no single cause for erodibility. But without question, the organic matter in the soil - decayed and decaying plant and animal matter - helps protect it from washing.
Organic soils soak up water
Organic matter in soil can absorb and store much more water than can inorganic fractions. It acts like a sponge, taking up water and releasing it as required by plants. It also helps bind soil particles into larger aggregates, or crumbs. Soils with this kind of structure are very resistant to erosion. Conversely, nearly all soils containing little or no organic matter are very susceptible to erosion.
Besides absorbing water readily, a good cropland soil should be able to dry out or warm up quickly when the rain is over. It should hold enough moisture to supply the needs of a crop between rains, yet permit water to pass through the soil. A good soil will not stay too wet or too dry.
Another factor in erosion from water is the crop that is being grown in the soil and the way that crop is being managed. Sloping land planted with trees or grass will erode less than the same land planted with maize or soybeans. Maize planted on terraces will suffer less erosion than maize planted in rows that march straight down the slope, inviting runoff water to rush downhill between the rows.
There are other, less obvious relationships between soil erosion and crop selection and management. Many soils can be planted with maize without much erosion risk if the maize crop is rotated with legumes and small grains. If maize is planted year after year, however, soil losses begin to mount.
The basic factors then that contribute to soil erosion from water in rainfed agriculture appear to be similar the world over. For any particular plot of land, they include the degree of slope, the length of slope and its shape, the erosivity of the rain and inherent erodibility of the soil, and the mismanagement of the land by the farmer or herdsman. Much more remains to be learned, however, about the management of specific soils in tropical and subtropical areas to reduce the impact of these erosion factors.
"Invisible" erosion takes toll
There are several types of man-made erosion, all but the first clearly recognizable as trouble. The first - and most insidious - is sheet erosion, which is the more or less even removal of a thin layer or "sheet" of soil from a sloping field. It is insidious because the amount of soil seen to be removed is usually so small in any given year that a farmer often fails to notice that erosion is occurring. Occasionally he becomes aware of sheet erosion only after he notices that a formerly buried object - a rock, the lower portion of a fence post, or root of a tree - is suddenly exposed.
However, sheet erosion removes great quantities of topsoil. Even a very thin layer of soil, only slightly thicker than a piece of wrapping paper, when transported down a slope, can weigh several tons per hectare. It does not take many years or many rainstorms for losses from sheet erosion to become significant.
A second variety of erosion is more evident to the farmer, and that is "rill" erosion. Sheet erosion occurs mainly when the surface of a field is smooth and the slope is uniform. But the surface of most fields is irregular. There are apt to be low places and high places; rough places and smooth places; and various kinds of soils, even in a 5 hectare field. When it rains, the soil erodes unevenly, and rainwater accumulates and flows into depressions, taking the path of least resistance as it moves downhill. The surface flow moves into small channels, or rills, which are cut into the soil several inches deep. Rills are small enough to be erased easily with normal tillage methods, but left alone, they can become progressively wider and deeper until they cut into the subsoil and form gullies.
Gullies climb uphill
A gully always begins at the lower end of a slope and eats its way back uphill, where it creates a gully head with a sudden or steep fall. Eventually it will work its way to the top of the slope, growing deeper and wider with each rainstorm. The splash action of the falling water at the head of the gully undermines the lower part of the excavated earth wall, causing collapse of even more of the soil.
Unlike a rill, a gully cannot be smoothed out with a plough or a disk. While a new gully may be narrow and 2 or 3 feet deep, older gullies can grow to enormous size - 40 feet deep and as much as 100 feet wide.
The formation of gullies is frequently encouraged by man and his animals. Many gullies begin with stock trails, farm roads, and other regular or irregular pathways on sloping land. Some large gullies develop tributaries, particularly at points where livestock habitually enter and leave a ravine.
A recent study of the development in the 19th century of severe gully erosion at the head of a creek in New South Wales, Australia, revealed that it began during periods of cultivation and overgrazing and, not incidentally, during the years of the highest rabbit populations. These animals, like many insects, can speed up destruction of vegetation and soil erosion.
Gullies are relentless destroyers of good farmland. They can cut up a field into small, odd-shaped parcels and restrict the free movement of animals and farm machinery. They are a menace to livestock; calves and other animals frequently fall in and are unable to escape. Gullies can also threaten nearby barns and other buildings, which may have to be moved before they are undermined.
The stabilization and repair of gullies is the most costly of all erosion control work. Stopping a gully often requires extensive earthmoving and construction of dams or other measures. On the other hand, the formation of gullies can usually be prevented through good land use.
How erosion reduces yields
For the farmer, and for the consumer as well, the worst thing about soil erosion is that it reduces crop yields and increases the costs of growing food and fibre.
Firstly, erosion reduces the capacity of the soil to hold water and make that water available to plants. This subjects crops to more frequent and severe water stress.
Secondly, erosion contributes to losses of plant nutrients, which wash away with the soil particles. Because subsoils generally contain fewer nutrients than topsoils, more fertilizer is needed to maintain crop yields. This, in turn, increases production costs. Moreover, the addition of fertilizer alone cannot compensate for all the nutrients lost when topsoil erodes.
Thirdly, erosion reduces yields by degrading soil structure, increasing soil erodibility, surface sealing and crusting. Water infiltration is reduced, and seedlings have a harder time breaking through the soil crust.
Fourthly, erosion reduces productivity because it does not remove topsoil uniformly over the surface of a field. Typically, parts of an eroded field still have several inches of topsoil left; other parts may be eroded down to the subsoil. This makes it practically impossible for a farmer to manage the field properly, to apply fertilizers and chemicals uniformly and obtain uniform results. He is also unable to time his planting, since an eroded part of the field may be too wet when the rest of the field is dry and ready.
Eroding soil affects water resources
Damage from water erosion is not limited to the loss of productivity on the land where it occurs. The bulk of eroded soil from a hillside comes to rest a short distance away, at the foot of the slope or on a nearby flood plain, where it may bury crops or lower the fertility of bottomlands. A portion of the eroded soil is deposited in local drainage or irrigation ditches or runs into ponds, reservoirs, or tributary streams and rivers. Wherever it is deposited, it is unwelcome. Sediment-filled ditches have to be dug out again; ponds, lakes, and reservoirs either have to be dredged out or abandoned. Locally, sediment is an expensive nuisance .
Damage also occurs downstream, sometimes at great distances from the farmland that originally contributed the sediment. Carried along by a river, sediment is dropped out as the waterway reaches flatter, lower reaches. The sediment deposits raise the level of the riverbed and reduce the capacity of the channel to hold water. Riverbanks overtop more frequently, and valuable bottomland, often extremely productive, is damaged by flooding.
Windblown soil endangers land
Soil blown by wind is second only to erosion by water as a destroyer of agricultural land. It occurs most often in arid and semi-arid regions, but it can also happen in areas of seasonal rainfall. Wind erosion is a persistent hazard in the Sahara and Kalahari deserts of Africa; in Central Asia, particularly in the Steppes of the Soviet Union; in central Australia, and in the Great Plains of the United States, well known as the Dust Bowl of the 1930s.
Windborne topsoil may be transported over very long distances and, like soil eroded by water, it is usually deposited where it is not wanted.
Farmlands, fences, machinery, and buildings can be severely damaged by wind erosion, and sometimes they can be buried completely. Costs of rehabilitation can run so high that the land is abandoned.
The following conditions set the stage for erosion from wind:
* the soil is loose, dry, and finely divided;
* the soil surface is relatively smooth and plant cover is sparse; and
* the field is sufficiently large and the wind strong enough to initiate air movement.
When the wind blows hard over a smooth field, at some point near the surface the wind velocity will be zero. Above that point there is a layer of smooth airflow, and above that, an area of turbulence. It is this turbulent airflow which causes soil particles to begin to move. Once movement is begun, the soil particles themselves abrade the soil surface and magnify the effect of the wind. In a severe storm, dust clouds rise hundreds of metres into the air, and on occasion travel hundreds, even thousands, of kilometres before the eroded soil falls on the land or into the ocean.
The soil particles that are blown away are usually the finer ones; the coarse and heavy sand remains. If this process continues for long, the productivity of the damaged land gradually decreases.
The physical causes of wind erosion are clearly different from those which allow soil to wash, except for one factor that is constant in all man-made soil erosion - the absence of vegetation to hold and cover the soil. It is when trees, bushes, grasses, and other plants are removed from land that erosion occurs.
Poor management degrades soil
Soil does not have to be washed or blown away for its productivity to be lowered. Through improper soil and water management, a soil's properties may be altered so that its fertility is seriously reduced or lost for good. Excessive cultivation, for example, can wreck the structure of some soils so that they are no longer capable of holding enough moisture for growing plants.
Salinization, or the accumulation of salts in the topsoil, can also have a deletrious effect on soil productivity and crop yields. In extreme cases, damage from salinization is so great that it is technically unfeasible or totally uneconomic to reverse the process.
In general, salinization is caused by water and dissolved salts moving up in the soil through capillary action. While salinization is occasionally the result of natural soil-forming processes, it occurs most frequently in irrigated soils, where it is worsened by the high salt content of irrigation water.
Salt-affected soils are found on every continent and nearly 7 percent of the land area of the world is affected. Salinization is a serious problem in Australia, the Soviet Union, and the United States, and it is critical in countries of north Africa and the Near East.
Soils degrade through waterlogging and loss of nutrients
Waterlogged soils also deter agriculture in many countries, even in parts of the world where an excess of water is not usually thought of as a problem. Waterlogging interferes with agriculture in many countries; in Egypt, for example, where about one-third of the Nile Delta has a water table only 80 centimetres below the surface. Other countries with waterlogging from high water tables and runoff include Iran, Iraq, Somalia, parts of Syria, and Pakistan.
Soil can also become degraded through loss of nutrients - chiefly nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium - if these are not replenished to maintain soil fertility. Besides being lost through erosion, nutrients are also depleted by the crops themselves, particularly if the same crops are grown on the same land year after year. And in the humid tropics, many nutrients are leached during the intense rainstorms, especially on unprotected land. Without question, farming all over the world is removing more nutrients from the soil than are being put back.
Soil compaction is still another destroyer of the soil. Sometimes it results from repeated passes over the same field with heavy machinery, particularly when the field is wet. It can also result from the hooves of grazing animals pounding down the soil too often in the same area, as they do around the only waterhole for miles. Compaction is not easy to correct.
Some countries poison soils
Other forms of soil degradation occur in the more developed countries, but are rarely of concern to the developing ones - so far. Farmland is not only paved over by urbanization but is occasionally poisoned with chemicals. While pesticides and even fertilizers are sometimes suspected of causing soil impairment, the damage in most cases is not permanent. However, some apple orchards sprayed with arsenic compounds in the 1930s were reported as still unproductive 30 years later. In recent years, there has been a general movement in many developed countries against using the more persistent insecticides, including a chemical group that includes DDT and chlordane. Radioactive fallout, and Strontium 90 in particular, also caused public concern during the period of nuclear bomb tests.
Today a more serious problem in several highly industrialized countries is the indiscriminate dumping of chemical wastes, some of which are extremely toxic to plants, animals, and man, and the growing use of sewage sludge, some of which contains dangerous heavy metals which can be taken up by plants. For a developing nation, however, such problems are at present insignificant compared with the growing threat to their agricultural productivity from erosion, salinization, waterlogging, and general loss of fertility.
<section>3</section>
2. Food production versus land degradation
Population pressures increase
Extent of soil erosion
Lower productivity forecast
Hillside forests destroyed
Overgrazing is critical
Salinization threatens production
Extent of sediment damage
Efficient shifting cultivation declines
Deserts are spreading
FAO studies indicate that agricultural production will have to increase by an estimated 60 percent by the year 2000 if the world's population is going to be fed. For this goal to be met, three things will have to happen. First, agriculture will have to be intensified on lands already being cultivated. In the 1970s, one hectare of arable land supported about 2.6 persons; by 2000, one hectare will have to support 4 persons.
Second, the area of cultivated land will have to be expanded by some 200 million hectares, or about 14 percent. It appears, however, that this amount of land - even if it can be found and developed will only just compensate for the amount of soil productivity lost over the same period, if erosion continues at present rates.
The third requisite, therefore, is that the continuing degradation of the world's soils be reversed and soils managed for sustained production. Meeting all three requisites will require a new sense of commitment on the part of the developing countries as well as the more developed ones.
Population pressures increase
There is no doubt that the number of people in the world is growing rapidly. Under even the most conservative projections, world population will increase from 4 billion in 1975 to an estimated 6.35 billion in the year 2000. Most of that population growth is expected to occur in those countries with the least capacity to feed themselves. The population of Asia and Oceania would increase 60 percent; that of Latin America, nearly 100 percent, and that of Africa, more than 100 percent.
World food production, of course, is also expected to increase, but most of that increase will occur in countries that already have relatively high per capita food consumption. For many in developing countries, per capita consumption will decline. These are a few of the disturbing predictions contained in The Global 2000 Report, published in the USA in 1980.
It is not necessary, of course, to look into the future to find hunger and misery. Despite major technological advances in agricultural production, millions of people in the world today are undernourished or starving. This paradox stems from a number of causes, of which the most alarming is the rate at which the productive capacity of the land is being degraded by mismanagement of agricultural and forest resources.
Agriculturists living and working in developing countries and travellers on business or holiday do not require statistical evidence to convince them that land degradation is widespread and serious and that it is encouraged by the pressures of a growing population.
Extent of soil erosion
For those who prefer observations substantiated with numbers, a joint FAO/UNEP assessment of land degradation around the world has come up with the following findings:
* In Africa north of the equator, 11.6 percent of the total area is affected by water erosion and 22.4 percent by wind erosion.
* In the Near East, 17.1 percent of the total area is affected by water erosion; 35.5 percent by wind erosion, and 8 percent by salinization.
Assessments provided by countries attending an FAO consultation on degradation also reveal serious resource damage. Of India's total area of 328 million hectares, 90 million are affected by water erosion and 50 million by wind erosion. The erosion is accelerated by the floods that visit the country every year, causing untold misery and affecting an average area of 20 million hectares. In Argentina, 13 percent of the cropland is affected by erosion from water and 16 percent from severe wind erosion.
In the USA, which has had an active soil conservation programme for nearly 50 years, the average annual loss of topsoil from all cropland today is about 12 tons per hectare - and it is higher still in many important farming areas. In Iowa, one of the country's leading maize producers, two cubic metres of soil are lost for every cubic metre of maize produced. The impact on production of such serious soil losses has been masked by other inputs, including mineral fertilizers and improved crop varieties, but the long-term effect will be to push crop yields downward, with inevitable increases in food prices.
Lower productivity forecast
What do these soil losses mean in terms of the world's future capacity for growing food? Provisional results of a new FAO/UNFPA project on "land resources for populations of the future", which forecasts probable farm output in the year 2000, predict that if soil losses continue unchecked in Africa, the potential rainfed crop production will decline about 15 percent during the next two decades. In Southeast Asia, production will fall about 19 percent, and in Southwest Asia, more than 41 percent.
From 10 to 22 percent of the rainfed cropland in these regions would become too degraded to use for crops at all but it could be used for grazing livestock. Even so, the study predicts that the land's "potential population carrying capacities" will decline by 8 to 12 percent, which means that these regions will be able to feed fewer people, not more, by the year 2000.
The Global 2000 Report takes a pessimistic view, predicting that land under cultivation will increase only L percent by the year 2000 because most of the good land is already under cultivation. Whether or not this estimate proves correct, an all-out effort to expand world cropland will be necessary, although reclamation could be expensive, and much more research on managing tropical soils will have to be conducted and applied before farming can be carried out safely and productively, especially on lands already degraded. Some relocation of people might also prove necessary, since the densest populations in developing countries do not always coincide with locations of the best agricultural soils.
Hillside forests destroyed
Part of the accelerated land degradation around the world is caused by the continued destruction of forests. In developing countries, where firewood is the chief fuel for cooking and heating, demand is fast outstripping the growth of new trees. Villagers in some countries are forced to burn dried cow dung for fuel, a practice that deprives local soils of needed organic matter and nutrients.
Deforestation of slopes also causes soil erosion and destructive floods. The 1974 floods in Bangladesh, which brought about severe famine by reducing the rice harvest, were caused in part by deforestation in Nepal and eastern India. In just 5 years, between 1975 and 1980, some 37 million hectares of tropical forests were destroyed in Africa, 12.2 million in Asia, and 18.4 million in Central and South America.
Forests need to be conserved and managed much more carefully than they have been in the past. One way to conserve them is to make eroding cropland more productive, so that people are not driven to cut trees and destroy watersheds to clear new land for farming.
Overgrazing is critical
Some 23 percent of the world's land is used for grazing livestock, and soil erosion caused by overgrazing is one of the most important environmental problems in the developing world. Some observers report that, on average, rangeland in developing countries is a third more crowded with livestock than rangeland in the developed world.
The destruction of grazing land follows an all too familiar sequence of events. Overgrazing by cattle reduces plant cover, eliminating the most desirable forage species first. This opens up the land to undesirable weeds, brush, and trees and leads to increasing soil erosion and lower soil fertility. The land becomes less and less productive.
With less nutritious forage available, some graziers respond by actually increasing the size of their cattle herds to compensate for losses in weight. In other instances, sheep replace cattle as forage deteriorates, and eventually sheep are replaced by goats, who will eat just about anything, including young trees. The end result is barren land, windstorms, erosion and floods.
Salinization threatens production
Waterlogging and salinity are reducing agricultural production in many of the irrigated areas of the world today - in the Near East and North Africa, in Argentina and Peru, in China, in the Soviet Union, and in the United States of America and northern Mexico. irrigated farming takes place today on more than 200 million hectares of the world's land and, according to published UN estimates, some 40 million hectares are either waterlogged or plagued by excessive salinity, or both.
While some land is literally sterilized by salts and must be abandoned, most symptoms of salinization are not so obvious. It is difficult to assess exact losses in productivity, since the symptoms are not always visible. Top growth may be reduced more than root growth, and grain yields for maize and rice may be reduced appreciably without affecting straw yields. Average losses in yields in different countries have been estimated as high as 20 percent on saline and waterlogged land and at 10 percent in the San Joaquin Valley of California, where annual loss of farm income from salinization is estimated at $31.2 million.
Rehabilitation of waterlogged and saline soils, however, is expensive and time-consuming and usually beyond the reach even of wealthy land users. Reclamation costs in one large area were estimated by the UN at $650 per hectare. A great deal of salinization research has been directed at finding more salt-tolerant plant species.
Extent of sediment damage
Sedimentation is a by-product of soil erosion. When erosion is reduced, so is sedimentation; when erosion goes unchecked, sedimentation damage also increases. When eroded soil flows into a stream with runoff water, a portion of it is transported in suspension until it reaches larger and larger rivers. The size of a sediment load can be truly amazing and is a fairly good index of the amount of erosion in the watershed.
The river that carries the largest amount of sediment in the world is the Yellow River in China with an average annual load in suspension of nearly 1.9 billion metric tons. It is followed closely by the Ganges, with nearly 1.5 billion tons of sediment a year. Next in line are the Brahmaputra, Yangtze, Indus, Ching, Amazon, and the Mississippi. The amount of sediment carried is not proportionate to the size of the watershed. The basin of the Yellow River is 673 000 square kilometres; the basin of the Amazon, which carries only a fifth as much sediment as the Yellow River, is more than 8 times as large.
Sediment causes damage in several ways. Firstly, channel sedimentation of navigable rivers means costly dredging bills to keep channels open for barge traffic. Secondly, the still waters of reservoirs placed in the path of streams or rivers cause silt to drop out, reducing the water storage capacity and the useful life of the impoundment. Thirdly, sedimentation of bottomland, which occasionally proves beneficial, can also be harmful if flooding rivers deposit deep layers of sand over fertile bottomland. In such cases, either the land is lost to production or large amounts of money are spent to remove the sediment.
Efficient shifting cultivation declines
Practice met local needs
Fallow is shorten
Two problems that are particularly threatening in developing countries are a decline in efficiency of traditional shifting cultivation and an increase in desert encroachment on what were once agricultural lands. Both problems require special attention.
Shifting cultivation is a traditional method of farming that works well where the ratio of land to people is high. It is a system, common throughout the tropics today, of cutting trees and shrubs and tall grasses, burning the litter, growing crops for 2 to 5 years on the cleared land, and then allowing the natural cover to return to regenerate the soil. Where the system is practiced successfully, the fallow period may last any time from 5 to 15 years, depending on the soil and type of vegetation. The important thing is that the land be left fallow long enough for the tired soil to regain its former fertility.
From the point of view of the conservationist, shifting cultivation can be the cause of excessive soil erosion. immediately after land is cleared and before a crop grows enough to provide some protection from rainstorms, the soil is extremely susceptible to washing. Erosion losses can be alarming.
Shifting cultivation, in one form or another, is carried out in many places, on a wide range of soils, and with a variety of crops. It was once practised in northern Europe. Today some 30 percent of the world's arable soils are under shifting cultivation in Africa, Latin America, Oceania, and Southeast Asia.
The system does not require the use of machinery to be successful. Clearing is accomplished with axes, cutlasses, machetes, and fire. The cropland thus wrested by hand from forest and savanna is then cultivated with hoes or other hand tools, or with animal drawn implements, resulting in little disturbance of the surface soil.
When, after a few years, declining crop yields dictate abandonment of the land, new cropland is cleared elsewhere.
Practice met local needs
For many years, shifting cultivation proved a satisfactory farming system - as long as there was plenty of land and populations did not become excessively high. While it was hard work to clear the land, local experience and tradition directed the farmer to the most fertile soils, the easiest to cultivate, and those best suited to each particular crop. Many African farmers had (and still have) names for the soils and rated the fertility of a piece of land and its suitability for various crops by the vegetation that covered it. They understood their farming system and knew how to make the most of it.
Forest fallow in particular is known to have a beneficial effect on soil structure. Structure is not nearly as good under savanna and cultivated crops. The forest does a better job of protecting soil against erosion than does savanna, and forest soils contain much more organic matter. Further, studies in East Africa showed that water was available in forest soil at all levels throughout the year. On grassland and in cultivated fields, upper layers of soil dried out rapidly after rain.
Fallow is shorten
The chief problem with shifting cultivation today is that increasing populations and the need for higher production to feed them are pressuring many farmers to shorten or even eliminate the fallow. Without the full period of regeneration, the land does not recover from the loss of nutrients, soil erosion, and deterioration of the soil structure that took place during cropping by the next time the land is cleared. As a consequence of shortening the fallow, yields are lower and soil damage greater. The result can be permanent destruction of the soil and a disintegration of the village system.
So far, the problem of shifting cultivation has not been solved, although there are many ideas on how to approach the problem. They range from the opinion that nothing at all should be done, to the opposite extreme of completely replacing shifting cultivation by new systems of continuous cultivation. In between these extremes, various proposals aim at a gradual improvement of the productivity of the present system. Much more research and field testing will be needed, however, before some of these approaches can be applied with assurance of success.
Deserts are spreading
Legacy is desert
Potential for deserts is widespread
A second problem demanding special attention is "desertification", a relatively new term for the creation of desert-like conditions in what was once agricultural land. Desertification is not a process of land degradation like soil erosion and overgrazing, but is an end product. It occurs in arid and semi-arid zones and results from a combination of drought and mismanagement of resources, sometimes from ignorance but just as often from necessity. If soil erosion is a sickness of the land, then desertification is a land's death.
There is evidence that desertification is as old as civilization, but today it appears to be accelerating. What focused international attention on desertification was the 5 years of drought that began in 1968 in the Sahel, the southern margin of the Sahara that encompasses several countries. While drought was not new to this region, the plight of the people in past years had gone unnoticed by the rest of the world. In the early 1970s, however, communication media made the vast migrations, the refugee camps, and the hunger and starvation in the Sahel familiar to every newspaper reader and television viewer.
The seriousness of the disaster was not exaggerated. By 1973, the fifth year of drought, Lake Chad had shrunk to a third of its normal size and was no longer a single body of water. Failure of the Niger and Senegal rivers to flood left much of the best cropland in five countries unwatered and barren. Shrubs and trees died and, as grazing became restricted, livestock concentrated around watering places, where they destroyed what little vegetation remained and compacted the soil. Those graziers who fled south found only more people and herds similarly stricken. Estimates of deaths in the Sahel during the drought years ranged from 100 000 to 250 000, while the number of drought-induced diseases, including epidemics of measles and spinal meningitis among children, was impossible to calculate. Livestock losses were also high.
Legacy is desert
The drought ended in 1974, but returned after a few years. Its continuing legacy is the intensification of desert-like conditions in the Sahel and an extension of true desert into land that once supported people and their livestock. There is convincing evidence of this. Following the drought, in 1975, aerial surveys were made of the Sudan's desert margins. The photographs were compared with aerial maps made in 1958 of the same region. Studying the line where scrub vegetation tapers off into barren desert, it was concluded that the boundary of the Sahara had shifted southward by from 90 to 100 kilometres during the 17 years between surveys .
Ground observations support this conclusion. Dense concentrations of Acacia trees, which are useful for firewood and forage, were common around Khartoum as recently as 1955; by 1972, the nearest stands of Acacia were located 90 kilometres south of the city.
Desertification is also evident elsewhere, including the Americas. Journals and maps of the first Spanish settlers in northern Chile indicate that the Atacama Desert was once dense jungle. Many believe that overcutting of forests and overgrazing by livestock were responsible for turning the area into a wasteland.
Potential for deserts is widespread
The territories of half of the countries of the world are located in arid or semiarid zones susceptible to land degradation and eventual desertification. Much of this land, which currently contains about 14 percent of the world's population, is gradually losing its capacity to support life .
A United Nations Conference on Desertification in Nairobi focused attention on the problem in 1977 and developed a broad plan of action "to achieve zero desertification by the year 2000". Recommendations of the conference covered a variety of activities.
Although the conference acknowledged the role of natural calamities, like changes in climate, in extending the range of deserts, it considered the actions of man the more critical. Of the causes of desertification identified at the meeting, only 13 percent involved natural changes in the environment. The other 87 percent were attributed to human mismanagement of resources, including overgrazing, overcultivation, cutting too many trees for firewood, and inefficient and destructive irrigation practices.
One cause of trouble identified was the response of farmers and graziers to fluctuations in rainfall between good years and drought years. In dryland grazing areas, large numbers of cattle and sheep tend to build up during years of normal rainfall, too many to be supported during years of drought. When the inevitable drought arrives, graziers are naturally reluctant to cut back on herds after a single dry year. When it becomes apparent that the drought will be prolonged and serious, many ranges are already overgrazed.
Dryland farmers also tend to extend croplands into more marginal lands during good years, pushing back graziers in the process. When drought begins, the new cropland lacks defences and the soil may emerge from the drought too degraded even for livestock.
<section>4</section>
3. Human barriers to conservation
Local institutions play role
Farmers need more income
Feeling for land essential
Land tenure affects erosion
Fertilizer purchases constrained
Political consciousness lacking
Laws may be unenforced
Funds spent unwisely
Machinery may hasten erosion
Social changes
Inappropriate technology can lead to failure
Local people must participate
It is not high wind or rain that is the real cause of accelerated erosion, nor is it some inherent defect in the land. It is people who destroy the soil, and they do it by demanding more of the land than it can provide without help.
People expand their populations until farming systems can no longer support them. The way they overgraze pastures and plant crops may cause soil to wash or blow. They strip away forests from the sides of mountains, where trees afford the only protection from erosion and landslides, and they push farming into semi-arid grazing land where drought can destroy both crops and land. Particularly in time of crisis or change, they treat precious natural resources as if they could withstand any depredation - and last forever.
But what man degrades, he can also improve. But here again, it is not the forces of nature that keep people from taking remedial action, and in most cases, it is not the lack of technical information. What really gets in the way of effective programmes of conservation are human institutions - people's habits and customs, their status and income, their form of government, and their way of looking at themselves, their societies, and the rest of the world. If soil erosion is approached as a technical problem alone, it will never be overcome.
Developing a consistent, long-term programme of soil conservation calls for institutions and services that are conspicuously absent in rural communities in most developing countries. They include security of land tenure and farm credit facilities, adequate markets and transportation to reach those markets, access to fertilizers and chemicals, technical assistance and adequate farm income.
Local institutions play role
In developed countries, local institutions play an essential role in promoting soil conservation. They include a locally based extension worker and a soil conservation technician. Local bankers also support conservation, as do machinery dealers and owners of farm supply stores. Schools teach vocational agriculture, including conservation farming, and clergymen preach the virtues of resource stewardship.
Conservation is also promoted in developed countries by specialized media of communications, including farm magazines, rural radio broadcasts, and agricultural bulletins published by government agencies and universities. Many institutions support and reinforce programmes of soil conservation.
In tropical and subtropical countries, rural villages have institutions of their own that have been developed over the years to meet the needs of individuals and the community. But in recent times, many of these villages have been overtaken by change and their institutions have not had a chance to catch up. Expanding populations, war, famine, economic instability - and even new-found wealth - have altered age-old relationships and the structure of family, village, and tribal organizations. Arrangements that worked well in the past have disintegrated and new institutions have not yet been created to replace them. In many places, absentee landlords, sharecropping, and growing landlessness all contribute to the deterioration.
So much is needed for the improvement of agriculture and resource management! People need banks or credit unions that can provide agricultural loans at relatively low interest rates and where farmers can invest their savings. They need local farm cooperatives for group purchases of fertilizers, seed, and other inputs to help them market their products. Many villagers also need more secure land tenure, schools for their children. and extension systems to help them apply better farming practices. They require a better return on their labour, better prices for the products they grow and consumers with enough money to pay those prices.
Farmers need more income
Like any other enterprise, the returns from farming must be sufficient to cover the cost of daily living and related business expenses, such as the purchase of seed, fertilizer, and fuel. They must also be large enough to allow farmers to save money to invest in measures to conserve soil and water and to increase production.
An adequate income, however, is much more difficult to obtain on a small farm with eroded land than on a large farm with good land. The size of the majority of tropical farms, particularly those in southeast Asia and tropical Africa, is less than 5 hectares, and many farms are smaller than that. They are often badly eroded, but to install costly mechanical conservation practices like terraces is beyond the means of the people that farm them. It is axiomatic in developing countries that the farmers who need to make the largest per hectare investment in conservation are the farmers who can least afford it.
There are, however, many inexpensive conservation practices which farmers can carry out themselves such as contour farming and appropriate agronomic practices, if only they knew how. Unfortunately, there are not enough trained extension workers in most countries to transmit the needed information.
Feeling for land essential
The greatest risk of land degradation arises when land users do not have a deep feeling for the welfare of the land. The risk is increased when the users regard the land merely as a source of sustenance and income. This is often so in developing countries where tenancy laws are not well developed to protect the land as well as the interests of tenants and landlords.
Unless a lease specifically mentions the condition of the farm at the end of tenure, a landlord may charge a rent high enough to compensate himself for losses of soil and soil nutrients. The tenant in turn will "mine" the soil to produce the rent.
Observers in India, where soil erosion continues at high rates, report that landlords customarily have no desire to spend apparently unproductive capital on small parts of their holdings, even assuming that they are aware that erosion is taking place. The tenant, who may be well aware of the erosion, either lacks money to deal with the problem or cannot spare the labour from the short-term need of next year's harvest. Beyond these considerations, he has no economic incentive to make the improvements since he cannot see how they will benefit him directly.
Land tenure affects erosion
Clearly, systems of land ownership as well as tenure and business arrangements which do not provide security to the farmer are major obstacles to conservation. Among the most pernicious of these are short-term land leases, which fail to provide an incentive to a farmer to invest in long-term improvements. In general, the less secure the tenure, the greater the encouragement to exploit the land.
Inequities in land ownership may also encourage soil erosion. In Andean Latin America, for example, wealthy ranchers often use the relatively level valley floors to graze cattle, forcing the small, poor landowners onto the steep slopes to produce subsistence crops. This practice leads to severe erosion on slopes, impairing the productivity both of the mountainside farms and the valleys below, where streams become clogged with eroded sediment.
Another foe of conservation is single-crop agriculture. Usually single-crop farming fails either to return a good living to the man who works the land or to maintain the productivity of the soil, or both. Even where the soil is very productive and not easily damaged, a single-crop system usually means a poor living for the farm labourer, if not for the owner. If the price of the one crop goes down to very low levels, the farmer may be ruined. One-crop farmers may be affluent one year and poverty-stricken the next.
Fertilizer purchases constrained
Lack of cash or credit is one of the major reasons for delaying conservation measures and for failure to adopt farming systems that lead to higher yields. It is the chief reason, for instance, why so many farmers in developing countries do not use mineral fertilizers and chemicals to control pests and weeds, despite evidence that their application would raise crop yields substantially.
In addition, the small farmer short of cash is often suspicious of innovations and untried methods of farming, particularly when he has not seen the benefits with his own eyes. One reason for his negative attitude is that he cannot afford to make mistakes with his time or money.
The poorer a land user, the fewer chances he can afford to take with his livelihood. In traditional farming, where the level of income is close to the subsistence level, any risk of loss is intolerable. Borrowing the cash seems foolhardy unless the farmer is absolutely certain that what he buys with the money will provide him with enough return to pay back the principal and interest.
Political consciousness lacking
Perhaps the most important ingredient missing in unsuccessful responses to the threat of soil erosion is a national political will grounded in awareness. A country's planners, with university-level training in economics, law, and political science, may be unaware that natural resources, including land and water, require conservation measures to protect them. Typically such people are not much interested in farming. Or they may be aware that the policies and programmes required to deal with the problem would prove unpopular with urban and rural voters. Frequently, soil conservation programmes lack appeal for politicians because the stern measures required for success are likely to annoy or even anger constituents. Frequently, they require heavy investments from which no short-term return can be perceived.
Lack of political interest can be found even in countries suffering the most severe resource damage. Despite widespread soil erosion, deforestation, and flooding, some countries still lack a good, workable plan for the care of the land.
Laws may be unenforced
Even where political indifference is overcome and a country adopts what appears to be commendable conservation legislation, the existence of a law on the books does not necessarily mean that it will be followed or enforced.
Reviews of political constraints on conservation programmes in some developing countries reveal that laws and regulations may be more than adequate to protect their natural resources, but often few if any of the laws may be put to use. Typical shortcomings consist of at least one, or all of the following:
* no national policy related to soil conservation beyond, in some cases, that of protecting hydroelectric dams from sedimentation;
* several different departments may have jurisdiction over various aspects of soil conservation work;
* no communication on resource problems and solutions at ministry level or even between departments in the same ministry;
* no communication, or possibility of communication, between responsible government officials and farmers;
* no indication that the excellent conservation laws on the books would ever be enforced.
In some countries, inappropriate laws and policies may lead to an increase in erosion by encouraging farmers to plant soil-depleting crops or to pursue damaging cultural practices for the sake of short-term gain.
Funds spent unwisely
Political considerations will occasionally force unwise expenditure of public funds to satisfy larger and more influential farmers and divert soil conservation funds to projects with a relatively low priority. In the USA, a recent survey disclosed that more than 52 percent of all erosion-control measures installed with government financial help were installed on land where erosion was not very serious. Much critical soil erosion was bypassed.
Unforeseen obstacles - some apparently minor - may block adoption of improved agricultural practices in developing countries. One reason for the failure of hybrid maize to gain a foothold in parts of South America, for example, has been the lack of institutions for producing the seed each year and for distributing it. Further, many subsistence farmers are not able to afford it. The traditional practice since agriculture began in many South American farming communities has been to save a portion of the harvest as seed for next year's crop. The custom is deeply ingrained in the economic and even religious life of the people.
Sometimes a farmer will be prevented from building terraces or converting to livestock because of rigidities in the market. There may be no local rental outlet for equipment or a farmer may not have access to a bullock where he needs it for conservation work. A coordinated local programme that makes bullocks or tractors available could remove one of the obstacles to improved resource management.
Machinery may hasten erosion
On the other hand, using farm machinery the wrong way may actually promote soil erosion. Where expanded cultivation has been encouraged, not only by larger populations and higher prices for food grains, but also by the ready availability of tractors, the tractors have made it easy to plough steep slopes without any regard for resource protection. Similar experiences have been reported where heavy machinery has cleared and cultivated new farmland before management of local soils was fully understood and practiced.
Social changes
Modernization of another kind has helped degrade soils in areas of shifting cultivation in eastern Africa, where at one time several tribes practicing shifting cultivation also moved their villages from time to time. This was necessary because of the long fallow period, 17 years or more, that it took for cropland to recover. Moving the village caused no great social upheaval, as the group moved together and retained its identity and relationships. In time, however, new institutions came to the villages, along with permanent buildings post offices, dispensaries, police barracks and court houses. Permanent houses were built for the people who worked in these buildings. These structures helped anchor villages of the shifting cultivator, and surrounding areas were soon cropped to exhaustion.
In some countries, social customs may be retained which are no longer appropriate to changed conditions and which will lead to soil degradation. For example, where the numbers of cattle appropriate to a man's station in life often exceed the capacity of the land to support them. It is numbers of livestock, and not their condition, that signify wealth and status among the herdsmen.
Inappropriate technology can lead to failure
Not all obstacles to sound resource management can be blamed on inappropriate institutions in developing countries.
Damage to the soil has also resulted from attempts to transfer a system of agriculture that has proved successful in a temperate zone to a tropical one, without adequate research to determine if the system is workable in its new environment. All too frequently, it is not. A number of farming systems developed in temperate Europe were exported without success to tropical Africa, where intense, erosive storms are commonplace. Europeans learned that many soils in the tropics, particularly those with high iron content, have to be managed differently from those in Europe. Clearing the vegetation from such soils and exposing them to heavy rainfall can make them as hard and unworkable as concrete.
Even if an improved farming system is technically appropriate for a developing country, its adoption may still prove unfeasible. Some conservation measures, like contour cultivation, are relatively simple to apply and are likely to increase crop yields as well as protect the soil. But more elaborate measures, such as building terraces, may require the use of tools or machinery that local people are ill-equipped to maintain and operate. Further, even the simplest practices often require some basic technical training and assistance before a farmer can adopt them.
To be sure, farmers in several countries were building elaborate bench terraces centuries ago, long before recent local conditions justified the effort and made the need obvious again. But other cultures have no tradition of terracing. Before one can recommend terracing to a people unfamiliar with it, one must know and understand the people, as well as the peculiarities of the soil and climate which determine the usefulness of such a technique.
Local people must participate
No conservation project will work unless local people participate in developing and applying it. Examples abound of elaborate conservation works, designed by officials in another city or by imported agricultural "experts", which have failed chiefly because the farmer had not been involved in the planning. As a result, he did not accept maintenance of the works as his responsibility; he regarded the new structure as something outside his concern. Involvement of local people in planning and carrying out a conservation programme is a requisite for its success. It is people who cause soil erosion and it is people, working together, who must find the cures and apply them.
<section>5</section>
4. Aims and techniques of soil management
Countries share experience
Covering the land helps
Zero tillage gains ground
Keep tillage to the minimum
Farmers practice contouring
Rotation reduces erosion
Terracing requires labour
Controlling windblown soil
Overgrazing challenges conservationists
Stern reclamation measures needed
Forests aid conservation
Watershed approach required
The aims of soil conservation in a world that needs more food can be stated briefly:
* to avoid erosion and other forms of soil degradation by using land in accordance with its capabilities;
* to apply measures to restore the productivity of the soil where it has been damaged and to prevent further damage from taking place; and
* to combine sound methods of soil management with other methods and inputs of modern agriculture to obtain satisfactory production on a sustained basis.
Translating these deceptively simple aims into action will be a demanding task. At a minimum, developing workable soil conservation programmes will require a number of concurrent activities, calling for a determined and continuing commitment to conservation by each country's leadership. Other requirements include:
* making an inventory of the condition of each country's agricultural soils and other resources and an assessment of what it will take to repair those that are damaged;
* sharing information on managing each type of soil among countries and conducting further research to develop sustainable farming systems for tropical soils;
* passing new legislation to establish a soil conservation agency and extension programme and funding the work at a high enough level to obtain satisfactory results;
* strengthening local institutions to support improved farming methods and involving local people in the development and application of these systems;
* providing technical conservation assistance from national and international organizations, both public and private, to developing countries that request such assistance.
Countries share experience
Countries embarking on such a course of action will not be starting from scratch. The lessons learned by pioneers in modern soil conservation, like the USA and Australia, are available to other countries to modify and apply to their own problems, as are the experiences of older societies, like the terrace-builders of Asia, the Near East and Latin America. There are also a number of research stations throughout the world that are spending a great deal of time and money trying to improve resource management and farming systems. Like the basic aims of soil conservation, the principles they have learned can be put very simply.
Keep the soil covered with living plants - or the residue of dead ones. Slow the movement of water downhill, and help rain to soak into the soil where it falls. Get more organic matter into the soil, and avoid stripping trees and other protective vegetation from hillsides. Where erosion from wind is a problem, break its force with trees or other plants and do a better job of holding down the soil. Most important as a guiding principle, people should ask no more of each parcel of land than it is capable of giving.
Soil conservation consists of safeguarding, not just cropland, but all kinds of useful land. Nearly all land is useful for some purpose. Some kinds of land - flat, fertile, and well drained - are ideal for growing crops. Other kinds can be used for crops only if protected with conservation measures. Still others should not be used for annual crops at all, but kept under grass and never grazed or should not be grazed past their limits. Other land is practically erosion-proof if left in trees but will deteriorate rapidly if the trees are cleared. And much steep land with shallow soils should not be used by man at all, but should remain in its natural state, a source for groundwater recharge and a home for wildlife. Good land use is probably the best conservation practice of them all.
Covering the land helps
The most inexpensive way to prevent soil from washing or blowing is to keep it covered. In most places, vegetation should cover at least 70 percent of the ground surface to provide adequate protection against erosion. Unfortunately, the most critical erosion on farmland occurs at those times of year when the soil is bare or when row crops are in the seedling stage. The farmer's preoccupation during this time of year is to eradicate the unwanted vegetation, which appears in the form of weeds.
But if a cover of living plants is impractical at this stage, a cover of dead plants is not. Many crops produce substantial crop residues in addition to the parts that are harvested or grazed. These residues may be ploughed under, left on the soil surface as mulch, or partially mixed with the surface soil when preparing the seedbed for the next crop. Used in sufficient quantity, mulches provide a measure of protection to the soil - much more than if the land were clean-tilled.
Zero tillage gains ground
Even better ground cover is obtained through a system developed during the last two decades. Called "no-till" or zero tillage, it involves planting an economic crop which keeps the soil covered, such as a cereal; harvesting it but leaving the stubble standing in the field; killing it with a single application of a chemical herbicide, and drilling the seed and fertilizer for the next crop into the soil through the stubble of the old crop. The soil is neither ploughed nor disked, but left alone as much as possible, reducing fuel and labour costs and lowering the risk of compaction.
In normal years, the crop germinates on time and yields are generally equal to or larger than yields from crops grown in clean-tilled fields. The roots of the old crop discourage weeds and improve soil structure and, as a result, the soil retains more moisture. In an unusually wet year, this may prove a disadvantage, but in an abnormally dry year, crops grown with no-till farming suffer much less stress than crops grown with traditional tillage. Most important, soil erosion, even on steep land, is usually negligible.
Variations of no-till farming, as well as other forms of mulch tillage and minimum tillage, are the fastest growing set of conservation and energy saving practices in the United States today. They were used on some 30 million hectares of cropland during the 1980-81 season with generally good results.
Keep tillage to the minimum
While the zero tillage idea is new to the West, certain forms of it have been practiced for a long time in parts of Asia and Africa, primarily to save labour. In the savanna zone of Africa, for example, farmers dig holes with a hoe one pace apart and plant maize seed in each hole, without any other form of seedbed preparation. If grass is growing between the holes, it is lightly slashed or left untouched. This system is well suited to many tropical soils, in which intensive tillage leads to rapid breakdown of soil structure and loss of moisture. More sophisticated forms of zero tillage, with herbicides used for weed control, hold even more promise for improvement of agriculture in the tropics.
Mulches of crop residues also help reduce erosion in tropical countries. Mulches can be straw, maize stalks, banana leaves or palm fronds, depending on what is available locally. Laid on the soil surface, or mixed into it, they reduce the surface area exposed to the impact of raindrops and decrease the velocity of runoff water by imparting roughness to the soil surface. When the mulches decompose, they add organic matter to the soil. Rain also infiltrates the soil more easily under mulch, since there is no sealing and no crust on the soil's surface.
Living mulches of grass and legumes are being tried in some places between rows of vegetables, with weeds regulated with herbicides. The living mulch helps to prevent crusting, controls erosion, and improves soil filth.
Farmers practice contouring
The use of vegetation can be combined with various other conservation techniques, like contour farming, to protect soil from washing. Instead of planting rows of crops straight up and down the hill, a farmer practicing contour cultivation plants rows at right angles to the direction of the slope, following the contour of the land. The practice works best on fields that slope uniformly in one or two directions, and it is used for orchards and vineyards as well as field crops.
To make contouring succeed, natural drainageways have to be identified and planted with grass to allow stormwater to move safely off fields without creating gullies. Grassed waterways have to be graded accurately and made wide enough so that runoff water is spread evenly over a wide channel. Waterways are permanent measures and require a dense, vigorous growth of vegetation to be successful .
If runoff in the field is still too rapid, it may be necessary to control it further and promote absorption by cutting contour furrows at intervals on the slope. More severe problems may be handled with diversions, which are channels with a supporting ridge on the lower side to intercept runoff. Diversions move water on a gentle gradient to a grassed waterway or other outlet.
Contouring is often combined with stripcropping, in which strips of a crop like maize alternate on the side of a hill with strips of denser vegetation, like small grain, grass, or a legume. Much of the soil washed downhill from each strip of row crops is trapped by the strip of denser vegetation growing below it. The cover crop can be grazed or cut for hay or silage.
Rotation reduces erosion
Farming systems that rotate crops with pastures of grass, clover and legumes reduce soil erosion in two ways.
Firstly, the period of time that the soil is exposed to water and wind is reduced sharply. In a maize-wheat-grass rotation in USA, for example, the grass pasture is not ploughed until spring, just before the maize is planted. Wheat follows the maize in the autumn or fall, immediately after harvest, and grass and clover growing in the wheat stubble also reduce erosion.
Secondly, crop rotation with legumes usually improves soil fertility, particularly nitrogen content and increases the ability of the soil to absorb and retain moisture. Land planted with maize following grass loses considerably less soil than maize following maize.
In the Corn Belt of central USA, three-year rotations of maize, small grain, and pasture were used with success for many years. On sloping land, two consecutive years of pasture have proved even more effective. In New England, a common rotation was potatoes, followed by oats and then clover. In recent years, however, more and more American farmers have abandoned crop rotation in favour of continuous crops of maize or maize and soybeans, to the detriment of the soil. Today, however, there is renewed interest in crop rotation among many growers.
In tropical countries, a grass fallow rotation system, with suitable cooperation between farmers and graziers, has occasionally proved effective in replacing shifting cultivation, as has mixed cropping of maize with legumes.
Terracing requires labour
Mechanical measures for controlling erosion are usually more costly than those that depend primarily on vegetation, and they generally require more labour, materials, and technical skill to install. They include many different kinds of terraces, diversions and grade stabilization structures.
Terraces, one of the most effective means of reducing soil erosion, are ancient inventions. They vary widely over the world - even within a single country - depending on tradition, type of soil, degree of slope, rainfall, and many other factors. In India, as in many countries, terracing is by far the most effective and widely practiced field measure for controlling runoff and preventing erosion. Terracing also helps conserve soil moisture and improves groundwater storage and crop yields.
In general, terraces break up a long slope into a series of short ones. Each terrace collects and controls the excess water from a definite area of the slope above it. Water collected in a terrace channel may be conducted to protected outlets where it will cause no damage, such as well sodded pastures or natural waterways. If the soil in a field is permeable enough, terraces may be built level and water allowed to stand and soak into the ground.
A few types of terraces may be familiar to the layman. Bench terraces, one of the oldest methods of erosion control, transform steep land into a series of level shelves or steps running across the slope. Bench terraces make cropping of steep slopes possible and safe; the steps are separated by almost vertical risers of rock or earth protected by a heavy growth of vegetation.
On slopes of 10 percent or less, terraces can be built with wide, gently graded banks, with a large shallow channel above each one. On gently sloping land, such terraces are usually constructed so that crops may be grown on them as well as in the intervals between them. These broad base terraces can be farmed with modern machinery. On slopes greater than 10 percent, terraces with grassed back slopes, or contour bunds, often prove effective.
In the USA, an increasing number of terraces today are laid out so that they are parallel to each other, permitting greater ease in using and turning large tillage machinery. Any excess water is removed with perforated underground drains. Where installed, parallel terraces are popular with farmers. The chief barrier to building more of them is the expense.
Even when properly constructed, terraces will not provide erosion protection for very long unless they are kept in good repair. Failure of terraces in some countries is the result of poor maintenance, not faulty terrace design. A crucial time for terrace maintenance is after each heavy rain during the first year after construction, when soil may settle. Breaks or low places should be mended promptly before damage becomes serious. Unless kept in good condition, terraces may cause more erosion than if they were never built.
Controlling windblown soil
The techniques for reducing erosion from wind are considerably different from those for slowing down water erosion. One approach is to plant rows of trees at right angles to the prevailing wind to break its force and provide shelter for the field just beyond. Shelterbelts diminish the length of land open to wind blowing and perform a function similar to that of terraces in controlling erosion from water.
Starting in the Dust Bowl days of the mid-1930s, USDA's Forest Service planted 220 million trees as "nets to catch the wind" in parts of the USA subject to wind erosion. Also, plants other than trees, like tall wheatgrass, have also proved effective in blocking wind and drifting snow.
An obvious solution to erosion from blowing is to maintain a surface on the field that cannot be moved by the wind. One answer is to keep the field covered with plants or mulch. Stalks of maize, for example, when disked into the topsoil, roughen the surface and interfere with the mechanics of wind erosion.
Another method is to plough the land into a rough cloddy condition and leave it without disking until planting time, so that the clods resist the force of the wind for as long a period as possible. The cumulative effect of blowing soil, or avalanching, can also be effectively reduced by growing crops in strips placed at right angles to the prevailing wind. Intervening strips are frequently fallow, but erosion on these exposed soils is cut sharply by the stripcropping.
Overgrazing challenges conservationists
Answers to overgrazing are far from simple and range conservationists will need to approach the problem differently in different regions and different societies. Some of the more obvious solutions are usually unacceptable to local people, like reducing numbers of livestock or migrating to different locations. Another approach is to introduce hardier and more nutritious species of forage to overgrazed areas and to harvest and retain at least a part of the forage to feed livestock during the dry season. Reseeding of degraded rangeland may also prove necessary.
Still another approach is to improve management of indigenous pasture and rangeland through rotational grazing, and by avoiding concentrations of animals that trample down soil and vegetation on stock routes and near watering points. Sources of water should also be widely distributed.
Stern reclamation measures needed
Where overgrazing has resulted in desertification, stern procedures are called for to halt the spread of desert and to begin reclamation. They include:
* retiring the land from any use by man or livestock;
* establishing new vegetation by seeding grasses and bushes, possibly with the aid of fertilizer and irrigation;
* constructing fences and other barriers to stop drift;
* stabilizing sand dunes with binding plant cover.
These activities, singly or in combination, should lead to eventual reclamation of many desert lands, provided of course there is sufficient rainfall or irrigation water available. Large sand dunes will remain, but they can be prevented from moving and covering productive land by planting of suitable vegetation.
Forests aid conservation
It has been said that Japan would have been washed into the sea long ago had it not been for its forest-covered hills and mountains, maintained through the centuries for the specific purpose of controlling erosion by water. As trees are cut and used, Japanese farmers constantly replant from tree nurseries kept supplied with planting stock.
Forests provide excellent cover on hillsides, but when first established, young seedlings do not provide enough cover to prevent erosion. Like other crops, trees need to be planted on the contour or on terraces if the land is steep .
Some forests can be harvested from time to time without causing great damage to the land, but in other places, where the forest soil is exceptionally light, trees are the best protection for the land and must be cut selectively, if at all.
On wastelands, a plant cover of grasses, legumes, brush, and trees should be established and maintained. If cutting and grazing are prohibited, the land may slowly recover and someday become productive.
Watershed approach required
Small dams may be required
A watershed is an area of land that drains into a single waterway or body of water. A small watershed of a few hectares that drains into a small stream forms part of a larger watershed, which in turn forms part of a larger watershed, until the combined watersheds may become a major river basin draining millions of square kilometres of land.
Of all the units possible for containing a conservation project - villages, states, provinces, countries - the only "natural" project area is that of a watershed. It is natural because it allows planners to focus on all the effects of downhill runoff in a given area and to plan accordingly to control or contain it. In a degraded watershed, which lacks forests and cropland conservation measures, water running downhill too fast erodes soil and washes out crops. It pollutes streams or fills lakes with sediment. It causes frequent flash floods and contributes to bigger floods downstream. In a well managed watershed, on the other hand, most of the stormwater soaks into the soil, increasing groundwater supplies and providing crops, pastures, and trees with needed moisture. Floods are controlled.
A typical small watershed project concentrates first on land treatment. Development starts at the top of the drainage basin and proceeds gradually down the slopes to the lowlands. In humid areas, the highest elevations are usually forest, and forest is often the resource most in need of repair. The benefits of forest cover on mountainsides are numerous, and in many steep watersheds where forests have been cut, the only answer to local problems is to replant them.
Farther down the slope, eroding pasture and orchards may have to be improved to reduce soil loss and eroding cropland protected with contour stripcropping or terraces. Areas unsuited for crops may have to be returned to grass or trees. All these land treatments are directed toward minimizing the amount of runoff water - and soil - that reaches the lowlands.
Small dams may be required
Even with adequate land treatment, excess runoff from unusually intense storms may have to be contained in various parts of the watershed behind small dams. The stored water may also be used for irrigation or local water supply or released slowly and safely at a later time to proceed downstream.
One of the virtues of the watershed approach to soil and water management is that while a large and badly eroded watershed can be selected for development, the work can be carried out gradually, one sub-watershed at a time. The work can be spread over a number of years, depending on the availability of funds and trained manpower. If and when all the sub-watersheds have been treated, then the larger watershed will also have been improved in a sound and systematic manner.
As a rule, watershed development requires the contributions of many disciplines and aims at improving the quality of life of local residents of the area as well as management of resources. New crops and cropping systems may form part of development, as well as better marketing facilities, new roads, new facilities for health and education and a general improvement of the environment.
In recent years, many countries, in such widely separated locations as Korea, Jamaica, Indonesia, and the USA, have conducted resource development projects on a watershed basis. Multilateral and national assistance agencies and banks have also supported the watershed approach with grants, loans, and technical assistance. Today, watershed planning and development is the preferred approach to soil and water conservation and management.
<section>6</section>
5. Government's responsibility for conservation
Responsibility for conservation rests with governments
Base policy on resource assessment
Single agency preferred
Drafting nationwide laws difficult
Punitive laws are ineffective
Improvement "packages" must attract farmers
Conservation teams include many disciplines
Local officials ensure success
Landusers form associations
Incentives are necessary
Direct payments have drawbacks
Attitude to short-term conservation costs
Responsibility for conservation rests with governments
A clear responsibility for conserving a country's basic resources rests with governments. Whether it is the national government that provides the principal leadership, as in the USA, or provincial governments, as in Australia, government at some level must take the initiative for establishing a conservation programme .
While the plan of action for each country will be different, a typical programme will include provisions for a conservation agency, research, an extension service and technical training. It should also provide for incentives and new institutions to encourage farmers to adopt conservation practices. Governments will have to assume that portion of the costs of soil conservation that benefit society as a whole, rather than individual farmers.
Securing popular support for a soil conservation programme is no easy matter. Soil conservation tends to be given low priority, even in programmes to improve agriculture, because immediate economic returns are not apparent. It will be necessary to convince rural and urban leaders that soil erosion leads to lower crop yields and higher food prices, while steadily eroding a country's self-sufficiency.
Advocates of resource management will have to make it clear that the cost to the country of soil degradation may be very great and measurable in terms of more food imports, malnutrition, and even starvation. The arguments must be persuasive, because government spending for conservation will have to be substantial during the next two decades if soil degradation is going to be arrested. FAO studies estimate that needed investments in soil and water conservation in 90 developing countries should total $1.5 billion in the year 2000. While the figure may seem high, it is only a tenth of the investment proposed that year for irrigation and one-twentieth of that proposed for mechanization. Further, much soil conservation work is not necessarily capital-intensive and much of the labour can be done by farmers themselves.
Base policy on resource assessment
A country's soil conservation programme should be based on a thorough assessment of its natural resources, including their current condition and the cost of repairing any damage already done to them. Ways to obtain such information will be discussed in Chapter 6. When the resource assessment is complete, a government should establish a national land use or resource policy to guide the development of a conservation programme, as well as other activities for the improvement of agriculture.
Policies will vary widely between countries, depending on their needs and goals. In one country, it might emphasize watershed development, forest management, and the need for local forest product industries. In another, it might call for an improvement in grazing lands - for more cattle and fewer goats - and possibly for relocation of some people in overcrowded areas. In still another country, the chief policy goals might be to improve crop yields 50 percent and to bring additional land into production. In all countries, it might well be a goal to increase farm income and bring about a general improvement in living standards of rural people.
Single agency preferred
After a country adopts a land use policy, it will be ready to develop and fund an agency to carry out its conservation activities. There are cogent arguments for establishing a single soil conservation agency in the government, rather than distributing the functions among several ministries or departments. A single agency can do a more effective job of promoting soil conservation because that is its central, rather than peripheral, task. There is the obvious reason of avoiding confusion and duplication of effort. Also, the head of a conservation agency can represent the conservation interest in the process of budgeting of money and manpower. Without such a single-minded advocate, it is unlikely that conservation will receive the continuing support from government that it requires.
One reason why so few countries have single resource agencies and comprehensive conservation laws is because, over the years, separate pieces of resource legislation have been passed one at a time, as each need was recognized. More single-purpose resource laws are concerned with forestry than with any other subject. In countries that have forests, the existence of laws for their protection and management is nearly universal. A smaller number of countries also have soil conservation laws, while countries of the Near East and North Africa have given more attention to grazing laws.
Only a few countries have comprehensive laws covering management of all natural resources. New Zealand, for example, has separate laws covering mining, forests, all phases of animal production, and various other types of agriculture, but it also has a single watershed and soil conservation law broad enough to cover all land use. In Zambia, a comprehensive resources law applies to the conservation of all natural resources, and the minister of land and natural resources has broad authority to define what comes under the law.
But these countries are exceptions.
Drafting nationwide laws difficult
Variations in climate and topography and in local needs and conditions have made it difficult for many governments to draft resource management laws that are equally fair or effective in all parts of their countries. In some places, a minister or a local authority is delegated the power to frame compulsory land use rules as the need arises. This delegation permits more flexible regulation that meets local requirements.
Resource legislation that is too coercive or that is poorly understood may, for one reason or another, go unenforced. Sometimes the emphasis on programmes changes when political leadership is changed. For example, before independence Kenya had a limited soil conservation programme. Under land use rules made under the Agricultural Act, charges were brought against people who failed to build and maintain terraces on steep land. Enforcement of the law was relaxed after Kenya became independent. As a result, most terraces were neglected or ploughed and erosion increased. Today the government recognizes the seriousness of land degradation and has adopted new programmes of corrective action.
One Kenya law, for instance, makes it an offence to clear or cultivate land if its slope is above a certain gradient. A chance to enforce this regulation came when farmers sought to register their land holdings with the new government. No registration was granted for steep land unless terraces were first installed to prevent soil loss.
Legislative solutions are also possible for problems created by tenancy. A law can be passed that allocates the cost and profit from soil and water conservation measures between tenant and landlord. In Uruguay, conservation works constructed by a tenant must be paid for by the landlord at their value when the tenancy is ended. On the other hand, a tenant who refuses to follow official conservation practices may be evicted.
Punitive laws are ineffective
In the USA, one of the 50 States has passed a law imposing penalties on farmers who allow too much soil to erode from their land. In a recent survey of American farmers, however, a large majority opposed any coercive measures on a national level, preferring the present voluntary programme to a mandatory one.
Generally speaking, regulatory approaches to soil conservation are as ineffective as they are unpopular. It is the local farmer who must apply the conservation measures called for, and he must have the knowledge, equipment, capital, and desire to apply them. Incentives and technical assistance are far more successful approaches to getting conservation on the land than punitive action.
Innovations in farming that are too radical may also run into resistance. Most people want to improve what they already have, not change to another system. Any proposal that tears down an existing culture defeats the purpose of a conservation assistance programme. Successful technical assistance requires a broad understanding of the rural people being served their values, their fears, and their goals. Even so, it often takes a long time to persuade land users to adopt improved systems of agriculture.
But it can be done. Japan is an example of a country that has successfully altered its institutions to permit a more productive agriculture. After the Second World War, Japan strengthened its farm-supply and marketing industries, established farm organizations and more agricultural colleges, and developed an extension system. An already existing tradition of conservation was encouraged and supported. These changes, combined with improved crop varieties and more fertilizer and other inputs, helped push rice production in Japan from a prewar average of four tons per hectare to about eight tons per hectare some four decades later. And resources are being managed for sustained use.
Improvement "packages" must attract farmers
An important key to this kind of success is for the government to have a good "package" of improvements to present to the farmer. The package should offer, not only improved resource protection, but also the promise of greater crop yields for about the same expenditure of labour. If possible, it should mean higher farm income.
In many parts of the world, it is common for a farmer to agree with an extension worker that a certain conservation practice is needed and useful. He will even resolve to adopt it the following season, and then do nothing about it, year after year. The reason for his failure to act is because of economic factors; he is not convinced that adopting the practice will pay.
On the other hand, for example, a drastically different system of wheat farming, promoted by soil conservationists in Western Australia, became an accepted practice among farmers within a relatively short time. It did so because it made economic sense from the start and picked up the enthusiastic support, not only of farmers, but of economists, bankers, and farmer organizations. This experience suggests that researchers who have not yet developed improved systems of farming that also result in more farm income had better keep searching. What is needed is not the best technical solution to resource problems, but the best solution that is acceptable to farmers.
Assuming the country has a system worth promoting, it is essential to train and equip a competent extension service to carry the concept into rural areas. In the USA, the number of technical people in the field to assist farmers solely with soil and water conservation totals about 10 000. If a conservation agency lacks its own extension people to work directly with farmers or villagers, it will have to train and use general agricultural extension workers. If it does, it will have to keep reminding extension people that their job is not only to increase production, but also to make sure than the soil is maintained to grow the crops of the next generation.
Unfortunately, only a handful of developing countries have a cadre of dedicated agricultural extension workers today, much less a service that is adequately staffed and trained. Problems of recruiting are numerous. Some of the more serious constraints to improving extension services in developing countries include:
* lack of interest in agriculture by many students with formal education. To many, farming is the occupation they went to school to escape;
* lack of experience in agriculture by students with town and city back grounds;
* reluctance by college-trained professionals to do the field work necessary to transfer textbook knowledge to practical applications;
* lack of prestige for agricultural positions compared with positions in administration, commerce and industry, foreign affairs, or the military;
* inadequate preparation of students in mathematics and elementary sciences, so that they require additional training to prepare them for conservation courses.
These constraints reflect the generally low esteem in which agriculture is held by many government officials and national leaders. These attitudes must be turned around through conscious national policies before a competent extension service can be enlisted and trained.
Conservation teams include many disciplines
The most useful technical assistance to rural people is provided by multidisciplinary teams. Conservation teams should include professionals trained in several disciplines - agronomy, civil and mechanical engineering, soil science, hydrology, economics, and rural sociology. Each professional should also receive rudimentary training in disciplines other than his own to gain appreciation of contributions of others to the overall task.
An engineer should know enough economics to realize that the structures he plans and builds must return enough benefits to the community to pay for their cost. An agronomist should know enough sociology to understand that a farmer may reject a perfectly good farming system for reasons which have nothing to do with its agricultural merits. Mutual understanding among team members is requisite to a successful multidisciplinary approach.
A well trained extension worker can also make sure that each new practice accepted by farmers forms part of a larger plan for the general improvement of agriculture. Most farmers adopt new practices in a piecemeal fashion; they usually try out those recommendations that hold promise of increased income. But an extension worker with multidisciplinary training keeps the ultimate objective in mind - to achieve higher farm production on a sustainable basis. He understands how resource management fits in the total farming system, just as he understands the importance of other inputs, like good seed, fertilizers, and control of plant diseases and pests.
This places a heavy responsibility for the success of any programme on the extension worker, but is a responsibility that cannot be fulfilled at any other level. At the national or provincial level, the soil conservation agency should concentrate on applied research, on training extension people, and on supporting their efforts with guidebooks, posters, and other training aids. National leaders cannot generally work face-to-face with the farmer but the field worker can do that.
Local officials ensure success
Local government officials also have a role in carrying out a successful conservation programme. Officials of local governments are better informed on local needs and conditions than central government officials. If possible, local officials should be a link between national policy and farmer action.
In the USA, which has had a Soil Conservation Service (SCS) since 1935, this essential link is provided by 2700 local soil conservation districts. The affairs of each district are directed by a board of from five to seven local people, typically farmers and ranchers, who are elected to office by other farmers or by the general public. Usually they serve without pay.
These local officials are responsible for setting soil conservation priorities in their districts and for carrying out information campaigns. Occasionally, they rent machinery to farmers, sell trees at cost for windbreaks, or testify on conservation needs before county or state committees. Technical assistance to individual farmers from SCS field workers is provided only with the approval of these local boards.
Many believe that the existence of conservation districts is the chief reason why the US Soil Conservation Service has survived for so long. Certainly the arrangement has been popular with land users, who are much more likely to accept guidance from friends and neighbours than from government employees from outside the community. They also feel free to describe experience and express opinions to district board members, who in turn can relay this information to the national conservation agency, where policies may be changed or modified.
Landusers form associations
In many countries, successful group action in conservation is achieved through cooperative associations of landowners, tenants, and farmers. An extension of this idea to countries without organized associations should help bridge the gap of understanding between government policy makers and farmers and lead ultimately to better conservation and land use.
Wherever barriers exist to the adoption of conservation measures, it is the responsibility of government - at all levels - to identify those barriers and to attempt to surmount them. Improved institutions may be the answer. Liberal agricultural credit, better seed and fertilizer, and equipment hire and purchase assistance can either improve soil directly or make it possible for farmers to adopt needed conservation measures. Lack of proper machinery, for example, can be an absolute bar to certain soil conservation activities. On the other hand, the development of a new tool or a disease-resistant variety of crop can make a new system of conservation farming profitable for the first time. In agriculture, a single factor in a farming system can have impact on many other factors.
Incentives are necessary
Most developed countries have found some form of incentive useful or even essential in encouraging farmers to practice soil conservation. Financial help may come in the form of direct payments to farmers, preferential credit, or low-cost or free use of equipment.
Direct payments seem to produce results, but they require supervision to make sure they are used for the purposes intended. In the USA, a limited amount of government cost-sharing is available to farmers to finance the cost of conservation measures, like terraces and drains. The amount of the cost-sharing and the specific practices covered are determined at the local level. Recently, several states have adopted their own cost-share programmes.
In New Zealand, the Soil Conservation and River Control Council has broad powers to make grants or loans under a variety of conditions. In Nigeria, costs of building terraces by hand were shared on a project between farmers and the government. Each farmer contributed one day of labour each week as his share, while he was paid wages by the government for the other five days. Acceptance of this approach was reportedly much better than on projects where the government carried out the work without involving the farmers.
Another approach to getting more conservation on the land is through tax incentives that allow a farmer tax credit for investments made in conservation practices .
Direct payments have drawbacks
A common problem with direct incentive payments is that the recipients often regard them as a deserved reward for good soil management and stop using conservation practices if the payments are interrupted. This dependent attitude on the part of farmers is largely avoided with preferential loans, which can be made for conservation purposes with low interest and generous terms for repayment. One means of ensuring a conservation loan would be to allow liability for repayment to depend on yields. This would remove the risk of impossible debt, which haunts many small farmers. Loan officials can also encourage more conservation. Many private bankers in the USA will make loans on farms only if the land is under a conservation plan.
Attitude to short-term conservation costs
If conservation systems always put money into a farmer's pocket, it would be unnecessary for governments to offer so many incentives or to assume so much of the total investment. For the farmer, however, short-term conservation costs often exceed anticipated benefits. Three agricultural scientists in the US Corn Belt tried to find out if building terraces on sloping lands could be economically justified from the farmer's standpoint. They concluded that, except in a few cases, the farmer will sacrifice income to control erosion. Other studies have produced similar results.
But the same conservation measures that are not perceived as economic to farmers may be highly economic to the country as a whole. Ensuring the continuity of the resources necessary for agriculture should be the deciding factor for investments in soil conservation.
<section>7</section>
6. Obtaining more facts about resources
Start with soil surveys
Soil Map of the World and other aids to assessment
Making land capability assessments
Further research needed
German researchers study erosion
Forest crops and other possibilities
There is still a lack of information in many countries on the condition of land resources just as there is inadequate knowledge about farming and grazing systems that combine satisfactory production with resource protection.
To know where to begin with a land use policy and a soil conservation programme, a country will need to know the answers to several basic questions about its resources:
1. What kinds of soils are found in the country? Where are they located? What are the potentialities and limitations of each soil for various uses?
2. How is the land being used at present? How are the agricultural soils being managed? If current farming practices are continued, what will happen to soil and related resources in future years?
3. If soils now being used for agriculture remain in agriculture, how can their management be improved? Can it be improved enough to use the soils on a sustained basis? Is more research needed to develop better farming systems for these soils?
4. How many hectares of land are in need of conservation treatment to prevent further serious degradation? Where are they located? How much will it cost to treat them adequately? How much annual maintenance would be required to keep them productive? At what annual cost?
5. Where can additional cropland be found in the country? What investments will be necessary to bring it into production? To protect it from degradation?
6. Where land now in crops cannot be protected enough to continue to cultivate it, what other economic land uses are possible? Should cropland be converted to grazing land? Into forest? Should the land be used for recreation? What would be the impact of these changes on the economic and social life of the people who live on the land? What would be the impact on the environment?
Water is another basic resource that must be taken into account, but as the subject is vast enough to warrant a separate publication of its own, it will not be treated here. However, its interactions in any conservation work must be borne in mind.
Start with soil surveys
Answers to these important questions will help guide a country's efforts to develop new or improved soil conservation programmes. A good place to start is with soil surveys. Soil surveys describe and evaluate the various types of soil in a country, locating them on maps. They describe each soil's susceptibility to erosion and its limitations for different uses. For example, one soil might be excellent for growing trees but subject to severe erosion if planted in maize. Another might make good cropland if the water table were lowered slightly. Soil surveys guide planners and farmers to alternatives for making land use decisions .
Surveys also predict crop yields for different soils and tell what crops, grasses, and trees are best suited to each soil. They also describe the soil and water management needed to use each soil on a sustained basis. Soil surveys are a basic tool of modern agriculture, as well as of many other enterprises involving land use, like highway construction.
But making a scientific soil survey requires time, the services of professional soil scientists, and a considerable investment. Thousands of separate ground observations are required for a survey, and these have to be delineated on aerial photographs of the area being mapped. Help in making soil surveys and assessments of land conditions is available to developing countries from a number of sources, including FAO, the USA, the Federal Republic of Germany, the United Kingdom, and others.
Soil Map of the World and other aids to assessment
On a world scale, important contributions in mapping and assessments have already been made by agencies of the United Nations. FAO and Unesco have completed a Soil Map of the World, a highly generalized but extremely useful look at the planet's soil resources. More recently, FAO completed an Agro-Ecological Zones Project, to obtain "a more precise assessment of the production potential of the world's land resources, and so provide the physical data base necessary for planning future agricultural development".
To carry out the latter project, FAO compiled data on those areas of land in the world suited to the rainfed production of 12 major crops. The study, which takes into account soils, climate, length of growing period for crops, and other factors affecting agriculture, presents its findings, not by country, but by agro-ecological zones. In this way, the food-producing potential can be determined for various regions. The project employs the principles of the FAO Framework for Land Evaluation, including the concept that suitability for growing a particular crop assumes use of the soil on a sustained basis and without risk of environmental degradation. Findings of this 1981 project should be of great help to agricultural planners and developers in every country.
More detailed guidance for countries on surveys is available in several FAO Soils Bulletins, including the following: A framework for land evaluation, No. 32; Assessing soil degradation, No. 34; and Prognosis of salinity and alkalinity; No. 31. These are available from FAO Distribution and Sales Section, Rome, and certain authorized sales agents.
Expert soil survey assistance is also available to developing countries through the Soil Management Support Services ( SMSS), a programme of the US Agency for International Development (AID) which is executed by the Soil Conservation Service. SMSS is also refining Soil Taxonomy, a system of soil classification developed in the USA, to make it more useful in the tropics. Similar facilities are available through the British Land Resources Division of the Overseas Development Administration (ODA).
In the absence of surveys by trained scientists, it is possible for a lay person with brief training to observe signs of serious land degradation and to record his observations in a methodical manner. During a rainstorm, for example, or immediately after it has ended, rills appear clearly as small channels in cultivated cropland, most often near upper slopes. Gullies are obvious, and it is not hard to learn to estimate their dimensions. A less obvious but tell-tale sign of erosion is a stream of water that turns muddy just after rain, especially when the muddy stream is seen entering a larger stream that is clear. The muddy stream is carrying recently eroded soil. Erosion is also signalled by deposits of gravel, sand, or silt in stream channels.
Sometimes a field is covered with gravel or stones, indicating that the fine soil has been washed away. Exposed roots of trees and shrubs are also evidence of erosion from water, as are washed-out fence posts. On sloping land, eroded soil accumulates above trees, stones, and fences. Deposits of soil at the bottom of slopes are another sign of erosion. So are light and dark patches in a field, indicating the cover of topsoil is uneven.
Signs of wind erosion, apart from the obvious experience of a dust storm, are deposits of white sand on the surface of the soil, ripple designs on sandy soil, and the formation of hummocks and dunes. Another sign is an accumulation of sand against grass stems, tree trunks, fences and sheds in the direction of prevailing winds.
Marks of salinity or alkalinity include salt crust on the surface of the soil or along the edges of irrigation furrows. Barren spots in a field of crops or unhealthy looking plants are another sign.
It does not take a professional soil scientist or an agronomist to spot these danger signals, and when carried out in a planned way, such assessments can provide a good, working appraisal of resource conditions.
Making land capability assessments
A number of simple guides for determining land capability are being used by farmers and conservationists in different countries today. Canada, Great Britain, and New Zealand all have their own schemes of classification, but most are adaptations of a system developed in the USA. The idea behind all of them is that proper use of the land is the best means of erosion control. The US system divides the rural landscape into eight capability classes, with Class I the best suited for growing crops and Class VIII unsuited for any agricultural purpose at all.
Further research needed
Despite the great advances in agricultural research made in most developed countries, much more needs to be learned about managing tropical soils and other aspects of farming in the tropics and subtropics.
Promising research is under way to develop alternatives to shifting cultivation. Among these are various forms of mulch tillage, mixed cultures of crops and forest trees, and intercropping. It seems likely that no single satisfactory answer will be found, but that different agricultural systems will be developed for different soil types and to meet the needs of different societies and cultures.
An example of the kind of practical research that is desperately needed was announced recently by the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-arid Tropics ( lCRISAT), at Hyderabad, India. The problem is that the deep black soils that cover much of India are too wet and sticky to cultivate during the monsoon rains. Left fallow during the rainy season, the fields are eroded and depleted by runoff, reducing the chance or good crop yields when the monsoon is over.
Now ICRISAT has developed technology that permits such crops as sorghum and pigeonpeas to be grown on deep black soils during the rainy season. The system has many facets. It involves shaping the land into broadbeds and furrows to facilitate cultivation and drainage. The system uses bullocks and a new two-wheeled tool carrier developed at ICRISAT. According to the inventors, the animal-drawn vehicle can do anything a tractor-powered vehicle can do.
Seedbeds are prepared during the dry season with the tool carrier and sowed just ahead of the monsoon before the soil becomes too sticky to cultivate. Improved crop varieties and combinations of crops are used with adequate amounts of fertilizer. Excess water is stored to be used for irrigation during the dry season. ICRISAT predicts that this farming system, which will permit farmers to harvest two crops a year instead of one, will have "tremendous impact on food production in India".
German researchers study erosion
Another example of helpful research was undertaken in 1978 and 1979 in Paran, Brazil, by scientists from the German Agency for Technical Cooperation (GTZ) working with staff of the Fundao Instituto Agronmico do Paran. The state of Paran. has suffered an alarming increase in soil erosion since its tree cover was reduced from 84 percent to 9 percent and the forests were replaced with large-scale, mechanized farming. With double-cropping of wheat and soybeans, annual soil losses on 6 percent slopes ranged from 700 tons per hectare on unprotected land to slightly less than 100 tons per hectare where terraces were combined with good tillage practice. But losses were still much too high to maintain soil fertility and to use the soil for crops on a permanent basis.
The German scientists conducted trials at two sites in Paran. and found that the root structure of cover crops increased water infiltration rates up to 416 percent on one type of soil and up to 629 percent on another. Erosion rates decreased significantly. They also found that wheat yields from non-tilled plots were higher in dry years than those from conventionally tilled plots, probably because of higher soil moisture content, lower soil temperature, and increased biological activity. Non-tilled soybeans, they learned, can be sown with lower risks than those conventionally planted.
Findings such as these offer hope that more protective agricultural systems can be found for this valuable farming area and for areas in other countries with similar soils and erosion rates.
Forest crops and other possibilities
In a number of countries, new and improved forest crops, like the fast-growing ipil-ipil tree (Leucaena leucocephala (Lam.)) in the Philippines, lay the groundwork for innovations in commercial forestry, releasing more land for crops. In a number of tropical countries, degraded forests have been transformed in just a few years into successful man-made plantations.
Much of current research on improving unproductive grazing land is directed toward finding hardier, more nutritious forage plants.
Research is also needed to find more productive ways for people to work with one another toward common goals of resource management, particularly at the village level.
A major research objective is to determine the relationship between soil loss and crop yields for major agricultural soils, so that the costs of conservation can be measured accurately against the benefits to individual farmers and to countries.
There have been encouraging experiments and field work in all of these areas, but they need to be multiplied many times around the world.
<section>8</section>
7. Sources of project assistance
FAO offers project help
South Korea expands cropland
Jamaican project succeeds
USAID helps rural poor
Sweden assists Kenya government
GTZ assists many countries
For countries seeking help with soil and water conservation projects, there are a number of sources of technical and financial assistance, both public and private.
One important source is FAO, which assists member countries with a wide range of field projects. These are carried out only at the request of the recipient countries, which assign their own technicians to the projects to work with FAO experts and provide support services.
The aim of FAO field activities is not to solve countries' problems for them but to develop local resources for dealing with those problems. In 1980, FAO was involved in some 50 projects or parts of projects in soil and water conservation and related resources. Of these, 16 were in Africa, 10 in Asia and Oceania, 19 in Latin America, and 5 in the Near East and Europe. Projects covered a variety of subjects, involved many disciplines and drew on the experience of conservation experts from many countries.
Participation in some projects is modest, with one or two FAO experts assigned to a country for a short time to deal with a specific problem of agricultural development. Other projects may continue for years and extend over whole regions of the world.
FAO offers project help
Aid offered in finding financing
In addition to the other forms of assistance it provides, FAO recently proposed four kinds of soil conservation projects for consideration by interested countries.
One type of project would assist a country's government to start a national programme of soil and water conservation. The programme might include improvements in shifting cultivation and help bring about land use planning for increased farm production on a sustained basis.
A second type of project would develop and implement soil and water conservation techniques in watersheds. This would involve land use planning in one or two critical watersheds as well as rural development, better management of soil, water, and plant resources, and improvements in shifting cultivation.
A third type would provide suitable training for land use officials and land use policy makers on the causes and consequences of land degradation.
A fourth type would provide practical training at the farm level in soil and water conservation techniques for farm planners and rural extension workers. An objective would be to create more awareness among these field workers of the extent of damage from soil degradation and to teach them to apply simple soil conservation techniques to protect farm resources.
FAO has already amassed considerable experience in all these types of projects during the last two decades and stands ready to share its experience and expertise with as many countries in need of assistance as its budget will allow.
Aid offered in finding financing
FAO also helps countries to identify and formulate projects for investment and, through the FAO Investment Centre, to apply for loans for agricultural and resource development. Today there are a number of important sources of investment funds for developing countries. These include:
* the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development ( IBRD), or World Bank. The IBRD makes long-term loans at conventional interest rates; most of its projects have been large-scale, including loans for irrigation and hydro-electric development. Recently, however, it has become increasingly active in promoting agriculture and rural development.
* the International Development Association ( IDA), a part of the World Bank group. The IDA makes loans under very favourable terms to countries not able to bear fully the burden of conventional loans. Its criteria for loan approval, however, are just as exacting as those of the World Bank.
* the International Finance Corporation ( IFC), the third part of the World Bank group. IFC helps establish more productive enterprises in developing countries, usually by facilitating the flow of private investment capital.
* the International Fund for Agricultural Development ( IFAD), which began operations in 1978. IFAD promotes agriculture in countries with chronic food deficits. It has a minimum capital of $1 billion, and is strongly supported by the oil-producing countries, among others.
* the European Investment Bank (EDF), which operates within the framework of the European Community.
* a number of regional banks, including the Asian Development Bank, the African Development Bank, and the Inter-American Development Bank, as well as Arab funds, national development banks, and private foundations.
From the mid-1970s to 1982 FAO's Investment Centre has helped countries to prepare development projects with total investment costs of nearly $13 billion. About half this amount has been provided in loans and credits from the financing institutions with which FAO cooperates. The remainder has come from the countries themselves. Increasing emphasis is being placed on investments which will result in improvement in the lives of poor farmers in the developing world.
South Korea expands cropland
Unexpected problems
Learn to consult villagers
An early example of an FAO project that was eventually continued with World Bank financing took place in the late 1960s and early 1970s in three large upland watersheds in the Republic of Korea. The mountainous country has a total land area of nearly 10 million hectares, but only about 23 percent was cultivated. The government wanted to expand farmland in the uplands through improved soil and water management.
The Upland Development and Watershed Management Project followed a successful small-scale demonstration project conducted with FAO assistance in two sub-watersheds. The pilot project proved that the watershed approach to development was practical in attacking a variety of related problems.
The larger watershed project, which was paired with a second project to improve forestry, was financed in part by the United Nations Development Programme, with the bulk of the funds coming from the Republic of Korea.
Part of the effort was directed toward helping Korean farmers in the uplands to apply soil conservation measures. Farmers learned to build various types of terraces and were encouraged to use fertilizers, manure, and lime. Technical specialists showed them how to build check dams and plug gullies, and they suggested planting hard-to-protect slopes in grass or trees.
Based on a land use and capability study made for the watersheds, project leaders recommended developing the hilly, eroded lands in upland drainage basins for dryland farming, using bench terraces to protect the soil wherever the slope, depth of soil and soil texture were favourable. They also suggested supplementary irrigation.
It was the opinion of the project leaders that one million hectares in the uplands that had been restricted by law to forest reserves could be safely converted to improved rangeland and 200 000 additional hectares could be switched to reseeded pasture. A new beef cattle industry could be established on the land, which could also provide manure for the cultivated areas.
Unexpected problems
As in all projects, unforeseen problems appeared as work moved forward. Traditional terracing techniques proved expensive and ineffective, and too many repairs had to be made before soils were kept in place. A new terrace design was tried, but it also proved costly and not always effective, either. Conservationists turned to slower and less expensive erosion control measures that allow natural processes to heal severely eroded areas.
Many forest soils needed fertilizer, but available agricultural mixtures failed to provide the needed nutrients. Further, soluble fertilizers were leached out quickly before they could benefit young trees. improved fertilizers and methods for applying them had to be developed.
But progress in the watershed development went forward, despite occasional setbacks. Flood and siltation damage below structures to control torrents was practically eliminated when torrent control works were planned as an integral part of the watershed drainage system.
In large areas of rainfed paddy land in steep valleys, there was no economically sound method of water storage for irrigation. Project scientists developed, designed, and implemented a dual purpose system of water storage and fish culture. After constructing and stocking 34 fish ponds, project leaders noted with satisfaction that farm income began to rise.
Learn to consult villagers
An important lesson learned by FAO experts was that farm management and community facilities could be improved only through decisions made by the local farmers themselves. At the start of the project, several experts gave instructions to villagers without first considering the villagers' needs and desires. In not one instance did they obtain cooperation by giving orders to local people.
On the other hand, when villagers were consulted, they not only cooperated, but made important contributions of ideas, cash, and labour. Taking the traditional cooperative spirit of the village society as a basic stepping stone, village development associations were established in 17 villages. Community concerns in a typical village were raising cattle and pigs, ensuring adequate, clean water supplies, home improvement, and credit facilities. Each development association was registered as a credit union, which embodies in its regulations the requirements of self-help, self-reliance, and democratic administration.
Based on its experience with the project, the government of the Republic of Korea accepted in principle the approach of comprehensive area development within the boundaries of watersheds. It subsequently requested a project extension to prepare feasibility studies for international financing, which led to World Bank financing and a continuation of the work.
Jamaican project succeeds
Planning calls for compromise
Agro-forestry has potential
Certain practices unacceptable to farmers
A more recent FAO project with a successful outcome was carried out in Jamaica. Jointly financed by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and Norway, its purpose was to train Jamaican professionals in conservation and to help make detailed plans for nine potential watershed projects in the Kingston area.
The nine watersheds, which cover about 45 000 hectares, are adjacent to Kingston, and several contribute to the city's water supply. The area has more than its share of problems, both physical and economic. Altitudes range from 150 metres to 1400 metres; rainfall ranges between 100 and 250 centimetres a year, but there are regular dry seasons. The rugged area supports some 60 000 people, about half of them engaged in agriculture. Roughly half the area is farmed, and average farm size is less than two hectares. Many farms are located on steep land where erosion is serious.
The people who live on these small farms are no longer young; average age of the farmers is 51. Much of the food they grow is for their own table. Yields of all crops are typically low.
The objective of the watershed projects is to improve resource management, while helping at the same time to improve the lives and livelihoods of rural people. The prime aid is to control soil erosion. Unless erosion is slowed down, the productivity of the watersheds can be expected to decline at a rapidly increasing rate over the next few years. Mountain forests will continue to be cut; the intensity and frequency of flooding will increase. Impoundments behind dams will fill with silt, and bridges and roads downstream will be threatened. Protection of the soil that remains and development of farming systems that sustain the land are therefore essential parts of the proposed development plans.
Planning calls for compromise
For planners, the 2-year watershed planning project proved a combination of success, disappointment, and compromise.
On the positive side, the small number of Jamaicans with professional training in soil conservation and watershed management was greatly increased through 11 different training courses running from 2 to 4 weeks. Training manuals were also prepared on hydrology, forestry, agronomy, soil conservation, extension, and other subjects.
In addition, 16 participants were selected for 6-month fellowships overseas to study various aspects of watershed management. Plans were also underway to incorporate soil and water conservation in the curriculum of the Jamaica School of Agriculture. Trained Jamaicans are now available to help carry out watershed development plans when the projects become fully operational.
Aerial photographs and soil surveys of the project area showed the planners that land use was not entirely rational. Sections of the watersheds with good potential for cropland were being under-utilized, while steep, highly erodible land was being intensively cultivated. It was clear that several areas under forest could more profitably be used for agriculture, while some of the poorer farmland should be planted in trees. Absentee ownership of forestland accounted for part of the irrational land use.
Planners called for prompt action to protect marginal lands with slopes greater than 30 degrees, where land holdings are so small that they cannot provide a decent living for the people who live there, no matter how hard they work. Such lands constitute more than half the area in the project. The FAO team speculated that the land could support a mountain economy based on activities related to forestry, like charcoal production, cottage industries, recreation and tourism.
Agro-forestry has potential
Agro-forestry has great potential in the area, since it constitutes an excellent means of production and protection in steep areas. Several systems of agro-forestry already exist, some of them highly diversified. On a typical farm, the upper canopy is formed by timber species, breadfruit trees, coconut, or mango trees. The lower stratum includes cash crops like coffee, cocoa, citrus, bananas, ackee (Blighia sapida Koenig), and pimento (Pimenta officinalis). Coffee is particularly promising for the area, since it provides reasonable protection to the soil under tree shade or in individual basins. More attention needs to be given, however, to suitable mixes of timber, fuel wood, and fodder species, and to food trees.
Certain practices unacceptable to farmers
But there were disappointments. Farmers at the demonstration sites did not adopt all the practices recommended to them. One type of "discontinuous" orchard terracing, for example, was not accepted at all, even though it clearly increased production and reduced soil erosion. On the other hand, the discontinuous terraces required a good deal of management and maintenance, evidently more than local people wanted to invest. Project planners decided instead that more use should be made of individual basins for tree planting, a form of treatment that is relatively cheap and reasonably effective in preventing erosion. Most important, it requires little of a farmer's time for its upkeep.
There was also concern that growers would not maintain improvements after the demonstration ended. Farmers in demonstration areas were heavily subsidized to install terraces and similar construction works. They also obtained seedlings free of charge and fertilizer at reduced cost. When full-scale watershed development begins, the Jamaican government will not be able to afford subsidies at the present scale and this may discourage some farmers.
It is also clear that better marketing outlets will have to be created if there is to be an incentive for higher production. Project planners felt that these could be provided through already existing Jamaican Agricultural Societies, which could also help supply fertilizers, seeds, and chemicals.
Despite problems, however, planners were confident that six of the nine watershed projects, when funded, will bring about major improvements in the area.
USAID helps rural poor
Guatemala receives aid
Model convinces farmers
USAID also carries out assistance programmes. They are designed, among other things, to help the people of certain developing countries with soil and water conservation and watershed improvement projects. A major focus for USAID development assistance is the alleviation of hunger, malnutrition, and starvation in developing countries through programmes to increase and sustain the productivity of small farmers. Emphasis is given to the poorest countries and to those committed to helping their rural poor participate in development.
On resource projects, USAID frequently contracts with professional employees of the USDA's Soil Conservation Service (SCS), who volunteer to work for a time in a developing country. Recent AID projects involving SCS people were in Haiti, Nepal, and Peru, among others. SCS employees - and some who have retired, too - also lend their experience to other countries under a variety of other bilateral agreements and as part of FAO teams.
Because of the long experience of the USA in soil conservation, many trainees from other countries spend time there each year, working in SCS field offices and attending universities. In 1981, some 200 trainees from 35 countries received training from SCS in the USA. The courses were financed by AID, FAO, or by their own governments.
Guatemala receives aid
An SCS expert arrived in Guatemala in early 1977 to help farmers in the highlands to develop a soil conservation programme. The work was financed by a loan from USAID.
Guatemalan government teams had determined that soil erosion on croplands throughout the area was at unacceptable levels. The project objectives were to provide adequate, simple soil conservation practices that could be passed by word of mouth, to eliminate runoff on the steep slopes from all but the worst storms, and to allow for water storage and time for infiltration to take place on farmland.
Model convinces farmers
USAID team members set up a model to demonstrate the effect of rainfall on soil under four conditions: with bench terraces and mulch; contour planting; diversion ditches; and no land treatment at all.
After each demonstration, farmers were asked to select the practice they would like to use. They consistently selected terraces as their preferred conservation measure. Word of the demonstration passed quickly among people of the area.
To help farmers plan and lay out terraces, the USAID team developed simple, homemade tools, including an engineering level made from three strong corn stalks, native hemp, and a rock. Using this tool properly, a farmer could survey, design, build, and check terrace construction accurately enough to permit water infiltration to occur during most rains.
Farmers also learned to seed grasses on the steep terrace slopes and to use them for cattle feed or for mulch, which was piled on top of the soil around plants, Mulch had to be thick enough to prevent weed growth and conserve moisture. It also protected the soil.
In 1978 and 1979, some 550 Guatemalan farmers under USAID guidance constructed more than 230 hectares of terraces by hand. All terraces withstood two rainy seasons well. Interviews with farmers revealed that using bench terraces increased average yields of maize 141 percent; potatoes, 98 percent; wheat, 81 percent; and beans, 83 percent, compared with yields when no conservation treatment at all had been applied.
Sweden assists Kenya government
Provides training for field force
Several European countries also provide conservation assistance to developing countries, both as individual governments and through such multilateral organizations as the European Development Fund and the FAO. The Swedish International Development Agency ( SIDA), for example, is one of several agencies assisting Kenya with agricultural problems. Since 1974, SIDA has been helping Kenya develop and strengthen its programme of soil conservation.
Present population of Kenya is about 14 million, and its growth rate is about 3.5 percent a year, one of the highest in the world. More than 85 percent of the nation's people live in rural areas, and most of them make their living from agriculture.
Population pressures have opened up many steep, marginal lands for cultivation of food crops and for animal production. Trees have been cut indiscriminately. Little consideration has been given by new settlers to critical soil erosion, although Kenya's topography, soils, and pattern of rainfall make it very susceptible to damage.
Provides training for field force
Since SIDA began its collaboration with Kenya, 2-week training courses in soil conservation techniques have been held for about half of the government's 4500 technical assistants and for hundreds of technical and administrative officers. The objective is to train all of them. Each course includes practical experience under field conditions to develop a trainee's ability to apply the techniques he has been taught.
A detailed, illustrated booklet of 200 pages, Soil Conservation in Kenya, describes techniques that can be used by small-scale farmers using labour-intensive methods. Supplements are being prepared continuously to guide field extension workers.
The interests and proposals of SIDA cover nearly every facet of resource use in Kenya. Current recommendations include integration of forestry and agricultural development activities into a single small watershed programme; expansion of nurseries to include forest tree species useful for agro-forestry; trials of new farming systems in hilly areas; new institutional arrangements, such as storage facilities, and major improvements in dairy herds. SIDA also proposes regular improvements in the size and quality of the field extension unit, already one of the best in Africa.
Even with the help of SIDA, FAO, and other countries and organizations, Kenya faces a long, uphill fight to improve resource management, proving again that it is much easier to cause soil erosion that to cure it.
GTZ assists many countries
Nepal erosion analysed
Another example of help from the individual nations of Europe is the Federal Republic of Germany, which not only contributes to multilateral organizations, but also gives direct assistance to other countries through the German
Agency for Technical Cooperation (GTZ ) . A non-profit, state-owned company formed in 1975, GTZ provides expert help in a wide range of fields, including agriculture, forestry, and rural development. GTZ participates in projects that are financed by official German development funds and in projects in which payment comes from the developing country.
At the last count, GTZ had participated in more than 1600 projects in 90 countries and had a field staff of 1300, augmented by 800 people from GTZ consultant firms. Like FAO, GTZ believes firmly in the value of multidisciplinary teams, with members thoroughly informed about local conditions. That is because answers to problems of soil mismanagement usually cannot be solved with simple applications of conservation practices. They are much more complex than that.
Nepal erosion analysed
A case in point is the experience of a GTZ team in the midlands of Nepal, where severe soil erosion occurs as a direct consequence of heavy population pressure.
Overgrazing in the area leads to destruction of the remnants of forest, which are also damaged by repeated lopping of branches for fodder. Crops are grown on steep slopes, and more slopes are formed when roads are built. Soils are highly erodible, and terraces, where they exist, are built with a slope and are always subject to erosion. The bare soil washes easily during three months of intense monsoon rains. Diversion of crop-growing to other areas is out of the question; the whole region is overpopulated.
Recommendations of GTZ scientists for reducing soil loss and helping grow enough food for local people call for a number of concurrent activities. They include:
* intensifying the use of existing irrigable rice terraces to permit new forests to be planted on the steep slopes;
* increasing the supply of animal fodder by encouraging vegetation along terrace bunds, now virtually unused;
* control of runoff of surface water during the monsoon with a suit able channel and irrigation system.
It would be helpful if the number of goats were reduced, so that forests would not be used for fodder, but it seems this may not be possible.
GTZ experience in Nepal has led to the conclusion that soil loss caused by bad cultivation methods cannot be remedied by the soil scientist alone. It demands the cooperation of geographers, agriculturalists, biologists, water engineers, animal breeders, economists, and sociologists. Together, they could explore the complexity of the soil as a totality and as the basic factor for the production of food.
<section>9</section>
8. Conclusion: A time for national action
Since its creation, FAO has promoted the need for resource conservation. A further contribution to worldwide awareness was made in March 1980 with publication of the World Conservation Strategy, launched by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature ( IUCN) in cooperation with FAO, UNEP, and Unesco. Most recently, a World Soil Charter was adopted at the Twenty-first Session of the FAO Conference, held in Rome in November 1981. The text of the charter is published as an appendix to this publication.
At an earlier meeting in 1981, a paper prepared for the Sixth Session of the FAO Committee on Agriculture set forth a checklist of actions to be taken at the national level in creating a comprehensive soil and water programme. Not all items will prove applicable in every country, but, in the opinion of Committee members, all merit careful consideration by each country's leadership. The recommendations are not presented in order of priority.
1. Develop a soil and water policy.
2. increase awareness among all sections of the community of the problems caused by soil erosion and the need for action to solve the m.
3. Prepare and execute intensive long-term training programmes at all levels in soil and water conservation, emphasizing a multidisciplinary approach.
4. Survey a country's agricultural and forest lands - both current and potential - and assess their suitability for different uses. Consider the likely hazards of degradation. Provide decision makers with alternative land uses that satisfy community needs while ensuring that the land is used according to its capabilities.
5. Provide advice, technical assistance and incentives - payments, improved credit, tax relief - to individuals and particularly to groups of land users willing to work with one another and with the government to achieve soil conservation.
6. Plan and develop resource management projects on a watershed-by-watershed basis.
7. Formulate research programmes which will provide sound scientific backing to practical soil conservation work, taking full note of socio-economic needs of farmers.
8. Establish an institutional framework for mounting and supervising soil conservation programmes for coordination with other organizations involved.
9. Develop soil and water conservation legislation in support of administrative action to be taken.
10. Seek foreign technical and financial assistance if required.
These or similar actions by concerned countries are necessary to launch a worldwide effort to arrest soil erosion and other forms of resource degradation. Clearly, it is urgent to reverse the accelerating destruction of resources through comprehensive soil and water conservation programmes which increase and sustain crop yields. Such programmes are within reach today of every country, and the national leaders who design and support them will be engaged in public service in the best sense of that term. As populations grow and demands on resources increase, there will be no higher calling in the world than that of resource conservationist. There is no work more needed today than projects that help keep the land alive.
<section>a</section>
Bibliography
Ahlgran H.L. First, the care of the soil. In: Grass, The Yearbook of Agriculture USDA, Washington DC. pp. 425-429. 1948
Arledge J. E. Soil conservation in the mountains of Guatemala. In: Soil and Water Conservation News, June. pp. 8-9. 1980
Bennett H.H. Soil Conservation. McGraw-Hill, New York. 993 p. 1939
Bennett H.H. Elements in Soil Conservation. McGraw-Hill, New York. 406 p. 1947
Bosworth D. and Foster A.B. Approved Practices in Soil Conservation. Interstate, Danville, Ill. 488 p. 1982
Bower C.A. and Fireman M. Saline and alkali soils. In: Soil, The Yearbook of Agriculture. USDA, Washington DC. pp. 282-290. 1957
Brown L.R. The worldwide loss of cropland. Worldwatch Paper 24. Worldwatch Institute, Washington DC. 48 p. 1978
Brown L.R. Resource trends and population policy: a time for reassessment. Worldwatch Paper 29. Worldwatch Institute, Washington DC. 55 p. 1979
Brown L.R. Building a Sustainable Society. Norton, New York. 433 p. 1981
Buckman H.O. and Brady N.C. The Nature and Properties of Soils.7^th ed. MacMillan, Toronto. 653p.
CEQ. The global 2000 report to the President: entering the 21st century. Vol. 1. Council on Environmental Quality and Department of State, Washington DC. 47 p. 1980
Carter V.G. and Dale T. Topsoil and Civilisation. University of Oklahoma, Norman 292 p. 1955/74
Davidson D.A. Soils and Land Use Planning. Longman, London & New York. 129 p. 1980
Dudal R. An evaluation of conservation needs. In: 9. Soil Conservation: Problems and Prospects. R. P.C. Morgan (ed). Proc. International Conference on Soil Conservation, Silsoe, UK. CIT Press, Cranfield, Bedford, UK. pp. 3-12. 1981
Eckholm E.E. and Brown E.E. Spreading deserts - the hand of man. Worldwatch Paper 13. Worldwatch Institute, Washington DC. 41 p. 1977
FAO. Soil erosion by wind. Agricultural Development Paper No. 71. 4th printing. Rome. 88p. 1978
FAO. Soil erosion by water. Agricultural Development Paper No. 81. 2nd printing. Rome. 284 p. 1978
FAO. Legislative principles of soil conservation. Soils Bulletin 15. Rome. 68 p. 1971
FAO. Project AGL: PD/ROK/67/522, Republic of Korea. Project findings and recomendations. Terminal Report. Rome. 1974
FAO. Shifting cultivation and soil conservation in Africa. Soils Bulletin 24. Rome. 248 p. 1974
FAO. Soil conservation for developing countries. Soils Bulletin 30. Rome. 92 p. 1976
FAO. A framework for land evaluation. Soils Bulletin 32. Rome. 77 p. 1976
FAO. Soil conservation and management in developing countries. Soils Bulletin 33. Rome. 211 p. 1977
FAO. Methodology for assessing soil degradation. Rome. 70 p. 1978
FAO. Watershed development with special reference to soil and water conservation. Soils Bulletin 44. Rome. 257 p. 1979
FAO. Soil and water conservation. Paper prepared for 6th Session, FAO Committee on Agriculture. Rome. 18 p.1980
FAO/UNEP. Report of technical review mission. Project JAM/78/005/Norway. Rome. 1981
Fournier F. Soil conservation. Nature and Environment Series. Council of Europe. 194 p. 1972
Garlitz N.M. SCS provides worldwide conservation assistance. In: Soil & Water Conservation News, February. pp. 1-2. 1981
Gasser W.R. Survey of irrigation in eight Asian nations. Foreign Agriculture Report 165. USDA, Washington DC. 114 p. 1981
GTZ. Key policies and programmes for agricultural development. GTZ, Bonn/Eschborn. 319 p . 1979
GTZ. Outlines of agricultural cooperation. GTZ, Eschborn. 59 p. 1980
Hockensmith R.D. and Steele J.G. Soil erosion, the work of uncontrolled water. Agriculture Bulletin 260 (rev. ). USDA, Washington DC. 16 p. 1971
Hudson N.W. Soil Conservation. 5th ed. Batsford, London. 320 p. 1979
ICRlSAT. New hope for increasing food production in India. In: News from CGIAR 1: 1-8. 1981
IUCN. World conservation strategy. Int. Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources, Gland, Switzerland. 1980
Jung. L. The behaviour of the soil in response to changes in land use. In: Natural Resource and Development. Vol. 5. Federal Institute for Natural Resources, Tubingen. pp. 46-51. 1977
Kellogg C.E. The Soils That Support Us. MacMillan, New York. 370 p. 1956
Kellogg C.E. We seek, we learn. In: Soil, The Yearbook of Agriculture. USDA, Washington DC. pp. 1-11. 1957
Kellogg C.E. and Orvedal A.C. Potentially arable soils of the world and critical measures for their use. Reprinted from Advances in Agronomy, New York . 170 p . 1969
Kemper B. and Derpsch R. Results of studies made in 1978 and 1979 to control erosion by cover crops and no-tillage techniques in Paran. Brazil. ln: Soil and Tillage Research l, Elsevier, Amsterdam. pp. 253-267. 1981
Kriesberg M. International organizations and agricultural development. Foreign Agriculture Economics Report 131. OICD, USDA, Washington DC. 146 p. 1981
Lowdermilk W.C. Conquest of the land through 7000 years. Agriculture information Bulletin 99, SCS/USDA, Washington DC. 30 p. 1953
McCormack D. and Young K. Technical and societal implications of soil loss tolerance In: Soil Conservation: Problems and Prospects. R. P.C. Morgan (ed). John Wiley, Chichester, UK. pp. 365376. 1981
McDonald A. Early American soil conservationists. Miscellaneous Publication 449. USDA, Washington DC. 62 p. 1941
Morgan R. P.C. Implications. ln: Soil Erosion. M.J. Kirkby and R. P.C. Morgan eds). John Wiley, (London. pp. 253-301. 1980
Rafiq M. The present situation and potential hazard of soil degradation in 10 countries of the Near East region. FAO, Rome. 149 p. 1978
Sampson R.N. Farmland or Wasteland: A Time to Choose. Rodale Press, Emmaus, Pennsylvania. 422 p. 1981
Sheridan D. Desertification of the United States. Council on Environmental Quality, Washington DC. 142 p. 1981
Simon J. The ultimate resource. Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey 415p. 1981
Spurgeon D. The promise of agroforestry. In: American Forests, October 1980. pp. 20-67. 1980
Stocking M. A. Conservation strategies for less developed countries. In: Soil Conservation: Problems and Prospects. R.P.C. Morgan (ed). Silsoe, UK. CIT Press, Cranfield, Bedford, UK. pp. 377384. 1981
Streeter C.P. Reaching the Developing World's Small Farmers. 4th ed. The Rockefeller Foundation, New York. 1975
UNEP. Economic and financial aspects of the plan of action to combat desertification. UN Conference on Desertification, Nairobi. 1977
Williams J.R. et al. Soil erosion effects on soil productivity: a research prospective. In: Journal of Soil and Water Conservation 36:82-90. 1981 p
Wischmeier W. H. Use and misuse of the universal soil loss equation. In: Soil Erosion: Prediction and Control. SCSA. Ankeny, Iowa. pp. 371-378. 1977
<section>b</section>
Appendix: World soil charter
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
November, 1982
Foreword
Man's demand for food from the natural resources that sustain his existence has increased enormously in recent years. FAO's projection in "Agriculture: Toward 2000" reveals that 50 percent more food will have to be grown by the end of this century just to meet present nutritional levels; yet additional supplies will be needed to conquer famine and malnutrition. However, the ability of land to produce food is limited. The limits of production are set by soil and climatic conditions and by the management applied. Any "mining of land beyond these limits results in decreased productivity.
For a number of developing and developed countries alike, land degradation has emerged as one of the major constraints to the further expansion of agriculture both across the land surface as well as in terms of higher yields per unit/area. In certain developing countries this loss of land is taking place at an alarming rate. It results in decreasing levels of self-sufficiency and hence in increased dependence on supplies from outside. If remedial measures are not taken, 20 percent of the productive capacity of land in developing countries may be lost by the end of this century.
Conscious of this situation, the 21st Session of the FAO Conference, in November 1981, adopted the World Soil Charter. The Charter establishes a set of principles for the optimum use of the world's land resources, for the improvement of their productivity, and for their conservation for future generations.
The World Soil Charter calls for a commitment on the part of governments, international organizations and land users in general to manage the land for long-term advantage rather than for short -term expediency. Special attention is called to the need for land - use policies which create the incentives for people to participate in soil conservation work taking into account both the technical and socio-economic elements of effective land use.
In compliance with the World Soil Charter, FAO is pursuing an active programme on soil management and conservation, including those activities which are basic for the promotion of optimum land use: land resources inventories, assessment of degradation hazards, evaluation of production capacity, improvement of soil fertility, combating desertification, land reclamation, integrated land-use planning, training and institution building. In doing so, FAO is cooperating closely with national institutions, organizations in the UN system, UNDP, UNEP, Unesco, WHO and WMO, which are, from different angles, involved in the promotion of effective land use, and with other international organizations dealing with conservation issues.
I commend the World Soil Charter to all decision-makers and users of the land as a means to ensure good stewardship of the world's land resources on which the survival of mankind depends.
Edouard Saouma
Director - General
World soil charter
The conference,
Recalling Resolution VI of the World Food Conference (Rome, 1974), by which the Food and Agriculture Organization was urged to establish a World Soil Charter as a basis for an international cooperation toward the most rational use of the world's soil resources,
Realizing that land resources are limited and that of the total land area of the world only a small percentage is currently used to feed the world population which is likely to reach six billion by the end of the century,
Recalling further the Programme of Action as adopted by the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development (Rome, 1979), which called for "an efficient use of land... with due regard for ecological balance and environmental protection," and the Plan of Action of the UN Conference on Desertification (Nairobi, 1977) to combat land degradation and desertification,
Concurring that the food requirements of mankind including the eradication of malnutrition can be met by:
* the intensification of food-crop production including multiple cropping, wherever this can be safely accomplished,
* the bringing into cultivation of new lands, wherever conditions for sustained cropping prevail, with a view to meeting food production requirements,
* the establishment and better utilization of grasslands and forests,
Sharing the concern caused by the dangers of soil degradation resulting from misuse of land and inappropriate measures for intensifying production, particularly in areas which are exposed to water and wind erosion, or salinity and alkalinity,
Noting the research carried out by FAO in conjunction with Unesco, UNEP, WMO, and other competent international organizations, and in consultation with the governments concerned, with a view to assessing the lands that can still be brought into cultivation, taking proper account of permanent vegetation cover for the protection of catchment areas and of land required for forestry, grazing and other uses, with particular reference to the hazards of irreversible soil degradation as well as the order of magnitude of costs and inputs required,
Recognizing that decisive progress toward intensified assistance in the improvement of productivity and conservation of soils can be achieved by the adoption and implementation of appropriate principles and guidelines for action at the national and international levels,
Having noted the conclusions and recommendations adopted by the Committee on Agriculture at its Sixth Session and by the Council at its 79th Session,
1. Hereby adopts the World Soil Charter;
2. Recommends to the United Nations and international organizations concerned to give effect, within their respective spheres of competence, to the Principles and Guidelines set forth below.
Principles
1. Among the major resources available to man is land, comprising soil, water and associated plants and animals: the use of these resources should not cause their degradation or destruction because man's existence depends on their continued productivity.
2. Recognizing the paramount importance of land resources for the survival and welfare of people and economic independence of countries, and also the rapidly increasing need for more food production, it is imperative to give high priority to promoting optimum land use, to maintaining and improving soil productivity and to conserving soil resources.
3. Soil degradation means partial or total loss of productivity from the soil, either quantitatively, qualitatively, or both, as a result of such processes as soil erosion by water or wind, salinization, waterlogging, depletion of plant nutrients, deterioration of soil structure, desertification and pollution. In addition, significant areas of soil are lost daily to nonagricultural uses. These developments are alarming in the light of the urgent need for increasing production of food, fibres and wood.
4. Soil degradation directly affects agriculture and forestry by diminishing yields and upsetting water regimes, but other sectors of the economy and the environment as a whole, including industry and commerce, are often seriously affected as well through, for example, floods or the silting up of rivers, dams and ports.
5. It is a major responsibility of governments that land-use programmes include measures toward the best possible use of the land, ensuring long-term maintenance and improvement of its productivity, and avoiding losses of productive soil. The land users themselves should be involved, thereby ensuring that all resources available are utilized in the most rational way.
6. The provision of proper incentives at farm level and a sound technical, institutional and legal framework are basic conditions to achieve good land use.
7. Assistence given to farmers and other land users should be of a practical service-oriented nature and should encourage the adoption of measures of good land husbandry.
8. Certain land-tenure structures may constitute an obstacle to the adoption of sound soil management and conservation measures on farms. Ways and means should be pursued to overcome such obstacles with respect to the rights, duties and responsibilities of land owners, tenants and land users alike, in accordance with the recommendations of the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development (Rome, 1979).
9. Land users and the broad public should be well informed of the need and the means of improving soil productivity and conservation. Particular emphasis should be placed on education and extension programmes and training of agricultural staff at all levels.
10. In order to ensure optimum land use, it is important that a country's land resources be assessed in terms of their suitability at different levels of inputs for different types of land use, including agriculture, grazing and forestry.
11. Land having the potential for a wide range of uses should be kept in flexible forms of use so that future options for other potential uses are not denied for a long period of time or forever. The use of land for non-agricultural purposes should be organized in such a way as to avoid, as much as possible, the occupation or permanent degradation of good-quality soils.
12. Decisions about the use and management of land and its resources should favour the long-term advantage rather than the short-term expedience that may lead to exploitation, degradation and possible destruction of soil resources.
13. Land conservation measures should be included in land development at the planning stage and the costs included in development planning budgets.
Guidelines for action
Acceptance of these Principles would require the following action:
By governments
i. Develop a policy for wise land use according to land suitability for different types of utilization and the needs of the country.
ii. Incorporate principles of rational land use and management and conservation of soil resources into appropriate resource legislation.
iii. Develop an institutional framework for monitoring and supervising soil management and soil conservation, and for coordination between organizations involved in the use of the countries' land resources in order to ensure the most rational choice among possible alternatives.
iv. Assess both new lands and the lands already being used for their suitability for different uses and the likely hazards of degradation. Provide decision makers with alternative land uses which both satisfy communities' aspirations and use the land according to its capabilities.
v. Implement education, training and extension programmes at all levels in soil management and conservation.
vi. Disseminate as widely as possible information and knowledge about soil erosion and methods of controlling it both at the farm level and at the scale of entire watersheds, stressing the importance of soil resources for the benefit of people and development.
vii. Establish links between local government administrations and land users for the implementation of the soils policy and emphasize the need to put proven soil conservation techniques into practice, and to integrate appropriate measures in forestry and agriculture for the protection of the environment.
viii. Strive to create socio-economic and institutional conditions favourable to rational land resource management and conservation. These conditions will include providing security of land tenure and adequate financial incentives (e.g., subsidies, taxation relief, credit) to the land user. Give encouragement particularly to groups willing to work in cooperation with each other and with their government to achieve appropriate land use, soil conservation and improvement.
ix. Conduct research programmes which will provide sound scientific backing to practical soil improvements and soil conservation work in the field, and which give due consideration to prevailing socio-economic conditions.
By international organizations
i. Continue and intensify efforts to create awareness and encourage cooperation among all sectors of the international community, by assisting where required to mount publicity campaigns, conduct seminars and conferences and to provide suitable technical publications.
ii. Assist governments, especially of developing countries, on request, to establish appropriate legislation, institutions and procedures to enable them to mount, implement and monitor appropriate land-use and soil-conservation programmes.
iii. Promote cooperation between governments in adopting sound land-use practices, particularly in the large international watersheds.
iv. Pay particular attention to the needs of agricultural development projects which include the conservation and improvement of soil resources, the provision of inputs and incentives at the level of the farm and of the watershed, and the establishment of the necessary institutional structures as the major components.
v. Support research programmes relevant to soil conservation, not only of a technical nature hut also research into social and economic issues which are linked to the whole question of soil conservation and land resource management.
vi. Ensure the storage, compilation and dissemination of experience and information related to soil conservation programmes and of the results obtained in different agro-ecological regions of the world.
Possibilities for follow-up
The guidelines for action contained in the World Soil Charter call for a follow-up in different fields of land development and conservation:
Assessment of land resources and land-use planning
-- soil survey and land evaluation
-- assessment of soil degradation and desertification
-- assessment of land-use potential according to an agro-ecological approach
-- evaluation of population supporting capacities
-- planning of optimal land use
-- training in the above fields of work
Soil management and fertilizers
-- maintain and improve soil fertility
-- promote the efficient use of fertilizers
-- promote the use of organic manures, biogas and nitrogen fixing practices
-- assessment and elimination of micro-nutrient deficiencies
-- soil and plant testing
-- promotion of integrated plant nutrition systems
-- improvement of tillage practices
-- improvement of production in shifting cultivation areas
-- training in the above fields of work
Conservation and reclamation of land resources
-- soil conservation and watershed management
-- soil conservation legislation and soil conservation policies
-- reclamation of saline and alkaline lands
-- combating desertification
-- developing soil conservation services
-- training in the above fields of work
FAO extends its cooperation for follow-up activities related to these Guidelines for action. Inquiries can be addressed to:
WORLD SOIL CHARTER
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Land and Water Development Division
Via delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome Italy
