<title>A study of the reasons for success or failure of soil conservation projects - FAO soils bulletin 64</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
Modern soil conservation, as we know it today, developed in the 1930s when concern with problems of soil erosion led to the creation of soil conservation services in the United States and, shortly after, in other countries. Since then a vast amount of money, time and effort has been expended on many different soil conservation projects and programmes.
It is not known how much has been spent on soil conservation but one estimate is that the United States Government alone has spent in excess of US$ 16 billion since the 1930s with present expenditure exceeding $ 1 billion a year.
Expenditure of this magnitude would be acceptable if the problem was being solved, but indications are that approximately 6 billion tons of top soil are still being lost annually in the United States, with off-site damage caused by erosion, estimated to be in the order of $ 3 billion a year.
In other parts of the world the picture is no better. Although extensive soil conservation work has been done in Australia over the last 40 years, the Australian Government recently claimed that the country was losing 90 million tons of soil annually and admitted the cost of land degradation to every Australian farmer to be around A$ 3600 a year. If soil erosion in the United States and Australia is bad, the situation over most of Africa is even worse. For example, terrible famines in Ethiopia in recent years are at least partly attributable to advance soil erosion. In fact, so bad has land degradation become in Africa that a new word - desertification - has been coined to describe the situation. This is in spite of many soil conservation programmes and projects which have been running in Africa for many years.
There have, of course, been some very good and effective conservation projects and programmes in a number of countries but, nevertheless, in spite of substantial efforts and the expenditure of large sums of money over the last half century, the results have frequently been disappointing.
With this problem in mind, this study was undertaken to try to identify the reasons for success and failure in soil conservation projects. Armed with the results of this study, it should now be possible to avoid repeating many of the mistakes of the past and developing new projects which have a far greater chance of success.
<section>2</section>
Summary
PROJECT BACKGROUND
In 1985 and 1986 FAO undertook the important study "African Agriculture: the next 25 years". During the study soil conservation projects in Africa were examined to see why some have been more successful than others. The results were interesting so a more detailed study was undertaken. The findings of this detailed study are given in this publication.
The first plan was to select a few representative projects and study them in detail. However it soon became clear that projects vary so much that a small sample could not be representative. The plan was therefore changed to a less detailed study of a much larger sample. It also became apparent that there is a large amount of literature on assessments which has been carried out by other agencies, and although none of these were specifically addressed to soil conservation projects, their data and conclusions would still be very relevant to this project.
METHOD
The plan of work was to study all the available books, reports, assessment studies and project evaluations, and from this database to form some tentative conclusions. At the same time a fairly detailed evaluation was made of a sample of 40 projects which had a significant soil conservation component. A four-page assessment report was completed for each project, divided into sections relating to:
- planning and preparation before the project starts;
- implementation during the project; and
- assessment and continuity after completion of the project.
The projects covered all types of agency: multilateral, bilateral, and NGO, and geographically were spread worldwide. The simple six-point evaluation method used in the FAO Review of Field Programmes was also applied to all assessed projects.
CONCLUSIONS - BEFORE PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION
By far the most significant conclusion from the study is the importance of project design. Every major assessment reaches the same conclusion, for example the World Bank study of almost 1000 projects over a ten-year period found that of projects which had poor performance, 86 percent had design faults, that is the problems were designed into the projects. In one third of these cases poor design was the most important single factor leading to poor performance.
Design errors are mainly the result of incorrect assumptions made at the design stage.
The main donor errors are:
- over-optimism, including over-estimating the effect of new practices;
- over-estimating the rate of adoption of new practices;
- over-estimation of the ability of the host country to provide backup facilities;
- under-estimation of the time required to mobilize staff and materials for the project; and
- frequently a quite unreal estimate of the economic benefits.
Some of the main problems arising from the assumptions of the host governments are:
- over-estimating their capacity to provide counterpart staff and the funds for the recurrent costs arising from the project;
- a tendency to under-estimate the problems of coordination among different ministries or departments;
- a tendency to over-estimate the strength of the national research base and its ability to contribute to the project.
Other design problems on the recipient side may include the absence of a long-term policy for the development of natural resources and the political stability necessary to ensure continuity of political support. There was sometimes a reluctance to make full use of low-level institutions (e.g. farmers' associations, cooperatives, village councils), which are usually very important for the successful implementation of agricultural projects. Finally, some technical problems are not adequately considered or resolved at the planning stage, such as the pricing policy for agricultural products, the effect on the project of variations in exchange rates, and the existing social background, e.g. land tenure.
A checklist of good project design requirements
1. A project must have clear objectives and definable measurable targets which must be limited and obtainable. It must be clear whether the project is primarily directed towards achieving national objectives or those of the individual farmer.
2. Project design must be flexible so that the project can grow and change and adapt during the course of the project. The old style of a detailed blue-print type of plan may be appropriate for engineering construction projects but is highly unsuitable for agricultural development.
3. Project design must include details of implementation. The duties and responsibilities of project staff and counterparts must be clearly defined, and the details of operating, down to who pays for the petrol for the project vehicles. An annual workplan is essential.
4. Changes in agricultural systems take place slowly, and projects must be designed with a realistic duration. In the sample of soil conservation projects, of the successful projects 75 percent had a duration of five years or more, and only 25 percent less than five years.
5. Many projects have failed because of the technology.
The technology should:
- be appropriate and tested locally;
- offer short-term, on-site benefits, and large increments (50-100 percent);
- require affordable inputs, especially labour;
- not include foregone benefits, e.g. giving up land;
- not include any increased risk;
- be in tune with existing social factors, e.g. the separate roles of men and women in agriculture.
6. Where it is clear at the project design stage that there is a weakness in the capacity of local institutions, there should be heavy front-end loading of the training component. A three-year project which includes overseas post-graduate training means that the key counterparts are unavailable for most of the project. In soil conservation projects there is a trend away from overseas university training and towards more management training, widening of experience, and exchange visits with neighbouring countries.
CONCLUSIONS - DURING IMPLEMENTATION
Projects or programmes which set up a separate Project Management Unit (PMU) are in rapid decline, partly because these were frequently associated with multi-sector or multi-component projects, like the Integrated Rural Development Projects which are no longer in favour. The trend is towards projects which are based within existing line departments.
A high proportion of projects report problems arising from delay in staff appointments, both international experts and local counterpart staff. This occurs in many donor agencies from the largest to the smallest. Since appointing procedures are unlikely to change, the important thing is that the project design should be based on realistic assessments of the necessary lead time.
In project design the importance of flexibility was noted. This implies that there must be delegation of responsibility so that necessary changes and adjustments can be made on the spot by field staff without having to refer back to headquarters. When former project managers were asked why a project was successful, a common reply was, "Because head office left me alone to get on with it".
Most agricultural projects involve the introduction of new concepts or methods or materials but these have seldom been fully tested under farm conditions, and so a continuing backup from the national research service should be available.
Another common weakness is monitoring during the project. All the agencies which have conducted detailed evaluations of their operational procedures recommend that much more emphasis should be placed on regular monitoring.
CONCLUSIONS - AFTER THE PROJECT
Along with the need for better monitoring is a widely expressed need for more and better evaluation. It is only by the careful evaluation and study of past projects that the lessons and experience can be applied in the design of future projects. The increasing awareness of the low level of success of agricultural development projects has led to much greater interest in evaluation as a step towards improvement.
Current development jargon is so full of the buzz words sustainability, continuity, and replicability, that it is surprising to find how few of the projects designed more than five years ago gave any serious thought to the question of what would happen at the end of the project. Certain types of project have a specific objective to be achieved within a fixed time span (e.g. many FAO TCP projects) but in all cases where the objective is to introduce or encourage change, the question of the long-term future should be built into the project design.
SOME OBSERVED TRENDS
Projects on the whole are getting better. The FAO Evaluation Centre reports that in the period 1980-84, 50 percent of projects were rated good or satisfactory. In the period 1985-86 this had increased to 73 percent.
In the sample of soil conservation projects where, of those started in the 1970s, 25 percent were rated successful, but of the projects started in the eighties the proportion of successful projects has risen to 56 percent (Appendix 1).
Evaluations by the World Bank give a less encouraging result. They report that failure rates were 12 percent in 1979, 37 percent in 1984 and 40 percent in 1986, but not too much importance should be attached to these figures because the Bank assessment is based only on whether the project achieved its expected economic rate of return.
Projects are getting smaller and simpler. There is little interest today in Integrated Rural Development Projects which were thought to hold out so much promise in the seventies (Sections 6.1 to 6.5). There is also a noticeable decrease in multiple-donor and multiple-sector projects.
Projects are getting longer. The record clearly shows the need for a steady sustained pressure on agricultural problems rather than a short hammer blow. The three-year project is relatively uncommon now, apart from the narrow, specific-objective project mentioned earlier. The problem inhibiting the more widespread use of long projects results from the budgeting and accounting procedures of most donors. Where a country has an established long-term development programme, a donor can fund a time-slice of the programme.
The study of soil conservation projects does not give a clear picture of the usefulness of incentives, particularly subsidies and Food For Work. The most common view seems to be that all such incentives should be avoided if possible, relying only on the farmer's own perceived wish to carry out conservation practices. However many projects report that terracing programmes could not have been achieved without the incentive of FFW.
<section>3</section>
1. Introduction
1.1 Terms of Reference
1.2 Background to the study
1.3 Development of the study
1.1 Terms of Reference
This study was carried out as a part-time activity over two and a half years, in two phases. The Terms of Reference for Phase 1 were "To compile information, data and reports on a representative selection of soil conservation projects with a view to subsequent evaluation of the effectiveness of the projects in achieving their objectives". The final report of Phase 1 was submitted in January 1987, and reported 121 projects as possibly suitable for further study, of which about half were expected to yield sufficient documentation.
The Terms of Reference for Phase 2 were "On the basis of information gathered during Phase 1, analyse a number of selected soil conservation projects with the objective of identifying those factors which have led to success and failure, and prepare and submit a report covering the findings".
1.2 Background to the study
In recent years there has been much analysis and evaluation of aid and technical assistance programmes, spurred by the worry that many programmes and projects appear to be less effective than the expectations at the time of planning. Several major studies have confirmed this, and show that projects in the agricultural sector are particularly weak. For example:
- A World Bank analysis of 994 projects over ten years 1973-1983 showed a failure rate of 14 percent in all sectors, but 26 percent in agriculture.
- The Bank analysis of 212 agricultural projects 1979-1983 shows an average of 75 percent successful, with wide geographical variation, from Asia 85 percent to 45 percent in agricultural projects in East Africa (World Bank 1984).
- In an FAO study of 310 projects over 5 years to 1986, 63 percent were assessed as good or satisfactory in the definition of objectives, and 52 percent as good or satisfactory (FAO 1987).
The second point which comes through strongly in many studies is that the reasons for disappointing success rates have now been identified, and the question is how soon agencies can learn from these results and adapt their procedures. Two contrasting changes are worth mentioning.
FAO rated 50 percent of projects as good or satisfactory in the period 1980-1984, improving to 73 percent in 1985-1986. However the World Bank in 1985 said "Failure rates in agriculture continue to rise. Their proportion tripled over 1979-84, from 12 percent to 37 percent, the average for the period being 27 percent. The 1986 figure is 40 percent" (World Bank 1985a).
In his excellent survey of success stories in agricultural development in Africa, Harrison (1987) sums up the position by saying "It is not the purpose of this book to pretend that the battle is well on the way to being won. That is far from the case. By and large the breakthroughs are surrounded and vastly outnumbered by failures. On present trends, disaster will carry the day. But it need not be that way. Our success stories are like seeds. If they are sown widely enough, they can take over the field".
The brief was to study projects with a component of soil conservation and try to identify the reasons for success and failure. However in most projects, soil conservation is one of many components, and frequently a minor one. It was therefore necessary, in order to answer the question about soil conservation projects, to collect and study the literature concerned with broader projects, often covering the whole agricultural sector, and sometimes beyond. These wider studies are useful because although looking at wider issues, e.g. the whole question of aid (Cassen 1986), or soil conservation policy (Morgan and Rickson 1989), the conclusions can also be applied to soil conservation projects.
1.3 Development of the study
During the preparation of the FAO "African Agriculture: the next 25 years" study, (FAO 1986) there was a preliminary study of projects in Africa with a soil conservation component. Fourteen projects were subjected to a quantitative assessment, on a five-point scale, of thirteen parameters considered likely to have a bearing on the success of the project. It was decided to use a similar approach for the present study, but using many more parameters divided into:
Before project: concerned with identification, appraisal and design;
During project: concerned with implementation and monitoring;
After project: concerned with evaluation and sustainability.
An example of the evaluation sheets is shown in Appendix 3, and the results are discussed in Appendix 1.
The first plan was to make a detailed analysis of a few representative projects, but it soon became clear that projects vary in so many different ways that a small sample cannot be representative. So it was decided to use as large a sample as possible.
At the end of Phase 1, 41 projects were identified as suitable for assessment with sufficient documentation available, and a further 80 projects to be included if further documentation could be obtained. By the end of Phase 2 information had been collected on 133 projects (list in Appendix 4).
It was surprising that there were so many projects which could not be evaluated because there was insufficient documentation available. Eventually about 35 projects were assessed (listed in Appendixes 1 and 2).
During the study it became apparent that evaluation and assessment of assistance projects have become very topical in recent years. In addition to self-analysis by many development agencies, both large and small, there have been several major conferences devoted to the subject, and a shelf-full of books and reports. The distillation of information and ideas from these sources, listed in Appendix 5, has therefore been a major activity throughout the study.
The projects studied covered a wide range of types of assistance, so the terms donor, lender and aid agency have been used, as if they were interchangeable. Similarly the other side may be called the borrower, recipient, host or local institution.
The purpose of the study is to identify factors affecting the success or failure of projects with a significant soil conservation component, but attempts have been made to avoid recrimination for the mistakes of fifteen or twenty years ago because these are mostly recognized and admitted. Neither was it a duty to debate the strengths and weaknesses of different agencies, or the political economy of aid in general. It would be artificial to ignore all the peripheral factors affecting projects (such as the place of NGOs or the use of Food for Work) so some of these are briefly covered in Chapter 6 with references for readers wishing to study them in more detail.
<section>4</section>
2. Evaluation methods
2.1 What is "success"?
2.2 Evaluation methods used by some agencies
2.3 Methods used in this study
2.1 What is "success"?
Before attempting to evaluate the success of projects the criteria to be used to measure success must be defined. There are a number of possibilities:
- Banks work in terms of money. For the World Bank, an economic rate of return (ERR) of up to 25 percent is the base for setting up projects, and they are usually considered successful if they achieve more than 10 or 12 percent.
- "The principle determinant of success or failure is the degree to which new practices are associated with visible increases in annual domestic income for the farmers" (Murray 1979). This is a rather narrow view, although the question of farmer benefit is emerging as a major factor in successful projects.
- A rather cynical suggestion is that success of a project could be judged from the answer given by the project manager to the following question, "If this project were operating as a commercial venture, using funds coming from shareholders, would you invest your own personal money in it?"
- Probably the best yardstick, and the one used in this study, is to measure the extent to which the project achieved its objectives. However this requires that the project should have defined its objectives and also set up criteria for measuring their achievement. Later it is shown that it is rare to find this situation.
Followers of the British TV series "Yes Minister" or readers of the derived book may remember the occasion when a technical expert comes up with what the Minister thinks is an original and brilliant idea to control expenditure on projects. In that case it was local government expenditure, but the arguments apply equally to aid agencies because they have much in common - they are spending public money, they are concerned about spending it properly and being accountable, but they seldom manage to get it right.
The expert's idea was that all new proposed projects would be required to include a method of measuring the success or failure of the project. The proposal would have to include minimum thresholds in the form "The scheme will be a failure if it takes longer than this time... costs more than a given expenditure... employs more staff than this number... fails to meet the following preset performance standards". The official proposing the project would be responsible for applying these criteria.
The Minister thinks that this is a beautifully simple and effective way of managing expenditure on projects but is out-manouvered by his civil servants, one of whom reminds him that the practice of transferring officials every two or three years is done to "stop this personal responsibility nonsense" (Lynn and Jay 1984).
A related real-life anecdote came from a large agency where an official, commenting on the high failure rate of projects in a particular sector, said "Of course in this organisation you get credit for the number of projects you initiate, but before they are evaluated you have been moved to another desk so there is little risk of being associated with failed projects".
Whether evaluation reports provide a true picture has been questioned. Two major reviews suggest that there is likely to be a negative bias, because "evaluation reports naturally tend to focus on what went wrong, because the object is to profit from experience" (ODA 1983). Another comment is "Evaluations tend to focus on projects which have had or are encountering some form of difficulty. Thus the evaluation sample is not entirely representative" (FAO 1987).
2.2 Evaluation methods used by some agencies
During this study no single agency was found which could produce documentation which would allow a thorough study of the planning, operation and evaluation of all its projects. In some cases this was because documents were restricted to in-house use, but most agencies had poor records of what reports and documents had been written and an equally poor ability to retrieve them. One of the Bank Audit Reviews points out that the lack of documentation inhibits the process of learning from experience (World Bank 1986).
On the other hand every agency without fail recognized weaknesses in its monitoring, reporting and evaluation procedures, and was talking about, or doing something about, improving this aspect.
Generally, the scale of the evaluation operation correlates with the size of the agency. Several agencies have an evaluation unit which is independent of the operational divisions, e.g. World Bank, ODA and FAO. This has the merit of allowing impartial assessment of projects, but it also means that it can only offer advice and suggestions, which are not always accepted by the operational divisions.
Small agencies and NGOs find that maintaining an independent evaluation unit makes additional demands on the technical staff who are usually in short supply. The NGOs with whom this was discussed felt that monitoring and evaluation deserved more attention, but were reluctant to allocate more resources to it.
Agencies have their own sequence of steps in project planning, implementation and evaluation. Most include the four main components:
- identification and proposal;
- appraisal;
- implementation; and
- evaluation.
Studies of the methodology of monitoring and evaluation point out that plans for monitoring during the project, and evaluation both during and after, should be planned in complete detail right from the stage of project proposal (Casley and Kumar 1987 and 1988, Unesco 1984). However all the major reviews which cover many projects (e.g. World Bank, ODA, FAO) conclude that both monitoring and evaluation are weaknesses in most projects. Monitoring during the project is generally held to be essential so that the feedback can be used to make adjustments and improvements during the life of the project. Evaluation would ideally be a continuous process, starting at appraisal, continuing with mid-term reviews and at termination, followed by an ex-post review, and ideally a follow-up review 5, 10 or 15 years after the end of the project. All agencies have some programme for evaluation of at least some of their projects, but no agency was found to have procedures which approached the
ideal specification such as that set out by Goodman and Love (1980). The procedures of the World Bank are probably the most comprehensive, but even this agency is unable to do a complete evaluation on every project and since 1982 has followed "selective auditing".
Each agency has its own methodology for evaluation, and there seem to be two approaches to getting the most information with limited staff capacity. One is to carry out a fairly detailed study of a limited number of projects, limited perhaps by geographical location or by sector. An example is the "Synopsis of reviews of six African Rural Development Projects" by ODA (Morris 1981). The other approach is to use a simple assessment which can be applied easily and quickly to a large number of projects. An example of this approach is the FAO Review of Field Programmes which covered 715 projects in 81 countries. (FAO 1987).
2.3 Methods used in this study
There were four components of the evaluation procedure used in this study, using a mixture of subjective and objective assessments.
i. From the 20 or 30 books and reviews which each analysed many projects, several recurrent themes emerged. Some of these were formulated as a hypothesis and kept in mind when studying or assessing individual projects, so that one could note whether the project supported or contradicted the idea. Examples are:
- Duration of project is important and ten year projects are more likely to be successful than 5 year projects.
- Farmer involvement should start at the time of project preparation not at implementation.
- Projects implemented through Project Management Units (PMU) are less likely to be effective than those integrated into line departments.
This was a subjective and non-quantifiable exercise but very useful in distilling the enormous amount of information in the literature.
ii. The 13-point questionnaire used in the earlier FAO study (see Section 1.3) was expanded into a set of evaluation sheets, shown in Appendix 3. The 3 main sections ask questions relating to what happened before the project started, during implementation, and after the project was completed. Some questions collect background information and ask for a yes/no/do not know answer. Where possible a quantitative answer is requested using a five-point scale. A quantitative assessment can be made for each of the before, during and after sheets, and they can be combined for an overall assessment of the project. Another sheet records background information about the project and the documentation available, and there is a separate sheet for assessment if there was a significant training component.
Sets of evaluation sheets were completed by the author and by a number of past and present FAO staff members. Some projects were assessed independently by more than one person to check whether they obtained similar results. (They were encouragingly similar.)
The numerical results of these studies are shown in Appendix 1.
iii. The assessment sheets also used the simple six-factor evaluation developed by the FAO Evaluation Service and used in the FAO Review of Field Programmes. The six factors are clarity of objective, project design, borrower support and involvement, and achievement of objectives, which is sub-divided into output, transfer of skills, and follow-up prospects. Each of the six factors is assessed as poor, satisfactory or good. Assigning numerical values of zero, plus one and plus two to these categories gives a single score out of twelve.
iv. Many projects were identified as suitable for analysis but it was found that there was not sufficient documentation available to complete the evaluation sheets. All of these projects were studied to some extent and yielded points of interest and subjective assessments which have been incorporated into this report.
<section>5</section>
3. During project planning
3.1 Agency policies and procedures
3.2 Policies and procedures of recipient
3.3 Design of projects
3.1 Agency policies and procedures
The growth of the aid industry in recent years has had positive and negative effects. On the plus side there is more money available, and more experience to share. On the negative side, in the frenetic rush to find and fund projects and to speed disbursement, there is not enough time for assessing what is being done, and for using experience to improve programmes.
All aid agencies are trying to help less developed countries, but the identification, location and size of projects can all be influenced by preconceived policies or procedures or spending targets.
When evaluating projects planned in the early seventies, two facts should be borne in mind -one which distorted planning, the other which upset implementation.
Between 1970 and 1980 multilateral commitments for assistance to agriculture rose from US$ 700 million to US$ 6700 million per annum. This led to an increase in "pressure to lend", and to the setting of over-ambitious lending targets. The result was that it was too easy for marginal projects to slip through appraisal.
The second factor was the oil price rise in 1973, which knocked sideways all the assumptions about local costs and the national economies of borrower countries. To quote FAO - "Given the ubiquitous impact of the oil price shock-wave, it is hardly surprising that so few projects prepared in the 1970s were on target" (FAO 1988).
Disbursement is a major problem for most agencies. Project plans and appraisals are nearly always over-optimistic about implementation, such as the time needed to import equipment, to recruit and bring in experts, to select counterpart staff for training. But there is seldom enough flexibility in the budget to get over this problem. Perhaps some money can be transferred to the following year, but then there is a surplus to be spent in a hurry at the end of the project. Transferring funds between components because one is underspent distorts the planned balance of the project. Unplanned spending in order to meet disbursement requirements is a common failing. The problems of achieving planned disbursement have led some agencies to adopt special policies. For example the UK all-party parliamentary group on overseas development reported "The Government intends to expand what it terms 'Fast disbursing programme aid' to Africa" (All Party Parliamentary Group 1985). Concerned about
slow disbursement on projects in sub-Saharan Africa, IFAD set up in 1985 a programme of seven major steps to improve matters.
Disbursing aid funds wisely and effectively is more difficult than is assumed by people outside the industry. Band-Aid is an interesting example. A large sum of money was collected for immediate-assistance projects and the intention of the Trustees was to disburse the whole amount within 12 months. Two and a half years later about one third was still unallocated. Funding good projects is more complicated than they imagined.
Some of the main factors which donors should absorb into their policy for project planning can be identified:
- There must be a strong commitment to the programme by the donor agency, the host government and the implementing agency. All must be quite clear about what they want to do and how they plan to do it.
- In all the subsequent discussions of project planning and design it is emphasized that participation is critical. Most projects have some element of participation by the beneficiaries. Many seek it during operation, a few in ex-post evaluation, but few projects have sufficient participation at the planning stage. Where it does occur, it is mostly limited to central governments or national departments and agencies. It is seldom carried down the line to the level of the district, the village or farmers' groups. At project preparation, project appraisal and evaluation, the local staff tend to be junior partners of the international experts.
- Another factor which comes up as important at every stage is the question of the duration of the project. Most agencies are forced by their financial procedures to think in terms of fixed periods for projects, and there is little chance of overcoming this difficulty. But long projects are clearly more effective, and even where projects have to be funded in short-term tranches, it should be possible to assure funding over a longer period. It is not sufficient to say that after the three or five year project it will be evaluated and may be extended. This leads to unease and anxiety on all sides. What is required is an unequivocal assurance that long-term funding will be provided. If there is an element of uncertainty about whether a project will work or not, this should first be resolved by a pilot project. Projects are doomed to failure if they start with the underlying thought that "We do not know whether this will work or not, but we will try it for a few years and
see".
- Donor planning suffers from what the FAO Investment Centre review calls 'persuasive optimism'. Forecasts of the effect of projects are frequently over-optimistic, particularly anticipated yield increases, the effectiveness of dissemination, the rate of uptake, and the financial benefits to farmers. Benefit-cost ratios and ERRs are regularly over-estimated. World Bank has an appraisal process more rigorous than most agencies, and this commonly leads to ERR being lowered at appraisal, but this is evidently not sufficient to counter persuasive optimism. Thus:
-in the 10 years to 1984 only 44 percent of projects equalled or exceeded the appraisal ERR, falling to 23 percent in 1984;
- ERR at appraisal is consistently higher than the revised ERR (RERR) estimated at ex-post evaluation. Over the 3 years 1983-1985 the average appraisal estimate was 10 percent higher than the ex-post estimate.
Plate 1 In all the subsequent discussions of project planning and design it is emphasized that participation is critical (Bangladesh)
This tendency to over-estimate benefits is rather foolish because it can result in projects being unfairly labelled as failing to meet expectations. A project with a final RERR of 15 percent has failed to meet the target if that was set at 20 percent, but is successful if the ERR was 15 percent. The level generally considered acceptable is 10-15 percent.
3.2 Policies and procedures of recipient
In many of the projects studied, the project was impaired by problems arising on the side of the recipient. Where the problem is a weak economy or an unstable government there is nothing to be done, at least not in the short-term, by a soil conservation project. But it is always important to identify possible problems and constraints at the earliest stage of project identification. Among the following difficulties some are particularly relevant to soil conservation and agricultural development, others apply to assistance programmes in any sector.
The record shows that few countries have a satisfactory policy for the long-term development of natural resources. This requires an inventory of natural resources, or nowadays the popular phrase is a "national environmental profile", from which a long-term development policy can be constructed. Then within the policy there should be first a national conservation strategy (defining long-term objectives), and second tactical programmes for each agricultural sub-sector (defining the short-term routes towards the long-term objectives). It is quite remarkable that governments appreciate that a policy for mineral exports requires detailed study of the available mineral resources, but will cheerfully set up a policy of becoming self-sufficient in food without an assessment of how this can be achieved within the available resources of land, water and manpower. The record shows that the identification and planning of projects is often impaired by the ability of the recipient
government to see how a short-term project would fit into a long-term programme. Agricultural development programmes may be directed toward implementing a strategy, more often they are tactical, but in either case they need a policy to work within. Only a small number of projects have been directed towards assisting the formulation of a national policy for agricultural development.
Another issue which comes up in every review of assistance projects is that there must be a favourable political context. Harrison puts it rather well - "The political context can interfere with the best-designed ventures. Real participation may be blocked by governments opposed to any expression of popular autonomy - or by bureaucracies and ruling parties with vested interests in maintaining the power of officials and technocrats. The economics of development may be distorted by pricing policies that favour cities over rural areas. Even low-cost, self-help projects can be crippled when the modest resources or technical assistance they need are lacking" (1987).
The question of the effect of prices on agricultural production is extremely important. There are cases where artificially low prices to the producers have seriously reduced their interest in increasing production. There are also many examples where lifting prices to realistic levels and providing market outlets have contributed to the success of projects which include the adoption of new production techniques. The question of how much donors should try to influence borrowers over prices is debatable.
The other financial issue with political implications is exchange rates. Developing countries tend on the whole to overvalue the national currency and this can have undesirable effects on projects involving imports and exports.
Closely connected with political will is political stability. Rees (1988) says, "Unstable political regimes tend to create institutions and then dissolve them before they acquire sufficient experience and expertise". He might also have added that it is difficult for government departments to pursue long-term programmes effectively when there are frequent changes of ministers. He adds "It is particularly important that environmental planning has the support and sympathy of the people".
Another question which should be resolved early in the planning is the capacity of the recipient to provide the facilities and services needed by the project. There are too many cases where a mid-term review or a termination report reproachfully complains that the host failed to provide counterparts or transport, or some other agreed input. This may be the result of a reduction in the moral support of the host for the project, or unexpected budget cuts enforced by treasury, but the most common explanation is that the ability to provide these inputs was not adequately investigated at planning.
The reader who queries why projects start in these circumstances might consider the remarks of a senior official who said, "Well, I do not expect this project will change anything, but it will bring in some foreign exchange, there will be a bit more transport around in the department during the project, and when it finishes the buildings will be useful". The probability of success is not the only issue in the minds of political leaders in the receiving country - nor indeed of fund managers.
It is not only the capacity of governments and departments which needs to be considered. Institution building at lower levels may also be important. A consultant to the World Bank writes, "The present concern by the development community arises from a realisation of the importance of institutions and their development as prerequisites to lasting development. Along with this goes the realisation that not only are formal organisations, ministries, and parastatals often ill-equipped to perform their functions, but there is need to develop lower-level institutions if development assistance is to be useful in its intended purpose" (Butcher 1988).
Several other writers, and reviews of projects, stress the importance of identifying at planning stage the abilities and capacities of local groupings at the lowest levels of government administration and informal groupings below this. In many countries projects cannot succeed unless they are working with the existing social structure. In some countries this has a tribal base, in others the system of power may be through chiefs and headmen, either elected or appointed by government. Or it may be party politics taken down to grass roots level. The important thing in planning is to identify the role and the capacity of institutions at all levels and to channel their abilities into the project. Sometimes quite informal groupings can play a major part, such as the Mwethya groups (Women's Work Groups) in Kenya or the Ekip (ephemeral work gangs) in Haiti.
The question of land tenure frequently arises in soil conservation projects. The conventional wisdom is that farmers will not invest in soil conservation works unless they can expect to reap the rewards. This applies particularly to works with a long pay-back period, like terracing and tree planting. This was discussed at the Puerto Rico Workshop and summed up as follows: "Obviously, the farmer who is likely to be evicted from the land he or she is working is not likely to be interested in investing heavily in conservation practices. On the other hand, participants did report on successful activities in different countries where various land tenure systems are in operation. Perhaps the lesson to be learned from this is that any soil and water conservation project must be fully aware of and understand the local land tenure system and then tailor its programme to fit in with that system" (Sanders 1988).
An interesting recent development in Lesotho may have far-reaching effects. Traditionally the exclusive right to grow crops on arable land applies only until the crop is harvested, after which the right to graze the residues reverts to the whole community. Recent legislation cancels this age-old system, and allows the land user to forbid access by other people's animals. If successful, this could open up the possibility of applying a number of useful practices, for instance stubble mulching and conservation tillage, planting grass on terrace risers, and planting trees and shrubs on corners and boundaries of arable land.
Plate 2 The question of land tenure frequently arises in soil conservation projects. The conventional wisdom is that farmers will not invest in soil conservation works unless they can expect to reap the rewards. This applies particularly to works with a long pay-back period, like terracing or tree planting (Philippines)
3.3 Design of projects
Every review of projects emphasizes the importance of getting the design right, and most reviews identify it as the most important single factor influencing project success. Projects with poor performance usually have poor design, for example:
- The World Bank review of projects in the ten years to 1984, found that 86 percent of projects with poor performance had design faults and in one third of these it was the single most important factor (World Bank 1985, quoted by Balacs 1985).
- World Bank (1986) reports that poor content affected 62 percent of failed projects, and again it was the most important factor in one third of these.
- FAO reports an improvement in design of FAO projects. In 1981-82 design was good or satisfactory in 34 percent of 80 projects, 43 percent of 103 projects in 1983-4, and 61 percent of 147 projects in 1985-6. However this result still shows that 39 percent of projects had less than satisfactory design, which indicates room for further improvement.
Another constantly recurring theme in all the major project reviews is the old-style blueprint operation where everything is worked out in detail in the project document which then becomes enshrined as the operational rule book. This means that faults in the project continue even after they could and should be corrected. There is an almost unanimous recommendation for greater flexibility so that the project can learn from experience and change accordingly. This is usually associated with a recommendation that more responsibility should be delegated to project managers. NGOs and small projects are better able to profit from their ability to adapt as the technicians and the farmers learn from each other.
When considering the requirements for a soil conservation policy for Europe, Morgan and Rickson (1989) listed five points which with slight modification are equally relevant to project design:
- There must be a high level of political pressure for it to happen.
- There must be a technology which has been demonstrated to work.
- There must be a clear financial incentive. In the case of a policy this must accrue to government, in the case of projects it must accrue to the participating farmers.
- It must not be an end in itself, but part of an environment protection programme (in the case of projects read "part of an agricultural development programme").
- There must be a local organization to take responsibility for implementation.
The similarity of the requirements for a multi-national policy and an individual project confirms the thought that while practices are site-specific, the broad issues and principles are universal (Sanders 1988).
Project objectives
The FAO Review of Field Programmes (1987) is critical of the loose definition of project objectives, and these evaluation studies confirm that it is equally a problem in the projects of other agencies. In the FAO report the most common criticism (in 37 percent of 131 projects) was the absence of a well-defined link between immediate and development objectives. The immediate objects were found to have been described too vaguely in the project document in a quarter of the projects. This problem tends to be more noticeable in smaller agencies which do not have sophisticated and refined appraisal techniques. For example several projects were found whose general objective was defined as something like, "To raise the standard of living of the rural population", and the immediate objectives loosely defined in terms such as, "To increase food production in the project area".
Another quotation from FAO is "The problem of vague project objectives still crops up too regularly. There is the frequent lack of linkage between the broad development objectives being addressed and the immediate objectives of a project." In fact FAO has introduced special in-house training courses to address this and other weaknesses in the design of FAO projects.
In project design a balance is required between aiming to meet national objectives and those of individual farmers, since these are usually not the same. The national objectives of governments may include things like increasing agricultural exports, or import substitution, which are of little interest to the subsistence farmer. The project design must therefore identify the farmer goals and be firmly addressed to them. Many big agricultural development projects of the '70s failed because this was not realized at the time. Recent evaluation studies and reviews of them now give us a much clearer understanding of what the farmer sees as problems, and what are his goals and objectives.
Particularly in the context of soil conservation there has been a major change in thinking. It is now known for example that there is little point in educational programmes intended to explain to the farmer the problems of soil degradation and the need for him to do something about them. It turns out that he usually understands perfectly well, but he has more urgent and pressing problems which require all his energies, so that soil conservation is forced into being a low priority. Several studies have shown that a way forward is to relieve the most pressing problem, for example by improving a road network, or improving food security by introducing improved agronomic practices. The farmers are then able and willing to turn their attention to soil conservation. Examples of this approach are to be found in Shaxson (1988), and other case studies in Moldenhauer and Hudson (1988).
Studies have now shown that the objectives of the commercial farmer to maximize yield and income are not necessarily those of the subsistence farmer. He is likely to be more interested in improving food security by decreasing the risk of failure, or improving the return on inputs of seed, fertilizer, or labour, or reducing the labour input, or improving the quality of life by reducing drudgery, particularly relevant in the case of women farmers. The project design must take account of the financial implications for individual farming families of the recommended practices and investments. Is the farmer able and willing to make the investment?
What projects must offer in order to be enthusiastically adopted by farmers can be defined. Firstly there must be clear on-site benefits offering short-term benefits with large increments. A new technology must offer an increase of 50-100 percent, because a 10 percent improvement will not persuade him to change. The improvement must also occur within the time-span of the farmer's planning, which usually means the next growing season, or at most the next twelve months. Donor agencies or recipient governments may appreciate the value of long-term benefits or downstream benefits, or a 10 percent increase in average national yield, but none of these are important to the subsistence farmer although it is he (or commonly she) who takes the decision on whether or not to implement project recommendations. The criteria for new technology to be acceptable are discussed in Section 4.
Project design must be based on limited attainable objectives. Reviews show that planners tend to be over-optimistic about:
- the benefits of new agricultural packages;
- the ability of existing services to disseminate new ideas;
- the time required to make things happen, for example the selection of candidates for overseas training.
Associated with the turning away from big blueprint operations is a move towards a series of small changes rather than complete replacement of the technology, and towards projects which start slow and small so that the farmers can be involved as the project develops and grows.
The element of risk is important in small-scale farming, which is a gamble against the weather, pests, disease and prices. What a project can hope to do is either to shorten the odds against the farmer by decreasing the risk, or to increase his ability to invest by credit schemes. Improving the odds is by far the more common function of development projects. It is remarkable how even in the poorest community, money can be found to invest in what is seen as a certain winner.
Project targets
In agricultural development projects, and particularly soil conservation projects, it is difficult to establish targets where progress can be quantified. It is common to use a measurable item as surrogate for the real target, but this can introduce distortions. For example increase in crop yield has been used as a surrogate for measuring effectiveness of a soil conservation programme. But the programme will almost certainly include a package of practices, and a measured increase in yield claimed as the result of soil conservation practices may in fact be the result of improved water conservation, use of improved seed or fertilizer, or indeed factors external to the project such as improved marketing or pricing.
In forestation projects the number of tree nurseries established is frequently used as the measure of effectiveness. But this is a poor surrogate. The number of nurseries established does not necessarily reflect the number of seedlings produced; the number of seedlings in the nursery is not the same as the number distributed to farmers; this is not the same as the number planted which is in turn not the same as the number which survive. The number surviving after a year will be further reduced by drought, pest, disease, and attack by livestock. So the real measure of the effectiveness of the project, which is the number of new trees growing after several years, has only a very tenuous link with the chosen yardstick of the number of tree nurseries established.
A common deficiency in project design is the absence of an annual workplan which sets out programme activities against a timescale. The plan must be realistic and attainable, not a catalogue of hopes which are unlikely to be achieved. Most experienced development workers will be aware that in some countries the record of accomplishment submitted at the required time intervals tends to mirror the targets, with little relation to what has actually been done. Monitoring of progress must be accurate and reliable to be of any use.
Institutional arrangements and local participation
Good project design must include detailed plans of how the project will be implemented. It is a common complaint of evaluation missions that, first, insufficient attention was given to this matter at project preparation and at appraisal, and second that too much is assumed by the planners, with insufficient discussion with the recipients, at all levels. The mechanics of how the project interacts with existing departments, agencies and institutions is often not worked out in sufficient detail. For example many projects have been impaired by not having worked out the duties and responsibilities of project managers vis-a-vis a counterpart. Minor issues left unresolved at planning can reduce goodwill and cooperation - examples are control of expenditure and allocation of transport.
It is difficult for a project to be successful if it does not fit into a national policy or a long-term development plan for the sector. The lack of a long-term national strategy for agriculture in some countries in Africa has hindered development projects for many years.
There must be full agreement and cooperation between donor and recipient government. The project or programme cannot work if there is conflict with the indigenous regime over major political issues. Most agencies include in the project proposal a section on issues, i.e. conditions to be satisfied before the project will proceed. However from the evaluation studies it is clear that the urge to get projects started has on many occasions softened the resolve of the donor and led them to start projects without obtaining complete agreement and support. This is shown by the World Bank study which showed that in 79 percent of unsatisfactory projects, borrower support was unsatisfactory. On the other hand a firm stand by a donor can lead to a change of heart by the recipient.
Plate 3 The aim of the farmer may not be to maximize yield but may be to decrease risk of failure, improve the return on his inputs or remove the drudgery from the work (Jordan)
Plate 4 It must be remembered that the number of tree nurseries established does not necessarily reflect the number of seedlings produced;... the number distributed... the number planted... which in turn is not the same as the number which survive (Kenya)
An example is when World Bank pulled out of a huge nationwide programme in the face of what it felt was the intransigent refusal of the government to increase food prices to the producer. Whether as a direct result of this action or not, farmer prices were increased some years later.
The question of central or dispersed control of soil conservation activities is quite common. Many countries have a structure similar to that in the United States, where conservation is a federal responsibility but extension is a state responsibility. Hopefully this will become less important with the growing acceptance of the concept that soil conservation (and hence the soil conservation component of development projects) should no longer be treated as a separate discipline, but considered as an integral part of extension work (Moldenhauer and Hudson 1988; Shaxson et al. 1989).
Another weakness identified in project design is insufficient consideration of the capacity of local institutions to play their part in a proposed project. As a result this ability is frequently overestimated. It is not sufficient to list what inputs the project looks for; it requires a careful study, in cooperation with the local agency, of the resources of the agency, particularly manpower, since this often reveals the need for a training component in the project. Any other constraints should also be carefully discussed. For example in an on-going soil conservation programme in the Far East, the project proposal failed to appreciate the importance of language difficulties which are now seriously inhibiting progress. This could have been avoided by including in the project design a large component of language training at the beginning of the project.
Although in the past the need for institution-building has not always been recognized, there is nowadays a strong trend, particularly in FAO projects but also in other agencies, towards more projects with institution-building as a main objective (FAO 1987). All projects, whether mainly institution-building or not, should aim to reduce the dependency on international experts, for otherwise they can never become self-sustaining.
Some other potential problems of inputs by local agencies are funds for local expenditure, local research inputs, and cooperation between departments. Few of the projects which have been evaluated do not record some problems with local funding. The FAO review also finds this a frequent weakness, and one which is increasing, especially in Africa. Sometimes the problem arises from unpredictable external factors such as the price of oil or commodities, or exchange rates. But at the design stage it is important to try to identify and anticipate any possible financial shortfalls since unforeseen budget cuts can mean reducing counterparts, other local staff and transport to the point where the project becomes ineffective. Few agencies are able to follow the example of the Swedish authority SIDA which can in emergency provide funds for local recurrent expenditure.
The ability of local research institutions should be considered at project design, and is discussed in Section 4. It will be seen that in agriculture generally, and soil conservation in particular, there is a history of inappropriate technology. Even if local facilities are not strong enough for innovative research, it must be able to test technology which originated elsewhere through on-farm research, pilot studies, market research and social surveys.
The lack of cooperation between departments and agencies is a universal problem and by no means confined to developing countries. In project design the important thing is to identify potential problems and try to bypass them. In the past a popular solution has been to set up a new and separate Project Management Unit (PMU), but experience now shows that this should be avoided if possible.
Experience also suggests that the design of institutional arrangements relies too much on discussions at national level, probably with token visits to the field and some superficial contact there with the local officials. But experience shows few projects get down to discussions allowing a real input of ideas from village management and farmer associations. Of course this partly results from the inability of the visiting project planners to communicate directly at this level, but state-of-the-art thinking is that involving the people who are going to carry out the project is essential at the stage of project identification and preparation.
Project duration
Projects of short duration are not as effective as long-term projects and programmes. In the past three-year projects were quite common, with World Bank having an average of four or five years, but evaluation and assessment reports point out what should have been recognized in the beginning, that agricultural systems change slowly, and a ten year horizon should be considered as the norm. The uptake of a new variety can be quick, but anything that affects the system or the social structure is slow.
The problems of short projects are well documented. There is usually a slow start-up on both sides. Donor staff are not in post as soon as expected, tendering and procurement of donor-provided hardware always takes longer than expected. So does clearing through customs and delivery.
On the borrower side there are always delays in finding and making available counterparts and other local staff, in setting up the administrative procedures for the project, and creating a distribution mechanism for inputs. Together these lead to under-disbursement, cost overrun and general inefficiency.
Training is particularly constrained in short projects. In a typical five-year project which plans to send local staff for overseas training, it takes one year to locate and select the candidates, anything up to three years for the overseas training, and the officer returns to the project in time to help it close down.
The common practice of setting up projects with the possibility of extension is seldom satisfactory, particularly the approach, "Let us look again after three years and then decide what to do". The uncertainty undermines the confidence both of the project and the cooperating farmers. Where donor procedures do not permit the unequivocal promise of long-term support, it should still be possible for donors to buy a three-year or five-year time-slice of a longer programme. This has a better chance of continuity than an isolated fixed-term project.
Successful programmes which have been running for a long time invariably refer to the length of the programme as one of the factors helping towards its success. An outstanding example is the SIDA soil conservation programme in Kenya which has been operating for fifteen years and there is a clear understanding that the assistance will continue to be available as long as it is welcomed by the Government of Kenya.
At project design there should be consideration of sustainability and what will happen at the end of the project. Too many of the early projects simply faded away and after a few years the only remaining trace is the buildings. There should be plans, not necessarily detailed but carefully thought out, for the project eventually being institutionalized, i.e. incorporated into government agencies or institutions, or becoming independent and self-sustaining, which is often the desired end-product of cooperatives or credit schemes. In soil conservation programmes one would hope that they become absorbed into the national agencies, but an even better plan is that the whole project should be carried out from within an existing department, as in the SIDA Kenya project.
One other factor related to time is the idea of going back to some form of assessment or evaluation a number of years after the project has been completed. So far only the World Bank has been observed to do this on a regular basis, but it does seem to be a worthwhile exercise. The conclusion of the Bank survey is that in many cases a modest intervention of support and assistance after the project would be well worthwhile. A problem is that the budgeting and disbursement procedures of most agencies would find difficulty in accommodating this idea.
Training and education
During the last ten or fifteen years since evaluation became a serious activity, there have been two shifts in the approach to training and education. The first is that ten years ago it was commonly assumed that the most important way to achieve soil conservation was to educate the farmer, tell him about erosion and erosion control, and its importance to him and his grandchildren and the country. This was probably a legacy from the extension approach of North America where over the last forty years a very high level of awareness of erosion and conservation has been built up. However, even in America the weaknesses and deficiencies of this approach are now beginning to show, and in development projects they have shown up much more quickly.
It is now appreciated that on the whole the small farmer is well aware of the cause, the process, and the results of erosion, but he is not interested in doing anything about it because there are more important problems to attend to.
The other new realization is that the farmer's limited resources and attention are focused on short-term planning and activities. He may have anxieties about the future for his grandchildren, but he cannot afford to let his attention and efforts be sidetracked away from the immediate problem of feeding his family this week or this year.
A third point is that planners now appreciate that activities on farmers' fields are not going to be influenced by what the downstream effects might be, such as flooding and sedimentation. But land use planners with their feet on the ground have known this for a long time.
At the same time there has been a strongly increasing trend towards the realization that technical assistance should pay less attention to showing developing countries what to do (or what the planners think they ought to do) and put more effort towards institution-building, that is increasing the local capacity for being able to solve the problems themselves. So there has been a steady increase in the number and the size of training components, and this trend is still continuing. There has also been a sharp move away from what is now seen as a rather old-fashioned approach of sending people on long academic training courses to universities and research institutions in the developed countries. Instead there has been an increasing realisation that the value of this type of training is mainly in universities and research, and that the more pressing need in most developing countries is training in management, and a broadening of experience, preferably acquired in neighbouring
countries.
<section>6</section>
4. During implementation
4.1 Donor factors
4.2 Recipient factors
4.3 Technology
4.4 Research
4.5 Monitoring
4.1 Donor factors
Should projects be implemented through a special Project Management Unit (PMU) or through existing departments and agencies? There was a shift of opinion between the mid-seventies and mid-eighties, with a clear trend away from PMUs, and the project evaluation studies do suggest that more projects are successful when implemented through existing agencies. This is not to say that PMUs do not work; there are successful examples like the Swaziland Rural Development Areas Programme which started in selected areas but spread until it was a national programme and the PMU became institutionalized as a permanent government agency.
The arguments for a PMU may include:
- The need for the project to bring together a number of departments which are not in the habit of working together.
- The project is to be implemented on the basis of watersheds, which do not coincide with administrative boundaries.
- Existing infrastructure is unable to cope with the logistics of procurement and distribution of project inputs.
- There is no local agency able and willing to handle the administration and management of the project.
Possible disadvantages of a PMU are:
- It may weaken line departments by attracting the better staff.
- It may exaggerate jealousies between departments, or between departments and the PMU.
- It is less likely to lead to self-reliance.
- There are likely to be problems at the end of the project. Can the local staff employed by the project be absorbed into other employment? What will replace the functions of the PMU?
A number of agencies appear to have taken the decision that they will try to avoid using PMUs if possible (ODA, FAO), but larger programmes, such as those of the World Bank, are more likely to need a PMU because the size of the project is such that it could not be handled by existing agencies. An example is the World Food Programme in Ethiopia.
On the question of the factors affecting the donor side of project management, several issues arise. Quoting Harrison (1987) again: "Personalities are always important. The quality of leadership, from national down to village level, often makes the difference between success and failure. There are many cases where the presence of a charismatic leader, whether project manager or local chief or outstanding minister, has been an important ingredient of success. There are few successes with weak project leaders".
Project management usually feels that it is overburdened with administrative duties, either imposed from donor HQ, or the necessity to conform with local procedures. Several projects report difficulties because the most senior of the technical specialists was made the project leader without having appropriate experience or training in management. Aid agencies might profitably give some thought to ensuring that project managers are suitably trained in management.
A very common problem, reported by all agencies without exception, is time overrun, frustration, and reduced effectiveness caused by delays in getting staff in post. It is felt that there must be something fundamentally wrong with the personnel management of aid agencies for this problem to appear so frequently (more than 50 percent of the evaluated case studies), and it is suggested that this problem might be further studied elsewhere.
The importance of flexibility was stressed during the discussion of project design. This usually comes down to the ability to make changes as a result of field experience, and this implies that authority to make changes must be delegated to the project manager in the field. A common remark by staff of successful projects is "It worked well because they left me alone and let me get on with it".
Some other aspects of relations with local staff and the indigenous people also arise in the evaluation reviews. For example it is important to use the traditional decision-making processes. If local practice is autocratic decisions by the chief, then he must be part of a management committee. If all important decisions are taken by a party political group then they must be involved in project management. But ultimately the final decision to introduce new practices or ideas is made by individuals within the context of their society. There may be orders, suggestions or requests but, except in totally repressive regimes, these are only carried out by the action of individuals. It is not the project's job to change basic social structures; the project should accept and make use of the existing social culture.
This empathy with the local people and their social structure is explained by Harrison as follows: "Those who succeed in Africa also share a common attitude to Africa's people. They have respect for ordinary African peasants - not only theoretical respect for their human dignity, but practical respect for their views and their wishes, and respect for their accumulated wisdom and traditional practices. It is the converse of the Colonial, condescending attitude...".
4.2 Recipient factors
A project needs inputs and support from the host country at three levels - from the government, from the executing agency, and from the farmers. Looking at these in turn; at government level one looks for both moral and physical support. A very positive verbal declaration of support can work wonders for the morale of all staff on the project, and so can symbolic demonstrations. For example in Kenya the personal participation by President Moi at Conservation Work Days has had a big effect on building political respectability into all conservation activities.
In terms of policy, what one looks for most from governments is consistency and coherence of all government activities. Support which waxes and wanes under different ministers or even different governments is very damaging, and so are inconsistencies between ministries or departments.
Given a political climate within which the project can prosper, the physical backing required from government is the provision of resources, particularly financial and manpower. There is no doubt that recipient governments, anxious for a proposed project to go ahead, are prone to overestimate their ability to provide the inputs. As a result of either over-optimism at project preparation, or subsequent deterioration of the national economy, the inability to provide local staff was observed the 35 percent of the projects evaluated. At the level of local agency or institution, there was a strong tendency for donors to have unrealistic expectations of the support which can be provided by the implementing agency, and there is also a tendency for these agencies themselves to overestimate what they can provide, particulary counterpart staff. Although these problems emerge at the stage of implementation, it is at project planning that they should be measured, and corrected or
bypassed.
Irrespective of the quality of the management at higher levels, the effectiveness of a project is very dependent upon the staff at the lowest level of intervention, usually the extension agent or village worker. The poor performance of extension services in most developing countries is now well known, although many projects in the '70s floundered because it was not fully understood at that time. Attempts have been made to tackle this problem through massive interventions by large agencies, particularly World Bank. The initial acclaim for the T and V system was undoubtedly excessive and it is no longer seen as a universal panacea. This is important for soil conservation projects. The method is very effective in disseminating single items of advice such as what to plant or when or how, but attempts to include soil conservation topics into the system have so far been unsuccessful, at least in Zambia, Kenya and several other African countries. A common problem for extension
services is that there are usually few suitable recruits available with a combination of a rural farming background and sufficient educational achievement. This can result in a service too dependent on using urban school-leavers not in tune with the farmers.
The desirability of contributions to the project from the farmers also has mixed reaction in evaluation reports. There seems to be general agreement that project activities are likely to be better continued and maintained when the farmers have invested their own time money or labour. But the best way to achieve this produces conflicting suggestions. The use of incentives and subsidies is outside the scope of this report but some opinions are briefly discussed in Chapter 6.
Plate 5 Irrespective of the quality of management at higher levels, the effectiveness of a project is very dependant upon the staff at the lowest level of intervention, usually the extension agent or village worker (China)
4.3 Technology
The generally low level of success in agricultural development projects, and soil conservation in particular, is certainly caused to some extent by attempts to use unsuitable technology. In some poor-performance projects this is identified as the only reason, or the main reason, for failure. In others it is one of the causes. It is seldom that the technology is fundamentally wrong, but rather that it was discovered, too late, to be unsuitable for the particular conditions. Cassen (1986) has an interesting observation: "The tendency for agricultural projects to extend unsound recommendations has both technical and economic origins. Agricultural research, especially in Africa, although in drier areas everywhere, has generally failed to generate the flow of relevant recommendations on which a resilient and dynamic agriculture depends. Much of the strength of Indian agriculture has been based on a seed-fertiliser-water package that does not have its counterpart for most other
farming systems. Providing this counterpart for other areas, tailored to local circumstances, must be a prerequisite for better project performance, and represents one of the very highest medium-term priorities for aid programmes."
Combining the results of assessments covering several hundred agricultural projects, a list can be drawn up of what a technology should or should not do.
i. The technology must offer a quick payoff. For crops this should be in terms of one year or less. Forestry projects require longer but one recommendation was, "If you want to get trees planted, go for quick-growing species not slow-growing hardwoods". The enthusiastic take-up of growing eucalypts in Kenya is an example of applying this.
ii. The technology must offer a high financial rate of return. A possible increase of ten or twenty percent will not stimulate rapid uptake. This requires a return of 50-100 percent or more.
iii. A new technology must involve low risk, preferably reducing the existing risk. This question is referred to again when discussing the testing of packages.
iv. The technology must not require foregone benefits, particularly food. Practices which take land out of production will only be acceptable if there are balancing benefits.
v. The technology must have low inputs; from the farmer, low cash requirement and low inputs of labour; for the government, the technology should avoid recurrent costs, it should have a low import content and maximum use of locally available materials. It should avoid maintenance which requires imported spares or high levels of skill.
vi. A technology may be sound in purely technical terms but still fail because it does not take account of special issues, for example the different roles of men and women in production, or the attitudes towards communal production systems.
vii. The technology should be easy to teach and demonstrate. For widespread adoption there must be the multiplier effect of farmers teaching other farmers. A project which requires large inputs of engineers, or of imported earth-moving machinery, will inevitably be restricted to small project areas. This argument applies also to local inputs. A technology which requires a saturation level of extension agents will be restricted to a short period of time, or a limited area.
viii. A technology which is the development or improvement of an existing practice will be accepted more readily than something which is completely new. Awareness of indigenous conservation farming practices has improved dramatically in recent years as a result of many studies.
Plate 6 The technology should be easy to teach and demonstrate. For widespread adoption there must be a multiplier effect of farmers teaching other farmers (Ethiopia)
The importance of testing technology
It has already been stressed that technology can only be successfully implemented if it is suitable for the particular conditions, and this requires that it must be tested before being built into a project. The World Bank 1986 review showed that the use of untested packages of technology led to poor results in 61 percent of projects, whereas tested packages had an 80 percent success rate. This is confirmed by several other reports, thus Cassen (1986): "Where projects have run into trouble, it is often because they have attempted to persuade cultivators to abandon existing practices in favour of new ones without sufficient testing of the new ones".
Harrison said much the same thing: "As a general rule, no innovation or practice should be offered that would leave farmers worse off in a bad year than they would be with their traditional techniques and varieties".
The same thought is expressed in one of the basic principles of the Indian Council for Agricultural Research that "Only practices based on good evidence may be tested on farmers' fields, which must be protected from speculative experimentation".
This consensus can be summarized by saying, in investment terminology, that there must be no downside risk, and that possible weaknesses must be cleared out of the way before the project starts. There is a clear case for much more use of pilot studies but this is not popular with agencies looking for tidy packages ready for implementation and quick disbursement. It is not necessary in this report to quote the many projects which attempted to use technologies imported from other countries or conditions. Two of the more obvious examples are the inappropriate attempts to use the classical North American system of graded channel terraces in Francophone West Africa, and the equally unsuccessful use of bench terracing on unstable steep slopes in the humid tropics.
Deficiencies in the recommended technology should not be discovered during the project. The proposed recommended practices should be critically reviewed during the project appraisal, and plans made to resolve any uncertainties by field trials, adaptive research, or a pilot project, as appropriate. A useful list of questions to be asked at appraisal is given by Douglas and Lai (1988, p 52), and may be summarized as follows:
- Is it technically possible?
- Is it practically feasible?
- Is it productive?
- Is it financially desirable?
- Is it stable?
- Is it sustainable?
- Is it universally applicable?
- Is it socially and economically acceptable?
Single steps or packages?
There is not a consensus view on the relative merits of simple technologies versus packages. One view prefers simple technologies applied one step at a time, consolidating each step before taking the next. Certainly simple technologies are easier to disseminate and spread. But another view is that the large benefit which the technology must offer is more likely to derive from a package where several factors interact favourably. This is reflected in the common system of recommending bunding or terracing combined with the introduction of improved varieties and improved fertilization. One difficulty is to separate the benefits accruing from the components within the package. There is probably no universal answer to this question because the local circumstances and conditions vary so much, but it strongly reinforces the earlier recommendation that all uncertainties should be resolved by local testing and pilot studies.
On the other hand, if the project is sufficiently flexible, technical packages and improved techniques can evolve during the project to suit specific local contexts. An example of this being applied successfully is the Oxfam project in Burkina Faso. The project started with the idea of encouraging forestry on communal lands using micro-catchments to increase moisture availability, but after listening to farmers' suggestions and adapting the programme it eventually focused on water harvesting for food crops on private lands, and is one of the most successful conservation projects in Africa.
4.4 Research
In many developing countries the poor technology, or the absence of tested technology, is the result of weakness of the national agricultural research programme. The World Bank has found that only, "Perhaps 10 percent of developing countries already have adequate skills, good national research programmes and effective linkages with international research institutions".
Plate 7 It is difficult to separate the benefits accruing from the components within a package, e.g. terracing combined with the introduction of improved varieties and use of fertilizers (Pakistan)
Plate 8 The proposed recommended practices should be critically reviewed during the project appraisal, and plans made to resolve any uncertainties by field trials, adaptive research, or pilot project, as appropriate (Tunisia)
Cassen (1986) suggests that: "The weakness results from an interaction of several factors, only some of which are directly addressable by donors:
i. low government commitment;
ii. low status of research within government and lack of credibility with farmers;
iii. inadequate budgetary provision;
iv. rapid staff turnover, both of national staff and expatriates;
v. lack of information and analysis for setting consistent and appropriate research priorities;
vi. unsuitable institutional structures and poor coordination;
vii. the short donor project cycle which tends to lead to short planning horizons, inappropriate phasing, and discontinuities, when what is required is sustained and logical programme development".
Another commentary on agricultural research in developing countries gives a list of research problems:
a. farmer participation in design and trials is essential but almost invariably inadequate;
b. researchers are under pressure by funding agencies to produce highly visible innovations in a short period of time. As a consequence the emphasis is on producing hardware at the expense of improvements to the software of research methods, institutional organization, management, and communication procedures;
c. the short-term (often donor-funded) project approach to research and development means that virtually all published reports contain only early assessments of the technology's potential. These tend to report mainly on-station trials, thereby avoiding problems when the technology is introduced to farmers, and giving an over-optimistic view of its potential;
d. pressure to produce hardware results in inadequate searches for relevant experience elsewhere, and so the wheel is reinvented;
e. there is a reluctance to publish reports of the failure of experiments. Publication of experimental failure can prevent the exploration of blind alleys from being repeated (ODI 1988).
The deficiencies of research are particularly noticeable in soil conservation projects. There are several cases in Africa where large programmes of terracing have been carried out with the help of FFW or donor subsidy, but there is no tested package of improved agronomic practices to take advantage of the terracing. The concept of 'conservation-based farming' is widely accepted, but putting it into practice is held up by the failure of agricultural research to produce agronomic innovations to go with programmes of physical conservation works.
The general weakness of national research in developing countries is now recognized. World Bank has several programmes; as early as 1982 USAID made a major commitment to "develop human resources and institutional capabilities"; the All Party Parliamentary Group on Overseas Development (1985) recommended that British aid should be increasingly directed towards supporting national agricultural research programmes.
4.5 Monitoring
There is a clear consensus that good monitoring throughout the project is essential, and also that it is frequently inadequate. It has been shown that blueprint projects which are finalized at preparation are less likely to be successful than flexible projects which can adjust to experience gained as the project develops. This implies that there must be a regular and reliable programme of measuring, recording and reporting. This in turn means that there must be close contact with the beneficiaries, and also defined indicators of performance.
Evaluation studies show that it is very common for insufficient attention to be given at project preparation to working out plans for monitoring, and the lack of a clearly laid out plan encourages project staff to give it a low priority. It is the impression that field staff think of all returns and reports as being unwelcome chores that interrupt the real work.
The present position is that it has become customary to pay lip service to the importance of monitoring, but there is room for making it happen more effectively.
The information to be gathered and reported will vary from project to project. Questions which every project should be regularly asking are: is progress satisfactory? If not what are the difficulties which need to be addressed? What new ideas are emerging? And, which ideas may suggest changes to the project? If new technology is being introduced, the farmer reaction and uptake needs to be closely monitored in case the technology needs modification or can be improved.
<section>7</section>
5. After the project
5.1 Evaluation
5.2 Continuity
5.3 Spreading and sustainability
5.1 Evaluation
The consensus is that evaluation, like monitoring, is important because it allows lessons to be learned, leading to improvement in future projects. But like monitoring, it is not done with sufficient rigour. For example, "Many projects cannot precisely pinpoint who has benefitted and by how much or in what way. This does not indicate the projects are unsuccessful, but that existing methods of appraisal and evaluation are too limited. There is a need for more thinking on how to appraise projects for institutional development, sustainability, and environmental impact" (Butcher 1988).
Few agencies feel that they have the resources to evaluate every project, and so evaluation, particularly ex-post evaluation, tends to be biased towards projects with problems.
Also, small agencies particularly are reluctant to use the time of project staff on evaluation when they could be getting on with the next project. The larger agencies which have separate evaluation units face the difficulty that the independence of these units makes them less able to influence the operational departments.
There are several different approaches to evaluation reporting. To some extent the termination report by project staff can be considered as an evaluation, but it is often biased by the frustrations and difficulties, and tends to be more a catalogue of problems than a balanced account of performance. An ex-post evaluation either by an evaluation unit or by sub-contractors tends to be more open-minded, but the very fact that it is done after the event means that it is dependent upon records and reports, which are likely to be unwritten, incomplete, unavailable, or less comprehensive than the evaluation team would wish. The other source of information for ex-post evaluation teams is personal recollection which is notoriously inaccurate.
Informal ex-post evaluations are also frequently done as part of a study of a group of projects. This present study is one example and use has been made of many others. Evaluations of this type are particularly useful in identifying trends, and frequently-occurring good and bad factors, but being less detailed they are less effective at evaluating individual projects.
The last type of evaluation is that carried out some years after the completion of the project. The World Bank is the only agency identified which has made a formal study of projects ten to fifteen years after their completion. The observations from that study were found to be very instructive and perhaps this type of evaluation should be carried out more frequently. Most development workers are familiar with cases where past projects can only be located by the project buildings, now serving some other purpose, or by the piles of rusting machinery - which leads to the question of continuity.
5.2 Continuity
Some programmes may be designed with a fixed time-span, because they have a specific purpose, and end when the purpose is achieved. Examples are FAO short TCP projects where a specialist is provided to analyse a problem, or a bigger project with many staff over several years, such as The Ethiopian Highlands Reclamation Study. This kind of project ends with the final report, and there is no question of continuing the project, although there will hopefully be follow-up action.
Another category is where there is a weakness or deficiency which is going to continue for a long time, but donor and recipient agree on a fixed-term project, hoping that some improvement will occur in the agreed time. Institution-building projects are often like this, and there may be a series of successive separate projects, for example the USAID technical assistance to the Ministry of Agriculture in Lesotho. In this type of project the agreed fixed end-point avoids uncertainty.
The best situation of all is where the donor undertakes to support a long-term programme for as long as necessary, and an example is the SIDA support to soil conservation in Kenya.
The kind of project which is most likely to have problems and poor performance is where the objectives are too ambitious for the project life, so there is a built-in option to extend it if targets are not achieved. Experience suggests that this is likely to result in frustration and uncertainty.
The question of what happens at the end of projects was discussed under implementation in Section 4. Projects which are integrated into permanent institutions are less likely to suffer than those with a Project Management Unit (PMU) which disappears at the project end.
5.3 Spreading and sustainability
The problem of agricultural development is so vast compared with the available resources of aid and technical assistance that development programmes must constantly try to be catalysts for change which becomes self-spreading and self-sustaining. The ultimate objective of all aid agencies should be to make themselves unnecessary.
Sustainability is the current buzz-word in the aid industry, with major international conferences devoted to it (PANOS 1987, Conroy and Litvinoff 1988).
Some quotations from the 1987 International Institute for Environment and Development (IIED) conference follow:
Talking about sustainable spread, Chambers refers to "institutional spread", for example where activities by an NGO are taken up and adopted by other NGOs or by incorporation in government organizations; there is also spontaneous or induced diffusion, when there is a non-institutional effect such as visits by farmers who take away the seed idea which multiplies elsewhere. Chambers suggests that few NGOs or governments pay adequate attention to this. His third spreading activity is through impact on analysis and policy, quoting examples from India where projects had a big impact on official thinking.
Kramer comments, "The number of projects continued by counterparts in the absence of donor funds is abysmally small". Later he asks, "When the land management techniques are known, why does widespread adoption not seem to be making much progress?" And then offers, "The answer lies in the failure of development agencies to treat communities and farmers as fully capable of achieving their own sustainable management of resources. Policies, institutions, and infrastructure all too often work at cross-purposes to sustainable local resource management".
Another issue in self-sustainability is encouraging the development of informal organizations as well as building up government agencies. The World Bank says, "A major contribution to Sustainability came from the development of grass-roots organizations, whereby project beneficiaries gradually assumed increasing responsibilities for project activities during implementation, and particularly following completion".
The World Bank 10th Audit Report discusses failures of Sustainability in a study of 25 projects which were assessed as successful at completion. Thirteen of these (50 percent) were found to have failed between 5 and 15 years after the end of the project. Some reasons were:
- Failure to build institutional capacity to continue.
- Long-term sustainability was not considered during the project.
- Grass-roots organizations were not developed.
- Inadequate plans to hand over from a PMU.
- No capacity to maintain and update the improved technology which needs a continuing research base.
- Project attempted to change existing social/cultural behaviour.
- Borrower policies may change and undermine sustainability.
- Difficulties of recurrent cost financing.
<section>8</section>
6. Some variables in project design
6.1 Single or multiple purpose?
6.2 Single or multiple donor?
6.3 The scale of the project
6.4 Scale of agency
6.5 Changing fashions in lending
6.6 Incentives, subsidies and FFW
6.1 Single or multiple purpose?
Soil conservation projects with a single limited objective appear to be more effective. Some examples are:
- strengthening a soil conservation agency such as FAO projects in Ethiopia and SIDA projects in Kenya;
- strengthening research capacity in soil erosion like the Swiss project in Ethiopia;
- problem-solving studies such as TCP projects in the Seychelles (impact of water development schemes) and Lesotho (assistance in formulating national policy).
The better track record of projects of this kind may be due to some extent to the difficulty of evaluating the effectiveness in quantitative terms.
A trend towards this type of project can be detected, but it is not apparent whether this is a positive move towards them or a move away from the more operational projects of the past. ODA thinking is that "UK aid should be more narrowly focused... This would imply the avoidance of large multi-sectoral rural development projects and projects in marginal areas" Balacs (1985). FAO reports increasing emphasis on institution-building and less on the uptake of new technology (FAO 1987).
In the sub-sector of soil conservation this move is welcome. The new philosophy of soil conservation through land husbandry means there is less need for the projects of the last decade where the main intervention was physical earth-moving.
Another noticeable change is that where agencies have some flexibility to choose between directing their funds to emergency relief or long-term development, there is clearly a move towards long-term development. Oxfam, Band-Aid, CARE and the International Red Cross are all increasing their efforts towards prevention rather than cure.
Multi-sector projects deserve some discussion. Reviewing a small sample of projects in Africa, ODA reports: "It appeared to be generally the case that the incorporation of non-agricultural components into the projects overloaded management so that the project's implementation suffered. The integrated approach of many of the projects appeared to be based on the assumption that it was necessary to have all the components in the development of a particular area not only under one particular project, but also under one management umbrella.... The reviews concluded that non-agricultural components should be planned and implemented concurrently if necessary, but that this need not be within a single project management or indeed a single project" (Morris 1981). The same arguments apply to the question of more than one sub-sector in agriculture, and this is particularly relevant to soil conservation which nearly always involves activity in several sub-sectors.
There was a great vogue in the early and mid-seventies for Integrated Rural Development Projects (IRDPs). Cassen's explanation is "They were therefore the product of expanding aid budgets, and of an intensified commitment to distributing the benefits of aid among rural populations and low-income groups in particular. The projects represented a bold effort to attack rural poverty by addressing simultaneously the multiple obstacles in the way of rural development; they set out to improve productive services, provide infrastructure, and sometimes to provide health and education. They therefore tended to be large, multi-sectoral, and administratively complex."
Many IRDPs were disappointing and Cassen suggests two common reasons:
- inherently weak organization and management structures which rely in good measure on coordination between diverse public sector agencies, most of which gave higher priority to projects for which they were fully responsible;
- technical recommendations for farmers that were insufficiently profitable, too risky, or too demanding of labour at peak times of year;
- unduly high expectations of the capacity of implementing entities to handle greatly increased funds.
Another analysis of IRDPs is made by Morris (1985) who lists ten common weaknesses:
- inhospitable economic situation, i.e. governments not really able to bear the burden of expenditure involved;
- insufficient knowledge of the crop system; insufficient testing of new crop systems;
- over-optimistic yield assumptions;
- under-assessment of the cost of increased farm labour;
- proposals not attractive enough to farmers;
- marketing and pricing policies;
- increased size of extension staff;
- overloaded management of complex projects;
- management divorced from institutions.
Few projects of this type have been implemented in recent years.
6.2 Single or multiple donor?
In the past there have been projects where several donors shared the funding, but there is no doubt that this can lead to problems, particularly where there is a difference of objectives, operating procedures and financial procedures. The usual reasons for multiple funding are either a programme so costly that no single donor wishes to support the whole programme, or a national programme which comprises a number of separate projects in different provinces each managed by a separate agency. The problem with all such schemes is that the procedures of different agencies seldom mesh together. A typical example is the Rural Development Areas Programme (RDAP) in Swaziland which involved funding from World Bank, UK, AfDB, EDF, and USAID. The different rules about procurement of equipment were an administrative nightmare.
There are ways that shared support can work. One is for donors to put money into a pool with no strings attached and then operate the project through a single agency. Alternatively a funding organization may sub-contract the operation of the project to another agency. Neither of these is popular. Funding agencies are reluctant to relinquish control of their funds, and sub-contracting operators do not welcome having conditions imposed by their bankers.
6.3 The scale of the project
The record suggests that projects which have a significant component of technical assistance, tend to be more effective when small. The reason is that one or two international experts find it easy to work themselves into the local institution, whereas projects which have a large international staff tend to remain more independent, more separate, and less approachable in the eyes of the local officers. There are examples of technical assistance programmes which are so heavily staffed with expatriates that they dominate the local agencies and inhibit their growth and development.
In 1973 the World Bank announced new directions for agricultural lending specifically to target the poor which automatically led to a shift towards agricultural lending. However the main instruments selected to help execute the new strategy, area development and integrated rural development projects, have a poor performance record. The Bank's twelfth audit reports that this was largely because of over-optimistic assumptions about available technologies for rainfed smallholder agriculture. There does seem to be statistical evidence that over the six years 1980-1985 the success rate of Bank projects has declined as the average size of projects has increased. The present move away from multiple-donor, multiple-purpose, multiple-sector projects reduces the average size of projects.
Another issue affecting the scale of soil conservation projects is whether they should be approached on a catchment (watershed) basis, or should the emphasis be placed on the individual farm and farmer, or should projects be planned to coincide with the administrative boundaries? This question was addressed at the Puerto Rico Workshop on Conservation Farming on Steep Lands, 1988, where all three views were supported by different participants. A few years ago the concept of watershed planning was very popular, and some countries, for example Lesotho, decided that their whole soil conservation programme should be implemented through the catchment approach. Today support is more restrained, but as Sanders pointed out: "In conclusion, it should perhaps be said that if emphasis is placed on biological and agronomic measures, rather than physical practices, to achieve soil and water conservation, these approaches need not be mutually exclusive. The aim may ultimately be to treat a
whole catchment, but this may best be done by working progressively from the individual farm units" (Sanders 1988).
6.4 Scale of agency
The relative advantages and disadvantages of non-government organizations (NGOs) and community-based organizations (CBOs) have been compared with bilateral and other medium-sized agencies, and large multi-lateral institutions in several studies (Cassen 1986, Fowler 1988, Harrison 1987). A few selected points relevant to agricultural projects including soil conservation are given.
The case for small agencies:
- NGOs and CBOs are in close contact with the beneficiaries, often acting virtually as additional extension staff. They therefore have a strong local involvement and are able to identify the felt needs and are better able to associate with minorities such as the landless, ethnic minorities and also women, etc.
- They are better able to test, advise, develop, and help implement local techniques. Because they have limited resources they have to focus on low-cost ventures and are able to test innovations which could not be attempted on a bigger scale.
- Being independent they can often bypass bureaucratic problems, and overcome problems of inter-departmental cooperation. Being small and inoffensive their activities are unlikely to be seen as a threat by the establishment.
- They tend to be cost-effective for several reasons. "Their personnel are low paid, so more work is achieved for less money. Because of the low pay, only the dedicated apply for jobs..." (Harrison 1987). This applies to both field workers and headquarters staff, so overheads are low.
- They are particularly able to operate projects which depend on a large input from the farmers such as farmer-centred research and the local adaption of imported technologies.
- In addition to the international NGOs, there is much hitherto undeveloped potential in local NGOs. Sometimes these are difficult to approach and work with. when the initiative comes from projects associated with officialdom. Examples of international NGOs being able to mobilize and stimulate local NGOs are in Ethiopia, where there is an effective consortium of international and national NGOs all working together, and the International Red Cross which also works effectively with local branches, particularly in its new and growing programme of disaster prevention.
Plate 9 The aim may ultimately be to treat a whole catchment, but this may best be done by working progressively from the individual farm units (Thailand)
NGOs are ideally placed to be used as subcontractors by aid agencies to carry out pilot schemes or pilot trials. The problems caused by untested technology, or innovations which might have been locally adapted before introduction, have been clearly recognized as a major problem of design and implementation. In the case of introducing new ideas, smallness does not matter - a winner will be picked up and expanded by bigger agencies. A good example is the Oxfam one-man project of a simple method of water conservation using stone lines in Burkina Faso, started by Oxfam in 1979. It was very successful and picked up by IFAD as part of a larger national programme in 1986.
Some limitations:
- The characteristics of NGO projects are usually that they are small, directed towards a small target of people in a small area, dependent on highly motivated leaders, and linked only loosely, or not at all, to national programmes. This makes them less likely to spread or act as a catalyst. The water-spreading project using stone lines in Burkina Faso is an exception.
- The overall effect of NGO and CBO activities is inevitably affected by the size of their resources compared with the problem. As Chambers puts it: "In some cases bilateral agencies could usefully increase the amount of funds disbursed via NGOs, but this should not be seen as a substitute for the agencies improving their own performance in this area. NGO aid flows are insignificant compared with the volume of official aid, and international NGOs could absorb only a limited additional amount.
- But only governments and governmental donors have the resources for the giant task ahead".
- Another aspect of interaction between NGOs and bigger agencies is that NGOs usually do not have the skills and experience to design and manage agricultural development projects but can be greatly helped by a bigger agency playing the role of helpful elder brother. An example is FAO's long history of productive cooperation with local NGOs particularly through the Freedom from Hunger Campaign/Action for Development Programme (FFHC/AD) (FAO 1987, p 121 - p 124).
Some advantages are unique to large agencies:
- the ability to handle large ambitious programmes;
- maintaining a sustained dialogue and policy analysis with borrowing governments. This may include the possibility of influencing borrowers' economies and policies, although there is a continuing debate as to whether the provision of aid or loan funds confers the right to interfere in the domestic affairs of a sovereign government. IMF assume this right as a condition of lending; World Bank make programmes conditional upon changes when they believe that they are essential for the success of the project; and bilateral agencies may have a political or commercial dimension in their goals;
- large agencies may be making a big enough intervention so that general economic development of the receiving country may be seen as their principal priority;
- and finally, in many countries the size of the problem of agricultural development and food self-sufficiency is so huge that only large-scale intervention can make a significant impact.
6.5 Changing fashions in lending
Africa is presently the focus of attention in technical assistance and aid, and agriculture is the most favoured sector. This is probably the result of the series of droughts and resulting famines. It was not always so; other regions and other sectors have in earlier times been in the limelight, and sometimes the reasons for the changes are not apparent.
Some countries seem to be immune to assistance projects, with a long record of projects of disappointing performance. Africa seems to suffer more than other continents, and it was pointed out earlier that World Bank audits show a higher rate of failed projects in Africa than elsewhere, particularly East Africa.
It would be helpful if some common factors for countries with a high rate of failed projects could be identified such as political system, civil disorder, lack of political stability, or general low capacity of administration and management. This might be worth pursuing elsewhere.
There are also changing fashions in countries considered aid worthy. In the 1970s Thailand was deluged with aid programmes, in the late '70s it was Indonesia, and by 1980 Sri Lanka. In the '80s it has been Ethiopia, Kenya and Sudan. Some other countries seemed destined to be permanent recipients of aid projects.
There are also fashions in the chosen subsector within agriculture. In the '60s and '70s mechanization was out in front as the most popular solution to food shortages. Later the top subjects were integrated rural development projects, large scale irrigation projects, and livestock improvement. All of these presently attract little interest, and the topics of the late '80s were extension, agricultural research, and afforestation. The most likely choice for the next fashion appears to be the building of managerial capacity and local institutions.
6.6 Incentives, subsidies and FFW
There are several arguments for financial incentives or subsidies by a project or by the government:
- if conservation works are held to be in the interest of the State, then it is reasonable that the State should pay the whole or part of the cost. There are many examples of State intervention, for example flood control, river draining, reclamation of public lands, and perhaps pricing policy to increase or reduce crop production might be included. So the argument is why not extend this to soil conservation activities on private land?
- subsidies are commonly used to encourage or speed up actions which require a farmer input, e.g. building terraces;
- the expenditure by project or government may be seen as a demonstration of their commitment to the project.
There are also some arguments against incentives:
- subsidies may undermine the extent that the farmers identify with the works, and may encourage the idea that soil conservation is something you are paid to do by government;
- a decreased sense of involvement and responsibility can lead to poor standards of work and to poor maintenance.
Some analysts reject all forms of subsidy, for example: "All forms of paternalism should be avoided, including giving things away, subsidising farmer activities for inputs, or doing anything for the people. All work should be accomplished for the sole reason that villages have seen success achieved and have become enthusiastic enough to work towards achieving it for themselves" (Bunch 1988).
This view is supported by Harrison (1987): "Wherever people are paid for their labour contribution, as for cut-off drains in Kenya or soil conservation in Ethiopia, this feeling of identification is weakened. In both these cases payment fostered the attitude that work would only be done if payment was forthcoming, and that maintaining installations built by paid labour was the government's responsibility".
Plate 10 Subsidies are commonly used to encourage or speed up action which require a farmer input, e.g. building terraces (Haiti)
The most popular view seems to be that it is better to do without incentives if possible, but that there are cases when it has a place.
Food For Work is a special case because the primary objective is food distribution, and using it to do useful work such as soil conservation is an additional benefit. The trouble is that standards of design and construction are variable, and maintenance problems acute. Some soil conservation programmes have achieved huge physical results, e.g. the terracing programme in Ethiopia. It needs the wisdom of Solomon to balance the pros and cons of this work. It could never have been achieved without FFW, and it must have slowed down erosion to some extent. But much of the work was technically poor, the potential benefit was wasted because there was no improved farming package to go with the terraces, and it has given many people in government and many farmers the idea that building terraces is all there is to soil conservation.
Another example shows the difficulty of assessing Food For Work programmes. The visiting forestry specialist at an afforestation project said, "But you are planting the wrong species at the wrong time in the wrong place, and the survival rate will be almost zero". The local forester in charge of the project said, "I know. It hurts my professional pride too. But there are people starving in this District, and this project brings them food".
Like other incentives, it would be nice to do without FFW but there are times when it is useful. A comprehensive review of all aspects of Food Aid is given by Singer et al. (1987).
<section>9</section>
Appendixes
Appendix 1 - Results of project assessments
Appendix 2 - Summaries of the assessed projects
Appendix 3 - The evaluation method used in this study
Appendix 4 - Possible projects
Appendix 5 - References
Appendix 1 - Results of project assessments
RANKED LIST OF PROJECTS WITH SCORES
Overall^1
FAO^2
Sheets^3
Starting
Duration (Years)
Sponsor
B
C
D
E2
Allora
State
E1
Eppalock
State
E16
Kenya-SIDA
SIDA/A. Khan
F28
A. Khan
A. Khan
F2
Togo-FAO
FAO
E21
S. Korea
FAO
E15
Jamaica-FAO
FAO
E30
Hado-SIDA
SIDA
Fl
Tunisia
FAO
E3
Brazil
FAO
E31
TAWLD
Bank Aust.
E6
Tigray
War on Want
E19
Mutomo
DANIDA
E20
Machakos
EEC
E5
Ethiopia FFW
FEW
E4
Ethiopia FAO
FAO
E7
Gursum
Band-Aid/CARE
E27
Tinau
HELVETAS/GTZ
Ell
FISC
SIDA
E29
RDAP
Bank/EEC/
USAID/ODA
E8
Gambia
USAID
E33
TRIDEP
Bank/ODA
E13
Solo
FAO/WFP
E18
Baringo
Bank
F25
Phewa Tal
FAO
E9
Indore
ODA
E10
NWRADP
Bank
E17
EMI
ODA
E22
Thaba Bosiu
Bank/USAID
E14
Citanduy
USAID
E12
Khomokoana
FAO/SIDA
Projects with insufficient data for full assessment
E21
Korea
FAO
E23
Lesotho BASP
Many
E24
Lesotho LWRD
USAID
E26
Nepal Trishuli
FAO
E32
Thailand Mae Sa
FAO
Note:
^1 Arithmetic mean of scores on sheets B, C, and D.
^2 Out of 12
^3 Range from -2.0 to +2.0
EFFICIENCY OF ASSESSMENT
CHECK ASSESSMENTS
To test whether there were differences in the way individual assessors made their judgements, separate independent assessments were carried out by more than one person on a number of projects. On the whole the results were surprisingly in agreement. Some examples of assessment made by different people are shown below, with different assessors identified as A, B, C, etc. One interesting result is that assessments made by people who were directly involved in the project tended to give a lower score than the rating by evaluators not connected with the project. This is probably because they were rather more aware of the frustrations and difficulties and did not see the good points as clearly as an independent observer standing farther back.
Project Evaluation Sheets
FAO Score
B
C
D
Av.
E4 Ethiopia
A
B
C
E3 Brasil
A
D
E1 Eppalock
E
F
F1 Tunisia
A
G
H
Correlation with FAO score.
The overall rating from the four-page assessment was plotted against the simple six-point scoring method developed by the FAO Evaluation Service and used in the FAO Review of Field Programmes, which is included on Sheet D of the evaluation form. There is a good correlation, suggesting that the six-point score is effective for arriving at a simple and easy assessment of projects.
COMMENTS ON RESULTS
Differences between donors:
The results do not show any significant difference between the effectiveness of projects operated by multi-lateral agencies, bi-lateral agencies, and NGOs. There is some suggestion that the average of NGO projects is slightly better than the others but the number of projects involved is too small to read any significance into this. There is also the possibility that the average of World Bank projects is on the low side, but a number of the Bank projects are relatively old, and it is clear that the Bank has made major attempts, on the whole fairly successful, to identify and correct the problems which arose in Bank projects in the seventies. There is also a suggestion that the USAID projects included in this survey tend to have a slightly lower than average performance, but it would be unfair to attach any significance to this since the small sample may not be representative. The agency supplying the largest number of projects into the assessment is FAO for the obvious reason
that there was direct access to the documentation and to people involved. These projects show the widest range of assessments, but this is partly because it is a larger sample.
The correlation of the six-point FAO score was tested with each of the 3 separate scores on sheet B (Before), sheet C (During), and sheet D (After). In each case there is some correlation, but it is strongest with the scores of sheet B (Before). This reinforces the conclusion made in the main report that good design and planning of the project is one of the main requirements for success. In general, well planned projects have a good chance of being successful, projects with poor design and planning are seldom rescued by above average implementation.
The correlation was tested of success rate against the date when the project started, looking for a trend over time. The scatter is too wide for firm conclusions but it can be seen that in general the percentage of successful projects increases with time. In the 1970s four out of 16 projects were successful, in the '80s nine projects out of 16 were successful. On the whole it seems that agencies are learning from their experience, and projects are improving.
The correlation between duration of project in years, and the six-point FAO score was tested. Again there is a considerable scatter but confirmation that long-duration projects are more likely to be successful than short-duration projects.
- Of the 16 successful projects (a score of 6 or more), only 4 (25%) had a project duration of up to 5 years, and 12 (75%) had a project duration of more than 5 years.
- The 16 successful projects (score of 6 or more) had an average project life of 10 years, and the unsuccessful projects (score less than 6) had an average life of 5.8 years.
- There is a direct correlation between score and project duration, as shown in the following table.
Average Project Duration (years)
Number of Projects
Score (out of 12)
5 or less
16 or more
Appendix 2 - Summaries of the assessed projects
E1 Australia, Eppalock Catchment Soil Conservation Project, Victoria Soil Conservation Authority.
Objective: To stop siltation of the Eppalock reservoir. Area 82 700 ha, Mediterranean climate with MAR 625 mm.
Budget: Aust $ 1.26 M from Victoria State Cons. Auth. $ 1.32 M from landowners.
Duration: 1960-1975
E2 Australia, Soil Conservation Project, Allora Shire, Queensland, Soil Conservation Branch of Department of Primary Industries, and Local Authorities.
Objective: To develop over a period of at least 10 years an improved soil conservation plan for soil conservation works and improved cropping practices on a badly eroded area. Total area affected 9120 ha. Sub-tropical climate with MAR 710 mm.
Budget: Total costs A$ 20 M from Government, A$ 51 M from landholders.
Duration: 1973-1983 and continuing.
E3 Brazil, Soil and Water Conservation Support Programme, BRA/82/011 and Federal Ministry of Agriculture.
Objective: Institution building, to assist the development of a National Soil Conservation Programme by the Federal Government, with implementation through the State Governments.
Duration: 1982-1988
E4 Ethiopia, UNDP/FAO Project - Assistance to Soil and Water Conservation Programme, ETH/80/001, ETH/81/003, ETH/85/016. Cooperating agency Community, Forestry and Soil Conservation Development Department (CFSCDD) in the Department of Agriculture.
Objective: Institution building. Technical assistance to strengthen the Soil Conservation Department, with a substantial training component.
Duration: Phase 1 1981-1986, Phase 2 and 3 1987 - continuing.
Budget: total over 3 Phases, donor US$ 8 M, local costs Birr 5 M.
E5 Ethiopia, Rehabilitation of Forest, Grazing and Agricultural Land, WFP Ethiopia 2488, local agencies Forestry and Soil Conservation Department and WFP agency.
Objective: To provide food for work on construction of soil conservation terraces, tree planting and other erosion control measures, in the food-deficient regions of Ethiopia.
Duration: 1980-continuing in several phases.
Budget: total in first 3 Phases to 1984 was US$ 42.8 M. Total expenditure to 1989 US$ 105 M.
E6 Ethiopia, Assistance to Integrated Agricultural Programme for Settled Farmers in Tigray, War on Want cooperating with Tigray People's Liberation Front.
Objective: Technical assistance on soil conservation and agricultural development to rebel government of Tigray in drought-prone and famine areas of Northern Ethiopia.
Duration: 1986-continuing with interruptions from civil war.
Budget: details not available, allocation for soil and water conservation works was  1.4 M in 1984.
E7 Ethiopia, Gursum Land Use Project, Band-Aid operated through CARE and Ministry of Agriculture, RRC, and local authorities.
Objective: Mechanical soil conservation works (terraces) through FFW followed by improved agricultural practices.
Duration: 1986-1989 with probable extension 89-92.
Budget: donor budget US$ 1.5 M plus unknown amount of FFW paid by Canada. Donor funding for extension if approved additional US$ 1.9 M.
E8 The Gambia. Gambia Soil and Water Management, sponsored by USDA and SCS, cooperating with Soil and Water Management Unit within Ministry of Agriculture (A unit set up by the project and in effect a PMU.)
Objectives: Strongly institution-building and technical assistance for training. To create a soil conservation service which did not previously exist.
Duration: 1978-88 in 3 phases of 3, 2, and 5 years.
Budget: donor costs US$ 2.75 M, all grant.
E9 India. Indo-UK Dryland Farming Operational Research Project. Sponsor: ODA working through ICAR and Madya Pradesh University.
Objective: To demonstrate on a watershed scale improved agronomic practices together with soil conservation measures on vertisols of central India with 1500 mm of rain in a summer monsoon season.
Duration: 1974-1980.
Budget: Donor costs UK  0.5 M, plus similar local costs.
E10 Somalia. North-West Region Agricultural Development Project (NWRADP), financed IBRD, executed by PMU and local Ministry of Agriculture.
Objective: Integrated Rural Development Programme, technical assistance to programme of soil and water conservation and improved cropping practices in a low-potential region of North-West Somalia.
Duration: 1979-1984 for Phase 1, followed by Phase 2, 1984-1989.
Budget: For Phase 2, donor costs US$ 22.7 M, local costs US$ 7.3 M.
E11 Lesotho, Farm Improvement with Soil Conservation (FISC), SIDA cooperating with Conservation Department, Division of Technical Services, Ministry of Agriculture.
Objective: Technical assistance and support for soil conservation programme in 6 project areas, totalling approx. 5000 ha in Mohale's Hoek District in southern low rainfall area of Lesotho.
Duration: Phase 1 July 1985-December 1986, extended to 1988 and Phase 2 continuing.
E12 Lesotho, Khomokoana Project, funded by SIDA, execution by FAO cooperating with Ministry of Agriculture.
Objective: Integrated Rural Development Programme with considerable soil conservation input.
Duration: 1975-1980
Budget: Donor costs US$ 2 M, local costs not known.
E13 Indonesia, Upper Solo Watershed Management and Upland Development, UNDP/FAO, Project No. AG:DP/INS/72/006, includes WFP 648 from 1975 onwards, cooperating with Directorate of Reafforestation and Land Rehabilitation in Ministry of Forestry.
Objective: A programme of improved land use and farming practices with large component of construction of physical works under WFP. Large area of central Java with subtropical/tropical climate. Project area 1.7 M ha.
Duration: 1973-1976
Budget: donor costs US$ 1.1 M, local costs US$ 1.0 M.
E14 Indonesia, Watershed Management in Citanduy River Catchment, funded USAID and operated through PMU cooperating with local agencies.
Objective: An integrated programme of improved land use with subsidized improved farming practices and large component of soil and water conservation structures on model demonstration farms. Project area, 0.4 M ha in southern central Java with tropical climate.
Duration: Phase 1, late 1970s-1980, Phase 2, 1980-1985.
Budget: US aid US$ 23 M.
E15 Jamaica, Forestry Development and Watershed Management in the Upland Regions, FAO projects working with local agencies, JAM/67/505, GCP/JAM/005/NOR, JAM/78/006. Followed by USAID project in 1978-1983.
Objective: Technical assistance and institution-building over a long period with a considerable training component. A country-wide project, Caribbean tropical climate.
Duration: 1968-1973 with extension to 1976 and follow-up project 1980-1982.
Project costs not available.
E16 Kenya, Assistance to Soil Conservation Programme, funded by SIDA and operated through Division of Soil Conservation in Ministry of Agriculture.
Objective: A long-term programme of technical assistance and institution-building with support to the National Soil Conservation Programme.
Duration: 1974-continuing.
Budget: Annual SIDA budget (all grant) increasing from US$ 0.6 M in 1974 to US$ 3.2 M in 1988. Similar matching local costs.
E17 Kenya, Embu-Meru-Isiolo Arid and Semi-Arid Lands Programme, (EMI), ODA cooperating with Soil Conservation Department of Ministry of Agriculture. Some links with FAO/TCP/KEN/8803 and 8805.
Objective: A technical assistance programme of soil and water conservation in the dry areas of east central Kenya, in practice work limited to 7800 ha in Embu District and 5000 ha in Meru District.
Duration: 1981-1986
Budget: Annual UK budget approx. US$ 0.3 M.
E18 Kenya, Baringo Pilot Semi-Arid Areas Project (BPSAAP), World Bank funding through PMU working with Ministry of Agriculture.
Objective: To test improved soil and water conservation practices in the low-potential low-rainfall areas of north-west Kenya.
Duration: 1980-1984
Budget: US$ 6.5 M
E19 Kenya, Mutomo Soil and Water Conservation Project, funded by DANIDA through Ministry of Agriculture.
Objective: Soil and water conservation in arid south-east Kenya.
Duration: 1982-1987
Budget: Donor costs US$ 1.5 M and local costs US$ 0.2 M.
E20 Kenya, Machakos Integrated Development Programme (MIDP), funded by EEC, implemented by PMU working with Soil Conservation Department.
Objective: Integrated Rural Development including soil and water conservation in low to medium potential areas of Kenya. The Machakos District is 1.45 M ha with MAR 600 mm.
Duration: 1978/9-1984.
Budget: Annual budget 1981/82 for soil conservation component US$ 0.5 M.
E21 South Korea, Upland Development and Watershed Management Project, FAO Project ROK/67/522. Operated by PMU.
Objective: To demonstrate the economic feasibility of comprehensive watershed development and management, increasing agricultural productivity through improved soil and water management. The project area was a watershed of approx. 100 000 ha in each of 3 Provinces.
Duration: 1967-1973
Budget: US$ 5.2 M over 5 years.
E22 Lesotho, Taba Bosiu Rural Development Project, World Bank Project 361-LSO, linked to USAID project on soil conservation. Operated through PMU cooperating with Ministry of Agriculture.
Objective: Multi-factor rural development using soil and water conservation practices and improved farming. The project area was 12 000 ha, with summer rainfall of 800-1000 mm.
Duration: 1973-1979.
Budget: Costs World Bank US$ 5.6 M, USAID US$ 2.8 M, local costs US$ 4.2 M.
E23 Lesotho, Basic Agricultural Services Project (BASP), funded by World Bank and several other sponsors, administered through PMU working with Department of Agriculture.
Objective: To apply a nation-wide package of extension services.
Duration: 1977-1982
E24 Lesotho, Land and Water Resources Development Project (LWRD), mainly USAID input with contributions from ODA and SIDA. Implemented by a PMU within the Department of Agriculture.
Objective: A country-wide plan to improve and support the Soil Conservation Service, the Extension Service, and the Agricultural Research Service.
Duration: 1975-1983
Budget: USAID US$ 2.9 M, other donors US$ 3.0 M. and GOL costs of US$ 2 M.
E25 Nepal, Phewa Tal Integrated Watershed Management Project, UNDP/FAO Project NEP/74/020 and NEP/80/029 and NEP/85/008. Operated through a PMU working with 4 local Departments.
Objective: To apply soil conservation measures and improved agricultural practices and reafforestation within the mountainous Phewa watershed.
Duration: 1974-1985 in 2 phases.
Budget: donor costs US$ 4.4 M and local costs US$ 0.6 M.
E26 Nepal, Trishuli Watershed Development Project, FAO Project NEP/4/233, operated within the Ministry of Forestry.
Objective: To establish the most suitable approach to the protection and development of the hill areas including erosion control work, construction of wells for drinking water supply, and demonstration trials of crop and livestock production.
Duration: 1967-1970.
E27 Nepal, Tinaw Watershed Project, sponsored by Helvetas and GTZ, Project 4/GTZ/PN/76.2173.3. Operated by a PMU cooperating with the same four departments as Phewa Tal.
Objective: also the same as at Phewa Tal i.e. integrated development within the watershed.
Duration: 1978-1984, with extensions 1984-88, and 1988-90.
E28 Pakistan, The Aga Khan Rural Support Programme, mainly sponsored by the Aga Khan Foundation with funding from other agencies. Operated through a PMU working with all local agencies.
Objective: to develop an agricultural development programme for the dry mountainous areas of the extreme north of Pakistan.
Duration: 1982-1997 or longer.
Budget: US$ 8.3 M for the first 4 years.
E29 Swaziland, Rural Development Areas Programme (RDAP), a multi-donor programme sponsored by ODA, USAID, IBRD, ADB, EDF, and GOS. Operated by an independent PMU in selected areas, initially 4 increasing to 18.
Objective: Integrated rural development including improved land selection and use, livestock control, soil conservation works, and improvement of the whole rural infrastructure.
Duration: Phase 1, 1970-1976 and Phase 2, 1977-1983.
E30 Tanzania, Hifadhi Ardhi Dodoma (HADO), funded by SIDA and operated through the Ministry of Agriculture.
Objective: To halt erosion in the Dodoma Region by a policy of total stock exclusion and increased dependence on crop production.
Duration: 1973 continuing to at least 1996.
Budget: for Phase 2, 1986-1996 in Tanzania Shillings SIDA 38 M and local government 12 M.
E31 Thailand, The Thai-Australia-World Bank Land Development Project (TAWLDP), also called the Thailand Northern Upland Agriculture Project, funded initially by Australia and World Bank. Operated through a large PMU in contact with Ministry of Agriculture.
Objective: To develop an improved form of land use and agriculture for the medium rainfall hill land of northern Thailand.
Duration: Phase 1 (Australia) 1967-1986, Phase 2 with World Bank assistance 1979-continuing.
E32 Thailand, Mai Sae Integrated Watershed and Forest Land Use Project FAO Project No. THA/72/008. Operated by PMU within Conservation Department of Ministry of Agriculture.
Objective: To apply multi-component land use planning, improved forestry and agricultural practices and soil conservation works intensively within the small Mai Sae watershed in northern Thailand.
Duration: Phase 1, 1973-76, Phase 2, 1976-1981.
E33 Tanzania, Tabora Regional Integrated Development Project (TRIDEP) sponsored by World Bank, ODA, and other bilaterals.
Objective: A plan for the long-term development of the Tabora Region in Tanzania starting with detailed land use planning and soil survey followed through to recommended land use and farming practices.
Duration: 1978-1983
F1 Tunisia, Amnagements Agro-Sylvo-Pastoraux dans des Bassins Versants du Centre et du Nord-Ouest Tunisiens. UNDP funded Project No. TUN/81/004. Operated by FAO through local agencies DCS.
Objective: Integrated agricultural development in selected catchments in central and northwest Tunisia.
Duration: 1982-1984
F2 Togo, Soil Conservation Project, funded by UNDP and operated by FAO, Project No. TOG/83/009 and TOG/89/001. Operated by FAO staff working with local agencies INS-DSC.
Duration: Phase I 1984-1988
LIST BY COUNTRY OF PROJECTS ASSESSED
Date
Agency
% Soil Cons.
Australia
Eppalock
El
State SCS
Allora Shire
E2
State SCS
Brazil
Soil & Water Cons.
E3
FAO
Ethiopia
S & W Cons.
E4
FAO
Rehabilitation
E5
1981-Con
WFP/FFW
Tigray
E6
1986-Con
War on Want
Gursum
E7
Band-Aid/Care
Gambia
S & W Management
E8
USAID
India
Indo-UK
E9
ODA
Indonesia
Watershed Man. U. Solo
E13
WFP/FAO
Citanduy
E14
1970-Con
USAID
Jamaica
Forestry & w/shed man.
E15
FAO
Kenya
Assistance for S. Cons.
E16
1974-Con
SIDA
E.M.I. S & W Cons.
E17
ODA
Baringo Pilot SAAP
E18
W. Bank
Mutomo S & W.C.
E19
Danida
Machakos Integ.
E20
EEC
Lesotho
FISC
E11
1985-Con
SIDA
Leribe-Khomokoana
E12
FAO SIDA
Thaba Bosiu
E22
WB & USAID
BASP
E23
Bank, ODA, USAID
Land Water R.D.
E24
USAID, ODA, SIDA
Nepal
Phewa Tal Watershed
E25
FAO
Trishuli
E26
FAO
Tinau
E27
Helvetas/GTZ
Pakistan
Aga Khan Rural Support
E28
Aga Khan
Somalia
NWRADP
E10
W. Bank
South Korea
Upland Dev.
E21
FAO
Swaziland
RDAP
E29
USAID ODA W. Bank
Tanzania
Hado
E30
1973-Con
SIDA
TRIDEP
E33
Bank/ODA
Thailand
TAWLD
E31
1967-Con
W. Bank/Aust.
Mae Sa Int. W'Shed
E32
FAO
Togo
S.C. Project
F2
FAO
Tunisia
Land man.
F1
FAO
List by Country of Projects Assessed (Cont.)
Summary by region
Africa
Asia
S. America & Caribbean
Australia
Summary by donor
National and Bilateral Agencies
NGOs
Multilateral agencies
SIDA
War on Want
USAID
CARE
UNDP/FAO
UK, ODA
BANDAID
World Bank
National Agencies
Aga Khan F
WFP
Australia
EEC
Danida
GTZ
Helvetas
Appendix 3 - The evaluation method used in this study
Notes for using Project Evaluation Check Lists
1. There are five sheets.
A. Basic factual information about the project - labelled PROJECT DATA
B. Information relating to planning and preparation - labelled BEFORE
C. Information relating to implementation - labelled DURING
D. Information relating to monitoring and assessment, labelled AFTER
E. Information relating to training component, if any - labelled TRAINING
2. For each assessed project the checklist will be completed as fully as the data permits.
Some questions look only for a qualitative answer, yes, no, don't know.
Other questions look for a quantitative answer on a five part scale, where:
0 means neutral to the success/effectiveness of the project;
+1 means the factor made some contribution to the success of the project;
+2 means the factor made a strong contribution to the success of the project;
-1 means the factor was a minor handicap or difficulty;
-2 means the factor was a major handicap or difficulty.
Some questions look for a yes/no answer first and also invite a quantitative assessment.
3. Any additional relevant information can be written in on the most appropriate sheet, using the back if necessary.
4. Each project will be allocated a number when it is evaluated.
English language projects will be E1, E2 etc.
French language projects will be F1, F2 etc.
Spanish language projects will be S1, S2 etc.
5. The questions considered important, and answers looked for on the first run through are marked on Sheets A, B, C, and D with a solid vertical line at right hand side. Sheet E and other questions can be left for a second run if required.
6. How the sheets are quantified, questions weighted, and converted to an overall assessment of success will be finalized when all projects have been looked at.
SHEET A MARK 3 PROJECT DATA
Our Project Number......
Country......
Sponsor......
Title......
Sponsor's Project Number......
Local Agencies......
Duration Dates......
Delays or Extension......
Total Costs Donor US$......
Local US $......
Local......
Loan Terms......
Components as % of donor costs* or total costs*
* Delete one
Technical Assistance
Equipment
Training
Other
Main sources of information......
Other reports, on hand......
Other reports, not acquired......
People/institutional contacts......
SHEET B MARK 3 BEFORE
Our Project Number
Yes
No
Do not know
1. Who initiated?
Sponsor
Host
Neither, other
do we have it?
2. Planning sequence.
Was there a document for proposal or identification?
Yes/No
Preparation or evaluation?
Yes/No
Appraisal?
Yes/No
Agreement/Document?
Yes/No
3. Were there discussions
at political level (Govt.)?
at managerial level (Depts)?
with other Aid agencies?
with farmers?
Was there a National agric. development plan?
If so, was the project integrated into it?
How well could the local institutions cope
in terms of staff?
Material support (e.g. transport)?
local costs?
4. Objectives/targets
Was there an element of institution building?
Were the objectives well defined?
Were the objectives realistic?
Was the time span realistic?
5. Plans for evaluation
How good was the definition of targets?
How good was the definition or indicators/verifiers?
Were there specified assessment/evaluation dates?
Did evaluations take place as planned?
6. Was the climate favourable? e.g. social environment
Was there existing S. Cons. programme
Was there interest in S.C. among farmers?
7. General planning. Was the project
feasible?
well conceived?
compatible with local systems, institutions?
competing with other projects?
competing with other Depts?
Was there flexibility to change during the project?
Was there an annual workplan?
SHEET C MARK 3 DURING
Our project Number......
Donor Factors
Operational Mode
Yes
No
Do not know
through a new project management unit (PMU)?
through how many Depts?
Project provides
Building - houses
Offices
Transport - personal
trucks
Equipment - office
technical
earthmoving
farmers
Staff - expat T/O's
No
Man months
personality of leader
effectiveness of team approach
- within international
- within local staff
Policies
Was there flexibility within project?
How effective was donor back-up?
Were there plans for regular monitoring?
Did the monitoring happen as planned?
Local Factors
Strength of moral or practical support
at Central, political level
at Dept, managerial level
at District, project, field level
In farming community
Constraints
Local staff
number
level of experience
continuity of staffing
Roads
Transport
Financial - control, disbursement
Import/procurement
On-farm labour
Other
Both
Suitable T of R/defined duties and responsibilities lines of command, accountability
Int.
Local
Was technology Ok?
Was political climate Ok?
How did disbursement compare with planned
Yes
No
Was there payment or FFW on structures
SHEET D MARCH 3 AFTER
Our Project Number......
Repeat Section 5 from Sheet B - Evaluation plans
Yes
No
Do not know
How good was the definition of targets?
How good was the definition of indicators/verifiers?
Were there specified assessment/evaluation dates?
Did evaluations take place as planned?
Was monitoring adequate during?
Was assessment adequate during?
Was assessment adequate after?
Were components right?
What lessons learned?
What happened at end of project?
Govt continued the project
Farmers continued the practices
Maintenance of structures
Maintenance of admin
In retrospect,
did the country need/want it?
did the country profit from it?
have the resources to service it?
In retrospect,
did the farmers need/want it?
did the farmers profit from it?
have the resources to service it?
Define major bottlenecks, constraints...
Assessment using FAO criteria
Poor
Satisfactory
Good
Clarity of objective
Project design
Borrower support and involvement
Achievement of objectives
Output
Transfer of skills
Follow-up prospects
Any other overall assessments? (e.g. ERR for W. Bank)
SHEET E MARK 3 TRAINING
Our Project Number......
To be completed only if training is a significant component
1. Training component as % of donor costs
Planned Achieved
2. Formal programmes
Units: man-days* or % of donor costs,* or specify other*
* Delete as appropriate
In-country
Short < 1week
Medium 1 week to 1month
Long > 1month
Farmer
Technician
Professional
Out-of-country
Number of people sent
Specialist/Technical courses
1^st degree
academic graduate
study tours, other experience-gaining
3. Informal counterpart training
amount
effectiveness
4. Farmer training programmes
amount
effectiveness
How effectively was progress of the training programme monitored?
How were results of training assessed?
e.g. were students asked about effectiveness of the training?
Deficiencies or problems in training component
Appendix 4 - Possible projects
ALGERIA
Beni-Slimane Project.
AUSTRALIA
Eppalock Catchment Soil Conservation Project, Victoria.
Allora Shire Soil Conservation Project, Queensland.
Gooriannawa Valley Soil Conservation Project, New South Wales.
Ord River Reclamation Project, Western Australia.
Werriwa Soil Conservation Project, New South Wales.
BHUTAN
Agriculture and Irrigation Planning Project. ADB.
BRAZIL
Soil and Water Conservation, FAO.
Soil Conservation in Parana State.
BURKINA FASO
GERES Project.
First and second rural development projects. World Bank.
Agro-forestry Project.
Soil Conservation Project, IFAD.
Training Programme, EIER.
Fonds de l'eau et de l'quipement rural. National Programme.
Soil and Water Conservation, OXFAM.
CHINA
Strengthening of Soil and Water Conservation, Sichuan Province, EEC.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Natural Resources Management Project, USAID.
EL SALVADOR
Land Resources Study of Acelhuate River Catchment, ODA.
ECUADOR
Poza Honda Watershed Management Plan, FAO.
ETHIOPIA
Awash Valley Water Development, AfDB.
Second Agricultural Minimum Package Project, World Bank.
Drought Areas Rehabilitation Project, World Bank PADEP Projects.
Ethiopian Highlands Reclamation Scheme, FAO.
Rural Reclamation and Development Project, Shewa and Welo, WFP.
Tigray Project, War on Want.
Gursum Land Use Project, BANDAID, CARE.
Agroforestry Project, BANDAID.
Rural Development, BANDAID.
Rural Development, Jarso, BANDAID.
Agri-Service Projects, NOVIB.
Conservation Project, SIDA.
GAMBIA
Soil and Water Management, USAID/USDA/SCS.
Gambia Rural Development Project, World Bank.
GUATEMALA
Soil Conservation Project, USAID/USDA/SCS.
Agroforestry Project, USAID.
HAITI
Land and Water Development, WFP.
Project Rivire Blanche, Israel.
Soil Conservation, USAID.
HONDURAS
Integrated Watershed Management, FAO.
Natural Resources Management Project.
Guinope Integrated Development Project.
INDIA
Himalayan Watershed Management Project, World Bank.
India-UK Project.
Sukomajri Project.
Social Forestry, SIDA.
INDONESIA
Watershed Management in the Upper Solo River Basin, WFP.
Upper Solo Watershed Management and Upland Development Project, FAO.
Land Capability Appraisal Project, FAO.
Land Use Planning and Watershed Management Training, FAO.
Citanduy Watershed Management Project, USAID.
Upland Agriculture and Conservation Project (UACP), USAID.
JAMAICA
Forestry and Watershed Project, FAO.
JORDAN
Soil and Water Conservation, FAO.
KENYA
Desertification Control, DANIDA.
Rural Development Turkana, NORAD.
African Land Development Programme, ODA.
Kikuyu Area Land Consolidation, ODA.
Embu/Meru/Isiolo Soil and Water Conservation Project, ODA.
Masinga Catchment Area Soil and Water Conservation Programme. EEC.
Machakos Integrated Development Programme, EEC.
Arid and Semi-arid Land Programme (ASAL), World Bank, USAID.
Pilot Soil and Water Conservation Project, Embu/Embere, FAO.
Katilu Project, FAO.
Baringo Pilot Semi-arid Area Project, World Bank.
Shinyanga Rural Integrated Programme, World Bank.
Winam Gulf Conservation Project, Canada.
Mutomo Soil and Water Conservation in Kenya, SIDA.
Gura Project, SIDA.
Turkana Project, NORAD.
KOREA, REPUBLIC OF
Upland Development and Watershed Management, FAO.
Watershed Development Project, World Bank.
LESOTHO
Projects before Independence
Tebe-Tebeng Valley Pilot Project Scheme,
Taung Reclamation Scheme.
Farm Mechanization Scheme.
Mejametalana Improvement Area.
Thaba-Phatsoa Improvement Area.
Projects after Independence
Thaba Bosiu Rural Development Project, World Bank.
Senqu River Agricultural Extension Project, FAO.
Leribe-Khomokoana Soil and Water Conservation, FAO.
Thaba Tseke Mountain Development Project, CIDA.
Land and Water Resource Development Project, USAID.
Liphiring Integrated Project.
Join Hands Ratau.
Lesotho Woodlot Project.
Land Conservation and Range Development Project, USAID.
Mohale's Hoek, Maphutseng Valley, WFP.
Lesotho Agricultural Production and Institutional Support Project (LAPIS), USAID.
Formulation of Watershed Strategy, FAO.
MALAWI
Lilongwe Land Development Project, ODA.
Kasungu Flue Cured Tobacco Project, UK, CDC.
Lunzu-Lirangwe Land Development Project.
MALI
National Soil Conservation Programme.
MAURITANIA
Desertification Control, DANIDA.
MEXICO
Soil and Water Conservation, Mexico, USDASCS.
MOROCCO
LOUKKOS Watershed Management Project, FAO.
NEPAL
Phewa Tal Watershed Project, FAO.
Trisuli Watershed Management Project.
Tinaw Watershed Management Project, Swiss Aid.
Resource Conservation and Utilisation Project (RCUP), USAID.
NIGER
Keita Project, FAO.
Majjia Valley Project.
Soil and Water Conservation Project, IFAD.
PAKISTAN
Aga Khan Rural Support Programme.
Watershed Management of the Hazara District, WFD.
Rural Integrated Development Project, FAO.
PERU
Soil Conservation, Peru, USAID.
PHILIPPINES
Palawan Integrated Area Development Project (PIADP), EEC.
Highland Agricultural Development Project, ADB.
Multiple-use Forest Management Project, FAO.
SENEGAL
Dune Fixation, FAO.
Cereals Production 2, USAID.
SOMALIA
Sabaale Settlement Scheme, NOVIB.
Northwest Somalia Agricultural Development Project, World Bank.
Erigavo Erosion Control Project, OXFAM.
SRI LANKA
Integrated Rural Development Project, Hambantota, NORAD.
Reorganization of National Research for Agriculture, FAO.
SUDAN
Qala and Nahel Refugee Settlement Programme, NOVIB
Tree Planting Project, BANDAID.
SWAZILAND
Rural Development Areas Programme, Multi-donor.
TANZANIA
Hado Soil and Water Conservation Project, SIDA.
Tabora Regional Integrated Development Project, TRIDEP, World Bank.
Land Use Planning in Tabora Region, ODA.
Support to Soil and Water Conservation in Tanzania, IFAD.
THAILAND
Thai-Australia-World Bank Land Development Project (TAWLD).
Mae Sa Integrated Watershed and Forest Land Use Project, FAO.
Rainfed Agricultural Intensification Project, USAID.
Mae Khaem, USAID.
TUNISIA
Amnagements Agro-Sylvo-Pastoreaux dans des Bassins Versants.
VENEZUELA
Conservation Subsidy, FAO.
Valles Altos Project, USAID.
ZAMBIA
Soil Conservation in Eastern Province, SIDA.
Integrated Rural Development Project, ODA.
SOURCES OF INFORMATION USED IN THIS STUDY
Institutional Reviews
Number of Agricultural Projects Reviewed
World Bank 10th Audit
(total of 994 projects over 5 years)
World Bank 11th Audit
World Bank 12th Audit
World Bank (Barnes & Olivares)
FAO Evaluation Unit
(over 5 years)
FAO Investment Centre
ODA 10 year Review
ODA Review of African projects
USAID and USDA/SCS
various
app. 60
Books with case studies
Cassen
Harrison
Conroy and Litvinoff
PANOS
Moldenhauer and Hudson
This project
Data collected on English language projects
Data collected on French language projects
Personal involvement by principal author and other evaluators
Total
Appendix 5 - References
All Party Parliamentary Group on Overseas Development, 1985, "UK Aid to African Agriculture". ODI, London.
Balacs P., 1985, Rural Development in Africa: A synthesis of project experience. EV 400. ODA, London.
Bunch R., 1988, Guinope Integrated Development Program, Honduras. In: The Greening of Aid: Sustainable Livelihoods in Practice. Eds. Conroy C. and Litvinoff M. Earthscan Publications, London. Ch 1, p44.
Butcher D., 1988, Human and Institutional Development. In: The Greening of Aid. Conroy C. and Litvinoff M. (eds). Earthscan Publications, London. Ch 5, p195.
Casley D.J. and Kumar K., 1987, Project Monitoring and Evaluation in Agriculture. World Bank, Washington DC.
Casley D.J. and Kumar K., 1988, The Collection, Analysis, and Use of Monitoring and Evaluation Data. World Bank, Washington DC.
Cassen R., 1986, Does Aid Work? Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Conroy C. and Litvinoff M. (eds)., 1988, The Greening of Aid: Sustainable Livelihoods in Practice. Earthscan Publications, London.
Douglas M.G. and Lai K.C., 1988, Conservation Project Design. Soil and Water Conservation and Land Utilization Programme, SADCC Coordination Unit. Maseru, Lesotho.
FAO., 1985 Ethiopian Highlands Reclamation Study. UTF/ETH/037/ETH Executive Summary. Rome.
FAO., 1986, African agriculture: the next 25 years. Rome.
FAO., 1987, Review of Field Programmes 1986-87. Report C87/4. Rome.
FAO., 1988, Problems in Agricultural Project Design. Investment Centre Staff Paper 112/88 DDC Gen 13/SP. Rome.
Fowler A., 1988, Non-governmental Organisations in Africa: Achieving Comparative Advantage in Relief and Micro-development. Discussion Paper 249, Institute of Development Studies. Brighton, UK.
Goodman L.J and Love R.N., 1980, Project Planning and Management. Pergamon, New York.
Harrison P., 1987, The Greening of Africa: Breaking through in the Battle for Land and Food. Paladin Grafton Books, London.
IFAD., 1985, IFAD Special Programme for Sub-Saharan African countries affected by drought and desertification. EB/85/24/R16 25 March 1985. Rome.
IFAD., 1986, Special Programme for Sub-Saharan Africa. Ethiopia Formulation Mission. Rome.
Lynn J and Jay A. (eds)., 1984, The Diaries of a Cabinet Minister, Ch. 16, The Challenge. Guild Pub. Co., London.
Moldenhauer W.C. and Hudson N.W. (eds)., 1988, Conservation Farming on Steep Lands. Soil and Water Conservation Society, Ankeny, Iowa.
Morgan R.P.C. and Rickson R.J., 1989, Does Europe need a soil conservation policy? Paper presented to Inaugural Meting of the World Association of Soil and Water Conservation in Europe. Coventry Polytechnic, UK. 3 Jan. 1989.
Morris J.C.H. 1981 A synopsis of reviews of six African rural development projects. Internal evaluation report. ODA, London.
Morris J.C.H., 1985, How to integrate for success: Do integrated rural development projects really work? In: Int. Agric. Development. June 1985 p 15-17.
Murray G. F. Terraces, trees, and the Haitian peasant: An assessment of 25 years of erosion control 1979 in rural Haiti. USAID/Haiti. AID-521-C-99. October 1979. Washington DC.
ODA., 1983, The Lessons of Experience: Evaluation Work in ODA. HMSO. London.
ODI., 1988, Notes on discussion papers 16 to 23; In: Newsletter 18, May 1988. Agric. Admin. Unit. London.
PANOS., 1987, Towards Sustainable Development. Proceedings of Nordic Conference on Environment and Development at Saltsjobaden, Stockholm. Panos Institute, London.
Rees C.P., 1988, Planning Techniques for Sustainable Development. In: The Greening of Aid: Sustainable Livelihoods in Practice. Conroy C. and Litvinoff M. (eds). Earthscan Publications, London. Ch 4, p147-161.
Sanders D.W., 1988, Summary of Workshop Discussions. In: Conservation Farming on Steep Lands, Moldenhauer W.C. and Hudson N.W. (eds). Soil and Water Cons. Soc., Ankeny, Iowa. p275-282
Shaxson T.F., 1988, Conserving soil by stealth. In: Conservation Farming on Steep Lands, Moldenhauer W.C. and Hudson N.W. (eds). Soil and Water Cons. Soc., Ankeny, Iowa. p9.
Shaxson T.F, Hudson N.W, Sanders D.W., Roose E. and Moldenhauer W.C. Land Husbandry, 1989, A Framework for Soil and Water Conservation. Soil and Water Cons. Soc., Ankeny, Iowa.
Singer H, Wood J.B. and Jennings, 1987, A Food Aid: The challenge and the opportunity. OUP, Oxford.
Unesco. Project evaluation: problems of methodology. Paris. 1984
World Bank., 1984, 10th Annual Review of Project Performance Audit Results. Report No. 5248 Vol III. Washington DC.
World Bank., 1985a, Annual Review of Project Performance Results, 11th Audit Review. Report No. 5859 Washington DC. p38-43.
World Bank., 1985b, Sustainability of Projects: First Review of Experience. Report No. 5718. Washington DC.
World Bank., 1986, Annual Review of Project Performance Results 1985. 12th Audit Review. Washington DC.
Other Reading
Barnes D.F. and Olivares J., 1988, Sustainable Resource Management in Agricultural and Rural Development Policies: A Review of Bank Policies, Procedures, and Results. World Bank, Environmental Department, Working Paper No. 5. Washington DC.
Cracknell B.E. (Ed) The Evaluation of Aid Projects and Programmes. ODA, London.
Dasgupta P. Sen, A.K. and Marglin S.A., 1972, Guidelines for Project Evaluation. Project Formulation and Evaluation Series No. 2, UNIDO, Vienna.
FAO., 1984, Guidelines for the evaluation of technical cooperation projects. Evaluation service, Rome.
FAO., 1986, Review of Field Programmes 1980-1985. FAO, Rome.
Hansen J.R., 1978, Guide to Practical Project Appraisal: Social benefit-cost analysis in developing countries. Project Formulation and Evaluation Series No. 3. UNIDO, Vienna.
IFAD., 1986, Soil and Water Conservation in Sub-Saharan Africa. Issues and Options. Africa Division, Rome.
ODA., 1986, The evaluation activities of the ODA. 1976-1985. EV371. London.
Seckler D., 1987, Issues in economic evaluation of soil and water conservation programmes. In: Land Degradation and Society. Blaikie P. and Brookfield H. (eds). Methuen, London.
USAID. Evaluation Handbook, 2nd edition. USAID Office of programme evaluation MC1026.1 1974 Supplement 11. Washington DC.
WFP., 1984, Report of the Executive Director on Food Aid for Soil Conservation and Watershed Management. WFP Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes. 18th Session, Rome, 29.10.84-7.11.84. Ag. Item II Int. eval and term. reports. WFP/CFA: 18/11 Add. Rome.
FAO SOILS BULLETINS
Soils of the arid zones of Chile, 1965 (E**)
Survey of soils laboratories in 64 FAO member countries, 1965 (E**)
Guide on general and specialized equipment for soils laboratories, 1966 (E**)
Guide to sixty soil and water conservation practices, 1966 (E**)
Selection of soil for cocoa, 1966 (E** F** S**)
Aerial photo interpretation in soil survey, 1967 (C** E** F** S**)
A practical manual of soil microbiology laboratory methods, 1967 (E**)
Soil survey interpretation and its use, 1967 (E**)
The preparation of soil survey reports, 1970 (E** F** S**)
Physical and chemical methods of soil and water analysis, 1970 (E* F* S*)
Soil fertility investigations on farmers' fields, 1970 (E* F* S*)
An study of the response of wheat to fertilizers, 1971 (E)
Land degradation, 1971 (C** E**)
Improving soil fertility in Africa, 1971 (E** F**)
Legislative principles of soil conservation, 1971 (E*)
Effects of intensive fertilizer use on the human environment, 1972 (E*)
Trace elements in soils and agriculture, 1972 (E* F* S**)
Guide to the calibration of soil tests for fertilizer recommendations, 1973 (E* F** S**)
Soil survey interpretation for engineering purposes, 1973(E* F** S**)
Fertilizer legislation, 1973 (E** S*)
Calcareous soils, 1973 (E** F**)
Approaches to land classification, 1974 (E**)
Management properties of ferralsols, 1974 (E*)
Shifting cultivation and soil conservation in Africa, 1974 (E** F* S*)
Sandy soils, 1975 (E*)
Planning and organization of fertilizer development in Africa, 1975(E**)
Organic materials as fertilizers, 1975 (E* F** S**)
S.I. Units and nomenclature in soil science, 1975 (E*)
Land evaluation in Europe, 1975 (E**)
Soil conservation for developing countries, 1976 (A* C** E* F** S**)
Prognosis of salinity and alkalinity, 1976 (E*)
A framework for land evaluation, 1976 (C** E** F* S**)
Soil conservation and management in developing countries, 1977 (E* F*)
Assessing soil degradation, 1977 (E**)
Organic materials and soil productivity, 1977 (C** E*)
Organic recycling in Asia, 1978 (C** E*)
Improved use of plant nutrients, 1978 (C** E*)
Soil and plant testing and analysis, 1980 (E*)
Soil and plant testing as a basis of fertilizer recommendations, 1980 (E** S**)
Salt-affected soils and their management, 1988 (A* E*)
China: recycling of organic wastes in agriculture, 1977 (E* F* S*)
China: azolla propagation and small-scale biogas technology, 1978(E* F* S*)
Soil survey investigations for irrigation, 1979 (C** E* F*)
Organic recycling in Africa, 1980 (E*)
Watershed development with special reference to soil and water conservation, 1979 (C** E* F* S*)
Organic materials and soil productivity in the Near East, 1982 (E* with Arabic summary)
Blue-green algae for rice production - a manual for its promotion, 1981 (E*)
Le recyclage des rsidus agricoles organiques en Afrique, 1982 (F*)
Micronutrients and the nutrient status of soils: a global study, 1982 (E*)
Application of nitrogen-fixing systems in soil management, 1982 (C** E* F* S*)
Keeping the land alive: soil erosion - its causes and cures, 1983 (E* F* S*)
El reciclaje de materias orgnicas en la agricultura de Amrica Latina, 1983 (S**)
Guidelines: land evaluation for rainfed agriculture, 1983 (C*** E* F* S*)
Improved production systems as an alternative to shifting cultivation, 1984 (E* F* S*)
Tillage systems for soil and water conservation, 1984 (C*** E* F*)
Guidelines: land evaluation for irrigated agriculture, 1985 (C*** E* F* S*)
Soil management: compost production and use in tropical and subtropical environments, 1987 (E* F* S***)
Soil and water conservation in semi-arid areas, 1987 (C*** E* F*)
Guidelines: land evaluation for extensive grazing, 1991 (E*)
Nature and management of tropical peat soils, 1988 (E*)
Soil conservation for small farmers in the humid tropics, 1989 (E* S*)
Radioactive fallout in soils, crops and food, 1989 (E* F*)
Management of gypsiferous soils, 1990 (A*** E*)
Micronutrient assessment at the country level: an international study, 1990 (E*)
A study of the reasons for success or failure of soil conservation projects, 1991 (E*)
Availability: December 1995
Ar
Arabic
C
Chinese
E
English
F
French
P
Portuguese
S
Spanish
FAO Soils Bulletins are available through FAO Sales Agents or directly from Distribution and Sales Section, FAO, Vialle delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy
