<title>Wholesale markets</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
Wholesale marketing systems for fruit, vegetables and other fresh foodstuffs, such as livestock and fish, are often inadequate. They neither maximize benefits to producers, nor to consumers. Experience demonstrates that there are substantial benefits to be gained from giving positive encouragement to the development of more professional approaches to the provision of marketing infrastructure where wholesalers can purchase produce from large numbers of assembled farmers, or their agents, and in turn sell their purchases to retailers.
Governments can address the problem of inadequate infrastructure by undertaking development programmes which reorganize institutional marketing arrangements, create facilities at new sites or improve existing services. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) has over a number of years been involved with providing technical assistance to governments to develop improved marketing organizations.
There is a tendency that these improvement programmes become too elaborate and costly, therefore jeopardizing their financial and economic viability The cause of this problem is mainly the poor definition of project objectives and the preparation of an inadequate development brief. Problems also arise because of a lack of communication between the various parties involved with development. I he programmes, of necessity, are initiated by one group of professionals, typically agricultural economists and planners, but implemented by a group of construction oriented professionals, such as architects and engineers. There is substantial background technical literature on the subject of wholesale market design, but very little guidance is available, in a concise and comprehensive form, directly oriented to the needs of such administrators and planners, so enabling them to carry on a constructive dialogue with design professionals.
This manual has been compiled to fill this gap and to provide a systematic methodology based on the sequence of steps normally adopted in the development process The manual should be of practical value, both to senior professionals and to technicians, in undertaking marketing and engineering surveys, in the preparation of feasibility studies and master plans, and in formulating proposals for the provision of physical facilities. Such studies may be directly undertaken by government agencies or marketing authorities or by consultants appointed to assist them. The
manual also provides guidance on the monitoring of market improvement studies and the preparation of appropriate terms of reference that can be used for briefing consultants.
Although the manual is not directly involved with subjects such as market institutions, management, operations and regulation these issues are broadly outlined as they have a significant impact on the physical environment. No development programme should be initiated without investigating these subjects. Other matters covered in the manual include consumer demand projections, implementation issues, financial and economic feasibility, and the justification for the provision of specialized facilities, such as cold storage.
The manual partly replaces the previous guide prepared by FAO (H.J.Mittendorf, 1976. Planning of urban wholesale markets for perishable food). As a background to this manual and for a comprehensive view of the whole subject of marketing improvement the FAO Economic and Social Development Series Bulletin No. 37 :l C. Abbott, 1986. Marketing improvement in the developing world) should be consulted.
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
In the nature of preparing a planning and design manual which covers a number of professional fields it is inevitable that it should draw from a wide variety of published sources, including textbooks, official handbooks, consultants' reports and manufacturers' information. The primary information sources are listed in a bibliography at the end of the manual and the author gratefully acknowledges these sources. Where diagrams and other material are reproduced these are by the kind permission of the authors. Many colleagues and friends provided material for the manual, either directly or through published reports and working papers.
Reference material was made available by the FAO library in Rome and the libraries in London of the Royal Geographical Society, the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors and the Architectural Association. The author is particularly grateful to the following individuals for supplying information and illustrative material: G. Schuetz (FAO Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean, Santiago, Chile), K. Harrison (Agricultural Marketing Organization, Amman, Jordan), K.B. Atkins (Director, Commercial Services, Birmingham City Council), C.Y. Lee (Korea), HJ. Mittendorf (former Chief of the FAO Marketing and Credit Service), J. Novoa (FAO Rome) and C. Ungkarpla-Ong (Director, Cooperative Promotion Department, Bangkok, Thailand). The author is responsible for all editorial changes to the material used.
Continuous encouragement and constructive advice on the contents of the manual was provided by E. Seidler and A. Shepherd of the FAO Marketing and Credit Service.
<section>3</section>
Part A - Introduction
The following two chapters broadly review the background to wholesale marketing, how it is evolving and the design approaches that can be adopted in formulating projects for the construction of new markets and the improvement of existing markets.
Although much has been written on the subject of wholesale marketing, there is a dearth of information on the practical aspects of market planning. There is a particular need for a simplified methodology for planning and design which would act as a "drawing-board aid" and provide a systematic approach to the preparation of development proposals. For general application, a manual needs to be very broad in scope, taking into account the wide range of issues (economic, social, environmental, planning, engineering and management) that are involved with any market expansion and improvement programme.
1. Changing role of wholesale markets
Food is the most basic of human needs In less-developed countries any improvement in food marketing will have a significant impact on the poorer sections of the community. The proportion of the household budget spent on food for lower income families tends to be much higher than for the wealthy and may be between 50 - 60 percent of the total family income. For the very poor, expenditure on food may rise to 70 - 80 percent.
The function of wholesale markets
The consumption and production of marketed food are spatially separated. Production is generally in rural areas and consumption primarily in urban areas. Marketing is the process that overcomes this separation, allowing produce to be moved from an area of surplus to one of need. The concern of this manual is the planning and design of physical infrastructure that will be required for part of this process, the wholesale marketing of fresh produce, primarily fruits and vegetables.
The purpose of wholesaling. Food reaches the consumer by a complex network, involving production, assembly, sorting, reassembly, distribution and retail stages. A simplified diagram showing this process is illustrated in Figure 1. The social institution or mechanism that forms the linkage between the producer (farmer) and the retailer is the assembly and wholesale trading system, which enables farmers to sell in small quantities and purchasing by traders and wholesalers to be made in bulk.
Figure 1 The operation of a food marketing system
Figure 2 illustrates how this process operates. Without wholesalers, retailer would need to purchase directly from farmers, involving many minor transactions. With both rural assembly and wholesale markets, the number of transactions is reduced and the marketing process simplified. In this case, the retailer does not need to concern himself with any of the sorting, reassembly or distribution functions and concentrates solely on selling to consumers.
Wholesaling facilitates the economic function of buying and selling (usually termed as "price formation") by allowing the forces of supply and demand to converge to establish a single price for a commodity. The assembler or wholesaler may also perform a storage and warehousing function, as well as allowing economies of scale to be obtained in the transportation of produce from farm to market. The people involved in wholesaling can act simply as merchants, buying and selling produce, be brokers dealing in orders rather than goods, be commission agents (or factors) acting for the producers (and without title to the produce) or be export/import agents, only dealing in foreign trade.
Figure 2 Impact of wholesaling
How food reaches consumers. In a rural subsistence economy the source of food mainly comes from what is grown on the farmers' own land, supplemented if possible by purchases in local rural markets. For urban areas the sources of food are more diverse and will vary greatly depending on economic and cultural factors. The most obvious source will be market stallholders or conventional retailers operating from fixed premises, who will receive their supply from wholesalers and, perhaps, directly c from producers.
In less-developed economies, sources of supply other than from formal retailers are frequently of equal significance and are particularly important for the urban poor. There is often a petty commodity or informal sector, which is largely carried out by hawkers, who typically supply fresh and cooked produce. There is usually also subsistence production within the city from household or backyard gardens.
Production from household gardens. In some Chinese cities over 85 percent of the food consumed is grown within the municipal boundaries (although these cities do have extensive administrative areas). These are rather extreme cases but figures of 10 - 30 percent are quite common. In Jakarta, for instance, the household's own production accounts for around 18 percent of the total consumed, although this varies with income and occupation of the household head. Surveys in Western countries have also concluded that production from kitchen gardens makes a significant contribution to the household diet, with 10 -20 percent of the domestic plot area often being given over to food production.
International trends in wholesale and retail marketing
Wholesale markets develop in a number of of stages. They start as general markets, then become more specialized by trading in a limited range of produce. A later stage is to deal with samples of produce and finally to transact only graded produce. A recent trend in Western Europe and the USA is to by-pass the wholesale market system. Direct links are created between producers and supermarket chains, usually by means of contract farming arrangements.
Very few new wholesale markets have been created in developed countries in the last decade, although old markets have been relocated to new sites. Those that already exist have tended to also attract warehouses for integrated food distribution, changing their role to "food centers" (in the USA) and including other non-fresh food products. Wholesale markets still have a role in the marketing of horticultural produce but the traditional fresh meat and fish wholesale markets, particularly those dealing with live produce, are generally being closed down in major urban centres. rends in retailing. In less developed countries the retail sector will Lend to be located in traditional markets and small-scale shops, but with the growth of integrated food distribution systems the use of these facilities is likely to decrease. Supermarkets and hypermarkets will become more important sources of supply. A typical example of the changes in food distribution that are likely to occur with
economic development is illustrated in Figure 3.
Urbanization. and trends in consumption . With rapid urbanization and increases in income, the general long-term trend in food distribution of less-developed countries will be for per caput consumption of horticultural produce to rise, accompanied by changes in dietary preferences, often along Western lines. Expenditure on food becomes increasingly elastic, allowing discretionary purchases of non-staple, often imported, foodstuffs.
Changes in work patterns, particularly the employment of women, and the impact of technological innovations in post-harvest handling, food processing and storage, including the use of domestic refrigerators, tends to encourage the development of one-stop shopping at supermarkets, usually on a once-a-week basis. In Hong Kong, for example, the number of supermarkets grew from 62 in the mid 1970s to 655 by the mid 1980s, when they accounted for around 55 percent of retail food sales. This rejects what has occurred in Western Europe. In Sweden supermarket sales of vegetables in 1990 accounted for 90 percent of the total, whilst in England, France and the Netherlands they were around 55 percent. Supermarket sales in Spain were only around 30 percent on average, but higher for imported produce and lower for local produce.
Types of wholesale markets
Markets can be viewed in economic terms by the degree of competition that exists within them. This ranges from "perfect" competition when there is a large number of buyers and sellers who have a perfect knowledge of demand, supply and prices, to "imperfect" markets when a single firm or individual is dominating the market, either by "monopoly" (a single seller) or "monopsony" (a single buyer). A more common situation is one of "oligopoly" (few sellers) or "oligopsony" (few buyers). Markets can also be viewed by their degree of public intervention. This ranges from unregulated markets to fully regulated markets which trade in accordance with rules and regulations (see Chapter 9).
This manual is, however, primarily concerned with the physical location and functioning of the wholesale marketing system. The kinds of markets considered can be broadly classified into two types: Secondary and Terminal Wholesale Markets. These markets are exclusively, or at least predominantly, involved with wholesale produce and transactions for the sale of incoming produce are generally between farmers or traders and wholesalers.
Figure 3 Evolution of food distribution systems
Secondary wholesale markets. These markets are located in district or regional cities and take the bulk of their produce from rural assembly markets located in production areas, where the transactions are small scale and usually take place between farmers and traders. The distinction between rural assembly markets and secondary wholesale markets is often not clear. The difference is that secondary wholesale markets are in permanent operation (rather than being seasonal in nature or dealing in specialized produce), larger volumes of produce are traded than at the rural assembly markets and specialized functions may be present, such as commission agents and brokers.
Terminal wholesale markets. These markets are located in major metropolitan areas, where produce is finally channelled to consumers through trade between wholesalers and retailers. Produce may also be assembled for export. The merchants tend to be well organized and a commodity exchange may exist for forward trading. A variant on terminal markets are markets located at major ports (or a border railroad or sometimes an airport) dealing exclusively with import and export of produce.
Nature of market design problems. Markets may share a number of characteristics. They may act as the terminal market for a regional city but also provide facilities for the assembly of produce destined for other locations, both within the same province or district, or other parts of the country or for export. Although the scale of secondary and terminal wholesale markets, in terms of the volumes of produce traded, may be different there are many resemblances. They both perform similar wholesale functions, the distinction between them being their location and the scale of their catchment areas. Secondary wholesale markets are essentially rural or located in a small city, with local catchment areas, while terminal wholesale markets are urban, with regional or national catchment areas.
Design problems that are unique to secondary wholesale markets may be related to seasonal peaks in production and the provision of farmers' markets, aimed at a specific group of users (and often introduced to change the operation of existing marketing channels). To tackle the problems of secondary wholesale markets requires a full understanding of their local context, including the regional road system, the location of production areas, the seasonal variation in production volumes and their relationship to primary assembly markets in rural areas.
The problems of terminal wholesale markets are usually ones of congestion caused by an unsuitable location or by an inappropriate mixture of wholesale and retail functions. Traditionally, wholesale markets were built adjacent to city centres, located at a focal point of the inter-city transport facilities and close to the main retailing areas. Population growth, changes in urban land-use patterns and the development of modern transport systems have all had an influence on the suitability of existing and proposed wholesale market sites. A recognition of urban planning problems is therefore essential to understand the growth of terminal wholesale markets.
However, from a planning point of view secondary and terminal wholesale markets can be treated in a similar way. They tend to share common problems in the types of data that need to be collected in order to analyse them and in the methodology that is used in preparing layouts and designing facilities. This applies whether a new location is being proposed or an improvement to existing services is being undertaken.
Is it possible to standardize wholesale markets?
It would be very convenient if a standard model for wholesale market development was available for use in less-developed countries. This is generally possible if you look at other specialised contemporary building types, such as international air passenger or cargo terminals, medical operating theatres, industrial laboratories or warehouses using mechanical handling equipment. Although the design approach will depend on the climate of a particular region, the space standards used for designing such building types will generally be the same whether the facility is in Alaska or Calcutta. The overall organization will be broadly similar and so will be the level of sophistication of equipment. The use of modern management techniques will also be broadly applicable, irrespective of the location.
Special characteristics of wholesale markets. Although differences may exist, say between London and Rome, modern wholesale markets in developed countries have much in common. In terms of layout and circulation they are similar to hypermarkets or to large-scale distribution warehouses. They need to handle efficiently the input and output of large volumes of produce and to provide facilities for the sale of that produce. So why are wholesale markets in less-developed countries different? The distinction is largely that neither the inputs into nor outputs from the market, in terms of the types of produce, how it is transported and its quality and quantity can be standardized in the manner that is possible in a developed country. This has a significant impact on both the planning of the market site and on the design of its buildings.
"Ideal markets" There are a number of general principles by which "ideal" markets should be conceptualized. Textbooks on marketing economics often refer to them as the "golden rules". The reality of wholesale markets in less-developed countries is that most of these principles have not been fulfilled. It is necessary to invert the principles in order to understand what occurs in such markets:
 produce is not cleaned before it is brought to the market;
 different qualities of produce are not sold separately;
 produce is not graded before being sold;
 produce is not sold by standard weights or in standard packages;
. produce is sold with a lack of price information, creating an atmosphere of uncertainty; and
 storage facilities are not used or arc not available and immediate sales have to be made.
The main concern of a market development programme should therefore be to attempt to reverse a number of these factors in order that improved conditions can be obtained for both producers and consumers. As discussed in the section on international trends, markets need to develop in a number of stages. They start as general-purpose markets, then become more specialized by dealing with a limited range of produce and only later trade in graded produce, selling by samples as in Western Europe and the USA.
It is virtually impossible to move rapidly to more sophisticated practices when the producers arc small, the buyers arc not organized and the management skills for running a complex marketing system are not available.
What are the forces for change to wholesale markets?
Although the intention may be to develop private sector market institutions, the main forces for change in wholesale marketing in less-developed countries, except in very exceptional circumstances, will come from central or municipal government agencies. A basic cause for this is often the weakness of the national wholesale fruit and vegetable marketing system and related marketing information networks.
Relationship to national programmes. Marketing interventions, particularly for assembly and/or secondary wholesale markets, are often related to targets for achieving increased production from government-assisted horticultural projects and form part of an agriculture sector component of national plans and basic needs programmes. The main aim may be to improve incomes for fruit and vegetable producers, constrained by the lack of an expanding market for the sale of their produce.
National programmes related to terminal wholesale markets are more likely to be concerned with efficiently meeting the food needs of rapidly expanding urban populations, particularly those in the lower income groups. Existing consumption of fruit and vegetables may be relatively low and a government may have identified marketing as a major constraint in increasing consumption to provide better nutrition, while providing improved incomes to rural producers.
Physical changes. Changes in marketing systems will be influenced by a whole range of factors, of which the main one is likely to be the growth in demand for produce because of demographic changes.
Within existing markets this is usually seen in the inability of existing marketing systems to cope with the increased demand, causing congestion and delays. Space for efficient handling of produce is inadequate and the market area is overcrowded, frequently leading to activities spilling over into the adjacent streets. Parking facilities are usually limited and provision for waste disposal is often lacking.
Other physical factors that might influence the need to expand or relocate a market are changes to transport modes and new communications facilities, such as the construction of access roads to production areas, a new urban highway system or a new port, enabling improvements to be made in the marketing of produce both for domestic and export markets.
Improvements in storage facilities may also allow producers to market their produce in a more flexible and cost-effective manner.
Institutional and political changes. Institutional changes that might occur include the growth in banking and credit infrastructure, allowing producers a greater freedom in how they market their produce; increased political stability and liberalization of pricing systems, bringing about changes in support policies for both producers and traders; and the development of traders' associations and wholesaling skills, which may enable more sophisticated marketing organizations to be developed.
Public intervention may play a part in bringing about changes, such as through the introduction of rules for regulated markets, including modifications to sales methods. Often this intervention is taken as an opportunity to introduce an open-auction method to encourage the marketing and prompt disposal of better quality produce, with immediate payment. Traditional practices, which are often banned, include the method of bid
ding "under a cloth", which is seen as providing many opportunities for cheating. There is often resistance to adopting auctions, however, as they can be time consuming if there is wide variation in the quality of produce. There may be pressure to combine lots, leading to a buyers' market.
Outside forces. Changes can also occur because of factors outside the control of a marketing authority but which may have a significant impact on market development. The most common of these is likely to be planning pressures from municipal authorities to relocate an existing market because of a desire to redevelop an area of a city or make mayor land-use or environmental changes to the structure of a city. Of all forces for change to an existing market this is likely to be the most common. However, market authorities need to be conscious of the negative effects that relocating a market might cause. Traders may not be willing to move, people working within the existing market may experience difficulties in moving their place of employment and the poorer sections of the urban population served by the market may lose access to cheap supplies.
Another outside force can be the introduction of new health and safety regulations. An example of this, currently applying to markets in Europe is the effect of new European Economic Community directives on the marketing of fresh meat and fishery products. This is likely to lead to radical changes in the organization of existing markets in Europe, requiring more stringent control of temperatures and the exclusion of vehicles from within market buildings.
<section>4</section>
2. An approach to wholesale market planning & design
This manual for wholesale market planning and design is aimed at a wide range of users. These may include policy-makers charged with decision making about markets, senior administrators, planners and, in some ways most importantly, technical staff, many of whom may be relatively inexperienced in market development. Although local planning guidance and regulations may be available the manual can act as a supplement to this information, as well as providing material for use by participants of training programmes. Consultants engaged by market authorities may find the manual particularly useful as a check list of the range of issues involved with market development .
Why is it it necessary to plan wholesale markets?
The main purpose in preparing master plans and designs for market facilities is to find solutions which are both functional and efficient, as well as meet budgetary constraints. This means essentially that the employment of consultants to assist in the planning process should make the reaching of appropriate solutions easier as well as saving money for a market authority. A good measure of success would be if the savings in capital and recurrent costs are at least equal to the professional designer's fees.
Economic and appropriate solutions. It is thus important that market developments provide a balanced and affordable programme, applicable to the scale of the particular market, its likely growth and its expected revenues. Emphasis should be placed on finding solutions which are applicable to the resources and construction technology available in the country, minimizing the use of foreign exchange and reliance on technologies which might be difficult to maintain.
Consultation procedures. As well as fulfilling the needs of the market authority, the design solutions will have to be acceptable to all the parties who might be affected by the development. These will include government agencies, producers, market organizations, traders and local communities. During the design process, frequent discussions will need to be held with all the interested parties in order to define development priorities and to evolve a list of facilities which the market might require
(which will form an "accommodation brief" for the designers). Practical operating procedures will need to be formulated and discussions will need to be held to set viable and acceptable levels for the rental, parking and commission charges that the market should adopt. Caution is required in these consultations with traders so that they do not become acrimonious by concentrating too greatly on the financial relationship, to the exclusion of involving them with planning and design issues.
Development objectives
An essential step in evolving the market development programme is to define a clear set of objectives or "goals" which will guide both the policy makers and designers. It is essential that this step is not omitted as only by undertaking full discussions on the project's objectives will the often conflicting needs of the users of the market be resolved. Objectives are likely to be at two distinct levels: national/sectoral and project.
National and sectoral development objectives. These goals are concerned with the benefits of the project to the nation as a whole and to the agricultural and commercial sectors. The goals will tend to be simple statements of national policy, measured by indicators such as: greater per caput consumption of fruits and vegetables; increased production of fruits and vegetables and related increases in producers' incomes; lower consumer prices, with a less variation in seasonal price fluctuations; and reductions in post-harvest losses due to improved marketing and handling practices.
Project-level design objectives. These goals will be concerned with optimization of the operational system and physical design of the proposed market. Typical criteria that are used in assessing the success of a market project are: whether it meets defined minimum physical-space standards; whether it can be constructed within defined cost limits and budgets; and project evaluation criteria, which will relate by means of financial and economic analysis, the project's capital and recurrent costs to the potential returns from tolls and rentals.
Other project-level criteria include whether there are potential savings in market operating costs, for producers, traders and wholesalers, by the introduction of new or improved facilities. These savings can occur from lower handling and equipment costs or more favourable rates for insurance and cartage. Demonstration that such savings might occur will be critical in persuading market users that higher rents and/or market relocation are justifiable.
The development programme should also show that defined levels of operational flexibility can be obtained. These include: immediate needs for day-to-day operational changes; short-range flexibility, reflecting seasonal variations in trade; and long-range flexibility, providing the opportunity for easily extending and changing facilities.
A wholesale market design methodology.
This manual bases the problem of market planning and design on a clear design methodology. Figure 4 provides a diagrammatic summary of the overall process, emphasizing how the stages of the design methodology are part of a linked system. The interactions between the activities are critical. No aspect of the programme should be designed in isolation from the design of other facilities nor be undertaken without the collection of basic data. All aspects of the design should be subject to the same overall planning and financial constraints.
Figure 4 A design methodolgy
A process approach. In preparing a market master plan a process approach needs to be adopted, with distinct outputs occurring at each stage. Within each stage a systematic procedure must be followed. This is essential so that the various professionals involved can have a clear understanding of the roles of others participating in the design process. There are a number of ways in which the overall design process can be viewed: by design stages; functions; levels; or activities.
Design stages. The most convenient way to look at the design process is by the sequence (or stages) in which a design is developed. The first step would usually be a project identification and pre-feasibility study. If the project appears feasible this would be followed by a second stage of detailed design development and a third stage of project formulation and feasibility analysis. The second and third stages are to a large extent interdependent and are likely to be carried out in parallel as they both rely on collection and analysis of survey data, particularly of the actual volumes traded at the market. The fourth stage is project implementation, either for upgrading or relocating an existing market or for the construction of a new market. Chapters 3 - 6 of the manual follow this sequence.
Design functions. Another way of looking at the design process is by identifying the functions and types of professionals who would be involved in the development. The project formulation and feasibility stages are primarily the concern of individuals with backgrounds in socio-economic, institutional or management aspects. Design development is the concern of physical planners and engineers, whilst project implementation will involve project management, architectural, surveying and engineering skills.
Design levels. The stages of the design methodology also reflect various design levels. Project identification is primarily concerned with the broader issues, starting with national policy matters and then considering the sub-regional planning context of the market. In the case of secondary wholesale markets this will be the rural hinterland scale. For terminal wholesale markets the main consideration will be the traffic and land-use problems of the area of the town in which the market is situated. At the detailed design and feasibility stages the planning of the market site and overall building design become important. At the implementation stage the main concerns will be the detailed design of buildings and infrastructure and the procurement of fixed and mobile facilities.
Design activities. For each design stage it is possible to develop a detailed flow chart or check-list, reflecting the design functions and levels mentioned above. These will define the activities that need to be followed in order to arrive at the final plans, budgets and implementation programmes. The pattern of activities that will need to be carried out at each design stage will follow a framework similar to the following:
 data collection, which might be from organizations such as government departments, consultants' studies or other published sources;
 socio-economic, marketing and engineering surveys;
 data processing, by manual and computer methods;
 data analysis and synthesis;
 the preparation of outline recommendations and sketch designs;
 the development of detailed recommendations and designs, including consultations with interested parties. This might entail further data collection, processing, analysis and synthesis, leading to a modification of outline plans and the production of draft final designs; and
 after a period of further consultation and final revision the preparation of the final recommendations, budgets and master plans . The output of this final stage might also include the need for further studies and surveys on issues identified during design.
Table
<section>5</section>
Part B - Planing and design activities
This is the core of the manual and is based on the stages of project design described in Part A. It proceeds from project identification through to implementation. With a simple project these stages may not need to be rigidly separated, but with a more complex project the structure will help to clarify the process of project development. Within each stage the other aspects of the design process are also reflected: the design levels, functions and activities. The section does not go into much detail, but defines what should be broadly achieved at each of the design stages and what are likely to arise as key concerns and problems. In order to avoid repetition there is cross-referencing to the technical appendices in Part D.
An important issue that needs to be mentioned before describing the details of project formulation is that the process is likely to be lengthy. It can often take 6 8 years from reviewing the need for a new market to its occupation. To undertake any of this work requires that staff are identified to be involved with the project formulation and that a separate advance budget is available for the funding of design studies and surveys.
Figure 5 Stage I - Project Identification and Pre-feasibility
3. Project identification and pre-feasibility
The first stage in project preparation is to undertake an identification and pre-feasibility study. The purpose of this is to identify if there are problems with the existing marketing system which might be solved by a planning and infrastructure project. An initial analysis should be made of facilities and accommodation requirements, alternative site development scenarios should be considered and an outline master plan and action programme prepared. A flow chart illustrating the overall process is represented in Figure 5.
Project context and data collection
Unless full records have been kept by a market authority it is usual to start any study of existing or proposed markets with virtually no information. A thorough review of all available background data will therefore need to be made. Information will be required on the general planning context, the levels of agricultural production, marketing channels and the existing consumption of fruits and vegetables and, if applicable, poultry, fish and livestock. This will be largely a desk study, assembling information from published sources. Information sources will include the following:
 national marketing and agricultural policies and strategies, contained in government sectoral plans (typically from a ministry of agriculture) and district reports;
 records of previous and current development activities and existing commitments, compiled by planning and public works departments;
. local and regional demographic and planning studies, including those undertaken by consultants and universities;
 official maps and air photos; and
 legislation and regulations on the institutional and legal framework for markets, including public health and safety regulations.
A site visit to both existing markets and production areas will also be necessary to get a feel for the present conditions. Techniques such as "rapid rural appraisal", using the experience of multi-disciplinary teams (described in Chapter 11), will help to establish information on conditions as efficiently as possible. It is important to visit markets during peak trading periods and not just during government working hours.
Problem definition
Reviewing and analysing data collected on the general institutional and management context and on the existing site conditions and facilities should allow the overall shortcomings of the present system to be identified. The types of analysis that can be attempted will be limited by the availability of data, but should include, at least, a description of the existing market channels and an overall idea of the volume of trade that is passing through an existing market or might pass through a proposed market. Techniques for data analysis arc contained in Chapter 12.
Typical problems. The typical problems that might be identified at this stage include economic and institutional problems, such as the existence of monopolies and unfair trading practices, financial constraints, inadequate market management and lack of staff training. Other problems might include seasonality of demand and lack of storage space, high produce losses and other costs associated with physical constraints, such as, poor infrastructure, inadequate space in relation to through-put, traffic congestion and lack of modern equipment.
With an existing market the major problem will be whether to relocate the market and, if so, whether the existing market should also be retained. It does not always follow that one market per city is necessarily the optimum solution, particularly for those with high-density centres.
Definition of project goals and beneficiaries. On the basis of the problems that have been identified with the existing marketing system an attempt should then be made to define the project's goals and the likely beneficiaries. At this stage this will tend to be a very simple statement of national or regional policy. A typical example might be as follows: to improve marketing facilities so that producers of fruits and vegetables in area "x" can obtain a ready market for increased horticultural production and a wider range of fruits and vegetables, in greater quantities and al competitive prices, can be available to consumers in city "y".
Alternatively, the project-goals could be specified in terms of the benefits that might accrue to a particular market authority by, for example, improved efficiency gained from the upgrading of present facilities or additional revenues created from the development of a new market.
Initial project formulation
The next step will be to formulate an overall programme which will meet the project's goals and solve the problems that have been identified. Simple methods for making projections of space requirements are discussed in Chapters 4 and 13. The main difficulty at this stage will be how to match any budget limits against the physical facilities that might be needed to improve the marketing situation. Although probably only limited survey data is available it is necessary to define a simple procedure that can help to conceptualism the problems. This can be refined later when further surveys are undertaken.
Physical requirements. A first approximation of the physical requirements and budget costs for the development should always be attempted, as this will form a basis for discussion with all the interested parties. It may not be possible to prepare even a diagrammatic layout at this stage. The basic design parameters on which the projections should be based do not need to imply any preconceived notion about the spatial organization of a market. They should assume, however, that the market would be a modern facility, organized with minimum obstructions in the system and a maximum grouping of functions. It is likely to bear very little relation, therefore, to a traditional market. Different approaches should be adopted for secondary wholesale markets than that for terminal urban wholesale markets.
Terminal wholesale markets. The fundamental issue to address with a terminal wholesale market will be whether an existing site is suitable and the degree to which outside planning forces should be allowed to influence any decision to relocate to a new site. Basic estimates of demand and trade volumes arc essential at an early stage in order that sensible decisions can be made about whether the existing market site and size are adequate, particularly if institutional and traffic management improvements could be made which might allow it to remain at its present location. These estimates will be tentative and need to be adjusted later when more reliable survey data on consumption patterns becomes available. The location factors that should be considered in the selection of a new market site are discussed in Chapter 13. Critical to this selection process is that a new site is chosen in consultation with all interested parties.
Secondary wholesale markets. Improvements to secondary wholesale markets, particularly those serving large hinterlands, may be similar in nature to those for terminal markets. Often, however, they are part of a programme for changes to a network of local assembly markets and collection centres. The programmes are frequently based on the development of packages of facilities for each market, the range of facilities provided being based on the overall site area of the market yards. There are major limitations to using this approach as the sole criterion as it is often an arbitrary figure, based on historical events, not necessarily reflecting the present level of economic activity. It is important not to over-simplify the problem and ignore other criteria which may be more reliable indicators.
A crude ranking system can be evolved which compares the existing physical conditions of the markets to a list of "basic needs". This approach assumes that the first priority of a market development plan will be to make up the deficiency in the present provision, rather than impose a standardized package of improvements. Almost invariably this will mean that the main part of any budget should be allocated to the provision of key infrastructure, particularly roads and paving, including off-site facilities, rather than to the construction of new buildings.
Project evaluation
At this early stage in design there will probably not be sufficient information to undertake even a preliminary financial analysis. The project will have to be evaluated on the basis of its overall global impact.
Project Impact. A project's major impact is likely to be on the system of marketing of fruits and vegetables. It may lead to higher production and more stable consumer prices. The potential benefits are, therefore, to producers and consumers. It is usually possible to accurately define the target beneficiaries of a project, based on production and demographic data.
Other aspects of a project's impact should also be identified. A typical impact would be a significant reduction in produce losses and an efficiently operating market for both producers and traders. This will serve to reduce marketing costs which will ultimately benefit consumers. On a broader front, by incorporating the development of a market information system a project may have an influence on the overall price mechanism, which might have a national impact on marketing efficiencies. The effect of a project on any possible private enterprise efforts in market development should be assessed to see whether it would deter or encourage these initiatives. A negative effect could be unnecessary competition for private markets, while a positive effect would be the growth of smallscale traders and wholesalers.
Project benefits. It is important in assessing a project's impact to be clear how benefits might arise. The mere provision of new or improved physical facilities will not guarantee any benefits, if not accompanied by appropriate institutional and management changes. In many cases, the operating performance of markets can be improved with virtually no physical change, other than, possibly, the provision of new equipment or the application of a traffic management scheme.
Project risks. Risks which could influence the overall design of a project need to be identified at this stage. These risks should to be described, and an estimate made of their probability (high, medium or low) and whether they are of a short or medium-term nature, or are long- term strategic problems.
A typical short-term risk is that agreement has not been reached on the market's institutional framework and management method, including the establishment of a project advisory committee or management board. This may lead to potential delays in the appointment of consultants to undertake surveys and feasibility studies and to prepare detailed designs and tender documents. Other common problems are that action is delayed because of difficulties in purchasing suitable land and that the source of funding or loans is not clarified. The subject of risks is discussed further in Chapter 5.
Where an existing market is to be improved or extended, problems may also arise if it is not possible for the construction operations at the market site to be phased in a way that enables the market to continue to operate during the construction period.
Further actions
The definition of project risks will provide the basis for clarifying the issues that will need to be resolved before progress can be made with project development. The intention should be that, before proceeding further, the risks are either eliminated or arc reduced .The typical types of issues that will need to be resolved arc:
- management and institutional;
- financial and loan requirements; and
- provision of land.
Initial surveys to be undertaken. The main conclusion that will be drawn at the end of the project identification stage is almost certainly that the collection of further data will be required. In order to refine the preliminary estimates of throughput, data will need to be collected on the number and size of existing markets, their daily trading patterns and the variations in trade between seasons, both in terms of the type of produce and the quantities marketed.
Ideally data should be available before any further detailed design development occurs, but the timing of surveys will also be influenced by factors such as the need to collect data during peak production seasons or to avoid logistic problems caused by working in a wet season. It is essential, however, that design should be based on adequate data and it will be necessary, if they have not already been undcrtakcn, to carry out surveys of:
 volumes and types of produce transacted at different times in the year;
 surveys of traders and market channels;
 traffic modes and volumes; and
 investigations of a site's engineering and physical characteristics.
Further details of survey methodologies and typical examples of survey pro-forma sheets are given in Chapter 11.
<section>6</section>
4. Detailed design development
The second stage in the preparation of a project is detailed design development. This will result in a final master plan, outline building designs and cost estimates. The overall design process is shown in Figure 6.
The second-stage designs will provide the basis for the evaluations undertaken in the third-stage feasibility study, which may lead to design modifications. The second and third design stages are, therefore, to a large extent interdependent and can be carried out in parallel. Both stages will rely on the collection and analysis of survey data, particularly of the actual volumes of produce traded.
Processing and analysis of initial surveys
The first step in preparing a detailed design will be to undertake and analyse the surveys which were outlined at the end of Chapter 3. Apart from surveys of existing facilities and engineering investigations, the most important of these will be the surveys of produce flow (see Chapter 11).
Table
Roadside surveys. These surveys should, ideally, be undertaken over an extended period, covering all produce flows into a city (including both wholesale markets and retail outlets). The best method, if resources are available, is to carry out a complete roadside survey, using fixed checkpoints. However, as such road-blocks are often also used to control "illegal" trade and to extract gratuities from traders, the traders may be reluctant to cooperate in providing accurate information. The agreement of municipal authorities and police to assist in the surveys may also be difficult to obtain
As well as quantifying the volumes of produce flow, roadside surveys provide useful data on the transport modes used by farmers and traders, including the key role often played by public transport. The surveys should provide an understanding of how the existing marketing system operates, including the roles played by the various functionaries who are participating in the marketing channels and the origin and destination of produce flows. More details of the types of analysis that should be undertaken are provided in Chapter 12.
Figure 6 Stage 11- detailed design development
Estimate of demand and trade volume. The next step is to make a detailed projection of the potential demand for produce. In preparing the demand estimates a series of assumptions will need to be made. There are a number of models used by economists which take account of income-elasticity coefficients, relating changes in income to spending behaviour. Because of lack of data it is rarely possible to use these techniques and reliance usually has to be placed on estimates of present supply, matching these to available data on per caput consumption of fruits and vegetables. Using this approach the substitution effect between different produce is assumed to be zero.
Per caput consumption. Consumption data should ideally be derived from detailed local nutritional surveys of the daily intake of fruits, vegetables, fish and meat, for a range of income groups. From such surveys, estimates can be made of annual consumption, which is expressed in terms of kilogrammes per head (or "caput") of population.
FAO has undertaken regional food balance sheet studies of per caput consumption, taking into account factors such as production levels, imports, exports and processing requirements (see Chapter 12). These are likely to be the most easily available data, but need to be used with some caution as the figures are national averages. They tend to disguise substantial variations in consumption between different seasons, locations, income groups and between urban and rural areas, particularly if there is also a large tourist trade.
Detailed estimates of physical requirements
Before the preparation of an outline master plan it is necessary to ensure that there is sufficient space at an existing or proposed market site to accommodate the range of facilities required for the operational procedures envisaged.
Throughput The first step in this procedure is to make projections of the likely throughput of the market. A simple approach to projecting throughput is to develop scenarios for the peak monthly throughput of the market based on estimates of demand at specific design dates for the likely population to be served, using projections from previous studies of population growth and migration trends.
At least three possible design scenarios should be developed for a range of design populations. The first should be a minimum size, corresponding to present immediate demand and based on the results of roadside surveys, if available. The second should be a size corresponding with likely demand in the near future (say within 5 years) and the third an ultimate size which would accommodate the growth in demand over the expected life of the market (usually taken as 20 to 30 years).
Estimating assumptions. In making throughput projections, two key assumptions need to be made. The first is the extent to which peak production and the sales of fruits and vegetables could vary by season. A peak season may be as much as 2.5 times the annual monthly average and perhaps 5 times as much as the minimum month. Second, the percentage of the wholesale trade going through the market will also vary depending on the operation of existing marketing channels and how they might realistically change in the future.
Data from roadside and retail surveys will provide a basis for establishing these factors, but the data should be treated with some caution as they may not be representative of the whole year. The figures are also likely to be overestimates, as not all produce reported as being traded is actually sold and substantial losses are likely to occur. This does not affect the input volume, as the market must still be designed to accommodate it. However, any calculations that use output volumes (such as retailers' parking requirements) may need to be adjusted to reflect this. The overall output trading volume should therefore be reduced by say 5 percent.
A reasonable throughput target for when a market is fully operational should also be projected. However the extent to which trade might switch from present markets and other channels, such as direct sales to supermarkets, must be evaluated carefully. This is essential bearing in mind the degree to which some produce will by-pass the market system, particularly that from home gardens within the city. The volume of this trade will not appear in roadside surveys, but will form part of the overall per caput consumption. A conservative basis for planning, commonly applicable when existing markets are not going to be closed down, is that a new market will gain the new trade and existing markets and other channels will broadly retain their present level of trade. In that case the 1st phase of a new market could be sized to meet an initial (5 year) growth.
Space requirements. In estimating space requirements for markets very simple techniques should be used. Two estimating methods can be adopted, which are explained in detail in Chapter 13:
 an approach based on overall annual through-put. A range of 10 - 20 tons per square metre (m) of covered sales space is desirable;
 an approach based on the "ideal" space standards that need to be allocated to accommodate the various activities required to handle the average (or in some cases maximum) daily throughout of commodities.
Figure 7 Diagrammatic layout of typical wholesale market
There is usually a reasonable degree of agreement between these two methods. The estimates provide a basis on which to allocate floor space for the primary, commercial or sales activities that will be undertaken in the main market buildings. These activities would include the unloading of produce, its display by producers or traders, its sale to wholesalers (by private treaty or auction) and its short-term storage and display by the wholesalers before being sold and dispatched to retailers.
Simple assumptions also need to be made about the space requirements for ancillary uses, such as offices, additional storage, and other facilities. A crude rule-of-thumb basis for estimating this would be to allow 50 - 100 percent in addition to that already estimated for the main commercial floor space.
For a recent FAO study in Thailand long-term wholesalers' stores (including cool storage) were assumed to require an additional space equivalent to 40 percent of the commercial sales space. However, this figure may vary quite radically. One extreme might be a secondary wholesale market in a rural area where the market's essential function is to assemble produce for immediate despatch (in which case virtually no long-term storage is required). At the other extreme might be an urban terminal market, without auction facilities, which provides a large amount of medium to long-term storage (possibly including cold stores) for produce such as onions, potatoes and fruits.
Washing, packing and grading might require additional space of around 1m per ton of throughput. Offices for market management staff (whether private or public enterprise) and for basic support facilities (such as security and toilets) will each need an area equivalent to at least 5 percent of the commercial sales space. Other facilities, such as banking, post offices, extension services and farm input sales will need a further area of around 10 percent of the commercial sales space.
Outline master plan
An outline or draft master plan is a physical representation of a market's development programme, broadly setting-out the space and circulation requirements related to an existing or proposed site. I he plan will be very diagrammatic at this stage, as illustrated in Figure 7.
The purpose of preparing the plan is to provide a basis for the consultations which will be needed to develop the project further at the feasibility and implementation stages. Adequate time must be provided at those stages in order that full consultation can occur and potential design conflicts can be resolved. The plan also provides a rationale for the approximate cost estimates that are used in the financial and economic analysis described in Chapters 5 and 10. A background to the planning process and further details of typical planning criteria are discussed in Chapter 13.
Function of the plan. The main function of a plan must be to maximize the throughput of a market, providing the most efficient access and traffic circulation system, whilst minimizing costs. The success of a plan in the long term will depend on whether it allows the market's users to mould and adapt the market to their particular requirements. Although the influence of a site is important, the essentially functional nature of markets leads to compact and regular layouts, using standardized building forms and also resulting in lowest development costs. Architectural quality is not of paramount interest but should not be forgotten, as through geometry and landscaping the layout will provide a visual clarity to the users and, if properly considered, will relate the market to its surroundings, ensuring that it provides a positive contribution to the built environment.
Planning and land use criteria Important factors to be considered in preparing an outline plan are how the construction of the market might be phased and the extent to which separation of more permanent uses from those which are of a transient nature is needed, so that future growth and changes can be accommodated without disruption.
As roads and parking areas are a major part of total capital costs and are elements that can be varied substantially in both extent and standard of construction they will be important in determining the outline plan. The key issue will be to evolve an arrangement with a satisfactory relationship between the site access, the internal circulation system, unloading and loading areas, general parking and the main market buildings.
After preparing the draft plan, the distribution of land uses should be reviewed. As a rough rule-of-thumb the portion of the site covered by buildings should be around 20 - 30 percent, road space and parking between 50 - 60 percent and other uses, including drain reserves, some 10 20 percent of the total area. Examples of the distribution of land uses are given in Chapter 13. Values for land uses at a typical small scale terminal
market (Kalimati market, Kathmandu, Nepal) are as follows:
Land use Area
m % of
total
- Buildings 6 060 29.8
- Farmers' market area 710 3.5
- Roads 5 955 29.2
- Parking areas 3 570 17.5
- Footpaths & landscaped areas 3 495 17.2
- Drainage & other reserves 580 2.8-
- Total site area 20370 100.0
Access and circulation. Markets obviously need to be located adjacent to main highways, but a direct approach off a heavily used route or close to an intersection could cause problems. These problems will become more difficult with future traffic build-up, thus making planning approval unlikely. The layout, therefore, should have its own segregated access.
Within the market, incoming produce should also be strictly segregated from outgoing. The usual technique is to adopt a one-way circulation system using a continuous peripheral road, with the main buildings located within the centre of the block. An advantage of this approach is that it enables drivers to search for parking spaces and to correct mistakes. As a basic principle it is also desirable to avoid cross roads within the lay-out. To reduce the number of conflict points as many of the junctions as possible should be T-junctions (3-way). If cross roads are essential they should be created by using roundabouts (rotaries)
One of the most difficult features to achieve in any market-site layout is to obtain sufficient road length al the site entry so that incoming trucks can slow down and be checked-in at the entry-gate without causing backing-up onto the public highway. 'I his problem also occurs on leaving the site. A layout with more than one exit would have obvious advantages in terms of traffic control, although this may create problems of extra staffing for security, the collection of lolls and the management of sale documentation.
Parking. The turnover of vehicles in a market, particularly those of retailers is rapid and it is desirable that parking spaces are generous. A minimum of around 32 m per truck parking space should be used, excluding the main circulation. As a general rule an overall standard for the provision of parking places (trucks, pick-ups and private cars) of 3 spaces per 100 m Of sales area is reasonable. This should also allow unloading and loading facilities to be directly adjacent to the main market building. For peak periods, however, this needs to be increased to around 5 spaces per ]00 m, which may require the provision of an overspill parking area a little remote from the market facilities. More elaborate methods For estimating parking requirements are given in Chapter 13.
Figure 8 Comparison of types of wholesale premises
Engineering services Engineering services other than roads need not be considered in any detail at this stage but, as the site layout is gradually defined, consideration will need to be given to the location of other service networks. In tropical areas, because of the scale of open drainage systems and the significant run-off from paved market areas, surface water drainage is likely to be the most important service to consider.
The majority of other services are likely to be placed underground, but these networks need to be coordinated with each other for ease and economy of construction and in order that future maintenance does not disrupt the working of the market. The easiest way to understand the distribution of services is to prepare a series of typical cross sections, which resolve both the vertical and horizontal relationship of the services. Engineering services are summarized al the end of this chapter and discussed in detail in Chapters 13 and 14.
Site facilities
The type of buildings that the market might accommodate needs to be considered at this stage in the design because it will affect the site layout.
Types of market but/dings. There arc four basic types of market buildings which can accommodate the main commercial floor space. The choice of an appropriate type will depend on the operating system and method of sales to be adopted at the market. Figure 8 illustrates the basic types in cross-section, using the same roof form so that comparison is simpler:
i) garage type
With this type of market premises the wholesalers' stalls run the full depth of the building, with access platforms on both sides. One side (3 metres width) is sometimes used for unloading from rail wagons, while the other may be wider (say 7 metres) and used for both unloading and loading into trucks.
This type of building is suitable for the sorts of large-scale wholesalers found in North America and where retailers use large trucks, typically with pallet loading.
ii) back-to-back type
This is a variant on the garage type, the essential difference being that it has a central wall dividing the wholesalers' premises. By varying the position of the dividing wall, different sizes of premises can be obtained. Only one access point is provided for the purchase, display and sale of produce as these activities normally take place at different times of the day. It is usually better if the platform is at the same level as the road if the majority of the market users have small pick-ups, cars or animal carts, or if larger trucks with side-loading are going to be used.
This type of premises is an ideal form for medium and small-scale wholesalers and is particularly suitable for developing countries. The building type can be either used as the point where the purchase of produce is made from commission agents and traders on a private treaty basis or can be used in conjunction with a separate auction hall. A variant of this building type, used in Amman, is to construct a single depth wholesalers' premises backing onto a boundary wall or fence. This makes very effective use of the site area.
iii) central spine, with buyers' walk
This is similar to the back-to-back arrangement but also incorporates a central buyers' walk which facilitates the appraisal of produce by buyers. The buyers' walk is typically 4 metres wide, such as at London's New Covent Garden market, with unloading and loading of produce confined to the rear of the premises.
Many West European countries (such as France and Spain) have adopted this type of premises, but its use in other countries, such as Brazil, has not been entirely successful. In some cases the buyers' walk is made much wider (more than 16 metres wide in the Paris Rungis market) to allow a wider display of produce and the easy movement of produce to retailers vehicles. Recent public health trends have, however, tended to discourage the entry of vehicles into the covered sections of market buildings, particularly where they trade in meat or fish products.
iv) central spine/ball-type market building
This is an integrated facility where the sale of fruits and vegetables is undertaken in a multi-purpose shed. The typical facilities might include producers' sales space, a buyers' walk, wholesalers' storage facilities (often enclosed in steel cages) and, where applicable, an auction hall. Levies on produce sold would be collected at one or more sales counters, where security facilities might also be accommodated.
The building illustrated in Figure 8 is of a limited depth and would be suitable for medium and small-scale wholesale markets in developing countries, particularly as it could be relatively simply converted, if necessary, into one of the other types. Some hall-type markets are of a much wider span, such as in Milan, (Copenhagen and some Japanese cities. Although convenient for major cities with small-scale wholesalers and many retail customers, this building form is not necessarily appropriate in developing countries because of the high cost of the roofing system and the potentially greater internal handling costs.
Compact site planning. Whatever type of premises is selected it is important that a consolidated layout is created rather than a scatter of smaller unrelated buildings. The sales spaces should be grouped together, probably only segregating the larger wholesalers, as their building requirements will tend to be different, The distance between buildings should be determined by "ideal" dirnensions for parking and circulation (see Chapter 14). An approach based on grouping of facilities has distinct advantages:
 the site is easier to manage, particularly if an auction system is used;
 the security system can be simpler;
 safer site circulation, with minimum crossing traffic and road lengths;
 flexibility in use, allowing seasonal variations in commodities to be accommodated and allowing adjustments to be made between wholesalers' premises, auction spaces and other uses;
 ease of routline maintenance, cleaning and solid waste collection;
 fuller building utilization at any one lime, with few redundant spaces;
 concentration and economic provision of building services; and
 greater weather protection for both the produce and market users.
Multi-storey market buildings. Market buildings with the sales space on more than one floor should, unless absolutely necessary, be avoided. Only offices for wholesalers, commission agents or brokers and other uses not involving the transfer of produce should be accommodated at a mezzanine level if there is insufficient space on the ground floor.
Non-horticultural produce markets. Fish marketing is usually undertaken in a separate building, the plan organization of which can be similar to that of a central spine type building. Construction would normally be to a higher standard, particularly in the provision of easily cleanable internal (wall and floor) finishes. The building should be provided with facilities for gutting, cleaning and boxing, with a cool room for the temporary storage of fresh fish and a freezer room for frozen fish. It is preferable that a fish market has its own quality- control facilities, perhaps at mezzanine level, overlooking the sales space.
Separate facilities must also be provided if it is envisaged that the market will also trade in poultry, eggs, grains or meat. Accommodation for meat marketing can be virtually identical to that for fish except that it is preferable that ceiling mounted rails are also provided for the easy transport of carcasses. Flowers are often marketed in the same building as fruits and vegetables, but can be separated if the turnover justifies it or in more temperate climates where some form of heating may be required.
Market authority building. The site should be administered by the market authority from a central service building, which might be of more permanent multi-storey construction, sometimes physically linked to the main market buildings. The scale of facilities will vary depending on the size of the market, but typically this building might contain an agricultural inputs unit, one or more banks, a post office and public telephones. The market authority offices should ideally be located at first floor level, overlooking the whole market. Depending on the scale of the market, their accommodation would comprise an account's section, a general office, a director/manager's offices and a board room.
Even where the market is to be operated by private enterprise it will be essential to provide facilities for the public bodies concerned with marketing and public health Such facilities might include a hall for public meeting and exhibitions, accommodation for market information and extension services, an emergency clinic or first-aid post, an environmental health laboratory and a weights and measures office.
Ancillary site facilities. Provision should also be made on the site for public toilets, building maintenance facilities, centralized solid waste collection and crate storage. An entrance control gate will be required, including in most cases, a weigh-bridge. This will normally be combined with the site security facilities. Simple produce cleaning, grading and packaging may also be needed if this has not been undertaken at the farm level or at collection centres located in the production areas.
Other facilities that might be provided are a petrol filling station, a staff canteen or tea shop (although these could be limited if adjacent commercial areas contain adequate services), a creche for mothers working at the market and small-scale religious facilities (shrine, chapel or mosque).
Hostel accommodation might also be needed for farmers and hauliers who are obliged to remain in the city overnight or for out-station market staff who might come to the city for on-the-job training.
Facilities for retailing. Retail units for the sale of packaging materials are normally required at a market but the provision of other types of retailing facilities is a difficult issue to resolve as it will tend to interfere with the operation of the market. One possibility is to provide a limited number of semi-retail shop units for the sale of specialist food stuffs, such as herbs and spices and speciality fruits. This would only be an attractive proposition at a secondary wholesale market if it enables buyers or wholesalers to purchase goods they would normally want to buy anyway on a "one-stop shopping" basis. Terminal wholesale markets sometimes also include "cash and carry" facilities so that retailers can buy non-horticultural food stuffs in bulk at the same time that they are making other purchases.
Traditional marketing practices and land-use restrictions may dictate that a wholesale market has to operate alongside a retail market, in which case they should ideally be managed as one unit, but should always be physically segregated.
Farmers' markets. Another common issue is whether a market should support an associated farmers' retail market, where producers could sell to retailers and consumers. This would also enable producers who have not managed to sell their produce to wholesalers in the main market to dispose of their surpluses. The strong argument against this is that selling directly to the public in the farmers' market at times of oversupply, when prices weaken, will be in direct competition with the wholesale market. With an auction hall, for example, the possibility that supplies might be withdrawn for sale direct to consumers could have a disastrous effect. On balance, it would be better if this practice was discouraged, unless confined to sales only to retailers and strictly controlled (for instance by only allowing trading after the end of the main working day).
Specialist services. A recent trend, particularly in the USA, has been to provide a wider range of specialist facilities on market sites so that they operate as food centres, under a single management system.
Figure 9 Studies of building form - Kalimati market, Kathmandu
Long-term wholesaler storage facilities (usually for fruits and incorporating chill rooms) and banana ripening rooms are frequently incorporated within a market, often with some arrangement for financing by private enterprise, the market authority providing the land for the building and a share of the main infrastructure.
Animal slaughter, food processing, pre-cooling/drying facilities, cold storage and ice making plant may also be accommodated. These again are normally financed by private enterprise and should always be justified on the basis of a separate financial and economic analysis from that of the main market buildings (see Chapter 10).
Caution is required in appraising the need for these facilities, particularly their scale and technical specification. Optimum refrigeration conditions in cold stores, for example, are often less important than flexibility in general operating efficiency which can result in much higher utilization rates. Another common error is to assume that facilities will operate on a high technology basis, such as using pallet storage and fork lift truck loading and unloading. This may not be valid or appropriate where maintenance is poor and labour costs are low.
Figure 10 Final master plan of Kalimti wholedsale market, Kathmandu
Building form
The choice of suitable building forms and materials for different types of marketing facilities is part of the detailed design process and is discussed in Chapters 13 and 14. Figure 9 illustrates the type of output that would be expected from studies of building form. In preparing the detailed building designs the following factors will need to be considered
 space standards and design modules
 external climatic controls and internal servicing requirements, including ventilation and natural/artificial lighting
 overall building form and siting
 expansion needs
 choice of materials for foundations/sub-structure; super-structure; enclosure and cladding methods; and appropriate internal finishes and
 choice of structural techniques, including economy and ease of construction
Final master plan
The last step of this design stage will be to prepare a final master plan drawn accurately to scale and incorporating all the factors evolved during the process of design and consultation. I he master plan forms the framework for the development programme, integrating the final building designs with the vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems. A typical example of a final master plan, illustrating all the essential components that should be included, is shown in Figure 10.
Detailed site planning and infrastructure design
Detailed site planning proposals and site infrastructure layouts can be finalised when a final master plan has been agreed. In preparing proposals for a comprehensive site development the following types of infrastructure (which are discussed in greater detail in Chapter 14) would typically be included:
 site preparation, which would comprise stripping of the top soil and then cutting and filling the site to obtain level platforms for buildings and even grades for roads. Frequently the levels of sites have to be built up and this requires compacted fill to be laid on a geotextile blanket. Where soil conditions arc extremely damp, horizontal and vertical sub-soil drainage may be required. Soil conservation measures, sediment control devices and earth or concrete retaining structures may also be needed. These works should ideally be undertaken as a separate preparatory contract. This will allow the fill areas to thoroughly settle before work starts on the main infrastructure and buildings;
 the road and footpath system will be the main component of the site infrastructure, constructed as either a concrete pavement or a flexible bituminous pavement. Roads should be provided with kerbs and integral gutters. Paved off-site connections to existing main roads, including improvements to junctions, may also be required;
 car and lorry parking facilities will be needed, designed to accommodate peak-hour traffic flows, and using a similar type of construction;
 a surface water drainage system will be needed, designed to cope with storm-water flows, possibly with some on-site storage for peak discharge conditions. Drains will be a very important infrastructure component in the tropics. Except in very low rainfall areas, storm water is usually carried in open channels, which are either covered with steel grating or concrete slabs. Because of the large amount of impervious roof and road surfaces in markets it is also likely that any existing site outlet to a natural drainage course will need to be improved;
- water mains connection will be required, either from an existing public supply or from a bore hole. To provide adequate on-site storage, the supply should feed either an underground water reservoir or a main overhead service tank, or a combination of both. The main tanks would service a reticulation network, supplying overhead tanks in individual buildings and a system of fire hydrants;
 a piped sewerage system is needed, going either to septic tanks, with partially treated effluent going to surface water drains, or preferably directly to a main sewer, if this is available and economically viable;
 an electrical supply will be required to the site (usually an 11 kV overhead line) going to a transformer unit and main switch room. This will serve an earthed distribution lighting and power network, preferably located underground and a street/site lighting system; and
 a main telephone system which is an increasingly important component of market infrastructure. As well as providing facilities for sellers and buyers to arrange deliveries directly by telephone it can also form a major element of a market price information system, using facsimile machines and computer modems.
Additional survey requirements
At the end of the detailed design stage the need for further surveys may have been identified (see Chapter 11). These might include additional socio-economic surveys as part of the project feasibility studies (see Chapter 5), including repeating previous surveys for different seasons.
Further topographic, material suitability and geo-technical engineering surveys may also be required for project implementation purposes (see Chapter 6).
<section>7</section>
5. Project formulation and feasibility
The third stage of project design is a project formulation and feasibility study, which will confirm whether the project is viable. Projections of demand and cost information derived during the second stage detailed design will form the basis of a financial and economic evaluation of the proposals. The overall process that needs to be followed at this stage is shown in Figure 11.
The function of the third stage will be to critically examine the various physical design options (outline and foal master plans) that might meet the objectives set for the project. Different institutional and management strategies should also be examined and their requirements in terms of staffing, equipment and infrastructure evaluated. This may lead to design modifications, requiring the work undertaken in the second stage to be reviewed and revised. It might not be possible to complete the last phases of the second stage (the final master plan, detailed site planning and infrastructure designs) until the third stage has also been completed.
Figure 11 Stage III Project formulation and Feasibility
Overall project design
On the basis of studies already undertaken in the previous stages the objectives of the project should have been clarified. An end-of-project-status will have been be defined and the purpose of Stage 111 will be to confirm that the project conditions and overall goals can be achieved.
It should be clear that the project can achieve benefits for the main target groups of beneficiaries and that functioning market information and management systems can be established (see Chapter 6). At the start of Stage 111 it is necessary, therefore, to draw together all the previous data and findings into a form which will allow this evaluation. This process is usually termed "project design". Aid agencies, such as UNDP, often have their own methodologies for undertaking this (see Bibliography).
Assembling information. To evaluate a project it is first necessary to review the project context and assessment of the project's global impact prepared during the first design stage (see Chapter 3) and then to systematically assemble the surveys, plans and programmes derived in the previous detailed design stage (see Chapter 4) so that the proposed physical changes to a market can be both quantified and costed.
Recommendations
Evaluation of options. In assembling the project design many alternatives may be available which might meet the projects objectives. These will have been examined to see whether they are still viable and if they will need to be tested in the financial and economic analysis. These options, which may all have different operational and cost implications, might include:
 alternative institutional strategies;
 different approaches to setting revenue levels;
 alternative packages for management, operations and staffing; and
 alternative physical requirements, which might include: options for the final master plan or circulation system; different standards of building construction; and varying off-site infrastructure requirements
In outlining the options, it is usual to select the most likely one to represent the "basic case", which can then be modified to represent the other alternatives. In the case of an existing market the basic case may be to do nothing, that is to neither improve the facilities at an existing location nor to relocate the market to a new site.
Financial analysis assumptions There are a number of techniques for evaluating projects and these are outlined in Chapter 10. The most usual of these techniques is to prepare a financial analysis, where the costs and revenues of a project are represented as a financial statement as cash flows. To do this, all the physical inputs required over a project's life will need to be phased and then costed on an annual basis, in present-day prices.
Typical inputs, which would be compiled in a tabulated form, may include: civil works (buildings and infrastructure); equipment; technical assistance and professional fees of design and supervision consultants; furniture and fittings; land purchase, and temporary rental of accomodation. Recurrent costs will include staff wages and salaries and other operating expenditure, such as interest payments, insurances, office overheads, utilities, repairs and maintenance, audit fees and depreciation. These costs are set against the anticipated revenues derived from renting space to wholesalers, parking fees, commission on auctions and other charges.
Accurate cost estimates of capital works, recurrent expenditure and anticipated revenues for a project are often not possible at this stage and, in preparing the cash flows, assumptions will need to be made. These are again described in Chapter 10.
Financial and economic analysis
The expected returns of a project should be initially analysed on the basis of the projected cash flow for the "basic case". This will produce a financial "internal rate of return" (IRR), represented as a percentage and a "net present value" of the project, represented as a monetary sum.
Project returns and methods of calculation. As markets are often fully or partially financed by central or local government funding (see Chapter 7) they have to compete with other projects for this financing. It is usual, therefore, to expect that a project will have a return at least equal to what might be expected from comparable investments. A typical range of values would be between 10 -20 percent. Net present values should always be positive and exceed the total capital outlay on the project.
Internal rates of return and net present values are discussed in Chapter 10. They can be calculated manually but it is more usual to use either the financial functions on a desk calculator or to enter the cash flows into a spreadsheet program on a personal computer. The latter is most convenient, as variations can be calculated most easily.
Sensitivity analysis. As well as estimating the returns from the "basic case" a project should be further tested by undertaking a sensitivity analysis. This technique allows alternative physical design options to be considered, as well as the effect of likely variations in revenues and in the share of total produce. that might pass through" a market. Typically, the sensitivity analysis might test a substantial reduction in overall revenues, either from lower rents or rates of commission (perhaps 3 percent rather than 5 percent) or a decrease in turnover or an increase in recurrent costs from, say, over-staffing of the market. Another technique for looking at a project in a critical manner is to compare it to the costs and returns of not undertaking it at all ("do-nothing" or "without project"). This is a useful method when trying to assess whether to either build a new market or whether to improve an existing market.
Economic analysis. A financial analysis looks at a project only from the point of view of the operating costs and revenues of the market's owner. It will ignore any indirect economic benefits of a project, such as transport cost savings and reductions in wastage and deterioration of produce. These effects can be reflected in an economic analysis, which will give an estimate of the project's benefits to the whole economy.
To calculate an economic analysis requires a number of adjustments to the financial cash flow. Depreciation should be omitted as well as land acquisition and taxes, as these are both transfer payments. Shadow pricing of labour, if had been included in the financial analysis, should be omitted. If management training and other forms of government or donor assistance is provided the estimated costs of these should be added to the cash flow.
Estimating the net economic benefits of marketing projects in developing countries is difficult as many of the benefits are unquantifiable. Some benefits are indirect, including improved supplies of better quality produce, greater market transparency and more competitive trader participation. The direct benefits of a market project include reduced handling costs, lower transport costs because of an easing in traffic congestion and reductions in produce losses.
The latter is often the most convenient method of estimating overall benefits. If, for example, the reported losses for vegetables are around 25 percent and the economic analysis assumes that losses can be limited to an overall 20 percent as the result of market improvements, then the benefits would be based on the value in monetary terms of a 5 percent saving in produce.
It is usual to expect that the economic returns of a marketing project will look better than the financial returns. As with the financial analysis, though, it is advisable to examine the returns critically by applying a sensitivity analysis.
Looking at the distribution of benefits it might also be apparent that those from part of a project (such as a cold store) are low compared with the benefits obtained from other sources. The economic viability of this part of a project should be looked at separately, strictly reviewing whether all the storage is necessary and if a proportion of the accommodation might, for example, be better provided in conventional naturally ventilated stores.
Project justification
The justification for a project will be based on a description of its benefits, backed-up, as far as possible, with the quantified results from the financial and economic analysis. In discussing project justification in Chapter 3 the main method of analysis was to look at a project's global impact and the short-term risks which would affect its progress during the later design stages. The project justification should again examine these issues to ensure that the project will still benefit the target beneficiaries and that the short term risks have been eliminated.
At the formulation stage, however, it is also necessary to determine all the factors which, although they do not have to be resolved before project design can proceed, could cause major delays in the effective operation of a market. Physical improvements to a market cannot be looked at in isolation and if it doubtful whether the appropriate institutional and non-physical changes will be achieved then the whole project's viability is likely to be in jeopardy.
Immediate risks to achieving financial targets. These risks include the postponement in the appointment of the market manager and the full complement of market operations staff; delays in the setting of regulations for the level of fees and the administration of the market; shortage of working capital for operation, staff salaries and recurrent maintenance; and the lack of suitable training courses for market staff. It will be essential to resolve these matters before the market starts to operate.
Long-term risks. Even at this stage and despite rigorous analysis, long-term risks may still be present which might prevent achievement of a project's output, raising doubts about its overall viability or about the design parameters used in its preparation. The most likely of these risks is that the basic assumptions for achieving agricultural sector targets are not realistic. There may not, for example, be a guaranteed market for fresh fruits and vegetables and demand may not necessarily rise in line with increased production from horticultural projects. Realistic per caput consumption targets are needed to provide the basis for this assessment.
Another common mistake is to be too optimistic about a market's performance in terms of the percentage of the total potential wholesale trade that will pass through it. This is often justified on the basis that using the facilities of the improved or newly located market will be mandatory, but despite this it still remains only an assumption and one which has caused the failure of many projects. The reduction of these risks will depend on the adequacy of the surveys undertaken at the design and feasibility stages and the effective long-term monitoring of the project, starting at the implementation stage(see Chapter 6).
Environmental aspens. As well as its general benefits and its financial and economic performance, a project should also be assessed as to whether it might have any negative impact on the environment.
The negative environmental impact of a project normally relates to the development of the market site itself. If this not undertaken properly and in conformity with an agreed master plan the development could: increase traffic congestion in the vicinity of the market site, particularly if the site entry is poorly located;
 cause flooding to adjacent land, because of increased surface water run-off, a restricted site outlet or lack of on-site storage; and
 produce glare and noise impact on adjacent land uses if insulation, screening and planting proposals are not carefully integrated into the development programme. These issues are discussed in further detail in Chapter 13.
Project recommendations
At the end of this design stage, assuming that a project has been found to be it is viable, the preferred design option should have been selected and the final shape of a project determined, including its management and institutional arrangements. In summary, the issues that should have been resolved include:
 project outputs- the expected results from a project;
 project activities- the tasks to be undertaken to achieve these outputs;
 project inputs- the components that must be included in a project to allow the activities to be undertaken:
- physical (civil works and equipment);
- manpower and technical assistance; and -further survey and study requirements;
 project budget- what it will cost to provide the inputs; and the
 project work plan - when the project activities are likely to take place.
Further issues to be resolved. The financial and economic analysis of a project and the types of project risks, outlined in the project justification above, will provide a basis for defining issues that may need to be addressed before progress can be made with project development. Before proceeding further there should be clear policies and action programmes available to eliminate or reduce risks to a low level, possibly requiring adjustments to the project design.
Check list of typical project issues. The types of institutional, financial and physical issues that may need to be considered at this stage are likely to be as follows:
 the purchase or transfer of land for new sites;
 Iease-back arrangements between government and private enterprise;
 the finalization of financial and institutional arrangements;
 the clarification of legal and tax issues;
 agreements with statutory authorities on solid waste collections, surface water drainage, sanitation, water supply and other environmental issues;
 agreement on boundary and environmental matters with adjoining owners;
 foalisation of facility requirements, planning criteria and a detailed design brief which will form the basis for the preparation of tender documents at the project implementation stage;
 finalization of training requirements and programmer; and
 agreement with the market's users on lease conditions, acceptable levels for rents, rates for commission on auction sales and other revenues.
<section>8</section>
6. Project implementation
The fourth stage in project preparation is implementation which, although not directly influencing the broad policy-making aspects of the planning process, does have an impact on the detailed design of projects, Faulty assumptions on implementation are as much to blame for the failure of market projects as the adoption of erroneous design parameters, A flow chart of the overall implementation process is shown in Figure 12.
Before implementation can commence a wide range of issues needs to be considered, These are discussed further in this chapter and in Chapter 14. The issues include:
 the availability of finance for construction;
 establishment of a monitoring and performance evaluation system;
 the phasing of development and provision for market operation during the construction period;
. role of the parties participating in implementation;
 trader and public participation;
 technical assistance requirements. for both design and construction supervision and for the management and operations staff;
Figure 12 Stage IV- Project implementation
 preparation of tender/bid documents; and
 choice of an appropriate type of construction contract
Phasing of development
As a basis for construction management a bar chart showing the project's implementation should be prepared, defining phasing targets for the entire development of the market. A typical example of such a bar chart is shown in Figure 13. For more complex projects, when the overall details have been broadly agreed, a critical-path network should be prepared to guide the project implementation process.
The programme should incorporate practical time-frames for the construction contract lengths and the periods required for the pre-contract stages. Sufficient time should be allowed for: detailed design, the preparation of tender documents; tendering and tender analysis, recommendations and acceptance; and the contractor's mobilization. Other matters requiring careful consideration will include packaging the works into separate construction contracts and scheduling of equipment procurement.
Recommendation/action
Existing markets. Although construction operations should ideally be undertaken without a market continuing in operation this will rarely be practical unless temporary accomodation at another site is easily available A common problem in expanding or upgrading an existing market, therefore, is the need to adjust the programme realistically so that the market can stay in operation over the whole development period. This will mean making the maximum use of existing buildings until new accommodation is prepared and allowing a staged handover of facilities to the market's operators.
Pace of development Any market development is likely to take a number of years and a common error is to assume that this process can be easily compressed. In order to accelerate implementation some activities can, however, be initiated before the real start of a project,. These initial actions will include the pre-qualification and selection of design and supervision consultants and the preparation of tender documents for any site-preparation works in advance of the main construction contract.
Initial development needs and overall programme The first year of the development will usually be a preparatory year, often involving the installation of sub-soil and temporary drainage, retaining-wall construction and the provision of compacted earthworks. A temporary construction-site access road may be required, particularly if an existing operating market is involved, and a new main surface-water drainage outlet may need to be installed.
These works will be followed by a main construction period, often lasting up to three years. This will commence with the installation of the main site infrastructure, including the off-site roads and drains and be followed by construction of the main buildings.
The contract administration system
Design and supervision consultants, either from the private or public sectors (see Chapter 14) will normally be appointed to oversee the works. Apart from day-to-day supervision of the project, their responsibilities will also cover the preparation of the tender (or "bid") documents, including working details, tender drawings, specifications and bills of quantities, an overall cost plan and procurement schedules for obtaining equipment.
Figure 13 Project implementations bar chart (Kalimati market, Nepal)
Contract administration issues. Before initiating construction operations, a number of issues related to construction supervision and monitoring procedures will need to be resolved:
 definition of responsibility of the employer's (client's) representatives;
 who will have responsibility for setting out the works; . who will have authority for giving instructions on the site; . the scope of any materials-testing programme;
 the frequency and chairing of site progress meetings;
 who will be responsible for preparing a schedule of defects at the end of the contract period;
 the date for '"practical completion" of the works, when the client can occupy the market. Stages of completion with partial possession by the client can occur with large-scale developments; and
 the length of the "defects-liability period", within which the contractor is responsible for making good any defects. This is normally one year.
Financial management. The administration and financial management of payments to contractors will normally be the responsibility of the design and supervision consultants, who will undertake valuations of the work completed (including unfixed materials on-site) and then prepare a certificate showing the amount for interim payment by the employer. An amount of around 5 percent is normally deducted or "retained" from the valuations to cover the making good of defects.
On completion of the works the consultants will also prepare a final account, which will form the basis of the final payment, including the release of the retention moneys. With a contract based on measured quantities (rather than a fixed price) the final account will adjust the tender sum amount to correspond to the actual works completed.
Local contracting capacity. To achieve the desired phasing the construction works will need to be broken up or packaged so that they can be handled by the local construction industry. The abilities of local contractors will, therefore, need to be reviewed.
Most countries have a system of licensing of contractors. In order to be registered they have to satisfy a range of minimum requirements. These criteria are related to the technical personnel they employ, the construction equipment they possess, their experience in terms of projects completed and their financial assets. Normally, contractors are graded into classes (typically, three or four grades) and what needs to be considered in packaging contracts is the suitability of particular grades for different sections of the work.
Selection and pre-qualification of contractors. Generally, bidding should be on a selective tendering basis, taking into account the need for the contractors to have experience in both the installation of site infrastructure and of fairly sophisticated buildings. Part of the works will probably require experience in high-quality earthworks and therefore a general civil engineering contractor, with relevant plant, would be appropriate. This might be best achieved by letting this section of the works as a separate contract.
Minor works on the site might be undertaken by smaller-scale contractors if they are carefully short listed and the design of the infrastructure and ancillary buildings is made sufficiently robust and simple.
Contract conditions. For the main contracts, at least, it will be essential to have unambiguous and easily administered contractual arrangements. Local conditions of contract are likely to exist but these may only be appropriate for particular types of work.
The contract conditions of FIDIC (Federation Internationale des Ingenieurs-Conseils) may be an alternative basis as they are internationally understood and, although biased towards civil engineering types of work, do have both general and specific conditions which allow them to be tailored to local conditions. The contracts should ideally all be on a "measure and pay" basis, tendered on the basis of bills of quantity, for which the FIDIC conditions are ideally suited.
Affirmative action programmes. Affirmative action programmes towards local construction industries may exist so that they can compete against international contractors. These programmes will need to be taken into account both in selecting contractors and in the financial and economic analysis of the project. A common approach is to exempt local contractors from any contract tax and from sales tax levied on materials, as well as allowing them a percentage incentive on their bids.
Caution must be exercised in the tender review, however, to ensure that a combination of an experienced local contractor in joint venture with a foreign Contractor (acting as a management contractor) is not rejected solely on the basis of a lower bid by an inexperienced local contractor. The normal criteria used in evaluating tenders is to select the lowest "conforming" bid, which is the one that combines a low price matched to a proven ability to undertake the works.
An additional incentive to local contractors its often to allow a mobilization advance of say 10 percent of the contract value. If this is contemplated, it is essential that adequate provision is made in the contract documents for its proper utilization, so that the payments are only made against specific project activities, such as a percentage release on the arrival of the contractor's equipment and plant, with the balance released as the work progresses to the satisfaction of the resident engineer.
Implementation of market operations
Assuming that the institutional framework for the market has been resolved (see Chapter 7) there are a number of other issues with which the market staff and traders will need to involve themselves in order that management aspects of the implementation programme are effective.
Operational matters. These include issues such as staff selection and training. Many of the disciplines and skills required will be relatively novel and it will therefore be necessary for a training programme to be developed appropriate to these needs. The selection of applicants for stalls and storage space, and the setting of rents and tolls will also need to be resolved (see Chapter 8).
Post-contract administration. On completion of the construction works the market authority will take over responsibility for looking after the physical infrastructure. A market operator is, in effect, the manager of a major infrastructure system. To do this, the market authority will have to consider how the periodic operation and maintenance of the market will be undertaken. Apart from day-to-day maintenance, which is likely to be the responsibility of "in-house" staff, this will include:
 the setting of maintenance standards for the longer-term repair and replacement of infrastructure;
 the definition of emergency safety and security procedures; and
 obtaining public liability and accidental damage insurance.
Information systems. The setting up of market information and price systems will need to be considered right from the outset (see Chapter 8) so that the dissemination of information can commence with the operation of the market. A monitoring system will also need to be set up so that a market's performance can be evaluated against predetermined physical and economic criteria, particularly if lessons from a project are to be applied to other market developments.
Project completion. At the end of an implementation period the market should be fully operational, market information and management systems should be functioning and it should start to be clear whether the market will be able to achieve benefits for the main target groups of beneficiaries. However, the impact of a market project on its beneficiaries is likely to be difficult to measure, particularly in the short term of a project life.
Project monitoring criteria. The achievement of a project's goals will, therefore, need to be measured by the monitoring system. A number of indicators may be used to measure the project's impact. These might include:
* increased per caput consumption of fruits, vegetables, fish and meat in line with national basic-needs targets;
* expanded production areas for fruits vegetables and related increases in producer's incomes; and
* lower consumer prices for fruits and vegetables, accompanied by a levelling-out of seasonal fluctuations in consumer prices.
To verify these indicators may need regular surveys to be undertaken by the market authority or by the responsible government departments. Surveys may include changes in per caput consumption of produce; estimates of changes in production areas planted and yields; and consumerprice monitoring. These data, combined with an analysis of the daily trading and receipts records maintained by the market authority, will indicate whether the operation of a market has been successful. The foundation of the monitoring system should be established during the implementation period by undertaking base-line surveys.
<section>9</section>
Part C - Management and operations
In developing institutional proposals for any market it is necessary to find a legal arrangement which balances the role of traders and other entrepreneurs, whose support will be essential if the market is to be commercially viable, with that of government agencies who may need to intervene in the marketing process (often by providing needed services).
This part of the manual, (comprising Chapters 7, 8 and 9) gives a brief overview of the creation, operation and regulation of marketing organizations, as a context for the development of physical master plans and building designs. For more detailed explanations of institutional options, reference should be made to the Bibliography at the end of the manual, in particular, the writings of Abbott, Harrison and Mittendorf.
7 market management systems
This chapter is largely concerned with the establishment or modification of larger urban terminal wholesale markets as their complex management needs particular attention. Secondary wholesale markets can obviously operate with simpler organizations, but the same basic principles need to be observed, including the need for a clear management structure and for a board with a broadly similar spectrum of representation and responsibility to that required for an urban wholesale market.
Why government intervention? Before considering alternative types of institutional strategies, the reasons why, might be necessary for governments to intervene in the marketing process need to be clarified.
It is possible for market developments to be fully implemented by private enterprise; most of the markets in, for example, New Zealand and Switzerland follow this pattern. In less-developed countries, however, government often has a decisive role to play in initiating and planning market projects, as well as financing major site infrastructure components. New markets cannot operate in a legal vacuum, and in the development of appropriate institutional arrangements, regulations and operational procedures, it is also often necessary for government to take the lead.
Type of market ownership
Alternative institutional strategies for the ownership and management of a market will need to be fully examined before selecting the ideal form. This might be a parastatal public enterprise, a private corporation or company, a cooperative or traders' group, or a combination of these. The choice will determined by local socio-economic and political factors, but the principal options are discussed here to provide a basis for evaluating their relative merits. A joint venture is often the most appropriate form.
Marketing corporations. A traditional approach to the problem is to establish a marketing corporation or authority (sometimes called a public benefit corporation). However, there are now pressures to reduce rather than increase the number of parastatal corporations. Public corporation performances are frequently poor and their operation bureaucratic. Because markets involve politically sensitive basic food commodities, such corporations cannot avoid government participation in much of their decision-making. This might lead to excessive control and interference. For a public corporation to implement new operational regulations commonly requires legislation, for which legal drafting and legislative processes may be protracted. For these reasons, management by a state corporation is not generally recommended.
Limited-liability companies. For the establishment of a limited-liability company, shareholders need to be identified and the directors would require a share holding qualification. This might not be feasible in a management structure where it is necessary to have a broad spectrum of expertise gathered together from both the private and public sectors. Private companies are flexible institutions, but their formation does not completely free a venture from detailed procedures, as it will still need to comply with the provisions of legislation.
Although a wholesale market may be set up on an alternative institutional basis, when it is fully functional and operating at a profit there may be pressure to pass the operation to the private sector. In the short term, when there are marginal financial returns, it may not be possible to attract willing investors. The registration as a limited company may be the long-term aim, but not necessarily a practical solution to immediate management demands.
Cooperative societies A cooperative society is another possibility for establishing a market, but must be viewed critically as it may not answer the need for effective management. Cooperatives often have a poor record in the management of markets, although it must be stressed that this varies substantially between countries, to the extent that some of the most successful markets in the world are cooperative nun.
A cooperative of wholesale traders is the most common form, but may be counter-productive; self-interest dictating behaviour which is detrimental to the needs of both producers or consumers. Often, a buying and selling ring is created, keeping prices down for the producers and high for the retailers and consumers. Again, there are exceptions to the rule and some of the most efficient markets in Europe are run by wholesalers themselves. The cooperative format is often the most appropriate method for a grouping of producers. It facilitates the concentration of produce at collection centres and the organization of joint transport to market. Other examples of cooperative ventures include markets established and run by religious organizations, friendly societies charities and ex-servicemens' organizations.
Local authorities. The most usual form of market ownership is by a state, local or municipal authority. These often have the power to establish and regulate markets, to lease space, charging fees as necessary, and to clean the market area. Although there are a number of significant exceptions, control solely by a local authority is unlikely to be the best management system for an urban wholesale market. Experience has shown that the main motivation of many local authorities is to maximize local revenues. Space is often let to retailers of commodities quite unrelated to agriculture, thus defeating the objective of a food market. However, as the relevant local authority, the municipal government will need to be represented on any proposed management forum.
Development boards. Legislation often exists for the establishment of a development board. This particular institutional format, one step beyond the standard government departmental organization, offers greater administrative flexibility in the management of specific projects. The principal advantage of this form of institution is that the authority has to be self-accounting. Staff may, however, need to be appointed in accordance with
government rules. This can allow management to remain closely tied to government for an interim development period while, in the light of experience, the final format of the market management system is evolving.
By special statute. Markets can also be created under Special Statute, which enables an institution to be created exactly matching particular local requirements. Such a measure could be used to establish a market authority and define the area within which it would be the sole authorized location for wholesale produce transactions. The main components included in a Special Statute might be a definition of the board representatives and their powers, the establishment of a self-accounting fund, the setting of regulations and the prescribing of penalties. This approach is often an ideal mechanism because it can accommodate the most appropriate mixture of private and public participation, allowing a mixed form of ownership, and equally importantly, a system for joint financing.
Short-term measures. The legal form in which a marketing institution might be created will need to be examined in detail. If appropriate measures already exist this obviates any operational delays that might occur whilst awaiting government approval for specific enabling legislation, such as a special statute. If a project is to proceed immediately there may be a need for such an interim institutional arrangement, but care should be taken that this will not preclude a more satisfactory long-term arrangement. A development board is often the most flexible form of initial institution.
Market management boards
Every market requires an overall control and policy body. This is typically a management board.
Composition of the board For a central wholesale market it is usual for the membership of the board to broadly cover the following sectors: fruit and vegetable producers; consumers including womens' groups; banks and credit organizations; local government; central and regional administrations; traders; cooperatives; and users' organizations, such as retailers and hoteliers.
Commercial representation on the board might be from the local chamber of commerce and from wholesale traders who are licensed to operate in the market. These may be elected by a local association of traders, although if this does not already exist it may need to be promoted by the market authority.
Government representatives arc usually drawn from the local ministry of agriculture, as technical advisers on food and agricultural marketing services, on horticultural matters and on quality control. Representation is also sometimes given to the police and public works departments, because of the importance of traffic control and waste disposal. Although these are important issues they can best be covered by an appropriate form of liaison, thus limiting the overall size of the board and reducing the influence of government bodies.
Chairing the board l he election (or sometimes appointment) of the chairperson of the board is a critical step in a market's establishment. With parastatal organizations this would normally be a prominent citizen, such as the governor of a province or state. Normally, the general manager of the market would act as the secretary to the board and the market's accountant would be treasurer, but neither should be voting members. They should attend all board meetings and, using their staff, provide the board with a full range of administrative services.
Board meetings. meetings would normally be convened by the chairperson as and when required, with more in the early years of market establishment than in subsequent years. A schedule of quarterly meetings is quite commonly adopted, but if producers' representatives are in dispersed locations this may have to be reduced to two meetings a year. Key appointments, the annual budget and the setting of fees and charges should require full board approval. The board can also, however, be represented on management information committees which would meet as and when required. Board members are usually paid attendance fees in accordance with those paid by similar institutions.
Powers of the board The overall administration of a market would be under the control of the board of director whose general powers should include:
 establishing trading systems;
 fixing of the times for buying and selling;
 establishing storage and protection facilities;
 maintaining a system of weights and measures;
 issuing licenses to traders and retailers; . recruiting and hiring staff;
 defining staff hours and conditions;
 drafting traffic and parking regulations;
 defining the conditions of leases and contracts;
 fixing rents, transaction and parking fees; and
 imposing penalties, in the form of fines, expulsions and the withdrawal of trading licenses.
Staffing the market
The board of directors of the management board should be responsible for the direct appointment of a General Manager (GM).
Staff appointments. Other staff appointments may be the delegated responsibility of the GM. Some of the key posts, such as the deputy GM and an auction-hall manager, should be appointed on the basis of the GM's recommendations to the board for its approval, as long as this does not lead to delays in decision making. The board should have power to appoint all staff and set such conditions of service as may be appropriate. Staff may need to be appointed through temporary or voluntary long-term transfers from government departments.
For the post of General Manager in particular, it will be essential to attract someone with entrepreneurial experience and considerable drive, who would be prepared to make a long-term personal commitment to wholesale marketing development. If the project is successful it may offer a model which can be replicated throughout a large country, offering long-term career prospects for staff who acquire expertise and experience in wholesale marketing.
Staffing levels. Staffing levels should be set at the minimum needed to run the market and the experience of similar markets is the best basis on which to approach the problem. Overstaffing can be a serious issue and establishment levels should be thoroughly reviewed during project preparation.
Numbers of staff used can vary considerably. The Marche de Gros in Rabat, for example, employs around 35 staff to manage the fruit and vegetable section of its wholesale market, which has a turnover of about 150,000 tons per annum. Amman wholesale market, with a similar turnover, employs around 114 municipality staff and a further 22 Jordan Agricultural Marketing Authority employees. Another significant difference between these two markets is in the usage of porters, reflecting their different operating systems. Amman has only 350 porters, while Rabat has about 3,000 registered porters of which perhaps 2,000 might operate on a particular day.
Maracaibo market in Venezuela, which specializes in fish and has a similar turnover to Rabat and Amman, is able to operate with a staff of only 22, largely because it uses modern bookkeeping methods and is well equipped. Hunts Point market in New York, with about 32 employees, has a similar staffing level to Rabat but has an annual turnover of over a million tons (over six times that of Rabat).
Table 7.1 Check-list of typical staff working at a major wholesale market
General Manager Auction Hall Manager Cold Store Manager
Deputy Gen.Manager Chief Auctioneer Maintenance Manager
Management Info. Officer Auction Assistants Maintenance Engineer
Administrative Officers Auction Cashiers Mechanics
Accountant Auction Hall Clerks Electricians
Accounts Assistants Computer Operators Plumbers
Secretaries/Typists Training Officer Labourers
Clerical Assistant Packaging Supervisors Cleaners
Farmers' Market Inspector Packing Clerks Sweepers
Entry Supervisor Grading Clerks Porters
Tally Clerks Senior Security Officer Handcartmen
Toll Collectors Security Officers Car Park Attendants
Storekeepers Watchmen Gardeners
Hostel Supervisor First Aid Nurse Drivers
Guidelines on the type of staff that might be required for a medium to large wholesale market are given in Table 7.1. It should be noted that this table includes staff for the operation of an auction hall and farmers' market. It also assumes that the market is operating its own cold stores and that equipment and building maintenance is carried out by in-house staff. Sub-contracting of services, including cleaning, accounts and control services, is adopted in many markets to limit the number of permanent staff. Staff such as labourers, cleaners and porters are often employed on a casual basis.
Significant reductions in staffing levels can be achieved by adopting modern technology. Examples include the use of special identity cards to photo-electrically operate entry gates (used in Hamburg) and the linking of weighbridges to computers so that invoicing for tolls are immediately available and market sales records are generated automatically (used in Thailand at the Phitsanulok Agricultural Central Market).
In addition to the management personnel the following staff are normally required, the roles being filled by employees working directly for government departments:
 public health inspectors and laboratory assistants, employed by the ministry of health;
 price information officers and recording clerks, employed by an agricultural economics or marketing section of the ministry of agriculture;
 post-harvest officers and extension workers, employed by an extension section of the ministry of agriculture; and
 weights and measures inspectors, employed by the ministry of trade or commerce or by a municipal authority.
Staff structure The best technique for developing a staff structure is to prepare a simplified organization diagram showing a hierarchy of management responsibilities, such as is illustrated in Figure 14. Typically, a market's management structure, excluding any specialized functions, will be divided into the following broad areas of responsibility:
 Finance and Administration
which as well as providing secretarial facilities, legal and accountancy services, and personnel administration, also includes security and building maintenance:
Figure 14 Kalimati wholesale market, Nepal - organisation structure
 Operations Sales
which covers the handling of produce within the market and all revenue collection, including any auction activities;
 Quality Control
covering post harvest activities and public health; and . Extension encompassing extension, market information services and training.
The responsibility for the latter two functions will vary depending on the market's ownership. If the market is privately owned, these services are normally provided by government; the private owner often cooperating by allocating space within the market free-of-charge so that the services can be set up.
Estimating establishment levels. Preliminary estimates of staff establishment can be derived from the scenarios of turnover which have been prepared in designing the market (see Chapter 4) The initial step should be to estimate the tonnage to be sold by private treaty or auctioned per day and relate this to the average size of consignment. An estimate should then be made of how many of these consignments might be sold or auctioned per hour during the peak period, which can be established from roadside survey data or by making assumptions about when the peak period might occur (often between 0500 hours and 0800 hours). From the estimate of peak consignments the need for entry supervisors and tally clerks to check and weigh consignments and, if applicable for auctioneers, can be established by making assumptions about how many consignments each individual might handle.
As the market develops it will be reasonable to assume that the average size of consignment will increase and that the task of entry supervisors will be adjusted from the examination and weighing of every load to one of random inspection. The numbers of general support staff, including entry supervisors and auctioneers, will decrease in proportion with this improved efficiency.
Training. The development of a wholesale market may be a completely new venture and while potential staff may be graduates few will have specific training in horticultural marketing. Overseas study tours can to some extent fill this gap, but there may still not be sufficient expertise available to undertake the management of a wholesale market without specific additional training and continued technical support. A comprehensive training programme may need to be set up, focussing on in country training and short-term courses in neighbouring countries.
The types of courses that might need to be organized include: commercial accounting procedures; computing; recording of price data; packing; grading; vegetable and fruit sales; auctioning; fish marketing; building maintenance, leasing and rentals; market operations; small-scale processing; environmental health; weights and measures; cold storage management, operations and equipment maintenance. In designing appropriate courses full use should be made of the staff resources of the agricultural economics and marketing departments of local universities and agricultural colleges. Some useful material is available from the international institutions specializing in the training of market management staff, such as those in India and Korea (see Bibliography).
Management information system
It is essential that an effective management information system (MIS) is set up. There must be a regular flow of data upon which management can make informed and timely decisions. Data needed will include:
 monitoring of project implementation;
 a training programme, to ensure that staff acquire necessary skills;
 financial monitoring, to keep management regularly appraised of market profitability; and
 monitoring of produce demand and prices (in conjunction with government officials) to be fed back to producers and available for evaluation against baseline projections made of the project's performance.
To ensure that only data with a practical application is collected, it is essential to determine the users of data, their individual needs and the frequency and format for data presentation. For larger markets data storage, processing and retrieval should be computerised.
Operational committees. A common method of maximizing the exchange of information by the market management staff is to institute a system of operational committees, with responsibility for the collection of data. The board should appoint observer members to each of the committees. These committees are part of the management information structure concerned with reviewing day-to-day performance and are not board sub-committees with delegated responsibility for policy making. The observers act as a liaison between board and management, particularly when several months may elapse between meetings of a full board. Committees might be convened for the following subject areas:
 operations and maintenance;
 development and finance;
 administration and personnel; and
 overall executive coordination.
The general manager or his deputy should normally chair the committee meetings and other staff members, appropriate to the business to be discussed, would be in attendance. Committees would meet, as required, to deal with performance constraints but otherwise not less than monthly, to prepare a performance report covering their activities. An overall executive committee would be concerned with general coordination of all activities and would decide which matters should be reported to a full board meeting for information or decision.
Methods of financial control
So far as possible within the enabling legislation, a board should be self-accounting and operate upon commercial principles. Fees and charges should be set to cover all costs, including staff, and maintenance and depreciation of assets. For its day-to-day operation a market has a considerable number of cash transactions and a daily internal audit should be an essential part of the accounting system. External audit on an annual basis is also essential. Profits should be reinvested at the discretion of the board, possibly in other market improvement programmed.
Joint financing A joint-financing method is sometimes adopted in market development. A government organization or local authority finances the main infrastructure and a traders', wholesalers' or growers' association is responsible for the erection and maintenance of the buildings. The method of financial control will need to be more complex, where the traders, for example, contribute to a proportion of the recurrent costs of the market.
<section>a</section>
8 Market operations
The development of practical policies for the operation of a new market is critical both to the preparation of the physical design proposals discussed in Chapter 4 and as a basis for project formulation and feasibility testing discussed in Chapters 5 and 10. Many people are likely to approach such a problem based on their limited experience of existing markets they may have worked in or seen, bringing with them a variety of prejudices. It is important that such preconceived ideas do not hamper any innovative thinking and this subject is often, therefore, more appropriately considered by outside consultants.
Transaction methods: auctions and sales
A key factor in determining how a market will operate is the sales method it will adopt. The main methods for sales of fresh fruit, vegetables and fish are by private treaty, by commission sales, by auction, by pre-arranged contract, or by a telephone order (common in the USA and Europe).
Private treaty. The most common method of selling perishable produce is by private treaty between a seller and buyer. The main physical difference between this method and auctioning is that there is no auction hall. The farmer/traders with produce for sale rent a market stall from a market authority for the day, week or month dependent on anticipated volume and frequency of visits to the market. Alternatively, they may sell directly from the back of the truck or pick-up in which they brought produce.
They display their produce on the stall or on the tail gate of the truck and await an offer from an interested potential buyer. The bargaining begins and depending on the supply and demand situation, coupled with the quality of the sample, the private bargaining continues until an agreement is made between the two parties. The success of this system from the farmer's or trader's point of view is largely dependent on his knowledge of the current market supply and price situation.
Commission sales The procedure adopted for commission sales is similar to that used in a private treaty agreement, except that the producer is not there in person. The commission agent, who does not have title to the goods, acts on the producers' behalf to try and obtain the best price, for which he earns a percentage commission. For this system to work there must be a high level of trust between the producer and agent. (Often the agent may be a relative of the farmer or be a larger-scale producer from the same village who owns or has access to transport facilities.
Actions A common alternative method for selling produce is by auction. This aims to attract a large number of buyers who wish to purchase goods at a competitive price. The auction method means that the auctioneer starts at a minimum price, usually bearing some relation to the price prevailing at the previous day's auction. If there is no bid, the "lot" is withdrawn from the sale. It may be taken away from the market or be sold by the farmer or trader (or in some cases, the auctioneer) in a farmers' market on a private treaty basis for the best possible price, bearing in mind the supply and current price prevailing at the time.
On the other hand, if the opening price is taken up by a buyer at the auction, followed in turn by other buyers, the bidding proceeds until the rising price for the "lot" eliminates all but the last bidder, who then becomes the owner of the produce concerned. Sophisticated variants of the auction system use a clock to indicate how the prices are changing.
Preferred system Which sales method is adopted will depend on local custom and what type of produce is being sold. It is not uncommon to have a number of methods operating at the same market. Private treaty is the most flexible method, requiring the minimum of management and is typically adopted for the sale of small lots, particularly vegetables. Auctions are almost always used in the sale of livestock and frequently for the sale of fish. Fruit can also be sold at auction, particularly if some form of grading system has been instituted.
The auction system has the advantage that it can avoid the development of wholesalers' rings and, if well organized, can facilitate the sales of a large number of very small scale consignments. However, the problems of introducing an entirely new system of sales should not be minimised and if an auction is introduced the market authority is likely to experience some difficulties with the farmers and traders, as well as the wholesalers, in the months following commencement of trading.
Rentals, fees and charges
It is the responsibility of the GM to recommend to the market board for their approval the following types of charges for the use of the market's facilities:
 rent and service charges to wholesalers for storing produce in the mar ket shed or for renting separate storage premises;
 commission to be charged to wholesalers and others purchasing produce by auction;
 tolls to farmers for using a farmers' market;
 charges for using washing, grading and repacking facilities;
 car parking charges; and
 charges for all vehicles entering the market.
The setting of rental levels and appropriate levels of auction commission is likely be one of the most controversial subjects in which the board is involved. This issue should be investigated at the project's feasibility stage and alternative rental levels and fee structures fully tested during the financial and economic analysis (see chapters 4 and 10). Final resolution of this will be dependent on full consultations with the producers, wholesalers and traders, demonstrating that they will benefit from the market development programme.
As a guideline, commission fees for auctions can be set as low as 0.5 2 percent of the value of sales, and figures as high as 8 - 10 percent are not uncommon. A figure of between 3 - 5 percent is probably reasonable. Other revenues may account for a further 2 - 5 percent of the value of sales, producing an overall revenue of 5 - 1 0 percent. if an auction system is not being used it is likely that entry and parking fees will need to be proportionally higher to cover expenditure.
Produce handling procedures
A critical step in both determining staffing levels and in designing an appropriate physical layout is to understand the functioning of the market as a series of operational steps. Although there are differences in the detail of how produce is handled, the basic steps are the same.
Figure 15 illustrates a sequence of steps, based on the proposed day-to-day operational pattern for a typical wholesale market using the auction system in Nepal. Details of this process are elaborated in Table 8.1.
Table 8.1 The sales process at an auction market
Arrival and display of produce
On arrival the farmer or trader is checked and registered at a gatehouse at the market entrance. If, on checking, the produce is unacceptable (not washed, cleaned and sorted at the farm or collection centre) he is instructed to take it to a washing and repacking shed. Once produce has been brought up to the required standard it goes to an auction hall. The trader with produce of an acceptable standard has it weighed and is issued with a numbered ticket detailing his name, district, type of produce, number of units, their weight and, lastly, an identification number of the section of floor space where he is to take his produce to await the auction. The produce is moved to a designated space on an auction 쳎latform" (segregated into vegetables, fruit and fish) by a porter employed by the market on a casual basis.
The action
The auction then proceeds, supervised by a qualified auctioneer. A typical auction, in most tropical and arid countries, commences at 0500 hours. By 0800 hours it is likely that most of the day's intake would be sold. Where it is normal to serve the main meal of the day in the late evening as in some Mediterranean cultures (such as Malta) the peak auction period may be during the late morning, with sales to the retailer in the afternoon, ready for early evening shopping. Each auctioneer needs two clerks. After each accepted bid a clerk prepares a numbered sales note (or "chit") on which he enters the entry card number; the farmer's name and district; the product; quantity and selling price. One copy of the chit is given to the farmer, the second and third copies are given to the buyer; and a funkier two copies would remain in the clerk's book.
Purchase of produce by wholesalers and retailers
The wholesaler who has bought the produce must then immediately pay the farmer/trader. Subsequently, the wholesaler presents his two copies of the chit at a cashier's counter where commission will be calculated and paid. As the wholesaler is likely to be purchasing more than one consignment of varying products he is not required to go to pay until he has completed all his planned purchases. The market porters then remove the purchased consignment and take it to the buyer/wholesalers' storage area, where it might be repacked for immediate sale or sent to cold storage. Unsold produce might be stored temporarily at the auction shed or removed, to be sold at an adjacent farmers' market.
Retailers and institutional users come to the market and purchase directly from buyers/wholesalers' establishments adjacent to the auction area. When the cashier has received the sales commission he returns a receipted copy of each sale note to the wholesaler.. On leaving the market the wholesaler needs to show these receipts to the gateman to be counter-stamped.
For a market using a private treaty method of sales the sequence of steps are as follows:
톍hecking-in of produce at the entry gate. An entry toll is usually paid at this point (but sometimes later) based on the size of the vehicle, an estimated volume or a weight established from passing over a weighbridge. Produce may at this point be divided between graded and ungraded, so it can be directed to different points in the market.
 unloading of produce at space allocated by the market authority, either a sales platform within a market shed or in some cases (normally with fruit and vegetables) an open area where sales are permitted directly from trucks. If there is a prior agreement for purchase or a contract arrangement, produce may be taken directly to a wholesaler's premises.
 purchase of produce by whole salers by private treaty and then transfer to their premises.
 resorting, packing and display for purchase by retailers and other users such as hotels and restaurants. The produce may also be stored, the storage period depending on type of produce and whether the wholesaler has cool storage facilities.
-the retailer pays a market charge based on the type of vehicle (when he enters), or the weight or volume of purchases (on leaving).
Figure 15 Produce handling within a typical wholesale market
Financial management
Markets generate a large number of transactions within a short period, requiring simple, standard procedures to handle them. A market accounting system operating along commercial principles is required, based on a system of bookkeeping which will allow auditing on a daily, quarterly and yearly basis.
Persons with recognized accounting qualifications are usually difficult to recruit and it is often impossible to attract commercially qualified accountants, unless the salary and conditions of service are considerably in excess of anything offered by the public service. The project often needs, therefore, to train its own staff and, probably, traders who will use the market, in simplified accounting procedures.
Market information and extension
A major function of a modern wholesale; market is to aid market transparency by compiling information on market prices, quantities sold and qualities offered. This information is usually collected by officials from the ministry of agriculture or trade and is useful for both the market's management and for producers, so that they can choose both the location and timing of sales. It allows producers to delay harvest or store their produce till prices are better or transport facilities are available and helps them to make better long-term production decisions. it enables traders to decide to which market they should deliver produce, so helping to equalize supply throughout a country and even out price differences. The theory of improved market transparency is that it acts as a stimulus to the economic functioning of the market, improving competition and promoting adaptations to meet supply needs and market opportunities.
Dissemination of information The implication of introducing such procedures needs to be recognized at the project formulation stage as extra staff will be needed for data collection. Computing and communications equipment will be required. A notice board should be provided in the market to display information on a regular basis. The system should ideally be connected into both a national price collection procedure linked to the media (particularly if export produce is important) and to local assembly markets and packing or collection centres. Facsimile or computer modem facilities are the most appropriate method for transmitting this information. However, if telephone links are poor this may need to be supplemented by short-wave radio connections.
Extension. Markets are a convenient location for dissemination of extension advice and information, particularly related to marketing activities. Suitable publicity material should be provided on grading/packing requirements and possible outlets for produce. A full-time extension officer from the ministry of agriculture may be warranted for a larger market. Facilities for the display of extension material and the holding of extension meetings should be made available al the market .
<section>b</section>
9 Regulating the market
The regulation of markets is a subject bound up with the culture within which the market will operate. A balance will always need to be struck, between the needs of traders to operate in as free an environment as possible and the need to provide consumer protection and impose public health and safety rules.
Licensing
Licensing can operate at a the level of the whole market or of the individual operating within it.
Market operators' licenses. When a market is privately owned or is publicly owned and let out to a private operator it is normal to require a license to operate. The administration of such a licensing system will vary from country to country. Normally it will be responsibility of a trade or home affairs ministry. Sometimes licenses are the direct responsibility of the courts and require an application to he made to a judge or magistrate.
The basis for the license will be a written agreement with the relevant authority or the market management board to comply with the types of regulations outlined below. To ensure compliance with public-health standards and fair-trading practices it is often necessary for governments to appoint inspectors who make frequent visits to markets and who have the power to revoke licenses.
Traders' licenses. All wholesalers and commission agents who wish to trade at the market should also be licensed and required to submit an application to the board for their consideration. Accepted applicants would be licensed to trade and be required to sign a trading agreement with the board.
Market regulations
The normal practice in all markets is to establish a set of regulations covering market hours and practices. These will vary substantially between different countries, but will follow some general principles. These are outlined below.
Trading bours Some markets allow trading hours to be fixed by the traders themselves. However, although some markets function over 24 hours, it is normal to regulate this so that the market can be completely cleaned for security purposes and, where an auction system is operated, to allow the books to be closed for the day. Therefore, market opening times for receipt of produce, the time that auctions, if appropriate, will commence each day and the time at which the market will be closed, should all be clearly specified. These hours should not follow those worked by government employees and should reflect the real needs of the market users. They may, however, vary during the week (reflecting religious customs) and by season, if this might have a significant impact on working temperatures or the amount of daylight hours available.
The commencement of each day's operation and termination is normally signalled by a buzzer or by the ringing of a hand bell. At the close of each day's sales, all buyers should be required to leave the market within a specified period, typically within one hour.
Liability and general regulations The regulations should stipulate that all goods taken into the market would be at the sole risk of the owner and that the market authority would not be liable for any loss or damage, other than if it failed to make "reasonable" provision for security. The rights of users of the market to have any claim against the market authority on matters of public-liability would also need to be limited. Some form of public-liability insurance may be available to cover both those that work within the market and visitors.
The regulations should require that all scales and measures used in the market should be regularly checked for accuracy by an independent authority. No commercial publicity or handbills should be allowed to be displayed throughout the market without the express consent of the market authority. The users of the market would be required to keep it in a clean condition, up to a minimum specified standard. Other general issues that might be covered by regulations include traffic and parking regulations and limitations on access to the market without a personal or vehicle pass.
A notice board, listing the general regulations of the market, should be displayed at a prominent position near the site entrance and within all the main buildings.
Regulation of tenants and traders. Under the provisions of their tenancy agreements all wholesalers, commission agents and buyers, (usually referred to by the general term of "traders") would have to undertake to respect and obey the market regulations, a copy of which would be incorporated in the tenancy agreement.
Any violation of the market regulations should result in the cancellation of the tenancy agreement and possible prosecution. For the first offence a verbal warning is often given; for a second, a written warning is issued; and for a third offence the trader should be suspended from trading for a period defined by the market authority, ranging usually from one day to one month. In specific cases legal action should be taken against the trader involved.
The wholesaler would also be required to maintain accurate financial records (available for inspection by the market authority on request) and pay commission due for purchases on the same day as the purchase was made, as well as to pay all other charges on the day they were charged.
Regulation of farmers. The regulations would also cover the activities of other traders and farmers selling goods at the market. They should be required not to sell or expose for sale any unauthorized produce. This would normally be imposed to stop the sale of high value non-agricultural items, typically clothes, but will probably also cover the sales of wine, liquor or spirits.
Producers and other users of the market, including retailers, should also be required not to create or cause to be created any riot or disturbance or to remove, damage or spoil any part of the market premises.
Inspection, quality control and hygiene
Any market must maintain a high standard of public hygiene. It will need to comply with national public health regulations, perhaps the best known of which is the Food and Drug Act in the United States.
The scope of such legislation may be wide ranging and include general matters relating to cleaning and disposal of waste materials, through to detailed technical requirements for the testing of produce for contamination. These regulations may be enforced by special officials or ones from the government's health ministry, often using public health officers attached to the municipal administration or a local hospital.
Cleaning fire prevention and quality control Specific local ordinances imposing standards for the cleanliness of markets may also exist. These may be administered by either the public works authority's sanitary inspectors or by public-health officers. The market will also come under the control of local authority public works officials and the fire brigade in relation to means of escape from the market in the case of a fire breakingout and in the maintenance of fire-control facilities, such as extinguishers and hose reels. These factors should be incorporated into the design of the market buildings (see Chapter 14).
It will usually be necessary for the market to employ its own staff of inspectors to maintain the quality of the produce and to ensure that public ordinances are adhered to, particularly any relating to grading standards and to weights and measures. For larger markets, particularly those trading in meat and fish, it will be essential to have a fully equipped and staffed laboratory. To prevent cross-infection, produce that shows any sign of decomposition should be disposed of by the market authority in collaboration with the public health officers. The trader concerned should normally have the right to remove the inferior goods from the market should he so wish.
Solid waste disposal A major problem in all markets is the disposal of solid waste and although provision may be made for depositing waste at specific points or into skips, it will also be necessary to check that market users are not placing dirt, filth, rubbish or any other substance on the market floor, but are using the containers provided.
A system of small fines may be necessary to achieve this. Although administration of solid waste disposal is the responsibility of the market authority, the actual operation of the system may be the function of the municipal authority or a private contractor. Further details on solid waste disposal are given in Chapters 13 and 14.
<section>c</section>
Part D - Technical notes
This section of the manual attempts to fill in some of the technical detail touched upon in Part B where the various stages of the design process are outlined. To make these technical notes more useful a case study approach has been adopted, primarily using illustrative material drawn from FAO studies in Nepal, Thailand, Brazil and the Near East.
10. Project justification
The purpose of any market development programme is the promotion of an environmentally sustainable project, combining the provision of benefits to producers and consumers with profitability of market operations. To evaluate whether this is actually achievable a systematic and rigorous approach must be adopted in analysing a project.
The intention of this chapter is to amplify the discussion on project justification outlined in the description of project formulation and feasibility in Chapter 5. Further background to the subject of project economics and details of appraisal techniques are contained in the publications listed in the Bibliography.
Particular reference should be made to Price Gittinger, I (1972. Economic analysis of agricultural projects. Baltimore, The John Hopkins University Press); Abbott, J.C & Makcham, J.P. (1979. Agricultural economics and marketing in the tropics. Harlow, Longman); and Harrison, K. (1987. Improved food marketing and delivery Systems, in Elz, D. [ed.] Agricultural marketing strategy and pricing policy. Washington DC, World Bank).
Financial analysis assumptions
The first step in making a financial analysis (see Chapter 5) will be to phase the inputs of materials, equipment and labour required over the project's life and cost them, in present day prices, so that cash flow tabulations can be created. Assumptions that will need to be made in order to prepare cost estimates of the capital works, recurrent expenditure and anticipated revenues for the project, are described in the following section.
Table 10.1 Typical cost elements for site preparation works
Item and description Unit
 Demolition and cart away lump sum
 Site preparation lump sum
. Fill earthworks, by thickness m
 Geo-textile blanket, by type m
 Horizontal subsoil drains, by diameter and depth number
. Vertical sub-soil drains, by diameter and length number
 Temporary drains and sediment control lump sum
 Off-site improvements to surface water drainage outfall lump sum
 Retaining walls, by type, height and thickness metro run
 Septic tanks, by volume item
 Stilling basins/trash traps and confluence structures lump sum
. Fencing/walls, by type and height metre run
 Landscaping (bollards, tree planting, etc.) lump sum
Source: FAO Project TCP/THA/8958
Table 10.2 Typical cost elements for site infrastructure
Item and description Unit
Road works: 
 Road pavement (off & on-site), by type and thickness m
 Kerbs and gutters (on-site), by type metre run
 Street signs and markings lump sum
 Parking areas, by type and thickness m
 Sidewalks and footpaths, by type and thickocss m
Surface Water Drainage: 
 Open and Covered Drains, by width and depth metre run
 Covers/Gratings, by type and width metre run
 Culverts, by diameter and depth metre run
Water Supply: 
 Mains connection, by diameter and depth metre run
 Heading to street supply, by depth lump sum
 Connection charge lump sum
 Distribution network, by diameter (incl. thrust blocks) metre run
 Chambers, by dimensions, cover type and fittings - 
hydrants, wash-outs, air valves and junctions Number
 Building connections Number
 Stand pipes, by diameter Number
 Underground tank or water tower, by capacity lump sum
Sewers: 
 Unencased & encased pipework, by diameter and depth metre run
 Manholes, by dimensions, cover type and depth Number
Electrical power supply system, including street lighting
 High . tension installations: 
 Cable (by voltage), jointing and poles lump sum
 Lightning arresters, etc. lump sum
 H.T. metering, UMT and earthing Number
 Low tension installations: 
 Transformer, by voltage Number
 Ducting and cabling, by voltage and cable size metre run
 Main control panels and earthing Number
 Street Lights Number
Telecommunications. 
 PABX exchange lump sum
 Ducting and connection metre run
Source: FAO Project TCP/THA/8958
Capital costs. Costs for civil works are usually developed on the basis of multiplying approximate quantities by global "unit rates" derived from an analysis of similar, recent contracts. The quantities are estimated from the projected schedule of accommodation and measured off the outline designs for buildings and infrastructure defined in the site master plan. For the purposes of this analysis the cost for buildings is usually estimated on a simple per square metre basis, whilst for other infrastructure costs more detailed estimates will need to be made. Typical items that might need to be included in infrastructure estimates, which are explained in detail in Chapter 14, are shown in Tables 10.1 and 10.2.
The costs of major materials might be assessed separately. These include the costs for stone, gravel and sand, which might be obtained directly from a number of local quarries. Because the fabrication of the main structure is also likely to be a major cost component, separate budget costs for this might also need to be obtained. In general, materials for building and infrastructure design should either be locally manufactured or easily available as imports from local suppliers. However, a guaranteed supply and substantial saving in steel work and cement costs can sometimes be obtained by a project if it uses imported materials in lieu of what is locally available. Equipment may also need to be imported and cost estimates for these items should cover, if appropriate, the complete supply (c.i.f. for the destination city), including labour and materials in installation, commissioning, maintenance and spares. Typical market equipment is shown in Table 10.3.
Table 10.3 Typical market equipment
Weighbridge Garden tools
Platform scales Maintenance tool kits
Grading equipment Platform trolleys
Pan Scales Handcarts
Labelling equipment Solid waste management skips
Cashier's listing machine Public address system
Public health lab. equipment  amplifier
Auctioneer's portable platform  speakers
Wall clocks  speakers (ceiling mounted)
Produce thermometers  microphone and stand
Computers end primers  megaphone
Source: FAO Project GCP/NEP/043/SWI
The build-up of capital costs should include provision for technical assistance and professional fees of design and supervision consultants. This is usually estimated on a percentage basis (typically 10 percent overall) for both pre-contract services and site-supervision. Sometimes the local custom is for the site-supervision element of fees to be charged on a time basis, but using an overall percentage is adequate for financial analysis.
Civil works and equipment cost estimates should include a 10 - 20 percent physical contingency. Price contingencies for inflation should not. however, be included in cash flows (although they may form part of project budget estimates ) as the analysis is undertaken in current prices.
For furniture, fittings and minor equipment a dump sum estimate can be included, normally based on prevailing local prices for other construction projects or by applying a factor of around 5 percent to the capital costs.
Although a market site may already be owned by a market authority or government an allowance should he included in the cash flow for land purchase, again at current prices. Often there is a need for temporary rented accommodation for market offices or storage during the construction period and this should be included in the cash flow as an approximate lump sum.
It is also sometimes necessary to identify separately any items requiring a major foreign exchange component, particularly if this feature is going to be analysed in the economic analysis.
Table 10.4 shows a compilation of capital costs for a the first phase of a medium-sized market development programme. The table incorporates all the construction costs, major equipment, technical assistance and physical contingencies.
Recurrent costs. The main operating expenditure of a market will be staff wages and salaries. These should ideally be built-up from detailed staffing establishment figures (see Chapter 7), using prevailing pay scales in the private sector. Bonus payments, based on formulas for market productivity, may also need to be included in the cost estimates.
Other items of recurrent expenditure should again ideally be estimated on the basis of data which may be available from similar markets in the region. Typical items of expenditure that should be included are shown in Table 10.5. An overall percentage basis may have to be used if insufficient detailed costs are available. A 10 percent physical contingency is usually added to the overall operating costs.
A sinking fund should also be included, calculated on a straight line or declining balance basis. Depreciation should assume a 25-years life for civil works, with a residual value equal to acquisition costs plus site preparation, a 10-years average life for equipment and 5 years for furniture and fittings. Most desk top calculators with financial functions or spreadsheet programmes have a facility for calculating depreciation.
Revenues. The revenues generated from wholesale markets are the most difficult components to estimate. Revenues for markets charging market fees directly on sales or operating an auction system are the easiest. In this case it is usual to assume as a "basic" case that revenues might be around 5 percent of the turnover, which is a fairly normal rate of commission levied in wholesale markets (see Chapter 8).
To prepare estimates of revenues on sales sensible assumptions will need to be made about the growth in turnover, as well as estimates of the average value of produce. The latter can be derived from a combination of roadside surveys of produce types and price data.
Table 10.4 Sansai Market Centre: construction costs (Bht '000)
Item Unit cost (Bht) Total cost (Bht '000)
Buildings and Equipment: 
Main Sales Space 4,500/m 9,000
 Rentable Stores 5,000/m 4,000
 Washing, Packing & Grading 4,500/m 675
 Market Management Offices 6,000/m 600
 Other Offices 6,500/m 1,300
 Basic Support Facilities 5,000/m 500
 Grain Dryer & Silo (15 ton/hr) Provisional sum #0
 Market Fixed Equipment Provisional sum 1,000
Site Infrastructure: 
 Geotechnical/Materials Testing 5/m 300
 Site Preparation/Landscaping 350/m 16,430
 Grain Drying Area 500/m 250
 Car Park - 300 pick- ups/trucks 400/m 3,840
 Car Park - 30 cars 450/m 180
 Roads 550/m 14,050
 Surface Water Drainage 200/m 10,730
 Water Supply 30/m 1,610
 Water Supply Tower 50/gal 300
 Sewerage 10/m 540
 Electrical Supply/Street Lighting 60/m 3,230
 Telecoms* 110/m 5,900
Sub-Total 74,430
Professional Fees: 
 Design @ 3 5% 2,600
 Supervision @ 2.0% 1,490
Base Cost 78,520
Physical Contingency @ 10% 7,850
TOTAL (rounded) 86,400
Source: FAO Project TCP/HA/8958 Note: # constructed in later phase
Table 10.5 Typical market operating expediture
Insurances 
 buildings at 1 percept of capital
 plant and machinery at 2 percent of capital
 public liability at 0.5 percent of capital
Office overheads lump sum
Utilities: 
 electricity and water lump sum
 fuel vehicle maintenance, lubricants, greasing etc. lump sum
 refuse collection lump sum
Repairs and maintenance: 
 building and civil works at I percent of capital
 plant and machinery at 5 percent of capital
 office equipment and furniture at 10 per cent of capital
Debt servicing percentage of total capital requiring repayment
Annual audit fee lump sum
Source FAO Project GCP/NEP/043/SWI
Other revenues, from the monthly rental for stores, from market fines (a minimal amount) and from services such as washing, grading, packing and parking fees, can be estimated as 30 per cent of the amounts collected as market fees or as commission on auctions. A more refined method to estimate annual revenues (or when a market does not charge market fees or auction commission) is to use an assumed set of financial analysis parameters. Typical examples of such parameters are shown in Table 10.6 Unit rates extrapolated from actual market rates, where these are available (such as typical rental or parking charges), would be applied to these parameters to derive revenues.
Terms used in financial feasibility studies
Although there are many techniques for analysing projects, such as by the use of goals-achievement and social cost-benefit analyses, the preferred method for marketing investment projects is usually one that adopts an internal rate of return as the main criterion. This basic method for calculating financial and economic returns, using a desk-top calculator or spreadsheet, has already been outlined in Chapter 5. The following notes amplify a number of the technical stages that are used in such an analysis.
Table 10.6 Typical financial analysis parameters
. levy on estimated average monthly throughput of sales space tons
 utilization of wholesalers' storage premises percent/m
 monthly rental of wholesalers' offices percent/m
 annual utilization of cold storage space percent/m
 stored volume at cold stores tons per month
 sales of ice tons per month
 monthly rental of other facilities percent/m
 use of washing & grading/packaging facilities percent/m
 entry fee/short-term parking use for cars/trucks '000 spaces
 use of hostel facilities per cent bedspace occupancy per night
 annual usage of toilets '000 users
Source: FAO Project GCP/NEP/043/SWI
Projected cash flows. Cash flows arc a means of representing in a tabular form all the costs and benefits of a project that have been discussed earlier in this chapter. Each year of a project's life is represented by a column in a cash flow table. The rows of the table represent the costs and benefits occurring in each year. An example of a project cash flow and the resulting financial analysis is shown in Table 10.7. The analysis is not taken beyond around 25 years as this will have little impact on a project's rate of return.
Discounted values. A market investment project is developed over a number of years and its costs must therefore be phased to reflect this. So that the financial analysis can be undertaken in present day prices, all these costs are converted into current prices by applying discount rates, usually of between 10 -20 percent. The spreadsheet programme or desktop calculator will normally allow this to be automatically calculated.
Net present value. A project's capital and recurrent costs, and gross returns can be directly related in the cash flow to obtain its annual net revenues, which arc the balance of revenues over expenditure (whether positive or negative). With the application of discount rates, these can be converted into a single figure, the net present value, which represents the total value (or worth) of a project in present day terms. This figure is equivalent to the sum that would be required to go out and purchase such a market
Table 10. 7 Sansai Market Centre: financial analysis (Bht. million)
item Year 1 2 3 4 5 6-8 9 10 11 12-25
Capital Investment: 
Civil works & fees 20.0 38.4 28.0 17.2 0.9 0.0 21.3 1.1 0.0 0.0
Land acquisition 38.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Furniture & equip. 0.0 0.0 3.8 0.6 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Recurrent Expediture 
Operating costs 0.0 0.0 2.8 3.8 5.1 7.6 8.6 11.1 12.6 14.2
Depreciation 0.0 0.1 1.7 3.3 4.9 4.9 4.9 5.5 5.8 5.8
Total Expenditure 58.0 38.5 36.3 24.9 11.0 12.5 34.8 17.7 18.4 20.0
Annual revenues 0.0 0.0 14.0 21.0 28.2 42.4 47.7 61.9 70.2 78.6
Net Cash Flow (58.0) (38.5) (22.3) (3.9) 17.2 29.9 12.9 44.2 51.8 58.6
ANALYSIS:
Internal financial rate of return = 19.34 percent
Net present value = 159.34 million Bht. at a 10 per cent compound discount rate
Source FAO Project TCP/HA/8958
Internal rate of return. The return on any investment can be expressed as a percentage; the internal rate of return. This represents the average earning power on the investment over its life, in which the total of the discounted costs and benefits (the net present value) are zero. The calculation can be applied to the financial returns on a project or to the adjusted economic returns (see Chapter 5).
If this calculation is undertaken manually it has to be by series of approximate calculations (iterations), whilst a computer or financial calculator will automatically produce a single value. To input data into the spreadsheet or calculator it is only necessary to specify the following: the amount of the initial (first year) net investment;
 each successive net cash flow amount, for the remaining 24 years; and
 a discount rate equivalent to the opportunity cost of capital (in this case taken as 10 percent).
An internal rate of zero will mean that a project has covered its capital and operating costs. A higher rate will mean that it has made a profit. A
rate of return of between 15 - 18 percent is usually found acceptable in less-developed countries.
Specilalist analysis
In some cases a different approach will need to be taken in the financial and economic analysis from that discussed in Chapter 5. Examples might include:
 integrated projects, with widely varying benefits, where the wholesale market is only a component of a larger programme, which might also include assembly markets, storage facilities, market extension and training, collection centres and rural roads;
 partial market-improvement programmes, where only a limited investment is undertaken and the impact is confined to only a part of the market's operation. An example of this might be the introduction of a traffic management scheme, where the benefits could be assessed by reference to reduced transport costs; or
 the provision of specialist facilities at a market, such as large-scale grain drying and silo storage facilities, abattoirs and cold storage.
These problems are outside the scope of this manual and should be subjected to a separate detailed justification. Because, however, cold storage is often included as part of a comprehensive market development programme the following notes amplify the types of problems that such infrastructure might create.
Justification for cold storage. The justification for cold storage must be thoroughly examined before entering into costly investment decisions, which frequently turn-out to be "white elephants". In general, it is better if gluts are prevented by using production planning to allow staggered harvesting times.
There are, however, cases when refrigerated cold storage can help the market situation. This can particularly apply with imported fruits, such as apples, where they are being sold through the wholesale market. It can also apply to local produce at harvest time, when a large crop of a particular produce is being harvested and a farmer becomes aware that the volume being sent to market cannot be absorbed without causing a serious over-supply. Through refrigerated cold storage some tones of produce can be loaded into store within hours of harvest and maintained in sound condition until supplies begin to tail off and prices improve.
Although this may justify the use of cold storage, the site does not have to be in the market and it is often more appropriately located in the production areas. Market cold stores are needed:
 to hold imported fruit;
 to hold truck loads coming from the off-market cold stores for sale at the market; and
 to provide temporary storage for small quantities to prepare for main market days or for holding temporary surpluses.
As a basis for evaluating the need for cold storage the types and quantities of crops that can be stored should be thoroughly reviewed, by looking at the supply situation and the practicality of storing that type of produce. In general, the vegetable crops that may safely be cold stored are potato, onion and carrot. No attempt should be made to store other more delicate vegetable crops until practical experience in cold storage management has been gained. Of the fruits, orange, lemon and apple are the most practical for cold storage.
Cost estimates for cold storage. Budget prices for refrigeration and cooling equipment are difficult to estimate and assistance should be obtained from suppliers in determining the appropriate capacity (specified in metric tons) and equipment needed. The following items should typically be included in a budget estimate:
 Supply and installation of refrigeration machinery, typically comprising ammonia reciprocating compressor, atmospheric condensers (1 standby), blowers, accumulator, defrosting equipment, liquid receiver, oil separator, pipework, fittings and electrical equipment (compressor motor, air handling motors, re-circulating pumping set, 3 phase electrical supply);
 Supply and installation of ice making plant;
 Supply and installation of stand-by diesel generator;
 Supply and installation of ducting;
 Freight and insurance;
 Labour and materials in installation; and
 Commissioning, I years maintenance and spares.
<section>d</section>
11. Socio-economic and engineering surveys
Surveys are the foundation of any project and are an essential part of the design process. Some words of caution are required, however, before launching a full-scale survey programme.
Introduction to survey techniques
Like many of the issues covered in this manual, surveys are a vast subject in their own right, which in the case of markets in less-developed countries touches on many other areas of knowledge, including anthropology, statistical analysis, agronomy, agricultural economics and geography. This manual can only cover the most common surveys that will be required for physical planning purposes.
The main difficulty in setting up any survey programme is to obtain the maximum amount of information with the minimum of effort. This may appear to be completely obvious, but there will be strong pressures from many involved in the development process to short cut the surveys, often because of previous bad experiences of over-elaborate and costly surveys which failed to provide the data required.
Only that information should be collected for which there are staff and facilities capable of providing analysis. I or any one day's field work there is at least another day's work in the office. A survey team of, say, six people will generate enough work back in the office to absorb the time of 2 or 3 people for a week, even if they arc using a desk-top computer to analyse the data.
It is essential, therefore, to observe the following principles:
 the purpose of the survey should be clearly defined;
 there should be a pilot survey before undertaking a full-scale survey;
 questionnaires should be short, clear and only cover key questions. Only factual questions should be asked and it should be possible to answer as many of the questions as possible by simply ticking or crossing a box on the form;
 surveys should be random, either by selecting every 5th, 10th or so stallholder or lorry driver; or by superimposing a grid over a site plan of the market. They may, however, also be stratified to ensure that all interest groups (such as wholesalers, commission agents and retailers) are covered. To obtain statistically significant results the sample size should be as large as possible, within the constraints of the resources available to collect and analyse the data; and
 the survey enumerators must be fully briefed. They should be trained and tested in the field before undertaking the main survey. A team leader should be appointed to coordinate the surveys and to deal with administrative matters such as payment of expenses and provision of seats, food, drinks and umbrellas.
Background reading on surveys are contained in the Bibliography. Particularly useful are those which deal with rapid rural appraisal techniques, including: Holtzman, J.S. (1986. Rapid reconnaissance guidelines for agricultural marketing and food system research in developing countries. Michigan State University, Department of Agricultural Economics, Working Paper No. 30) and McCracken, J.A, Pretty, J.N.& Conway, G.R. (1988. An introduction to rapid rural appraisal for agricultural development. London, International Institute for Environment and Development).
Socio-economic surveys of existing facilities
Which surveys are undertaken will depend on the type of data that is already available and the extent to which it is necessary to supplement it. With existing markets the problem is simpler than with new facilities, where indirect methods of survey may need to be adopted. The basic information needs, however, are similar to those needed for examining an existing market.
Scope of surveys. The types of socio-economic surveys that are needed in the design of wholesale markets are:
 quantities and types of goods traded, by season;
 types and roles of market users/functionaries;
 marketing channels, by season;
 employment characteristics of the market, by gender;
 management system and operational methods;
 rents, tolls and revenues; and
 annual turnover and profits.
In addition to the detailed engineering surveys described at the end of this chapter, broad physical surveys are also required of:
 the existing market layout and facilities;
 space utilization and availability, including stall sizes;
 degree of overcrowding/congestion; - utilization of facilities such as cold storage and silos; and
 traffic surveys of:
- frequency of trips and departure/arrival times;
- volume of goods transported and modes of transport used; and
- origin and destination of produce.
Survey methodologies. There are three basic methods by which these types of data can be collected:
Observation. Casual (but informed) observation and limited interviews with the market functionaries can provide a wide variety of data. The techniques of rapid rural appraisal arc very valuable in this context. A useful technique is to follow the marketing of a batch of produce from the farm level or local assembly market up to the wholesale market and then follow it right through the market until it is purchased by a retailer or other trader.
Interview surveys. Market users can be interviewed using a random stratified sample and the data can then be expanded to provide an estimate for the overall market. Two methods can be used, sometimes in combination with each other:
 by stopping and questioning the drivers of vehicles entering or leaving at the market's check-point or gate house. l his method can be used to establish the weight of deliveries, the vehicle type, its origin or destination and what type of produce is being delivered to or taken out of the market.
 by interviewing stallholders or wholesalers on a sample basis. A questionnaire for this method, which has been used for a number of 20 percent sample surveys is shown in Figure 16. The survey enumerator stopped at every fifth stallholder he or she came to. A brief interview was held and a record was taken of the overall volume and types of produce that were expected to be traded that day, the origin of the produce and the expected destination (usually based on the previous day's trade). The survey data can be analysed using computer spreadsheets (the data in the case of a 20 percent sample expanded by 5 times to obtain a 100 percent coverage) to provide the following information:
Figure 16 Interview survey pro-forma for markets in Chiang Mai Province, Thailand
- total daily volumes and type of produce sold; -selling areas of stalls;
- gender and number of employees at each stall; -volume of purchases by channel;
- volume of purchases by origin of produce; and -volume of sales by destination of produce.
Roadside surveys. This is the most reliable and comprehensive method as such surveys record all the produce entering or leaving a city or its main market within a specified time period. This technique is further discussed as a case study in the next section of this chapter.
Case study of roadside survey of commodity flows (Thailand)
The purpose of these surveys (undertaken by FAO Project TCP/THA/8958) was to understand how the Muang Mai market in Chiang Mai operated as a secondary wholesale market for the Northern Region of Thailand.
Scope of surveys. As the market is a private establishment, with only limited intervention by the municipal government, no records were maintained of transactions. It was therefore necessary to undertake surveys to establish the total quantity of fruits and vegetables both entering and leaving Muang Mai on a typical day, including recording their place of origin and the destination to which they arc being sent. This was needed so that the catchment of the market could be defined and produce flows could be quantified by type and mode of transport.
The surveys were undertaken over two full days at the end of the wet season (16/17 August 1990) and one full day in the middle of the dry season (4 May 1991). Eight enumerators were located at key points in the market (see Figure 17) covering all the main entry and exit points. The enumerators were instructed that they should ensure, as far as possible, there should be no duplication. Each vehicle was recorded only twice: when it entered and when it exited the market. The act of unloading a vehicle was considered to be its time of entry and the completion of loading and its departure, its time of exit.
Survey methodology. The enumerators were provided with standard survey forms (see Figure 17), one row of the form- being used for each set of observations (either an exit or an entry of a vehicle). The enumerators were instructed to question the vehicle drivers if there was any doubts about the origin or destination of the produce. The surveys were started promptly at 08:00 am and finished at 16:00 pm, the operating hours of the market. Actual vehicle entry and exit times were recorded and later coded on an hourly basis. Vehicles types were recorded on the form by using a code number:
Head Load/gasket - 0
Push Cart - 1
Bicycle - 2
Rickshaw - 3
Motorbike - 4
Tuk - Tuk (3 wheeler) - 5
Pick-up (1.5 tons) - 6
Saloon Car - 7
4 Wheel Truck (6 tons) - 8
6 Wheel Truck (7.5 tons) - 9
10 Wheel Truck (13 tons) - 10
Other Vehicles - 11
The main commodities that the vehicle was carrying were recorded and the percentage that the particular produce formed of the total load was approximately estimated on the basis of the capacity of the type of vehicle. These data were grouped into six classes of produce:
V1 All leafy vegetables green vegetables
V2 Bulbs, root crops and tubers
V3 Fruit-vegetables (ea. tomatoes), peppers and others
F1 Northern fruits (Iychee, langsat and longan)
F2 Southern fruits (rambutan, mangostecn and durian)
F3 Citrus, melons and others
The total load in metric tonnes was recorded based on the type of vehicle used in carrying the produce. Account was taken of partial loads, such as 1/2 load and empty vehicles were also recorded, as well as those with non-fruit/vegetable loads. The origin or destination of the particular loads were identified as accurately as possible (by province/district/ towns).
Particular care was taken to establish traffic that might be emanating from the Chiang Mai municipal area. The same enumerator did not necessarily record the entry and exit of the same vehicle and vehicle licence plate numbers were also recorded to help establish these data. For analysis purposes the origin/destination (O/D) data of vehicles was
Figure 17 Roadside survey pro-forma and location map of survey points, Muang Mai wholesale market survey, Chiang Mai, Northern Thailand
classified into thirteen groups:
0 within Muang Mai market;
1 within Chiang Mai city;
2 Chiang Mai Province;
3 -11 other provinces in the Northern Region; and
12 outside the Northern Region (Bangkok, the south or the east).
The type of trade being undertaken was also recorded, such as whether it was wholesale or retail. The same vehicle might, for example, bring a wholesale load into the market and leave with retail commodities including non-fruit/vegetable loads.
Analysis of surveys. The coding of the data was first checked against the categories of vehicle types, produce and O/D locations described above. The classified data for each day of the survey was then analysed on a personal computer using a standard spreadsheet programme. Each line in the survey forms was represented by a line in the spreadsheet and was initially sorted on the computer using time as the primary key and origin/destination as the secondary key. The data was then sorted into three basic spreadsheets as follows:
 traffic entering the market (ie. destination Muang Mai);
 traffic circulating within the market; and
 traffic leaving the market (ie. origin Muang Mai).
These three main sets of data were then further sorted, by date and whether incoming or outgoing traffic, into the following categories:
 commodity flows and type of produce by origin/destination;
 commodity flows by time of entry/exit; and
 commodity flows and number of trips by vehicle type/mode.
Results of the wet season survey This section presents an analysis of the two days of the wet season survey; a similar analysis having also been undertaken for the dry season. Table 11.1 summarizes the commodity flows (in tons) in the wet season. There was a good correlation in the figures, both between the two days and between the incoming and outgoing flows. The average daily commodity flow for the rainy season was around 300 tons. The average daily commodity flow for the dry season was around 210 tons, 30 percent less than in the wet season.
Table 11.1 Summary of commodity flows in the wet season
Commodity Flow (tons): 
Type of Flow August 16 August 17 2 Day Total Av daily
Incoming - coming into market 257.15 347.93 605.08 302.54
Internal - circulating within 24.51 36.93 61.44 30.72
Outgoing - leaving market 297.02 285.26 588.28 291.14
Average 277.08 316.59 - 297.19
Further analysis of the spreadsheet data enabled a number of other summary tables to be prepared, which are given below. The first of these tables (11.2) presents the commodity flow by type of produce. It was clear from the figures that Muang Mai is primarily a vegetable market, with this type of produce representing 90 percent of the trade. The most important source for vegetables during the rainy season was found to be the upland cropping areas in the adjacent districts to Chiang Mail
Table 11.2 Volume of wet season produce by type
Type of Produce Incoming (tons) Outgoing (tons):
Av. daily % Av. daily %
V1 All leafy vegetables/ green vegetables 199.97 66.1 163.87 56.3
V2 Bulbs, root crops and tubers 52.42 8.7 36.81 12.6
V3 Fruit-vegetables, peppers and others 91.36 15.1 66.86 23.0
F1 Northern fruits (Iychee, langsat and longan) 3.30 0.5 2. 10 0.7
F2 Southern fruits (rambutan, mangosteen and durian) 21.72 3.6 5.07 1.7
F3 Citrus, melons/others 36.29 6 0 16.43 5.7
Total 302.54 100.0 291.14 100.0
In an analysis of commodity flows by origin and destination, contained in Table 11.3, a striking difference was found between goods coming into the market and those going out.
Table.3 Commodity flows in the wet season by origin and destination
Origin/Destination by province Incoming (tons) Outgoing (tons)
Av. daily % Av. daily %
Chiang Mai City 6.63 2.2 25.33 8.7
Chiang Mai Province 218.52 72.2 19.92 6.8
Lamphun Province 27.03 8.9 8.00 2.8
Chiang Rai Province 5.05 1.7 32.47 11.2
Phayao Province 0.75 0.2 - 0.0
Uthai Tharu Province 0.75 0.2 - 0.0
Mae Hong Son Province 4.60 1.5 1.30 0.5
Lampang Province - - 0.25 0.1
Tak Province - - 3.00 1.0
Suko Thai Province - - - 0.0
Other Provinces 5.80 1.9 12.40 4.2
Outside the Northern Region 33.69 11.2 188.47 64.7
Total 302.54 100.0 291.14 100.0
Table 11.4 Commodity flows in the wet season by arrival/departure time
Time of entry/exit Incoming (tons): Outgoing (tons)
Av. daily % Av. daily %
08- 09 am 39.95 13.2 18.60 6.4
09- 10 am 41.37 13.7 16.40 5.6
10- 11 am 42.39 14.0 45.59 15.7
11 - 12 am 42.98 14.0 52.20 17.9
12 - 01 pm 50.29 16.6 20.19 6.9
01 - 02 pm 44.67 14.8 45.89 15.8
02 - 03 pm 23.58 7.8 68.46 23.5
03 - 04 pm 13.58 4.5 9.73 3.3
04 - 05 pm 3.75 1.2 14.08 4.9
Total 302.54 100.0 291.14 100.0
The pattern of vehicles entering and leaving the market during the day is shown in Table 11.4. For vehicles entering the market the pattern conformed with what would be expected; a rapid build-up in flow to a mid-day peak, quickly tailing off by late afternoon. For vehicles leaving the market there was a completely different pattern, with two peaks in the late morning and mid afternoon, corresponding broadly to the haulage distances for the produce.
Table 11.5 illustrates an analysis of commodity flow by vehicle type. The main mode for incoming traffic was the light 1 - 1.5 ton pick-up, representing around two thirds of the total, with the remaining one third of the produce being brought by heavier vehicles. For the outgoing traffic the majority of the load (around 75 percent) was carried on 7.5 - 13 ton trucks. Around 15 percent of the total was carried on pick-ups, mostly for short: haul distances within Chiang Mai city and the adjacent districts.
Table 11.5 Commodity flows in the wet season by vehicle type
Vehicle type/mode Incoming (tons) Outgoing (tons)
Av. daily % Av. daily %
Head Load/Basket 0.04 0.0 0.12 0.0
Push Can 2.46 0.8 1.84 0.6
Bicycle - 0.0 3.&6 1.3
Rick straw 0.87 0.3 2.85 1.0
Motorbike - 0.0 1.14 0.4
Tuk - Tuk 0.11 0.0 2.06 0.7
Pick-up (1.5 T.) 198.64 65.7 43.86 15.1
Saloon Car 26.35 8.7 10.46 3.6
4 Wheel Truck (6 T.) 16.08 5.3 0.15 0.1
6 Wheel Truck (7.5 T.) 26.63 8.8 74.71 25.7
10 Wheel Truck (13 T.) 17.58 5.8 141.00 48.4
Other Vehicles 13.80 4.6 9.10 3.1
Total 302.54 100.0 291.14 100.0
Engineering surveys
Apart from the socio-economic studies and traffic surveys described above, engineering surveys will be needed for both existing or proposed market sites . These surveys will typically include:
 basic mapping; - detailed topographic and geodetic surveys;
 preliminary and detailed site investigations of engineering soils;
 an analysis of a site's drainage problems;
 structural condition of existing buildings;
 surveys and testing of existing services
 water supply;
 electrical supply;
 sewerage disposal;
 a review of available construction materials and technologies; and
 typical construction costs.
These types of surveys are common to any medium or large-scale development project. However, because market administrators and planners may find that they have to issue terms of reference for topographic surveys and site investigations before design and supervision consultants are appointed (see Chapter 14) further technical details of what they might entail is given below.
Topographic and geodetic surveys. The most essential step in preparing a detailed site plan will be the preparation of a topographic and geodetic survey of the site, at either ]:500 or 1:1,000 scale. The survey should be based on a closed traverse and related to a known datum (defined by its height above mean sea level). To relate levels to this datum may require flying levels to be taken so that that the site levels can be related to a fixed bench mark outside the site.
The survey should define the site's boundaries and pick up all the existing physical features, including buildings and other infrastructure under construction. Spot level should be taken at all breaks in slope, edges and bases of drains and on a 10 metre grid over the entire site. Techniques for undertaking the surveys will vary depending on the local surveyor's skills and availability of equipment. This might range from simple chain traversing, plane tabling and level surveys, through to electronic distance measuring. Advice should be sought from a national survey organization or local surveyor's professional body on the appropriate technical specification and realistic levels of accuracy. Typical standards to be adopted (based on British Standard BS 5606) might be:
 accuracy of level values not to exceed 5mm per single sight and 10mm per kilometre relative to a permanent bench mark;
 horizontal linear measurements to be accurate within 20mm per 100 metres (applying appropriate slope and tension corrections); and
 angular measurements to be accurate to within 20 seconds of arc.
Soils and foundation investigations. Detailed geotechnical investigations are required so that the foundation design of buildings, road pavements and other structures is both safe and economic to construct. The locations of test sites should be established so as to provide this optimum data for building and road design. The site investigations will usually be carried out by a specialist contractor, who will undertake the field survey and laboratory analysis, as well as prepare a comprehensive report.
The scope of surveys will normally include boreholes (typically using an auger and rotary-cum-wash boring rig), dynamic cone penetration tests and California Bearing Ratio (CBR) tests. Disturbed samples are collected from split-spoon samplers and undisturbed samples with open tube samplers. These data will need to taken to a laboratory, where the following analyses and tests should be be undertaken:
 standard penetration tests, related to the depth of boreholes and dynamic cone penetration tests, correlated to standard penetration test data.
 tests on physical properties:
- natural moisture content;
- Atterberg limits (liquid limit, plastic limit and plasticity index);
- bulk density and specific gravity;
- sieve/grain size analysis (wet method); and
- particle size/hydrometer analysis for clayey soils;
 unconsolidated undrained triaxial tests on undisturbed samples, providing stress versus strain curve data;
 consolidation tests on undisturbed samples, providing compression index values;
 modified Proctor compaction tests on CBR samples;
 California bearing ratio (CBR) soaked tests;
 chemical tests, including pH and soil sulphate content; and, if appropriate,
 soil-cement stabilization tests, using triaxial compression apparatus.
The contractor should be required to prepare a detailed report of the laboratory analysis and to plot the borehole log data to give typical site profiles, indicating the changes in soil types, depth to bed-rock and the groundwater table level. The application of these site investigation results is described in Chapter 14.
Figure 18 Spatial distribution of production areas in Nepal (by season)
<section>e</section>
12. Analysing demand and estimating market turn-over
The purpose of this chapter is to describe how the agro-economic, demographic and survey data collected by a project can be used to analyse existing trade patterns and form the basis for making projections of future demand at an existing or new market.
Analysis of existing trade patterns
In analysing existing trading patterns the intention should be to understand how a market relates to all the other outlets through which production is channelled. This will vary greatly, both by type of crop and by season. In some cases, typically with fruit production, the majority of produce may be sold at field level. This provides a guaranteed outlet and is often combined with an arrangement for providing cash before harvesting (the crop is "bought off the tree" In other cases, crops are traded through a hierarchy of local markets, which assemble produce for sending to a local secondary wholesale market or by-pass this market by sending directly to a terminal wholesale market in a distant city.
This analysis is a critical stage in the preparation of a development project for understanding the impact of any intervention in the marketing process. To describe how it can be undertaken is, however, difficult as the circumstances under which such interventions take place will completely vary between different countries. The following notes, therefore, give an indication of the types of issues that will need to be addressed.
Horticultural production and its spatial distribution. To understand existing trading patterns it is necessary to compare market survey results on the origin of produce being traded with published data on production. A typical tabulation of national-level vegetable production data for Nepal is shown in Table 12.1. The spatial distribution (by season) of these production areas is shown in Figure 18, together with the location of the main areas for fruit, fish and potato production.
Comparable production data is normally also available at provincial and district levels. The data should be examined to see what changes may be occurring in both the levels of production and its distribution. Agricultural production data is often very approximate as it is frequently
prepared by adjusting a previous year's data by applying theoretical changes in yield. However, the overall throughput of existing rural assembly markets, urban wholesale markets and retail facilities will obviously be influenced by local levels of production of fruit and vegetables and an analysis of available production data should help to establish the broad flows through the various marketing channels.
Table 12.1 Vegetable production and consumption targets, Nepal
Cultivated area ('000 ha) 83 96 138 140 141 141
Production (000 m/t) 423 528 743 875 970 1,515
Yield m/t per he) 5 6 5 6 10 11
Per caput consumption not not 
(kg per annum) stated stated 44.8 46.0 50.9 65.0
Source: Improved production of tropical vegetables in Nepal. 1988.
Pokhrel, M. N., Ministry of Agriculture, Nepal.
Note: excluding potato and leafy vegetables
Although the location of production areas is obviously influenced by factors such as soil fertility, moisture availability, temperature and topography, their relationship to potential consumers is equally important. Transport costs also play a major role in influencing the location of production areas, but there is usually a tendency for producers of a similar crop to congregate in a particular area.
This tendency to specialize can be studied as a pattern by converting the figures for the areas under crop or production levels, for each district or sub-region, into a series of coefficients, computing them as a percentage of a provincial or regional total. The coefficients can be grouped into, say, five different levels of productivity: very high, high, average, low and very low. These can then be plotted on a base map to show the spatial distribution and importance of production areas by district or sub-region within the market's catchment. From such an analysis, and by comparing the production areas in relation to the location of the main markets and the availability of transport facilities, it should be possible to deduce the likely direction of produce flows.
The following conclusions (see Figure 19) were deduced from such an analysis undertaken in Northern Thailand:
The majority of the produce from outside Chiang Mat Province naturally by-passed the province and this pattern would not be significantly altered by any intervention in the marketing system. Because of Chiang Mat cay's location in the centre of the province, only a proportion of its vegetable production would be marketed through the provincial capital. Producers south of the city were likely to sell either direct from the field or assemble their produce locally in the production area, for direct transfer to Bangkok and other destinations outside the province. In contrast, production areas to the north were more likely to use wholesale facilities available in the city. The relatively small volumes of flower production in the province were concentrated around the city. The pattern for upland and perennial crop production was found to be very similar to that for vegetables, but with probably less incentive for producers remote from the city to use its wholesaling facilities.
Many studies in the evolution of land-use have frequently confirmed the persistence of intensive horticultural production close to major centres of population. Market garden areas near to cities, producing high value fruit, vegetables and cut flowers, are a typical example of this. In addition to "rings" of production around cities, a substantial amount of cultivation in most less-developed countries may still be undertaken within the boundaries of municipal areas.
However, with urbanization, there will be increasing pressure on cultivable land within city boundaries, What generally happens is that land such as kitchen gardens becomes more intensively used, so that production of vegetables, fruit and fish (from pond culture) increases, while the production of other crops, such as rice, decreases. Despite its importance to low-income families, such intensive cultivation may be actively discouraged in order to reduce the incidence of malaria. It may also be used as an excuse to limit the operation of hawkers (who may sell both local produce and that produced outside the city) or as part of an often dubious programme of urban "beautification".
Seasonal variations in trade. A key factor in market operations is the degree to which trade varies by season, reflecting peaks in production. If a marketing authority maintains daily records from an existing market then a comprehensive data base will be available for making such an assessment. Table 12.2 shows such a set of data for three wholesale markets in the Near East, the peak months being compared to the average months using a ratio. Figure 20 illustrates the same data as a histogram, demonstrating the comparatively small seasonal variation at the Rabat wholesale market, compared with Amman and Cairo.
Figure 19 Variations in vegetable production in Chiang Mai Province, Thailand
Table 12.2 Seasonal throughput variations in Near Fast markets
Month Central Market
Amman, Jordan Rod al Farag
Cairo, Egypt Marche de Gros Rabat, Morocco
(tons) (ratio) (tons) (ratio) (tons) (ratio)
January 15,091 1.17 23,759 0.99 11,552 0.89
February 9,642 0 75 23,420 0.98 11,305 0.87
March 13,948 1.08 22,718 0.95 12,801 0.99
April 16,683 1.29 19,721 0.82 12,432 0.96
May 11,497 0.89 27,641 1.15 13,523 1.05
June 5,582 0.43 28,210 1.18 14,323 1.11
July 4,961 0.38 25,593 1.07 14,736 1.14
August 7,813 0.60 27,909 1.16 13,729 1.06
September 12,806 0.99 25,978 1.08 11,883 0.92
October 17,024 1.32 21,978 0.92 13,118 1.02
November 20,050 1.55 19,796 0.83 12,718 0.98
December 20,244 1.56 21,202 0.88 12,973 1.00
Total 155,341 287,925 155,093
Average 12,945 1.00 23,994 1.00 12,924 1.00
Source: Market Authorities (data collected by FAO)
Figure 20 Comparison of seasonal variation in trade volumes (Near East markets)
If markets records are not available or there are no markets presently in operation, then other methods of analysis will need to be adopted. For an existing market, the types of interview and roadside surveys outlined in Chapter 11 may give some indication of seasonal variation. However, there may not be sufficient time-series data to draw any concrete conclusions to suggest that the trade at a wholesale market completely reflects the seasonal variations. Peak production is often more likely to be purchased directly in the field, at the "farm-gate" or be marketed through local assembly markets/trans-shipment points. Comprehensive official or research data is not likely to be available on the variation in fruit and vegetable production by season, except for price data, which is virtually impossible to use for deducing seasonal indices because of the time lags in price changes, the impact of storage and the substitution between produce.
Figure 21 Simplified cropping programme in Sri Lanka
Typical cropping calendars for upland/lowland, rainfed systems and off-season production in irrigated areas can provide useful models for examining seasonal variations in horticultural production. A simplified example for Sri Lanka of such a cropping pattern is shown in Figure 21.
These diagrams can be interpreted by using the informed judgements of farmers and traders as to where production is coming from and the broad distribution of volumes between seasons (ideally on a monthly basis). For semi-dry produce, such as garlic and onions, storage and market price may have a significant effect on marketing. Curing, drying and storage extends the period of marketing and an off-season crop may alter prices substantially. In contrast some highly perishable produce may only have a single growing season and apart from what can be canned or dried, the main production has to be marketed during that period.
Figure 22 Marketing channel partcpants, Sri Lanka
Figure 23 Proportions of produce going through different marketing channel (Jordan)
Marketing channels. Another consideration in understanding the existing pattern of trade is the problem of defining the channels through which production might pass. Reference has been made in the previous sections as to how this may vary according to factors such as the location of production areas, credit arrangements and seasonality. Other factors such as political and cultural conditions, the level of transport facilities and the presence of a traditional network of rural markets will also influence how the channels may operate. Figure 22 illustrates the complex pattern of channels that exists in Sri Lanka
Informal surveys of farmers, wholesalers and retailers can be used to define such a pattern. However, to understand how the pattern might impinge on the role of a wholesale market the flows in the system need to be quantified. Figure 23 illustrates the results of surveys undertaken in Jordan on the flow of produce through the main marketing channels.
To make such estimates it may be necessary to extend the scope of surveys to include local assembly markets so that the role that they play can also be defined. Figure 24 illustrates the results of such a survey in Northern Thailand Some of the markets are exclusively involved with the assembly of produce, whilst others are involved mainly with distributing produce to rural consumers received from the nearby urban wholesale market of Muang mad, in Chiang Mail
Figure 25 is a further analysis of the data from Northern Thailand and suggests that the function of the local markets is strongly influenced by the type of produce that is traded. Most local trade is in vegetables, with a low volume of fruit sales, confirming the fact that fruit sales often by-pass the local market system. The reasons for this are that fruit sales are predominately for markets outside the district and the sales of vegetables are often to local people for their own consumption. They most probably have their own fruit trees or would buy from neighbours.
Trade volumes by-passing the wholesale market. To establish existing trade volumes, and amounts of trade that might be by-passing an existing wholesale market, surveys of produce flow should be undertaken over an extended period, covering all flows into a city. Table 12.3 shows the results of a typical roadside and retail outlet survey undertaken in Kathmandu over a 10-day period in April 1989.
The Kalimati market had been recently opened at the time of the survey. With such a new wholesale market, trade will only gradually build up and produce which formerly went through other marketing channels will then transfer to the new facility. If there is a genuine demand for a new market the increase in turnover should be quite rapid and a general trend for the volume handled to increase each month should be observable. Roadside surveys undertaken over a number of seasons will be required to see the longer-term effect of such changes on the pattern of trade
Figure 24 Assembly function of local markets, Chiang Mia Province
Table 12.3 Roadside survey: daily produce coming into Kathmandu (kg)
Commodity Kalimati whole- Other destinations
sale market in the city
Cabbage 8,334 5
Cauliflower 1,426 126
Onion, dry 6,648 
Onion, green 369 1,794
Garlic, green 490 2,975
Chilli" green 1,044 
Beans 1,108 9
Potato (incl. exports) 5,595 32,834
Tomato 12,979 591
Grass/leaf produce 427 2,251
Spinach 549 2,666
Other 2,748 1,106
Total (av. 10 days) 41,717 44,357
Source: FAO Project GCP/NEP/043/SWI
Transport changes. Roadside surveys also provide useful data on the changes that might be occurring in the type of transport ("mode") used by farmers and traders for bringing produce to market. Before farmers become well organized, public transport often plays a key role. In Kathmandu, for example, the importance of the wholesale market's location adjacent to a bus terminal has led to significant amounts of produce coming long distances by bus. This is illustrated in Table 12.4. The improvement of rural roads the availability of credit to purchase a motorbike and sidecar, the availability of low-cost pick-ups and the organization of group marketing, can all have a significant effect on marketing practices.
Over-view of existing trade pasterns. Once an assessment has been made of all the factors influencing the pattern of trade an attempt should be made to compile these into a complete model of the produce flows on a daily, seasonal or annual basis. Figure 26 illustrates what happens during the peak period in Northern Thailand. It assumes that the peak daily provincial production volume was around 1,600 tons and that rural markets had an overall total turnover of 170 tons per day. From this diagram it can be seen that most of the daily production in Chiang Mai Province is exported directly to Bangkok or other provinces. In the cool season the pattern is broadly similar except that the quantities of fresh produce exported are perhaps half of what would be exported in the peak period. In the hot dry season exports are more likely to be directed towards the other provinces in the Northern Region rather than to Bangkok.
Figure 25 Variations in type of produce sold in local assembly markets, Chiang Mia Province
Table 12.4 Mode of transport for produce coming into Kathmandu (%)
Mode of transport Kalimati whole- sale market (%) Other destinations in the city (%)
Truck 37.3 28.8
Mini-bus 12.2 66.8
Bus 50.0 -
Bicycle 0.3 1.8
Farmer himself (headload) 0.2 2.6
Source: FAO Project GCP/NEP/043/SWI
Figure 26 Daily produce flows in a regional marketing system (Northern Thailand)
Projected patterns of trade. Unless a comprehensive horticultural plan exists, which is usually not the case, it is unlikely that the long-term potential for increased horticultural production can be established. Such projections of future outputs, accompanied by an overall marketing strategy for produce, are the ideal basis on which to make an assessment of changes in the patterns of trade. In their absence, it will be necessary to make a number of broad assumptions in respect of the total volumes traded and the share that might pass through any existing or new wholesale marketing facilities.
From the analysis of marketing channels, the spatial distribution of production and the results of origin/destination surveys it may be concluded that to alter the present pattern of marketing would be quite difficult. In making projections for changes in a marketing system, therefore, rather conservative assumptions may need to be adopted in relation to the potential throughput of any new market. There would need to be substantial financial benefits to farmers to attract them away from existing market channels, particularly from the common practice of direct purchasing at the farm level by outside traders withestablished relationships with the farmers (such as providing inputs and credit arrangements). It would be unrealistic to presume, therefore, that a greatly enlarged proportion of the trade can be attracted, in the short term, to use new facilities, unless an existing market is being closed down.
Long-term estimates of throughput are even more difficult to make because of the unreliability of production projections. The agricultural sector in many developing countries is responsible for a decreasing proportion of the gross national product, although there may at the same time have been an overall expansion of cropped areas, particularly for horticultural produce and to a lesser extent for field crops. In many countries the potential for this rate of expansion to continue is likely to decrease as only the more marginal areas become available.
Another common factor is likely to be the impact of urban expansion, which typically causes a loss of presently cultivated land within and on the periphery of cities. These effects are likely to be off set, however, by increases in cropping intensity and by farmers switching to higher-value crops. Without detailed studies of land-use change any estimates of increased production are usually very tentative. A common working hypothesis is to assume that the production of fruit and vegetables will expand at a rate slightly higher than that of urban population increase (say, at 3 - 5 percent per annum).
<section>f</section>
Consumption of fruit and vegetables
As well as understanding how an existing market system operates and can be modified, it is also essential to quantify the present level of consumption of fruit and vegetables. There are two approaches to estimating consumption: a demand approach or a supply approach.
Demand approach. The basis for this method is the use of income elasticity coefficients, relating changes in income to spending behaviour. The concept is represented by a formula, relating population to income:
Qn = Qo (1 + p)(1 +ey) n
where: Qn = projected consumption at year n
Qo = consumption in the base year
p = annual rate of population growth
y = projected growth of per capita disposable income
e = projected income elasticity
n = number of years from base date
Although a number of countries, for example the Philippines and Sri Lanka, have rather complete data on elasticities this is not normally the case. Figures from other countries are not generally applicable, given different dietary and cultural habits. For example, the demand coefficient for eggs in the Philippines is 0.68, whilst in Sri Lanka it is 0.86 and more dramatically, the coefficient for maize in the Philippines is minus 0.61, whilst in Sri Lanka it is 0.2. There are other major difficulties in using demand elasticities as they assume that past consumption trends will continue. This might be reasonable if historic data is available to verify this, but generally it will not be. Another problem with the approach is in understanding the substitution effect between different vegetable and fruit crops, for which only limited data may be available.
Adequate demographic data often exists for estimating the population effect, but other factors in the equation are unlikely to be reliable without undertaking extensive surveys to establish income elasticities of demand, seasonal differences in trade and a profile of average disposable income.
Supply approach. Because of the problem of estimating consumption using a demand approach, reliance usually has to be placed on available data on per caput consumption of fruit and vegetables These are derived from estimates of present supply, making adjustments for imports, exporls and food processing. A typical example of such an estimate is shown in Table 12.5.
Table 12.5 National food balance sheer data for Nepal -1980/81
Commodity Production
'000m/t Import
'000m/t Export
'000m/t Net Supply
'000m/t Per caput*
kg. per annum
Potato 320 1 1 331 15.57
Vegetable# 511 6 517 31.35
Fruit 271 4 - 275 15.54
Irish 4 - - 4 0.27
Source: Marketing Services Division Ministry of Agriculture Nepal 1989. Notes: assuming allowances for seed production and waste.
#including leafy vegetables but excluding pulses and tubers.
Table 12.6 Typical per caput availability of major foods 1986 - 88 (kg)
Country Cereals Roots &
tubers Pulses & beans Fruit & vegetables Animal products
Developing countries
Bangladesh 1,582 29 44 22 50
China 1,867 159 29 68 239
India 1,310 38 126 67 117
Indonesia 1,789 187 18 58 71
Malaysia 1,224 75 29 105 380
Nepal 1,654 54 63 19 114
Pakistan 1,268 8 50 59 180
Philippines 1,390 109 8 104 224
Sri Lanka 1,340 73 50 103 98
Thailand 1,399 57 34 136 179
Tonga 501 1,146 - 127 179
Developed countries
Australia 786 92 17 157 1,016
Japan 1,179 79 22 131 510
New Zealand 719 104 18 214 1,134
Source: Selected indicators of food and agricultural development in the Asia-Pacific Region 1979-89. 1990. Bangkok, FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific RAPA Publication 1990/15.
FAO has undertaken a number of regional studies of nutrition, based on food balance sheets and taking into accounl availabilily of- foods and human energy requirements. From these studies estimates of per caput consumption can be derived. Data from one of these studies of selected countries in the Asia-Pacific Region is shown in Table 12.6. These type of data are likely to be the most easily available, but need to be used with some caution as the figures are national averages. They are likely to disguise substantial variations in consumption between different seasons, locations, income groups and between urban and rural areas, particularly if there is also a large tourist trade.
Per caput consumption data should ideally be derived from detailed local surveys. An example of such an approach is a study in Thailand which surveyed the daily intake of fruits and vegetables for a range of income classes, based on surveys in two villages over two seasons. The range of kg per caput values in Table 12.7 demonstrates the substantial variation that can occur. However, the overall average compares reasonably well to the FAO national figure of 136 kg per caput shown in Table 12.6. Results of a similar type of sample survey of consumption of major food items, for selected districts in Nepal, arc given in Table 12.8.
Table 12.7 Annual consumption of fruit & vegetables in rural Thailand
location year consumption (kg per caput):
minimum maximum
Surin (North Eastern Province) 1987 38.8 63.7
Average 63.5 97.8
Nakorn Ratchasima (near Bangkok) 1987 38.8 96.9
Average 44.9 150.7
Source: Konjing, C. Food security at household level in rural Thailand. Bangkok, Department of Agricultural Economics and Business Administration, Kasetsart University.
Table 12.8 Consumption in selected districts in Nepal (kg per caput)
Commodity Mustang Gorkha Jhapa Dhankuta Solokhumbu
Potato/Sweet Potato 61.83. 15.52 27.29 20.65 86.03
Vegetables (excl. legumes) 28.07 24.11 43.44 25.65 11.41
Fruit 7.67 7.60 7.08 8.70 3.15
Meat/Fish 10.18 7.87 8.12 7.98 4.44
Source: Food consumption survey, 1984/85. Nepal, Ministry of Agriculture.
Consumption estimates. The estimated consumption of fresh produce should be derived from the per caput data by relating it to estimates of the existing and future populations for the area served by the market. The following formula summarizes the calculation method:
Annual supply (tons) = total population served x per caput consumption x 0.001
The existing demand for fruit and vegetables in a typical city of around 300,000 people using this method and on the basis of an assumed range of kilogramme-per-caput consumption figures might be as follows:
Annual supply (tons) = 300, 000 x 150 kg. per caput x 0.001 = 45,000 tons.
Such an estimate needs to be checked against surveys of wholesale and retail markets in order to make an assessment of the quantities of produce that might be spoilt or be by-passing the formal marketing system. Particular care is needed in reviewing survey figures, as what may be reported as being sold at markets may also include a proportion of produce that either remains unsold at the end of the day or is sent on to other markets and perhaps sold twice in the same day. Another common distortion arises from some produce not having been purchased at the market and reaching the consumer through other channels. It may come from home-garden production (particularly fruits) or have been sold directly by farmers or traders to small corner stores, supermarkets, hotels and to institutions, such as hospitals, schools and army camps.
The values of daily throughput at a market may therefore need to be adjusted so that they can be matched with per caput consumption estimates. Table 12.9 gives an example from Northern Thailand of such a set of adjustments, comparing the trade in Muang Mai wholesale market to consumption in the Chiang Mai municipal area. It uses a range of values for the daily trade in Chiang Mai, taken from surveys (see case study in Chapter 11). The analysis assumes a constant per caput consumption and relates together possible low (dry season), medium and high (wet season) volumes-with variations in destination of produce. The analysis highlights the large volume (around 80 per cent of the total urban consumption) that by-passes the wholesale market, including a significant proportion coming from home-garden production.
Table 12.9 Daily consumption of produce, Chiang Mai, Thailand
Destination of Produce Volume Traded (tons):
(Fruit and Vegetables) Low Medium High
 Daily volume leaving Muang Mai wholesale market 210 250 300
 Daily volume leaving Chiang Mai and 
going to other provinces and to Bangkok 190 230 270
 Balance traded at retail markets in Chiang Mai 20 25 30
 Other trade at retail markets in Chiang Mai 80 75 70
 Volume by-passing Muang Mai wholesale market & retail markets: going to supermarkets, institutions and hotels (including home garden consumption) 40 40 40
Average daily urban consumption from all channels in Chiang Mai 140 140 140
Source: FAO Project - TCP/THA/8958
Estimating future demand
Future demand is always difficult to estimate as the marketing situation often alters rapidly in response to demographic and other changes. Other factors influencing demand may include a general increase in incomes, which is often attended by changes in dietary habits and substitution between different types of food stuffs. Frequently, such income changes lead to an increased consumption of meat, fish, speciality food and, sometimes, higher quality grades of rice (see Table 12.6). In making projections using the supply approach, however, the substitution effect between different produce has to be assumed to be zero.
The process by which the projections are made is to first make an assessment of how the existing pattern of trade might evolve (discussed in the first section of this chapter) and linen to estimate what proportion of this trade may be expected to pass through a new or improved market.
Market development policies. The first step in making the estimate of future demand is to try and set the projections in the context of a market development programme. Existing plans and programmes may already exist, either as public sector policies or as proposals for investment by the private sector. These will need to be reviewed to see whether they can form a realistic basis for an overall development programme. If not, it will be necessary to make some overall assumptions on the basis of the assessment made of existing trading patterns.
Projected demand In preparing estimates of the potential demand for produce (fruit, vegetables and fish) a number of assumptions will need to be made. The example shown in Table 12.10 from Kathmandu demonstrates the principles that might be followed in making an approximate estimate of future demand.
Other approaches to projecting demand levels for the urban consumption of fruit and vegetables are to use income elasticities (which is likely to pose the same problems as discussed previously) or to derive values from historical trends. Studies of per caput changes in consumption tend to suggest that., like increases in production levels, they will match fairly closely the rate of urban population increase.
Table 12.10 Demand assumption - Kahmandu, Nepal
 The consumption of fruits, vegetables and fish for six districts in Nepal, based on consumption survey data was broadly matched with national food balance sheet data. For example, for vegetables, the per caput consumption in 1983/84 of 42.14 kg. could be equated with an average in six districts of 27.5 kg per capita, if leafy vegetables were excluded.
 per caput consumption in the city of Kathmandu is substantially higher than the national average and an adjustment was derived by using unpublished data on average monthly household expenditure on goods and services. This enabled ratios to be calculated between the national average expenditure on fruits, vegetables and fish compared with that of urban Nepal and between urban Nepal and Kathmandu.
 consumption of vegetables in Kathmandu was estimated as follows:
27.5 kg per caput x 1.43 (urban/rural ratio) x 1.05 (addition for Kathmandu) = 41.5 kg per caput
 for fruits, however, using the same basis produced a figure of 33.14 kg per caput for Kathmandu, substantially above the national plan target. Therefore, the present consumption of 22.19 kg per caput was used.
 for fish the per caput consumption was based on the existing estimated consumption of fish in Kathmandu i.e. 5.8 kg per caput.
 all projections of future consumption were based on survey data or official published target levels of per caput consumption.
Source: FAO Project (GCP/NEP/043/SWI
Market throughput
After making projections of present and future demand, the next step in the preparation of an outline master plan is to ensure that there is sufficient space to accommodate the facilities required for the operational procedure envisaged (described in Chapter 13). As a basis for these calculations it is first necessary to make projections of the likely throughput of the market.
Design scenarios. A simple approach to projecting throughput is to develop scenarios for the peak monthly throughput of the market, using figures on per capita consumption and the likely population served, based on crude projections from previous population growth and migration trends (if more refined figures are not available). Possible design scenarios that often used are: a minimum size, corresponding to present immediate demand; a median size, corresponding with likely demand in the near future (say within the next 5 years); and an ultimate size, which would accommodate the growth in demand over the 20 -30 years of a project's life.
A typical example of a throughput calculation for Kathmandu, using the demand assumptions shown in Table 12.10 and taking into account production by-passing the wholesale market system, is shown in Table 12.11. The calculations use projected per caput consumption values for three types of produce at three design dates and assume an increasing share for the new market of the total wholesale trade in the city.
Design assumptions. The projections in Table 12.11 include estimates of the throughput at peak periods, taken as 2 - 2.5 times the annual monthly average production/sales, and arc based on the methods for assessing seasonal variations described earlier in this Chapter. It can be assumed, however, that the ratio will decrease over time. In estimating space requirements the extent to which these seasonal differences need to be considered is a matter of judgement. In principle, the estimating techniques described in Chapter 13 already take the peaks into account as they are based on average values. In some circumstances, for example, where there is a short duration peak caused by a particular crop, it may be better to calculate for the peak separately in order to make special provision for it.
Table 12.11 Kalimati wholesale market, Katmandu: design assumptions
Per caput
consumption
(kg/pa) Urban area consumption Traded at Kalimati:
Annual
total
(tons) Home
use
(m/t per annum) Volume
sold
(%) % of
total
(tons) Monthly
volume
Minimum size: (1988 Design Population - 411,000)
 Vegetables 41.50 17,060 3,410 13,650 30 340
 Fruit 22.19 9,120 1,820 7,300 20 120
 Fish 5.80 2,380 n/a 2,380 0 0
Total average monthly throughput (tons) 460
Peak monthly throughput, 2.5 x average month (tons) 1,150
Median size: (1990 Design Population - 442, 000)
. Vegetables 50.90 22,500 4,500 18,000 30 450
 Fruit 24.41 10,790 2,160 8,630 20 140
. Fish 8.00 3,540 n/a 3,540 0 0
Total average monthly throughput (tons) 590
Peak monthly throughput, 2.5 x average month (tons) 1,480
Ultimate size: (2000 Design Population - 700, 000)
. Vegetables 65.00 45,600 9,120 36,480 60 1,820
. Fruit 35.20 24,640 4,930 19,710 60 990
 Fish 13.34 9,340 n/a 9,340 50 390
Total average monthly throughput (tons) 3,200
Peak monthly throughput, 2.0 x average month (tons) 6,400
Source: FAO Project- GCP/NEP/043/SWI
Another key assumption which needs to be considered in estimating throughput is that the percentage of the wholesale trade going through the market will vary depending on the operation of existing marketing channels. Data from roadside and retail surveys may provide a basis for establishing how this might realistically change in the future. The figures should be treated with some caution, however, as they may not be representative of the whole year. Adjustments may therefore be needed, similar to those used when matching estimates of existing consumption to volumes recorded from roadside and other surveys (see estimated consumption in the previous section)
Design targets. A reasonable target for when the market is fully operational should also be projected but the extent to which trade would switch from present markets must be evaluated carefully, bearing in mind the degree to which some produce will by-pass the market system, particularly that from home gardens within the city. A likely eventuality is that a new market will gain the new trade and that the existing markets and other channels will broadly retain their present level of trade.
<section>g</section>
13. Planning and environmental design criteria
This chapter describes the calculation methods that can be used for estimating market building requirements and reviews the process and types of criteria that will need to be adopted in preparing the site plan and building designs and in making an environmental assessment of a market development project.
Selecting a new market site
In considering a site for a new market, public bodies are frequently pressured into accepting a location which is already owned by central or local government. This obviously simplifies the problem of land acquisition, but the justification for relocation and the characteristics of a proposed site still need to be rigorously analysed before this solution is accepted. Full consultations will be required with all the interested parties. The issues involved and desirable features to be reviewed in choosing a new site are discussed below
Number of market sites. The first decision that needs to be considered is whether it is necessary to concentrate all wholesaling activities at a single site. It may be possible for an existing market to serve the central area of a town and for outer suburban areas to be served by a new market. Alternatively, the scale of a city may favour more than one outer wholesale market, which may serve either the needs of producers bringing produce from different directions or the needs of retailers in a city with widely dispersed retail areas. The potential location of market sites to serve a city are shown in Figure 27. It may be appropriate to adopt a multiple-market solution for a city:
 if there are many small-scale retailers, with premises scattered throughout the city;
 if retailers' transport facilities arc inadequate and
 if roads are highly congested.
Size of site. The estimation of a suitable size for a new site is a difficult question as comprehensive detail is unlikely to be available on existing trading or on the desirable range of facilities that the site might need to accommodate. Suitable methods for estimating site size can be based on two basic criteria: urban population and annual turnover. An approximate basis for making such an assessment is to use a figure of 4 - 5 tons of turnover per m of overall site area area. More detailed figures on which to make an assessment are discussed in the next section in this chapter on estimating space requirement (see Tables 13.1 - 13.4).
Figure 27 Location of wholesale markets within a city
There are, however, likely to be wide deviations between countries in what is appropriate, because of seasonal fluctuations in supply, trading practices, cultural differences and the dissimilar natures of markets. Some may be exclusively for terminal trade in a city, while others may have a strong export or re-assembly orientation.
Locations A new site for a wholesale market it will need to be reviewed at two levels: its general location within the urban area and its siting within its immediate neighbourhood.
The siting of a market should ideally be adjacent to a main road, preferably with more than one point of access. A direct approach off a heavily used major highway or close to a major intersection may, however, cause site planning problems, which are only likely to be become more difficult with the build up over time of traffic. The ideal site is one visible from the main highway but which has its own segregated point of access not mixed up with local traffic. For many markets the produce is likely to be brought by bus and a location near to bus routes is therefore essential. Employees at the market and small retailers are also likely to depend on public transport, which in Asia may include bicycle rickshaws and small-scale motorized forms of transport.
The location of the market within the urban area should be a balance between the needs of the producers or their agents using inter-city transport routes, and those of the retailers who have to collect produce from the market and are using intra-city transport routes. A common criterion is adopt a maximum travel time of around 30 minutes for retailers to reach the wholesale market.
In towns and cities where the main retail area is still located in the centre there is frequently a conflict of interests. Municipal authorities are often eager to obtain use of a vacated central area site, justifying this on the basis of changes in the retailing structure of a city and of relieving traffic congestion. Such a move would usually be supported by the police and traffic authorities. Government departments are also inclined to support the relocation of markets, on the often valid basis that the move could increase the range of facilities that are available and reduce the stranglehold of existing trading monopolies, as well as for more dubious reasons, such as prestige and as a means of gaining control from existing commercial interests.
Many projects involving relocation of a market have foundered on the issue of a suitable site location, with a move from an old location being delayed or aborted because of opposition from wholesalers, retailers and other traders. It must not be forgotten in reviewing the need to relocate a market that it is likely to be a major employer of low-income labour. particularly of male porters and of women traders, who could be badly affected by an unneccessary move to an urban periphery market site.
Physical characteristics of the site. Although the main criteria for relocation may be to obtain an inexpensive and uncongested site which is of adequate size for present and future activities, the physical characteristics of a site arc also of critical importance. The primary consideration should be that the area is level, with stable soil conditions and not within a flood-plain. Sites with slopes of less than one per cent tend to be difficult to drain, while it is difficult to provide road access on sites over 15 percent in gradient. The latter sites are also likely to have potential soil erosion problems. The optimum range of gradients is 1 - 4 per cent, which should lead to the least-cost construction for roads, services and large-span market buildings.
Figure 28 Relationship between city size, turnover and market area
The site should, ideally, already be provided with public services, particularly water and electricity and also have a regular and compact shape, as irregular shapes will be wasteful, leaving Houseful pockets of land. The surrounding development should be compatible with the market. A location close to a residential area or public hospital, for example, is likely to lead to nuisance problems from the heavy traffic using the market and the long hours of operation. An ideal location of a market is on the edge of a light industrial area, with easy access to existing and future retail areas.
<section>h</section>
Estimating space requirements
To make an estimate of the overall sales space requirement for a new or expanded market necessitates an assessment of potential throughput using the method described in Chapter 12.
Care should be taken to ensure that an over-provision of space is not made. This can occur either because the peak trade by-passes the wholesale market system, typically because it is sold directly to traders at field level, or because climatic conditions during the peak season would allow produce to be temporarily sold in the open air or under lightweight covers, thus making provision of any additional sales space unnecessary. Nevertheless, the use of the peak factors is critical to the design of much of the engineering infrastructure, which is described in Chapter 14.
Spatial characteristcs of existing markets. The best basis for making projections of space requirements for new or improved markets is to compare them to how existing markets operate. Table 13.1 summarises the characteristics of selected markets in countries at different stages of economic growth. The retail structures in these countries vary from the highly developed system of supermarkets and chainstores in the USA, to the dominance of small-scale retailers and hawkers in Thailand.
Table 13.1 Wholesale markets operating in countries at different stages of economic development (1971 data)
Wholesale mar-
ket & year of
inauguration Per capita
income
(US$/pa) Catchment
population
(million) Market
turnover
('000 tons) Wholesalers Aver.
(No.) Sales
('000 tons) Area
(m)
New York (1967) 3,578 18.0 1,200 70 17.1 360
Hamburg (1962) 1,682 5.0 700 150 4.7 80
Seville (1971) 663 0 6 360 70 5.1 124
Amman (1965) 249 0.7 180 36 5.0 60
Lima veg. Mkt(1955) 246 3.0 720 700 1.0 21
Bangkok (1962) 137
 Yad Piman 2.3 350 300 1.2 17
 Yak Klong 1 2 250 133 1.9 22
Source Mittendorf H.J. 1976. Planning of wholesale markets for perishable food Rome FAO
Table 13.2 Average turnover at European wholesale markets (tons/m)
City Size
(million) Sales (bldg)
area
('000 m) Site
area
('000 m) Volume
traded
('000 tons) Turnover (tons/m)
Sales
area Site
area
under 0.1 10 56 69 6.90 1.23
Weighted average (rounded) 15.00 4.00
Source: World Union of Wholesale Markets. 1969. Manual on wholesale markets, The Hague, Netherlands, International Union of Local Authorities.
Table 13.2 shows the average area and wholesale market turnover values for a range of city sizes in Europe. Figure 28 illustrates these values plotted as a graph, demonstrating that there is a reasonable relationship between city size and turnover. Table 13.3 gives an analysis of markets in the Near East, compared to European markets and, as well as turnover by sales space, includes other indicators such as city size and the overall site area. Figure 29 and Table 13.4 gives a similar set of values for typical Brazilian wholesale markets, indicating rather lower turnovers per m of sales area and site area than in Europe or the Near East.
As well as providing a basis for making detailed space projections the data in these tables can be used to make a preliminary assessment of overall land acquisition requirements for a new market site. The figures, however, have to be used with some caution as they are both a reflection of different social and cultural factors and of methods of management that may occur between developed and less-developed countries.
Table 13.3 Through-put analysis of Near East wholesale markets
Characteristic Amman
Cent. Mkt
Jordan Rod al Farag,
Cairo
Egypt Marche de
Gros, Rabat
Morocco Average
European
Market
Population ('000):
 City 250 n.a. 610 493
 Hinterland 1,000 n.a. 1,275 1,435
Area ('000 m):
 Total area 28 88 50 93.5
 Sales area 9.9 26.4 7.5 17.9
Turn-over ('000 mt) 155.3 287.9 155.1 191.4
Spatial analysis (m per '000):
 City population 112 n.a. 82 370
 Hinterland population 28 n.a. 39 89
Turn-over analysis (tons per m):
 Total area 5.5 3.3 3.1 4.0
 Sales area 15.7 10.9 20.7 15.0
Source: FAO (1989 data)/ World Union of Wholesale Markets op cit.
Note n.a - not applicable
Figure 29 Relationship between turnover market area and sales area (Brazil)
Table 13.4 Comparative analysis of typical Brazilian wholesale markets
Market Area ('000 m) Annual
Volume
Traded
(tons) Turnover (tons/m)
Total
Site
Area Built-up areas Total
Site Bldg.
Area
Bldg.
Area As %
Total
Alagoas 32 7.20 22.5 52,077 1.63 7.23
Amazonas 295 14.23 4.8 56,133 0.19 3.95
Campinas 500 21.95 4.4 220,470 0.44 10.04
Bahia 1000 43.00 4.3 183,733 0.18 4.27
Ceara 530 23.91 4.5 114,417 0.22 4.79
Distrito Federal 617 40.75 6.6 134,421 0.22 3.30
Espirito Santo 119 7.59 6.4 115,766 0.97 15.25
Goias 107 17.70 16.5 108,072 1.01 6.11
Maranhao 117 4.33 3.7 42,521 0.36 9.82
Minas Gerais/Unidade de Belo Horzonte 3160 58.88 1.9 467,177 0.15 7.93
Minas Gerais/Unidade Reg. do Triangulo 200 6.24 3.1 57,066 0.29 9.15
Paraiba/ Unidade de Joasa Pessoa 86 11.53 13.4 50,856 0.59 4.41
Paraiba/ Unidade de Campina Grande 106 3.25 3.1 64,712 0.61 19.91
Parana/ Unidade de Curitiba 492 28.88 5.9 238,122 0.48 8.25
Parana/Unidade de Maringa 5.9 5.90 100.0 67,659 11.47 11.47
Parana/ Unidade de Foz do Iguacu 16 2.08 13.0 20,391 1.27 9.80
Pernambuco 250 43.40 1.7 265,111 1.06 6.11
Rio Grande do Norte 166 4.62 2.8 57,859 0.35 12.52
Rio Grande do Sul 774 56.67 7.3 317,185 0.41 5.60
Rio de Janeiro/ Unidade Sao Goncalo 228 16.01 7.0 93,131 0.41 5.82
Santa Catarina 134 4.99 3.7 26,881 0.20 5.39
Sergipe 33 6.75 2.0 29,878 0.91 4.43
Average 408 19.54 4.8 126,529 0.31 6.48
Source: SINAC, 1978. Brazilia.
Checking the adequacy of existing markets. Demand and demographic projections, plus average turnover data, can be used to estimate the adequacy of an existing market site.
This can be illustrated by projections made as part of an FAO study of wholesale markets in Chiang Mai in Northern Thailand. The existing Muang Mai wholesale market was overcrowded and unable to expand. The opening in 1990 of a new market, with a sales area of 6,400 m, at Kamtieng on the edge of the city allowed adjustments to be made in the wholesaling pattern of Chiang Mai city. It was assumed, as part of an overall marketing strategy, that trade at Muang Mai might in the future be restricted to largely serving the inner city (averaging around 150 tons per day) and that the balance of the metropolitan area would be served by Kamtieng. The potential throughput at Kamtieng was projected as follows:
 Metropolitan population in year 2000, including allowance for tourists:
= say 750,000
 Annual consumption of fruits and vegetables in the year 2000:
= 750,000 x 200 kgs. per caput (maximum)
= 150,000 tons per annum or average of 420 tons per day
 Potential throughput at Kamtieng Market:
= 420 tons per day minus 150 tons per day (at Muang Mai)
= 270 tons per day or 97,000 tons per annum
 Potential turnover using the presently constructed market sheds:
= 97,000 tons per annum/6,400 m = 15 tons per m
The calculation confirmed that Kamtieng market would provide sufficient floorspace in the short to medium-term to accommodate a reasonable average turnover of 15 tons/m.
Calculation methods for estimating floorspace at new markets. Projecting floorspace for a new market is a more difficult problem than assessing the adequacy of an existing market. It is very hazardous to build up floorspace figures from a series of too-elaborate assumptions about the potential shares of throughput that various facilities might be expected to achieve at a market. Very reliable survey data is required for such an approach, specific to the culture and matching exactly the management conditions that will apply in the market.
A better approach is to work from the whole to the part, firstly calculating the overall sales space and then making adjustments for additional facilities. Two simple calculation methods can be adopted, which may be used in parallel to check the basic assumptions.
The first method (Method A in Table 13.6) is an approach based on commercial criteria using, as the main parameter, an optimum overall annual turnover per square metre of sales area, which should usually range from 10 - 25 metric tons, including an allowance for main circulation areas (display/buyers' walk and loading platforms). These turnover figures conform with the data contained in Tables 13.1 - 13.4 and would represent reasonable average values for fruit and vegetable markets.
The second calculation method (Method B) is an ergonomic approach based on the ideal space requirement for various activities. This method uses the net area required to accommodate the average daily sales for each of the main commodities, plus allowances for overall circulation and for daily fluctuations in space requirements. The factors used in the calculation method would vary depending on the methods of display and level of sophistication of the market, which might range from traders sitting on the floor with their produce heaped in front of them to the selling from samples of produce which is already packaged, with mechanical handling before and after sales.
Table 13.5 Typical daily space requirements: Japan and Korea (tons/m)
Vegetables Fruits: Fish
Facility Japan Korea Japan Korea Japan
Auction halls 0.080 0.120 0.165 0.070 0.085
Middlemens' stores 0.055 0.100 0.110 0.050 0.055
Loading and unloading 0.055 0.100 0.110 0.050 0.055
Chilled/cold storage 0.500 0.800 1.000 0.400 1.000
Source NIKKEN SEKKEI, Osaka, Japan & FAO Project GCP/CPR/008/BEL
Some typical values of space used for storage and sales, that might be used in Method B. are shown in Table 13.5. The Japanese values represent nearly optimum use of space, whilst those from Korea could be used as design targets for a new wholesale market. If aggregate areas are built up on such a basis the values will need to be adjusted, by applying a percentage weighting factor, to make allowance for the mix of functions and extent of usage that will occur in a main sales areas. Not all the produce, for example, may go through the auction hall and the storage needs at wholesalers' premises may be lower than the turnover implies because loads are transferred directly between lorries. (More elaborate methods for estimating space needs are contained in a publication of the Korea Rural Economics Institute. 1981. Project proposals on the new Seoul agricultural wholesale market and the national marketing master plan. Seoul, Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries).
Table 13.6 demonstrates the application of the two calculation methods using turnover projections made for a new export-oriented wholesale market for the province of Chiang Mai, Northern Thailand. There is a reasonable degree of agreement between the two estimating methods; some variation is inevitable given the fundamentally different basis on which the projections are made. The estimates provide a basis on which to design market buildings, a medium-term target might be 4,000m, with a longer-term aim of 6,000m.
Table 13.6 Sansai Market Centre, Thailand: sales space projections
Throughput (tons) Space requirement:
per year (pa) per day (pa) tons/m area - m
Short to medium term. 
Method A 56,000 15 pa 3,730
Method B  Vegetables 45,000 125 0.05 pd 2,500
 Fruit 11,000 30 0.06 pd 500
Net Total 56,000 155 3,000
 plus loading area @ 25% - - 750
 plus peak factor @ 20% - - 600
Total (Method B) 4,350
Long term: 
Method A 100,000 20 pa 5,000
Method B  Vegetables 80,000 225 0.06 pd 3,750
 Fruit 20.000 55 0.11 pd 500
Net Total 100,000 280 4,250 
plus loading area 69 25% - - 1,060
plus peak factor @ 20% - - 850
Total (Method B) 6,160
Source :FAO Technical Report TCP/THA/8958
Table 13. 7 Sansai Market Centre, Thailand: space requirements
Function Space requirement (m ):
Initial Medium-term Long-term
Main sales space 2,000 4,000 6,000
Rentable stores 800 1,600 2,400
Washing, pecking end gracing 150 150 300
Market management offices 100 200 300
Other offices 200 400 600
Basic support facilities 100 200 300
Grain dryer and silo - - 100
Total 3,450 6,750 10,000
Source FAO Technical Report - TCP/THA/8958
Table 13.7 shows how the build up of commercial floorspace could occur during a 20-year project period using the projections shown in Table 13.6 and based on some simple assumptions about the space requirements for ancillary spaces. These assumptions were:
 wholesalers' permanent stores (including chill stores) outside the main sale area would be equivalent to 40 percent of commercial sales space;
 washing, packing and grading facilities at 1m per ton of through-put;
 offices for private enterprise, market management and for basic support facilities (weighbridge, public toilets and site security), each at 5 percent of commercial sales space; and
 other offices (banking and credit facilities, market information system, marketing extension and cooperative outlet) at 10 percent of commercial sales space.
<section>i</section>
Site planning
This section amplifies some of the planning principles discussed in Chapter 3 and 4. There are many publications explaining the planning process, some of which are listed in the Bibliography. The importance of consultation with all the parties involved with this process has been stressed on many occasions in the manual. Two useful publications which explain planning within the context of participatory development are: Goethert, R & Hamdi, N.1988. Making microplans. and Taylor, L. & Jenkins, P. 1989. Time to listen - the human aspect in development. (both from Intermediate Technology Publications, London).
More detail on the principles of site planning and appropriate standards that can be used in an urban context are contained in the following publications:
 De Chiara, J & Koppelham, L.E. 1978. Site planning standards, New York, McGraw-Hill Book Company;
 Cartwright R.M. 1980. The design of urban space, London, The Architectural Press Ltd.; and
 Lynch, K. & Hack, G. 1984. Site planning, Cambridge, MIT Press.
Site planning objectives. The project goals described in Chapters 2 and 3 will provide a general basis for the preparation of a physical master plan. These general goals need to be supplemented with more detailed objectives, which will be used both in reviewing site planning options and in the development of a preferred option into a draft, and then final, master plan. Care needs to taken in establishing these objectives as it is a common error of site planners to assume values which are in conflict with the values and habits of the site's users. There are, however, a range of general objectives which provide a useful starting point for developing more appropriate objectives suited to the conditions and culture in which a particular market is to be developed.
The most obvious of these objectives is functional adequacy; a plan must accommodate all the needs defined by a project's goals. It must also provide optimum communications, both in the sense of traffic movement (as a market is primarily a complex transhipment point) and social interaction (as it is a point at which sellers and buyers meet to conduct business). Choice and adaptability are important objectives, as change is inevitable with any market and the success of a plan in the long term will depend on its provision for users to mould and adapt it to their particular requirements. Minimum standards of public health, sanitation, accident prevention and structural safety will also need to be considered.
Although architectural quality may not be a main interest of either the market's developers or its users, this should not be forgotten. Cost, however, will always be the main criterion, but this must always be related to other objectives, with which it will frequently be in conflict. The main problem will be to strike a balance between that of minimizing initial capital costs and reducing the recurrent maintenance and operational costs of running the market.
Table 13.8 Kalimati wholesale market Nepal: space requirements (m)
Land use/accommodation Completion by end of Phase: % of
total
at ground floor level II III IV
Buildings:
 Multi-purpose shed 1,680 2,640 3,600 17.7
 Structural bays (number) (7) (11) (15)
 Fish shed - - 336 1.7
 Cold stores - - 880 4.3
 Management and administration 560 560 560 2.8
 Retail unit and hostel - 308 308 1.5
 Security block 72 72 72 0.3
 Main gatehouse - - 24 0.1
 Washing, grading and packing 128 128 128 0.6
 Toilets 152 152 152 0.8
Sub-Total, Buildings 2,590 3,840 6,060 29.8
Site Development:
 Farmers' market area 710 710 710 3.5
 Roads (on-site only) 3,360 3,640 5,955 29.2
 Parking areas 2,020 2,190 3,570 17.5
 Pavements and landscaped areas+ 1,940 2,100 3,495 17.2
 Drainage and other reserves 150 165 230 1.1
 Areas under construction # 3,010 1,135 - 0.0
 Future expansion area (paved) - - 350 1.7
Total site area 13,780 13,780 20,370 100.0
Source: FAO Technical Report, GCP/NEP/043/SWI
Notes: + Excluding paved areas associated with buildings, covered arcades and paving to the farmers' market area.
# Including temporary construction roads
Site planning options. As the starting point of the site planning process, different options should be generated to reflect the design objectives.
These options, will form the basis of the draft master plan and a typical approach to reviewing them is to start with an analysis of land uses on the site, derived from the accommodation brief. The main categories of land-use activities need to be identified and the relationship or linkages between them established. These linkages may be of a physical nature, such as roads, or more abstract, such as a flow of information. Linkages are more usually positive, but some may be negative. This could represent, for example, an incompatibility between uses, such as between a refuse disposal area and on-site residential accommodation.
Different diagrams or patterns should be created for each option, which will represent a simplification of the design problem to its logical essence. The options will need to be analysed, which will generally be based on how satisfactorily they perform in terms of cost and of minimizing time spent within the market. Although simple physical distance will give some indication of this, the effects of congestion in a market are critical and therefore time is a more relevant measure. The reviewing of options will provide an initial sorting out of ideas, which will need to be developed further during detailed design. The choice of planning options can be most practically understood by using a simple ranking system based on the site planning objectives discussed above.
Land-use analysis. The estimates prepared of space requirements for the buildings should be related to that of the whole site. Table 13.8 shows an illustration of a phased estimate of the market buildings needed for the Kalimati site in Nepal, including the space requirements for the ancillary and service buildings, and for a 2,000 metric ton cold storage facility. In the estimate an allowance was made for the substantial parking provision and road system which will be needed by the market at ultimate development. Although present retailers at the market may continue with the use of small hand carts, this pattern is likely to change rapidly with the introduction of small pick-ups and trucks.
Table 13.9 gives a comparable land use pattern for the Sansai market in Chiang Mai, where a large proportion of the site was allocated to traffic circulation needs. As discussed in Chapter 4, the main factor to consider in land-use analysis is the proportion of a site that is given over to roads and parking and in Table 13.10, which compares the land uses in three Near East wholesale markets, the importance of this is evident. The extreme congestion of Rod al Farag market in Cairo, for example, is explained by its lack of road space and traffic management, combined with restricted access in the roads leading to the market. The market is over-intensively used compared to its overall site area, although the turnover per m Of sales space of 15.7 tons is not that high.
Table 13.9 Sansai Market Centre, Thailand land use (m)
Land Use Cumulative space requirement (m):
Initial Medium-term Long-term
1. Wholesale Market 2,000 4,000 6,000
2. Offices/Other Buildings 1,450 2,750 4,000
3. Grain Drying Area 500 1,000 1,500
4. Reserve for Future Facilities 32,300 28,500 24,750
5. Car Park - 300 pick-ups/trucks 9,600 9,600 9,600
6. Car Park- 30 cars 400 400 400
7. Water Supply Tower 100 100 100
8. Landscaping/Drainage Reserves 13,500 13,500 13,500
9. Roadspace 25,550 25,550 25,550
Total 85,400 85,400 85,400
Source: FAO Technical Report - TCP/THA/8958
Table 13.10 Land-use analysis of Near East wholesale markets
Land Use Amman
Central Mkt Rod al Farag,
Cairo Marche de
Gros, Rabat
(m ) (%) (m ) (m^2) (m ) (%)
1. Covered sales space 2,500 (8.9) 12,900 (14.7) 3,000 (6.o)
2. Open sales space 7,400 (26.4) 13,500 (15.3) 4,500 (9.0)
3. Parking 2,400 (8.6) 0 (0.0) 4,000 (8.0)
4. Roads 9,200 (32.9) 17,300 (19.7) 12,100 (24.2)
5. Stores 5,700 (20.3) 40,900 (46.5) 1,600 (3.2)
6. Crates 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 4,800 (9.6)
7. Administration 800 (2.9) 3,400 (3 8) 1,800 (3.6)
8. Unused 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 18,200 (36.4)
Total 28,000 88,000 50,000
Source: FAO
Site master plan. The purpose of preparing a master plan is to provide a document, primarily a map or series of maps, supplemented by written statements, drawing together the synthesised information from the previous design stages and providing a basis for consultation and more refinement of the detailed design. The main function of the plan must be to maximize the throughput of the market, while minimizing capital and operating costs.
The basic approach will be to compile all the planning data, including the land-use projections and any diagrams prepared of market operations (such as in Figure 15) and plan options in order to draw them to scale (typically at 1:500, 1:1,000 or 1:2,000 scales), so they can reflect the actual accommodation requirements related to the circulation pattern and can be fitted within the confines of the site boundaries. The first draft or outline master will clarify what are the opportunities and constraints to development on a site. An example of the evolution of such a drain master plan is shown in Figure 30.
This will be a stage at which many sketches are made so that adjustments can be made which rationalize the relationship between the land uses and provide the most efficient access and traffic circulation system. The original neatness of sketch diagrams will often to be lost at this juncture, as the plan gets modified to meet the site's physical conditions, climatic considerations and the evolving requirements of the design brief. However, although the influence of the local site is important, the essentially functional nature of markets will tend to lead to solutions in which the general form is compact and geometrically regular, using standardized building forms.
Important factors that need to be considered in the plan are how the development might be phased and how the separation of permanent uses from those which are of a more transient nature can be used as a means of organizing the site so that future changes can be most easily accommodated. As roads and parking areas arc likely to be a major element of the total capital cost and are elements which can be varied substantially in both extent and standard of construction, they will be a major consideration in determining the ultimate form of the outline plan.
The easiest way to undertake an analysis of the plan is to measure the overall site area of each of the proposed land uses and prepare a table which relates them to the overall site area. The methods of measurement for preparing the table can vary from using a planimeter, to counting squares on a graph paper overlay, The important issue to remember is to always compare the measurements to the known overall area of the site. This tabulation can then be compared to Table 13.8 - 13.10 which gives typical values for the utilization of land at a variety of market sites.
Figure 30 Evolution of a draft or outline master plan (Sansai, Thailand)
The difference between an outline plan and master plan is one of detail. As the consultation process continues and the detailed design evolves the land-use pattern will be transformed by the actual designs for buildings and infrastructure. Two key issues that will need to be addressed in developing the final master plan are:
 how to evolve an arrangement with a satisfactory relationship between the site circulation system, unloading and loading areas, general parking and the internal arrangement of the main market buildings; and
 how to organise the site layout so that construction phasing is simplified and future growth and changes can be accommodated without disruption.
These issues are critical to a plan's success, particularly if there is any reluctance on the part of wholesalers to move to a new location or cooperate in the implementation of improvements to an existing market. Increased rents for premises will need to be justified on the basis that they will be offset by a well-designed market providing other benefits, such as lower operating costs (see Chapter 5). The potential savings from an improved or new layout include: adequate parking spaces and loading bays leading to increased vehicle turn-around, with less time lost for both wholesalers and retailers;
 compact building layouts with less manual handling of produce, leading to lower porterage and labour costs and a more efficient use of warehouse space;
 covered sales and handling spaces, giving protection from rain and sun, leading to reductions in deterioration of produce; and
 introduction of controlled entries and exits, leading to reductions in pilferage.
A study by the US Department of Agriculture in 1947, for the relocation of the wholesale fruit and vegetable market from a central area site in the middle of Atlanta (Georgia) to a new site outside the city,, estimated that the savings in annual operating costs would be made-up as follows:
 less time lost by vehicles 14 percent
. lower porterage and labour costs 12 percent
. reductions in deterioration of produce 67 percent
 reductions in pilferage 7 percent
Another example of the level of economies that can be obtained from improved facilities is shown in Table 13.11.
Table 13.11 Comparison of costs affected by facilites used by produce firms at the Maryland Wholesale Food Center (US $ per Imperial ton)
Item Old
facilities New
facilities Change
Rent 1.89 2.61 plus 0.72
Handling costs:
 labour 18.61 12.00 minus 6.16
 equipment 0.04 1.31 plus 1.27
Cartage 10.45 2.62 minus 7.83
Insurance on contents 0.40 0.31 minus 0.09
Total 30.94 18.85 minus 12.09
Source United States Department of Agricullure/Maryland Food Center
Authority. 1989. Wholesale Food Distribution Center Growth and Development, USDA, Washington DC.
Building design
The purpose of architectural design is often forgotten in the design of functional building types such as markers. It is assumed that by applying a simplified standard model (often copied from another site or country) an acceptable solution can be arrived at which will avoid the necessity and expense of having to employ an architect or engineer to design the market buildings. In reality, this is most unlikely to be satisfactory.
The only way that market buildings can be created to match the site and climatic conditions, the proposed management system, the level of technology of the country and the cultural context is if they are consciously designed. To arrive at inexpensive and appropriate building forms, albeit of a flexible and expandable nature, will require the market authority to involve itself with fully briefing any design consultant.
The writings of Christopher Alexander (1977. A pattern language towns buildings construction. New York, Oxford University Press) provide a comprehensive understanding of this design process. Examples of how architectural design principles can be applied to building types in less-developed countries are given in: Maxwell Fry F. & Drew, J. (1956. Tropical architecture in the humid zone. London, B.T. Batsford Ltd);
Figure 31 Internal layout of a typical wholesale market (Kalimati, Nepal)
Koenigsberger, O.H. et al. (1973. Manual of tropical housing and building -part 1, climatic design. London, Longman); and Saini, B.S. (1980. Building in hot dry climates. Chichester, John Wiley & Sons).
Building form . The initial task in selecting an appropriate arrangement for the buildings will be to understand the operation of the market, how produce will flow and how it will be managed (see Chapter 8). The designer will probably present this in the form of simple flow charts, elaborating those prepared during the site planning stage. To give these diagrams an architectural form is a complex process which can only be briefly touched upon in this manual.
As the first step, the market authority, preferably in conjunction with the designer, will need to prepare an accommodation schedule, specifying the overall estimates of space requirements. The basic choice of building form will also need to be made (see Chapter 4, Figure 8). A series of geometrical patterns, derived from ideal dimensions for the range of activities in the market, will then be applied by the designer to the accommodation schedule. The designer will prepare a series of sketch designs which "balance" the internal space and circulation requirements of the buildings with the need for flexibility in use and constructional simplicity. This is an iterative process, requiring constant consultation with the market authority and traders. In this process designers use a wide range of physical design data and techniques, including ergonomic and anthropometric standards, planning grids and structural modules (see Chapter 14).
Planning grids One of the key determinants of the planning grid will be the optimum size of sales areas and wholesalers' stalls. If they are over-sized this is likely to lead to a low turnover (less than 15 tons m) and an underuse of resources. As a consequence rents are likely to be disproportionately high as cost recovery normally requires that rents should not exceed 2 - 3 percent of the value of sales. For existing buildings the survey of facilities described in Chapter 11 should help to establish current practice by, for example, tabulating the number of stalls of a particular size. Typical values for these modules are shown in Table 13.12 but these figures should be used with caution as they may not match local circumstances. The ideal method is to use the minimum of fixed walls so that premises can be defined by moveable partitions, usually constructed of steel mesh. A typical plan showing the relationship between producers' sales areas, wholesalers' premises, a
buyers' walk and supporting facilities is shown in Figure 31.
Other dimensions. As well as the horizontal or (plan) dimensions of the sales areas there are a number of other key dimensions which will influence the building form. These include the dimension of parking bays (see Table 14.1), which should be related to both the width of structural bays and to the dimensions of the sales areas. Vertical dimensions are also important and, if not carefully considered, may restrict the flexibility of the building to accommodate changes in operating procedures.
The preferred minimum clear vertical dimension for market halls is 5 metres, which will allow small fork-lifts or powered pallet-trucks to be used in the future. If any form of racking and block storage is envisaged, a more suitable internal minimum height is 7.5 metres, again clear of any obstructions caused by the roof structure. Minor spaces, such as offices and other ancillary uses should have a minimum height of 2.4 metres.
Door openings through which fork lift trucks may need to pass should be a minimum of 4. 2 metres high and preferably 6 metres in width.
Another issue that will need to be resolved is how far the floor slab of the market buildings should be raised above ground level. Market buildings are often raised 0.9 - 1.2 metres to facilitate loading banks or platforms. This is an expensive element to construct and may lead to cracking problems with the floor finishes. It also imposes restrictions on how the building may be used. The better solution is to have a 0.2 metre changes of level, with permanent or temporary shallow ramps.
Table 13.12 Dimensions of wholesalers' units at selected markets
Land Use Module size (metres): Most common
width depth area (m) stall (m)
New York 7 21 147 242
London (New Covent Garden) 5 15/21/27 75/136 -
Rotterdam 7.5 13.5 100 100
Vienna 6/12 10/18 60/216 120
Barcelona 6 12/18 72/108 -
Paris 6 14 84 84
Buenos Aires 6 12/15 72/90 72
Bogota 10-12
Source: Mittendorf H.J. 1976. Planning of wholesale markets for perishable food, Rome, FAO.
Climatic design principles The building form will also be strongly influenced by climatic design factors, relating to the general climate of the country and to specific micro-climatic features of the site. The traditional building forms in an area will provide evidence of how buildings have been designed in the past to cope with the climate. However, the particular problems created by the need to build a modern wholesale market using a minimum of sophisticated technology makes a review of climatic design essential if comfortable conditions are to be achieved for the building's users.
There are three basic types of climate that are common in less-developed countries, which will have different implications for the siting of buildings, their internal layout and their construction.
 warm, humid climates: typical of the equatorial tropics and tropical islands, with high humidity and rainfall levels. The main characteristic of buildings in this climate is that they should be planned to minimize solar heat gain and to maximize air flow. The orientation of buildings should ideally be on an east-west axis, spaced at a minimum of five times the building's height to allow breeze penetration. Rooms in the building should be single-banked to allow cross-ventilation, with large openings (40 - 80 percent of the wall area) and positioned on the north and south elevations. Walls should have a low thermal capacity. Roofs will need to be insulated (see Chapter 14) and should have wide overhangs to prevent sun penetration and to give protection from heavy monsoon rains and high (sometimes hurricane force) winds.
 hot, dry (arid) climates typical of desert and steppe areas, with high temperatures and ground glare, and low rainfall levels. The buildings in this climate should be planned as compactly as possible in a courtyard form with precautions to prevent entry of hot dry winds.
Cross-ventilation to rooms is not essential and openings should be limited to 20 - 40 percent of the wall area. Walls and roofs should have a high thermal capacity, with shading devices to control sun penetration.
 composite climates: typical of equatorial and tropical uplands and Mediterranean areas, combining the problems of both humid and arid climates. Building design is ideally similar to arid areas, but with facilities to take advantage of solar radiation at cooler times of the year and temporary provision for cross-ventilation.
Architectural elements. Other factors that will influence the form of buildings will be the positioning of internal and external fixed elements, some of which have already been commented upon in Chapter 4, whilst others are discussed in Chapter 14. The following is a brief check-list of these elements, which may need to be incorporated into the design:
Internal elements External elements
 canopies  fencing
 buyers' walks  bollards and barriers
 display areas  gantries
 loading ramps (max. 8% grade)  fuel and water tanks
 shutter and sliding doors  gates
 sun screens and louvres  temporary shade structures
 fire-fighting equipment  fire hydrants
 refuse bins  solid waste skips
 directional signs  landscaping
<section>j</section>
External circulation and services
The access system and general circulation pattern of a market will generally be the most critical aspect of its master plan and initially needs to be looked at as a complete entity. In reviewing external circulation components of a market development plan all aspects of transport that might serve the site need to examined. These will include
 road transport, including small-scale electric vehicles;
 rail links;
 rivers and canals;
 air (for export markets); and
 non-vehicular transport (pedestrian head loads and animal carts).
Road patterns. The ideal practice in developing a road layout is to strictly segregate the produce coming in from that going out, usually by adopting a one-way circulation system. Figures 7, 11 and 30 give typical site layouts of small-scale modern market facilities which attempt to meet these general objectives.
A typical approach to establishing the road network for a market site is to provide a continuous peripheral road system or "ring road", with the buildings located within the centre of the block. By using minor loop roads or branches (cur-de-sacs) that penetrate within the block, the size of the area served by the ring road can be increased and individual facilities can be directly served by the road system. An important advantage of the ring road approach is that it enables drivers to search for parking spaces and to correct mistakes.
At this stage in the design process a hierarchy of roads should be established, reflecting the different intensity of use of facilities. Junctions and intersections between different grades of roads will need to be looked at in detail, particularly in respect of sight-lines and the spacing
between junctions. Grid road patterns may be used, particularly for large scale markets, but loop systems are more suitable for simpler layouts. As a basic principle it will be better to avoid any crossroads within the layout and to make as many of the junctions as possible 3-way (T-junctions).
Site entry and exit One of the most difficult features to achieve in any site layout is sufficient road length at the site entry so that incoming trucks can slow down and be checked-in at the entry gate without causing backing-up onto the public highway. In larger markets a series of entry gates are often located adjacent to each other, served by a single entry road. This problem also occurs on leaving the site and often this is more critical as it may involve handling a peak discharge of small volume vehicles (typically pick-ups). A layout with more than one exit has obvious advantages in terms of traffic control, although this may create problems of security and management of documentation.
Projected traffic flows and parking requirements. The turnover of vehicles in a market, particularly those of retailers, is rapid and it is highly desirable that a sufficient number of adequately sized parking spaces are provided. For a preliminary layout a minimum of around Go m per truck parking space should be used, excluding the main circulation. An overall minimum standard for the provision of parking places (trucks, pick-ups and private cars) should be 2 - 3 spaces per 100 m of sales area.
For peak periods, however, this could easily be increased to 4 - 6 spaces per 100 m, which may require the provision of reserve parking areas a little remote from the market facilities. Ideally, unloading and loading facilities need to be directly adjacent to the main market building, but this will not always be possible. In general, the desirable maximum distance from a parking space to a market building should be 100 metres, but it may be necessary to adopt a figure of 200 metres for peak parking in overspill areas. The use of the overspill areas should be confined to market users with small loads to carry.
In preparing more detailed proposals for a site, estimates should be made of the projected traffic flows and distribution by type of vehicle. These may include producers' delivery vehicles, retailers' and other buyers' vehicles, transport for permanent and temporary market staff, and the vehicles of the general public Table ]3.13 gives details for the Kalimati site in Nepal of typical parking requirements for vehicular traffic at the peak period (assumed in this case to be the period when retailers are making their purchases). Appropriate parking and circulation design standards are discussed in Chapter 14.
For very large market sites, traffic models, using computers, are necessary for projecting traffic flows. For smaller markets, however, simpler techniques based on examining the pattern of traffic data from roadside and market surveys (see Chapter 11) can be used. Of particular importance is to understand the types of vehicles that are using a market and when peak periods may occur. Figure 32 shows the pattern of arrival for vehicles using the Birmingham (UK) wholesale market based on a 7-day survey.
13.13 Kalimati wholesale market: estimated number of vehicles per day and peak period parking requirements at ultimate development
Type of
vehicles&
commodity
carried Throughput:
(m/t/day) Load
factor
(m/t) Total
no. of
Vehicles
per day Peak
period
ratio Parking
spaces
required
(number)
Average
day Peak
season
Within market: 
Retailers small trucks & pick-ups: 
. Vegetables 610 122.0 1.5 81 0.3 24
. Fruit 33.0 66.0 1.0 66 0.3 20
 Fish 13.0 26.0 0.5 52 0.6 31
Sub-Total 107.0 214.0 199 75
Add 22.5% for suppliers' vehicles/contingency* 17
Truck parking spaces required (@ 8m x 4m) 92
Add for wholesaler's cars (@ 5.5m x 2.4m) 8
Total parking spaces within the market 100
Outside market: 
Private cars and official vehicles: 
 One parking space for each senior official 12
 Add 150 % for visitors/general public 18
Car parking spaces required (@ 5.5m x 2.4m) 30
Add 20 % for short term truck parking (e, 8.m x 4m) 6
Total parking spaces outside the market 36
Grand total 136
Source: FAO (GCP/NEP/043/SWI)
Note: * Includes allowance for longer vehicles
Other services. Services other than roads can be disregarded in the initial preparation of the overall site plan, but as the site layout is gradually finalized, consideration will need to be given to the location of other service networks.
Because of the scale of open drainage systems and the significant runoff from paved market areas, surface water drainage is likely to be the most important service to consider next. The alignments of channels is likely to be a major constraint on the overall site layout because of the rigidity of design standards that will need to be applied. Invariably, the issue of off-site disposal of surface water and how it can be related to existing natural drainage lines will also have an important influence on the detailed planning of the site.
Figure 32 Mean arrival times for vehicles delivering to Birmingham wholesale market
The majority of other services are likely to be placed underground, but these networks need to be co-ordinated with each other for ease and economy of construction and in order that future maintenance does not disrupt the working of the market. The use of "common" trenches for the distribution of services, which establish precisely both their vertical and horizontal relationships, is often adopted.
Environmental impact and controls
Although the site layout should take into account the servicing requirements of the market there are a number of environmental problems associated with site development which may need to be resolved at the detailed design stage. 1 he following notes review the types of site-level environmental problems and the general solutions that may be encountered in market development. More detailed engineering design criteria are described in Chapter 14.
Surface water drainage. The technical issues associated with the disposal of surface water from market sites are not difficult if tackled properly. The surface water drainage system will need to deal with storm water flows for peak discharge conditions and the method for estimating this is described in Chapter 14. However, severe problems may occur if a substantial amount of filling is required to bring the site above flood level or to provide a more stable base for construction. This will need to be carefully addressed in order to avoid impacting on the adjoining sites, causing backing-up of drainage water at upstream sites or direct flooding downstream.
Information on actual recorded flood levels may not be readily available and an interview survey of local residents may be required in order to establish the level and duration of previous floods and the likely "return periods,' (the time intervals between occurrence of storms of similar intensity). Solving potential flooding problems often requires that off-site works are undertaken These will need to be incorporated into the market development programme.
Market sites must be almost completely paved and the critical factors to take into account when calculating the drain sizes and sections will be the gradients, the need for frequent cleansing of drains which are easily blocked by produce waste (open channels are normally either covered with steel gratings or concrete slabs) and any potential restriction created by the existing site discharge.
Water supply. Water supplies to markets are required for drinking and sanitation purposes, for general cleaning and, in some cases, for the washing of produce. If an existing mains supply is available this would normally be used, although some improvement to the mains may be required in order that the site can be served. Often, the only practical solution to the supply of potable water for a market will be to use a pumped supply from a bored tube well, with an on-site storage tower.
To obtain a guaranteed supply, sample borings may be required. If an adjacent site is already occupied then useful information can be obtained by discussions with the adjoining owners to investigate what problems, if any, they have experienced. A water-quality analysis of any existing supply may be required to test for the presence of pollutants, particularly faecal coliform bacteria (Escherichia coli).
Techniques for the construction of tube wells and other small-scale supplies, which may be appropriate for secondary wholesale markets, are given in the Ross Institute Bulletin No. 10 (Cairacross, S. & Feachem, R. 1978. Small wafer supplies. London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine). Usually a drilling or excavation permit will be required before constructing a new well or other form of supply.
Sewage treatment. Markets, like any other facility used by the public, will require the provision of toilet facilities A conventional water-borne sewerage system using an existing mains connections is often not available for market sites and some form of on-site treatment will be necessary. The purpose of the system will be to remove organic (excrete) waste so as to prevent infection transmission, pollution of receiving water courses, development of odours and breeding of files, typically Psychoda. National effluent guidelines frequently require that markets install their own treatment systems and this is usually enforced through building permits. Market sites, however, arc normally not large enough to justify a mini-treatment plant and there are major 풼ifficulties in the maintenance of such complex electrical and mechanical systems
Other options available include waste stabilization ponds, aerated lagoons and oxidation ditches These are unlikely to be appropriate for the relatively small-scale requirements of a market. They may, however, be warranted if the market is to be developed in conjunction with other facilities, in which case their economic viability will need to be assessed Suitable design criteria are given in Overseas Building Note No. 174 (Mare, D. 1977. Sewage treatment in ho' countries. Garston, Building Research Establishment).
In many cases, a septic tank system, with leach fields and partially treated effluent going to surface water drains is likely to be the most practical, economic and environmentally satisfactory solution. An agreement will need to be made with any local sanitary board for the collection of solids and periodic cleaning of the septic tank. The location of the septic tank should be away from any adjacent sensitive uses and close to the existing surface-water discharge A minimum distance of 30 metres should be maintained from any wail, 7 5 metres from streams, 3 metres from water pipes and 1.5 metres from buildings or boundaries. Estimating the capacity of the septic tank will depend on the numbers of sanitary fittings, which is discussed in Chapter 14.
For small secondary wholesale markets in rural areas simpler methods of excrete disposal are normally adopted. These are, typically, pit latrines and aqua privies. A full review of these techniques is contained in the Ross Institute Bulletin No. 8 (Feachem, R. & Cairncross, S. 1978. Small excreta disposal systems, London School of Hygiene& Tropical Medicine).
Disposal of solid waste. Refuse is potentially a major cause of environmental problems. These range from public health risks, fire hazards, odours and nuisance from burning and the polluting of ground and surface water sources. The management of solid waste is thus a key issue that will need to be resolved.
The waste generated at a market will have a high organic composition (minimum 50 percent), with a high moisture content (60 - 70 percent) and a low calorific value (+/- 1,000 kcal/kg.). Small-scale incineration is not practical or economic, nor advisable given the potential environmental impact it might have on adjacent sites. On-site compaction of waste and pressing into a container is not likely to be viable in developing countries, although it is an attractive solution for reducing transport demands and disposal facilities.
Waste should therefore be collected for disposal off-site. If the market's solid waste problems cannot be handled by the local collection authority then it may be necessary for the market to consider setting up its own facilities, either for recycling the waste as compost or by a controlled tipping or sanitary landfill operation. Techniques for this are reviewed in Flintoff, F. 1976. (Management of solid wastes in developing countries.. New Delhi, WHO Regional Publications, South-East Asia Series No. 1).
Equipment options for collection and methods for calculating the volumes of waste that might need to be handled are given in Chapter 14.
Noise nuisance. Noise levels at markets can cause a significant public nuisance, particularly given their extended hours of operation. Data from a survey by Chiang Mai University (Paiboonslip, P. 1985. Noise monitoring in Chiang Mai) indicated that one of the main retail markets had the highest ambient noise level, 81.16 decibels [dB(A)], of any site surveyed in the city. For this reason market sites are usually located away from residential areas and other sensitive land uses. If an existing site is adjacent to such uses careful design measures will need to be adopted in upgrading the market.
Community ambient noise standards may not exist and adopting those used in developed countries may be inappropriate. The Initial study findings report of the Chaing Mai Planning Project (Louis Berger International Inc. 1991) suggested the following standards, based on Japanese levels (but around 15 dB[A] higher), for areas where there is a special requirement for quiet conditions such as schools, religious buildings and hospitals:
Day-time Morning/Evening Night-time
Maximum noise level 60 dB(A) 55 dB(A) 50 dB(A)
It is usually assumed that the noise levels will apply at the property boundary. Another approach often adopted is to categorise land uses according to their sensitivity to changes in the ambient noise level. For example, no increase above approved noise levels for 90 percent of the time in residential areas might be permitted and only a marginal increase allowed in rural areas or those of mixed use. A significant increase in noise levels may be allowed for developments on industrial sites.
There are a number of ways the noise impact of a market development may be reduced, with different cost implications and effects on a market's operating system. This issue will need to be carefully considered during detailed design:
 distance attenuation, by siting noisiest uses away from sensitive areas. In open air, noise decays at a rate of around 6 decibels (dbA) per doubling of distance from the sound source (the decibel scale is a relative measure on a logarithmic base, giving a ratio of sound pressures);
 restricting the working hours of a market, so that for example the impact of heavy traffic early in the morning is minimized;
 attenuation by screening. The construction of walling around a site will have a significant impact on noise levels, particularly higher frequency sound. Problems that this might create in terms of pollution and climatic comfort levels are discussed below; and
 attenuation by window design, by modifying the windows of adjacent buildings, using double glazing combined with mechanical ventilation or by adding projecting external fins, both of which can have a considerable impact on internal ambient noise levels.
Air pollution. In the humid tropics, if sites are fully enclosed by high walls this might have a number of detrimental effects. Air flow will be restricted and this will hinder natural ventilation both within the market and of adjacent uses, leading to uncomfortable internal conditions. Equally important, however, will be the problem of containment of air pollutants as the construction and operation of any market will lead to a significant increases in pollution levels.
This may be acceptable in arid areas, as the general conditions for obtaining a reasonably comfortable working environment will require that as much shade is obtained as possible. For the humid tropics, however, it would be better to confine environmental improvements to the optimum siting of facilities, planted screening (which will have little impact in terms of noise attenuation) and the upgrading of windows. Allowing vehicles to enter the market building, as in some layouts where the buyers' walk is made wide enough for vehicles, is not considered to be acceptable in either the humid tropics or arid climates.
<section>k</section>
14 Engineering design criteria
The subject of engineering design criteria is a vast one which cannot be satisfactorily covered in a short manual. The following notes are meant to provide a guide for non-technicians so that they can understand the scope of engineering design related to markets. The notes should also be helpful in providing a basis for the preparation of terms of reference for consultants. Technicians may also find the notes useful for highlighting the types of engineering problems that can be encountered in market design. Many of the subjects may be covered by local building regulations and codes, but often these have a strong bias towards the construction of houses and may not be appropriate for the design and construction of markets.
Site investigations
The conclusions and recommendations of the site investigation survey described in Chapter 11 should include consideration of the following:
 the depth and appropriate standards to be adopted for the compaction of embankments and other areas of fill based on the soil type and the type of compaction plant to be used (to be confirmed during construction by undertaking field density tests);
 what measures should be taken for disposal of unsuitable fill material;
 the types of foundations required for different building types (described later in this chapter);
 the modulus of vertical subgrade reaction, dry density and coefficient of permeability of foundation soils;
 the maximum dry density and optimum moisture content of sub-grade soils, from modified Proctor compaction tests;
 the minimum 4-days-soaked California Bearing Ratio (CBR) value of the sub-grade soils and the recommended total thickness of the road pavement above the sub-grade, related to the number of commercial vehicles per day;
 maximum compressive strength of cement-stabilized soils, the proportion of organic matter they contain and whether practical problems and costs could make cement stabilization an attractive option;
 recommendations on the suitability of natural gravels and mixed soils obtained from the nearby quarry sites for use as imported filling material and as the sub-base course for road pavements;
 comments on pore water pressure inside the void spaces of the soil mass and whether vertical or horizontal sub-soil drains are required for the stabilization of the project site; and
 general recommendations on excavating procedures, the depth of cover, surrounds and bedding required for pipes and standards for backfilling of trenches in graded material.
Site preparation and development
On the basis of the site investigation survey, a visual inspection of the site and detailed traverse and topographic surveys the overall physical conditions should be assessed. The implications that this analysis may have for the site's development should then be defined, requiring either adjustments to the site layout and building designs or special consideration to be given in the detailed design of site preparation and infrastructure contracts. The main characteristics that should be considered in making this assessment will relate to the site's drainage and topography.
Site drainage analysis. The analysis of drainage should assess whether a site is low lying and how the surface water is presently drained, particularly the relationship of the outlet's invert to the present ground level. Sites with a large catchment area and discharge flow may require the provision of an improved site outlet and on-site storage for peak period storm water flows.
The analysis should also consider whether temporary drains and sediment control structures will be needed during the construction period and if stilling basins, cascades and trash trapping will be required as part of the permanent drainage system. This may be applicable when a site is located at the bottom of a slope, off which there may be a substantial surface water discharge, possibly carrying earth and other loose material which might block the market's drains. Trash trapping may also be necessary at the outlet from the site.
Sub-soil drainage may be needed in order to accelerate primary settlement because of a high water table near the existing ground and extremely soft ground conditions with a low bearing capacity (such as clayey-silt alluvial material). There are generally two forms of sub-soil
drainage that are used: either horizontal "French" drains which are laid adjacent to main drains and sewers, retaining walls and ground floor slabs of buildings; and vertical drains, often used where raft foundations are proposed.
Topographic analysts. The topographic analysis will assess whether it will be necessary for the level of the site to be raised. This may be needed to provide stable soil conditions for new building works, to provide adequate cover to the new drains discharging through the site and to ensure that the final level comes above high flood level. A 25-year return period is often assumed. Raising the site level will require fill material, either obtained by excavating slopes on the site or, more usually, by importing suitable fill material from elsewhere. This needs to be compacted by heavy plant, the usual minimum standard is 95 percent Proctor. To aid construction in soft ground conditions the fill may be laid on a geo-textile blanket.
Moderate gradients across a site can be accommodated by sloping roads and parking areas (see Table 14.1) and by using small changes in level within buildings, providing ramps where necessary. However, where a steep cross-slope exists, it may be necessary to form the site by excavating level platforms. In this case, earth retaining structures may be needed. These are typically constructed as pre-cast concrete crib walling, reinforced concrete or masonry retaining walls or reinforced earth slopes.
Roads and parking
With the exception of areas designated to buildings, landscaping or reserves for future facilities, the entire area within a market site will need to be paved in order to provide the maximum degree of traffic manoeuverability and to facilitate site cleaning. The main characteristics of the road system will have been established during the site planning process described in Chapter 13 A hierarchy of roads will have been defined and the number of parking spaces at peak periods calculated. The purpose of the detailed engineering design will be to refine the broad assumptions used in the site plan, often necessitating layout adjustments. The road layout will form the main base map for the construction contracts and, for this reason, it is essential to undertake the road design before other engineering services
Table 14.1 Appropriate road design criteria
Length
(metres) Width
(metres) Radius
Metre Gradient
(percent)
Roads:
 Lane width - 3.50 - 0.5 - 5.0
 Minimum road width (1 way) - 7.00 - 0.5 - 5.0
 Minimum road width (2 way) - 12.00 - 0.5 - 5.0
 Manoeuvering distance - 8.00 - -
Access ramps (no parking).
 Maximum up ramp - 5.50 - 8.0
 Maximum up/down ramps - 7.00 - 6.0
 Maximum preferred - 7.00 - 5.0
Horizontal curves:
 Outside curb (minimum) - - 10.50 -
 Outside curb (preferred) - - 15.00 -
 Solid waste vehicle (turning) - - 18.00 -
Vehicles:
 Pick-up/mini-bus 5.00 2.00 - -
 Standard truck 8.50 2.50 - -
 Articulated truck 15.00 2.50 - -
 Truck with drawbar trailer 18.50 2.50 - -
Loading bays (end-on):
 Minimum size 8.00 3.75 - -
 Preferred size 12.00 4.00 - -
Parking spaces:
. Pick-ups 8.00 3.65 - -
. Trucks 11.00 3.65 - -
 Small cars (minimum) 4.80 2.40 - 2.0 - 5.0
Sources: Mittendorf; Lynch and Hack; Tutt and Adler; De Chiara.
Geometrical design. The road system of markets will need to accommodate a wide range of vehicle types, from the smallest cars and pick-ups to large trucks, fire appliances and refuse collection vehicles. Appropriate geometrical design criteria that can be adopted for the design of small and medium-scale markets are illustrated in Table 14.1. The geometrical design of roads is a specialized activity and in the case of a
complex urban market it will not be possible to develop the design without technical advice. Typical problems that will require such assistance could be the application of traffic models to predict flows, the design of a main junction at the site entry/exit and the detailing of complex loading bay arrangements.
Pavement design. A high standard of road construction is always required in markets and the road pavement should be designed on the basis of the California Bearing Ratio (CBR) data for wet conditions, obtained during the site investigations, and the peak projected traffic levels (usually expressed as standard 8,200kg axle loads). Specialist advice is generally required to determine the thickness of the road pavement. A suitable design procedure for tropical roads is set out in the publications of the UK Department of Environment (Technical Memorandum H6/78 and Road Notes 29 and 31).
Where adequate supplies of local crushed stone are available "Macadem" construction would normally be adopted, with a compacted sub-grade, sub-base and base courses, linen finished with a tack coat and surfaced with a pre-mixed bitumen based material. Alternatively, concrete road pavements can be used, but they tend to be more expensive. Where traffic loads are light and subsoils are suitable, soil stabilization techniques can be adopted using lime or cement as the stabilizer. Roads would be usually provided with integral side gutters and precast concrete herbs. Parking areas may be constructed to a slightly lower standard of design.
Surface-water drainage systems
The process of preparing layouts of the surface-water drainage system will, in tropical countries at least, have a significant impact on the detailed site planning, To prepare derailed drainage schemes there are many published technical works and it will also be critical to employ the local knowledge of public works departments. Examples of such publications for tropical areas are the Malaysian Department of Irrigation and Drainage's procedures and the regulations of the Singapore Drainage Department (1978. Code of Practice on Surface Water Drainage, Ministry of the Environment, Singapore). The following notes, however, will be of use in making an initial assessment.
Catchment and discharge The first step is to review available mapping of both the site itself and the areas immediately around it. The direction of the site's main. outlet (or more than one outlet) to a natural water course should be identified and the catchment area of the site should be defined (the area of land whose surface water will drain into the site). The next step is to calculate the total peak discharge of water from the site. The most useful technique is to use the Rational Formula:
where:
C = run-off coefficient
I = rainfall intensity in mm per hour
A = catchment-area in hectares, including the site.
The run-off coefficient is selected from standard tables and will depend on the extent of paved areas and building coverage. For markets this is normally taken as a high value, such as 0.9, because the sites are normally flat, impermeable and have fully paved surfaces, and because the future land uses around market sites are likely to be heavily urbanized.
Rainfall intensity Comprehensive historical information on rainfall intensity is usually obtainable from agriculture or irrigation departments, but because of the urban location of markets the best source of rainfall data is often from the local airport. An assessment will also have to be made of the maximum recorded intensity of rainfall per hour for a range of design storm intensities, such as I in 5, 10, 25 or 100 year storms. For most public buildings a level of service of at least 1 in 25 years return period would be appropriate. This should ensure that during major storms there is no inundation of the market buildings and that road access is still possible.
With complex catchment-area shapes and where it is necessary to allow for some degree of storage within the channels a version of the Rational Formula modified to meet local conditions should be used.
Drain design. Covered or uncovered reinforced concrete rectangular drains are typically adopted, with a small dry weather flow channel in the bed of the larger drains to cater for a self-cleansing velocity. A freeboard of 10 per cent of the channel depth is often used in design as a safety margin to cope with high intensity short duration storms. The calculation of drain sizes is usually based on the use of the Continuity of Flow Formula:
Q (run-off:) = A x V
where:
A - cross-sectional area of channel in m
V = velocity of flow in m per second (taken as maximum of 3 and minimum of 1.8 m per second for self cleansing)
and Manning's Formula:
where:
R = hydraulic radius of the channel in metres
S = gradient of the channel as a percentage
n = Manning's roughness coefficient (which can be assumed as 0.014 for normal insitu concrete lining to the channels).
Cut-off drains on the site boundaries may need to be provided to control the inlet of water into the site. The alignment of other main drains is likely to follow the pattern of buildings and roads, with a minimum of crossings. Some drains are likely to have only a minimal slope and wider cross-sections need to be provided, particularly at the site outlet, to cater for back-water effects if the existing outlet is constricted and to provide a level of on-site storage at times of peak discharge.
At the detailed design stage it may be necessary to fully investigate the possibility of improving the site outlet by increasing the size of the existing outlet or by introducing a new outlet.
Water supply
The majority of the water use at a market will be for washing purposes. The water will need to be to a similar standard to that for drinking water. Local standards may exist for calculating demand which reflect climatic conditions and cultural habits. These should be used if available.
An approximate estimate for water demand at ultimate development of a typical 10,000 m market, based on Nepal Water and Sewerage Board standards (Drinking water installation and drainage requirements in buildings in Nepal, page 88), is as follows:
 Basic requirement assuming a "medium" demand of 4 litres per m of effective floor area for covered markets: = floor area of 10,000 m x 4 litres/m = 40,000 litres
 Cool storage requirements at 20 litres per ton:= say 500 tons x 20 litres per ton = 10,000 litres
Basic requirement = 50,000 litres
Add 50% contingency, incl. produce washing = 25,000 litres
 Estimated Total Daily Demand = 75,000 litres
From this calculation it will be possible to estimate the size of any incoming mains or borehole by converting the water demand into a flow rate. Assuming that the market in the example above operates over a 16 hour day then the flow rate would be equivalent to 1.3 litres per second. Because the calculation has been based on the total floor space the flow rate is broadly equivalent to a peak flow On a net site this would require a 50 mm diameter polythene pipeline.
Tabulations of pipe diameters for different flow rates, materials and gradients are given in the Ross Institute Bulletin No. 10 (Cairocross, S. & Feachem, R. 1978. Small water supplies. London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine). Specialist advice should be sought for the design of pipelines on very net sites (less than 1 in 50 gradient) or where there are high water pressures.
Depending on available pressures and the reliability of the supply the site may need to be served by an underground reservoir or a high-level tank (in pressed steel or concrete shell). Pumping may be required to raise the water to the tank level, so that the site can be served by a gravity distribution system. Any tank or reservoir should hold at least one full day's supply. The main tank would serve a reticulation system of ring loops, which will make maintenance simpler as parts of the system can be cut-off. Distribution should be to overhead tanks in individual buildings, stand pipes and to a separate fire hydrant system.
Fire-fighting systems
The large amount of organic material in markets means that they present a substantial fire risk and special provision should be made. A number of markets have been completely burnt to the ground in major fires.
Fire hydrants. The market site should be served by a series of above ground fire hydrants, spaced at approximately 30 metres intervals in loop systems encircling the main building and around the site periphery. The hydrants should be located in the pavement areas to protect them from damage by vehicles and be served by connections from a gravity fed overhead storage tank, thus guaranteeing a water supply for fire fighting. In designing the water supply system a minimum fire-fighting flow of 34 litres per second (450 gallons per minute) should be aimed for.
Fire prevention in buildings. Smoke detection and alarm systems should be installed in all the main market buildings. In order to avoid the need for a costly overhead sprinkler system the buildings should be compartmented by limiting the distance between fireproof walls to a maximum of 60 metres and to an area of less than 1,000 m. Key buildings with a higher fire risk should be provided with secondary alternative means of escape in case of fire and compartmented to a higher standard of fire resistance. Cold storage buildings should also be fitted with gas detection equipment.
All buildings should be provided with internal emergency equipment to the following minimum standards:
 1 fire bucket per 100 m of floor area (or part thereof);
 1 fire extinguisher per 600 m of floor area (or part);
 first aid kits and tools (asbestos blanket, hatchet, gloves, etc.) for each building or compartmented section; and
 internal fire hydrants to open-market sheds, served from overhead gravity fed tanks to a minimum pressure of 3 kg/cm. The hydrants should be provided with wall-mounted hose reels to serve a maximum radius of 30 metres.
These fire safety requirements have been generally based on the Indian Code of Practice for fire safety of industrial buildings: general storage and warehousing, including cold storage (IS: 3594, 1967) and Recommendations for providing first aid - fire fighting arrangements in public buildings (IS:2217, 1963). These principles should provide a reasonable basis for design, but local codes may exist and adjustments to meet these standards should be made. Consultation with the local fire brigade is always essential. The enclosed nature of market sites may make it necessary for the fire brigade to have special facilities for access.
Sewerage
For most sites it should be possible to use a water-borne gravity system (typically 150 - 200mm diameter pipework) but in some cases, where the site is very flat and where suitable locations for the treatment plant are limited, it may be necessary to pump the sewage. Local methods for estimating the peak sewage flow and the hydraulic design of the sewers should be available. On very flat sites it may be necessary to use a pressurized pumping mains. The design of this can be based on the Colebrook-White equation, which is published in the design tables of the UK Hydraulic Research Station. As new markets are often on filled sites with potential long-term differential settlement problems, it is desirable to be cautious in the structural design of pipelines, particularly their bedding, surround and relationship to rigid structures.
Septic tanks. Assuming that a mains sewerage system is not available then sewage would normally be taken to one or more septic tanks located within the site boundary. An appropriate method in tropical areas for estimating their size, is given in the Indian Code of Practice for the design and construction of septic tanks, part 11, large installations, (IS:2470, 1971). A typical size for a market with an annual turn-over of 40,000 tons might be around 26m capacity (7.7 x 3.4 x 1.7m depth). The partially treated effluent would be discharged into the main surface water drain at the outlet from the site.
Sanitary fittings The provision of sanitary fittings can be estimated on the basis of the Indian Code of Practice for drainage and sanitation (IS: 1172, 1971) and Layout for regulated market yards for fruits and vegetables (IS:1787, 1961). These standards are shown in Table 14.2.
To estimate the total number of fittings it is necessary to make a number of assumptions about the usage of facilities. The following calculation is based on the requirements for a medium-size wholesale market yard:
 assuming that the average out-going transaction size is a small pick-up load of one ton, the average number of people involved with each transaction is 1.5 (0.25 sellers, 1 buyer and 0.25 market staff) and market users are 75 per cent male, then the maximum number of market users per fitting at ultimate development would be:
 number of water closets:
= 280 tons (daily throughout) x 1.5 (usage factor) x 2 per 50 users
= 17 water closets
 number of urinals:
= 280 tons (daily throughout) x 1.5 x 0.75 (males) x 2 per 50 users
= 13 urinals
Table 14.2 Standards for the provision of sanitary fittings at markets
Fitting Male Female Market yards
water closets 1 per 25 persons 1 per 15 persons 2 minimum plus
1 per 50 persons
ablution taps 1 per we plus 1 per wc plus 2 minimum plus
1 per 50 persons 1 per So persons 1 per 50 persons
urinals 0 - 6 persons = 0 not applicable 2 per 50 persons
7 - 20 persons = 1 
21- 45 persons = 2 
46 - 70 persons = 3 
71-100 persons = 4 
wash band basins 1 per 25 persons 1 per 15 persons not specified
drinking fountains 1 per 100 persons 1 per 100 persons not specified
clearer's sinks 1 per floor not specified
Source: Indian Codes of Practice
Electrical services
The provision of power, particularly artificial lighting, is an important infrastructure component as it enables the fullest and safest use to be made of the market's facilities. Larger market sites will need to be served with their own high-tension supply (usually 11kV), which for economic reasons is often an overhead supply mounted on pylons. A transformer is normally required, typically 300 kVA, which can be a double-pole mounted type or one located within a building.
The transformed low voltage supply should run in encased cable ducts to a main switch board, with distribution cables to sub-switch boards in the individual buildings. For ease of maintenance all external cables should be ducted through cable trenches and internal wirings should be concealed in conduit wherever possible.
External lighting, For security reasons and so that the effective working period of the market can be extended, all internal roads and paved areas need to be adequately lighted by means of high level luminaires, either tungsten halogen, high-pressure mercury or sodium vapour. The best arrangement of lighting is to mount lamps or floodlights on the face of the market buildings, with pole mounted lamps on the site perimeter. Large open areas, such as parking areas, may require cable-suspended fittings.
The spacing of the lanterns will depend on the height at which they are mounted and whether they overhang the road area. For example, lanterns mounted at 8 metres and overhanging 2 metres would be spaced 25 - 30 metres apart. preferably in a staggered arrangement. Detailed design criteria are contained in the British Standard BS 5489 (1980. Code of Practice for street lighting London, BSI).
As an alternative, the German guidelines (DIN 57528) recommend the following standards of averag illuminance and uniformity:
 parking areas, with high turnover E = 12 lux/u^2 = 0.17
 dual carraigeways and A roads E = 12 lux/u^2 = 0.08
 B roads E - 12 lux/u^2 = 0.08
 outside stairs and ramps E = 15 lux/u^2 = 0.33
Building lighting Internal lighting levels to buildings need to be to a high standard of illuminance, with a minimum of 500 lux and preferably 1,000 lux to counteract the brighter natural lighting likely to be found outside. To minimize heat gain high-efficiency fluorescent fittings should be used for artificial lighting, with the building's ventilation arranged so as to draw heated air out. For food displays the colour of the tubes should preferably be warm, but some cultures have a strong preference for the use of cool tubes.
Mechanical ventilation. Although the correct location of buildings on their sites (see Chapter 13) and the choice of an appropriate building form and roofing material (see later in this chapter) will assist in the establishment of a satisfactory internal climate, mechanical ventilation may still be required.
In the humid tropics and coastal areas market buildings will tend to have completely open sides to maximize air movement. This may still not be sufficient to provide comfortable conditions if wind speed is low and solar radiation high. In arid, desert climates the frequent occurrence of sandstorms may prevent natural ventilation systems, such as cooling towers, from being used.
Roof extract fans are, therefore, usually provided for the main market sheds, typically reducing the internal temperature by 3 - 5 C. For offices and other facilities ceiling fans are often installed, although wall-mounted fans tend to be more effective. Air conditioning, even for just the market's offices, is not likely to be economically viable in most less-developed countries. Design standards for ventilation are contained in the British Standard BS 5720 (1979 Code of Practice for ventilation and air conditioning London, BSI).
Telecommunication systems
The telephone is essential for a modern wholesale market. In the USA, for example, around 40 percent of all transactions are made directly by phone. It allows rapid communication between wholesalers, retailers and exporters and also acts a management and extension tool. With the development of market information systems the telephone is the major means by which price information is transmitted to producers.
A major market will require the installation of its own switchboard (PABX system) which would be housed in the main management office. It should have sufficient external lines for the installation of computer modems and facsimile equipment. Public telephones will be required within a market, often accommodated at a post office, which may also provide telegram facilities.
Solid waste equipment
The local or municipal authority is already likely have a system for collection and disposal of solid waste. but this may be oriented to the collection of small-scale domestic waste, probably using compression type refuse vehicles. For markets this is not usually an appropriate system as it may involve the refuse collection staff of the market in additional handling.
Container interchange An ideal system often used in markets is one using container interchange, based around skip lifting vehicles. Skip volumes can vary from around 3 - 9 cubic metres The skips should be located at strategic locations in the market for gradual filling, usually from hand cart loads. They should be collected at the end of the working day and empty skips left For the next collection.
The best method for estimating waste generation is to base the calculations on local survey data, if this available. If not, the following method of calculation (based on projections made for the Sansai market in Chiang Mai, Thailand) provides a reasonable basis for estimating the number of skips that might be required:
 Assume Sansai's rate of waste generation is similar to existing markets in Chiang Mai (overall density ranging from 180 - 260 kg/m, average density 220 kg/m, market waste density 200 kg/m)
 Total daily waste arising (1991) = 754 m퀈 220 kg. = 166 tons
 Markets account for 11.3% of total = 166 t. x 11.3% = 18.8 tons
Average daily market turn-over in Chiang Mai = 370 tons
 Existing market waste - Chiang Mai = 18.8/370 tons = 5 %
 Projected average daily turnover at Sansai = 280 tons
 Projected waste generation at Sansai = 280 t. x 5 % = 14 tons
 Average specific weight of refuse = 200 kg/m
 Volume of waste generation, Sansai = 14 t./200 kg = 70 m
 Add 20 percent for grading/packing = 70 m x 1.2 = 84 m
 Average capacity of existing skips = 6 - 8 m
 Number of skip loads per day = 84 m/7 m = 12 loads
 Assumed collection Rota per day = 2 times
 Number of skips required = 12 loads/2 = 6 skips
 Allowance [or container interchange = 6 skips x 2 = 12 skips
Other types of solid waste equipment Another method for handling solid waste collection, popular in European markets, is to use metal or plastic containers (paladins) on castors. However, these only have a limited volume (around 1 cubic metre) and require the refuse collection vehicles to be equipped with a lift and tilt mechanism. Medium-size containers of 2-3 cubic metres capacity are also sometimes used, but again require special fork lifts attached to the refuse vehicle. Keeping the paladins and containers clean can also cause a major problem, unless special facilities are available for automatic cleansing.
The general cleaning of road and floor surfaces within a market is also very important. In most less-developed countries the only economic solution is to use a combination of manual cleaning with brooms and small-wheeled collection carts. Where labour costs are high, mechanical methods should be used, either small, hand-operated cleaning machines or vacuum-operated vehicles equipped with brushes for kerb cleaning.
For small secondary wholesale markets the most convenient collection vehicle may be a tractor and trailer combination. In this case refuse would be collected in the market at fixed enclosures (usually constructed of rendered masonry or concrete) and then manually transferred into the trailers. Often this service can be arranged with a local contractor, typically a farmer who already owns the equipment.
<section>l</section>
Building structures and materials
The subject of building and structural design is, like that of civil works design, not something that can be adequately covered in a short manual. The following notes may assist administrators in understanding the types of issues that will need to be considered by the projects architects and engineers when they are developing the design of the market.
Selection of building materials. In less-developed countries the selection of appropriate building materials is as important for the construction of markets as for any other building type. The term appropriate in this context means that, in selecting construction materials, there should be a balance struck between cost, utility and the optimum use of resources. It is generally preferable that local materials and technology are used, but this should not be at the expense of providing the most functional solution. The use of traditional or intermediate technologies does not mean that design will be simpler; the opposite may often be the case.
Reviews of suitable intermediate technologies are contained in Spence, RJ.S. 1983. (Building Materials in Developing Countries. Chichester, John Wiley and Sons) and Stulz, R. 1981 (Appropriate Building Materials Zurich, Swiss Centre for Appropriate Technology)
Typical construction. The typical construction of a low-cost market building would be a steel sheet or brick clad reinforced concrete (RCC) frame, completely open on the sides, providing unloading facilities for producers and a raised loading platform for wholesalers and retailers The roof would generally be of steel trusses, insulated and clad with colour bonded pressed-steel sheeting or, if available, some form of lightweight fibre sheeting. To provide comfortable and well-lit conditions in the centre of the building, high level pressed steel or timber louvre ventilators and "clerestorey" glazing should be provided at ridge level. Glazing in northern latitudes should be "north lights", in southern latitudes "south lights" and near to the equator by completely shaded unglazed openings.
Other facilities on a site might be of a more permanent nature. Construction of the building might be of conventional masonry, with a light RCC frame, or of calculated load-bearing brickwork, with steel roof trusses, clad with clay tiles or colour-bonded, pressed-steel sheeting. The construction of specialized facilities such as cold storage, would be basically similar to the main sheds, except that raft foundations may be required because of high loading. Insulation should be provided to the entire ground floor, chamber walls and roof.
Foundation design, The main criteria for structural design of foundations will be established from the site investigation survey. This will determine the appropriate bearing pressure that should be adopted in design and the types of foundations that will be required for different building categories, such as strip or raft foundation or isolated footing supported by long or short piles. The site investigation will also give recommendations for the depth of strip and raft foundation; the minimum length of pile foundations; and, if the site falls within an active seismic (earthquake) zone, measures which should be taken in the design of column footings and their inter-connection by tie-beams.
Depending on soil conditions, the foundations should ideally be conventional isolated pads under the main columns, with connecting strip footings, except for sections of the building where a raft foundation may be required because of higher loadings, such as under a main water tower or tank.
Structural design of buildings. Market buildings are essentially simple sheds and in their design the most important element to consider in the structure will be the choice of an appropriate system of roof construction. The selection of cladding materials is discussed below, but equally influential will be the decisions made about how the roof is to be supported. Ideally the span and width of structural bays should be as large as possible to provide an unobstructed operating space. Spans can range from 8 metres up to 24 metres, with bays at spacings of 6 metres to 12 metres. Buildings with depths greater than the maximum practical spans can be obtained by providing intermediate supports, often coinciding with a break in the roof plane for ventilation Although the shed form may be simple there are many opportunities for refinement in its detailing and elegant and economic structural forms are possible.
Structural loading assumptions. It is usual for national standards to exist for standard loadings and these will need to be adopted in design. The following figures (based on British Standard CP3: Chap V: Part 1:1967) may provide a useful supplement to these standard figures:
Dead loading 
 Steel roof cladding 480 N/m
 Steel trusses 100 N/m
 False ceilings 140 N/m
Distributed imposed - live loading
 Pitched roof 0.75 kN/m
 Produce display/sales 4.00 kN/m
 Cold stores 5 00 kN/metre height (minimum 15 kN)
 Other stores 2.40 kN/metre of height
 General offices 2.50 kN/m
 Hostels 1.50 kN/m
 Public halls (fixed seats) 4.00 kN/m
Roof structures. Common construction materials for roof structures are steel or timber trusses and reinforced concrete, supported on masonry, concrete, steel or timber columns. Practical and cost considerations will, however, restrict the range of options that are available. The presence of termites and wood-boring beetles, for example, may limit the use of structural timber. The modules required for sales spaces and storage areas and the geometry created by the parking bays will need to be studied in selecting suitable dimensions for the structural bays.
The ultimate decision, however, will be determined by a number of external factors. This will include the capacity and level of local technology what materials are available, the ability of local fabrication workshops, transport constraints and site erection facilities. In some regions the need to cope with seismic. movement or hurricane force winds will be the major determinant of the roof form. The final choice will invariably be made on economic grounds. For spans over 6 metres steel trusses will tend to be the most economic solution.
Roof cladding. For markets, the most important building component that will need to be considered is the cladding material selected for the roof. Roofs will account for the largest proportion of the total building costs and are likely to be the most complex technical problem encountered in the building design. Market roofs must be durable, noncombustible, easily maintainable and must be able to perform under all the internal and external climatic conditions imposed on the buildings.
Hot arid and composite climates will require roofs with a high thermal mass (9 - 12 hours time lag and a U value of not less than 0.85 W/m 캜). Tropical upland climates will require pitched roofs of a similar thermal mass, but a lower time lag of around 8 hours. In the warm humid tropics the need to cope with high levels of rainfall will tend to favour lightweight pitched roofs, insulated to achieve a thermal mass time lag of less than 3 hours (U value of not less than 1.1 W/m 캜).
The choice of roof materials is very wide and needs to be considered with the structural design. For flat or pitched roofs in arid climates, in-situ or pre-cast reinforced concrete finished in hot mastic asphalt or a cold-applied bituminous compound are the usual choice. Other options, which may be particularly applicable for secondary markets in rural areas, include fibre-reinforced soil roofs with animal dung waterproofing and reinforced brickwork finished with asphalt or tiles. Traditional pitched roof materials that might also be appropriate for rural markets include thatch, which has fireproofing problems, and clay or stone tiles, which are heavy and thus only generally suitable for short-span structures.
Most modem urban markets favour the use of light-weight corrugated sheet materials, such as galvanised steel which has a poor performance thermally, low surface reflectivity and is not very durable, particularly in coastal areas. Other options include plastic coated sheet stell aluminium
and asbestos cement. These perform more satisfactorily, but generally require foreign exchange for their purchase. Local production of corrugated, asphaltic or fibre-reinforced cement sheets may exist and these should be investigated.
None of the sheet materials can be used on their own and roof insulation will be required. Fibreglass, aluminium foils and polyurethane boards are very effective but may be too expensive. Locally produced insulating boards, using waste straw or other residues, are the ideal materials if available.
Materials supply. Before making any decisions on basic construction methods, a review should be undertaken of materials availability and supply. It is normal and desirable to design a market on the basis of the maximum use of locally available and manufactured materials and components. Certain items, however, will invariably need to be imported and the responsibility for their import should be considered in the preparation of project documents.
Cement is a material which is often in short supply and notwithstanding the existence of cement factories, it may need to be imported so as to guarantee a supply. Because of the difficulties of quality control the import should always be made the sole responsibility of the main contractor. The import of specialized fittings, such as street lights and fire hydrants, should also be made the sole responsibility of the main contractor.
The construction of market buildings often assumes a large steel component, or roof trusses, window frames, louvres, gratings, frames, partitions, water tanks and roof cladding. Although there may be a high level of capability for fabricating these components locally, steel shortages may have a significant impact on a project's progress. Significant cost and time savings can be made through the bulk purchase of steel internationally. It can then be supplied to selectively tendered local sub-contractors for the fabrication of components.
Where there are likely to be wide variations in the quality of locally available materials (such as earth-fill material, sand and gravel) and components (such as bricks and tiles) the tender documents should incorporate a sub-contract for a local firm to undertake geotechnical and materials testing.
Geotechnical and materials testing programmes. Geotechnical and materials testing should also be undertaken during the construction period so that the settlement of a site during filling can be monitored and appropriate adjustments can be made to infrastructure design, depending on the variations in site conditions and the different properties of materials being used on the site.
A typical list of the types of investigations that might be undertaken during construction is shown in Table 14.3.
Table 14.3 Geotechnical & materials testing during construction
Site preparation
Field density test by sand replacement method
Modified Proctor test in laboratory
Laboratory CBR tests
Field CBR tests
Mackintosh probes (for building foundations)
Consolidation test for primary settlement (T90)
Plate load test
Materials testing
Cement setting times
Cement soundness test
Cement compressive strength
Concrete cube tests
Concrete mix design (28 days strength)
Brick compressive strength
Brick moisture absorption
Los Angeles abrasion test/impact test
Tests on materials from sand and aggregate sources
Engineering design and supervision
Final design, preparation of tender documents and tendering procedures is the responsibility of a government public works department or a locally appointed firm of architect/engineers. Either could also act as the design and supervision (D&S) consultants for the project's duration and be responsible for management of the construction contracts.
Appointment of consultants. Although government staff might be appointed without any formalities it would take around 4 - 6 months for the mobilization of a consultant D & S team. Assuming that there are sufficient, experienced local consultancy firms to take on the role, the following steps would need to be followed for their appointment:
 preparation of D & S terms of reference;
 short-listing of local consultancy firms, including visits to their offices and to work for which they have been responsible;
 invitation to bid, including newspaper advertisements;
 review and evaluation of bids; and
 recommendations and approval to appointment by client body
In some countries there are variants on this procedure where the practice is to use contractors for both design and build. This is sometimes referred to as, a turn-key contract. This method usually has the advantage of faster construction periods and may allow greater financial control during the contract, but it does require that the client body has thoroughly worked out what it wants. A common method to ensure that the client's interests are protected is to appoint an independent project manager.
Scope of design and supervision activities. For large-scale projects, such as an urban wholesale market, a high level of on-site control will be needed. A full-time resident engineer is necessary on the site, assisted by inspectors and a site architect. The following activities would be undertaken by the D & S team and, if they are to be a private firm of consultants, would form the basis for their terms of reference:
 topographic surveys and geotechnical investigations, if not already undertaken by other consultants or government department;
 review of designs undertaken in previous design stages;
 final design and preparation of tender documents (specifications, drawings and bills of quantities) for site construction;
 advertising contracts and pre-qualifying contractors;
 tendering by short-listed contractors (local competitive bidding), reviewing of bids and letting of the contract packages;
 site supervision of construction contracts, including checking of setting out, general quality and financial control, valuations, certification for interim payments and preparation of final accounts;
 preparation of bid documents for materials and equipment procurement, followed by tendering (international and local competitive bidding), reviewing and letting of the contracts;
 submission of monthly technical progress reports on construction design, contract budgeting, equipment procurement and physical progress; and
 preparation and agreement of final construction accounts and handing over of building and sites to client body at the end of the defects liability/warranty period.
<section>m</section>
Bibliography
Abbott, J.C & Makeham, J.P. 1979. agricultural economics and marketing in the tropics. Harlow, Longman.
Abbott, J.C. 1986. Marketing improvement in the developing world. Economic and social development series 37. Rome, FAO.
Acharya S.S & Agarwal, N.L. 1987. Agricultural marketing in India. New Delhi, Oxford and Ibhi Publishing Co.
Alexander, C. 1977. A pattern language - towns, buildings, construction. New York, Oxford University Press.
AMTI. 1988. Regional training workshop on planning and design of fruit and vegetable markets. Seoul, Korea, Agricultural Marketing Training Institute.
Benedetta, M. 1979. Street markets of London. New York, Benjamin Bolm Inc.
Bromley, R. 1980. Municipal versus spontaneous markets a case study of urban planning in Call, Columbia. Third World Planning Review, 2 (2): 205-232. Liverpool.
Campinos, H. & Goethert, R. 1978. Urbanization primer. Cambridge, Mass., The MIT Press.
Cartwright R.M. 1980. The design of urban space. London, The Architectural Press Ltd
Chambers A.H. 1963. Wholesale markets for horticultural produce in cities and towns. Report No. 14. London, Horticultural Marketing Council.
Chambers R. 1989. Farmer first. London, Intermediate Technology Publications.
Chlsholm, M. 1962. Rural settlement and land use. London, Hutchinson University Library.
Darrow, K.1981. Appropriate technology sourcebook. Stanford, Volunteers in Asia Inc.
Davison, F. & Payne, G.1983. Urban projects manual. Liverpool, University Press.
De Chiara, J & Koppelham, LE. 1978, Site planning standards. New York, McGrawHill Book Company.
DHV Consulting Engineers. 1979. Guidelines for rural centre planning. New York, United Nations, Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific.
Drakakis-Smith, D. 1991. Urban food distribution in Asia & Africa. The Geographical Journal, 157 (1): 51-61, London.
Eighmy, T.H. 1972. Rural periodic markets and the extension of an urban system: a Western Nigerian example. Economic Geography, 48 (3): 299-315, London.
FAO. 1960. Fishing ports and markets. Rome, FAO.
FAO. 1979. Estudio de factibilidad mercados mayoristas de la Paz.. Rome, FAO.
FAO. 1975. Development of food marketing systems for large urban areas - II. Asia and Far East.. Rome, FAO.
FAO. 1982. The private marketing entrepreneur and rural development. AGS Bulletin 51. Rome, FAO.
FAO. 1983. Guide to improving rural markets. Rome, FAO, Marketing and Credit Service.
FAO. 1984. Guide to establishing small packing stations for fruit and vegetables in rural areas. Rome, FAO, Marketing and Credit Service.
FAO. 1986. Mercados mayoristas de alimentos de America Latina. Santiago, Chile, FAO Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean.
FAO. 1988. Guidelines on socioeconomic indicators for monitoring and evaluating agrarian reform and rural development. Rome, FAO.
FAO 1986. Capcitacion en planification y operacion de mercados mayoristas de alimentos de America Latina. Santiago, Chile, FAO Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean.
FAO. 1989. Horticultural marketing - a resource and training manual for extension officers. Agricultural Services Bulletin No.76. Rome, FAO.
FAO. 1990. Selected indicators of food and agricultural development in the Asia-Pacific region 19 79 -89. RAPA Publication 1990/15. Bangkok, FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific.
FAO/AFMA. 1986. Improvement of post-harvest fresh fruits and vegetables handling - a manual. Bangkok, FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific.
FAO/DSE. 1978. Rural markets - a critical link for small farmer development. Bangkok, FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific
Fenn, M. G. 1960. Marketing livestock and meat.. Marketing Guide 3. Rome, FAO.
Goethert, R & Hamdil, N. 1988. Making microplans. London, Intermediate Technology Publications.
Goodalt G. 1987. Dictionary of human geography. Harmondsworth, Penguin Books.
Harrison, K. 1987. Improved food marketing and delivery systems, in Elz, D. Agricultural marketing strategy and pricing policy. Washington DC, World Bank.
Hill P. & Smith, OH T. 1972. The spatial and temporal synchronization of periodic markets: evidence from four emirates in Northern Nigeria. Economic Geography, 48 (3): 345-355, London
Holtzman, J.S. 1986. Rapid reconnaissance guidelines for agricultural marketing and food system research in developing countries. Michigan State University, Dept. of Agricultural Economics
Horticultural Marketing Council. 1963. Study of operations in a wholesale horticultural market. HMC Report No. 13. London.
Hudson, N.W. 1975. Field engineering for Agricultural Development.-Oxford, Clarendon Press.
Huls, PH. 1986. Covered markets: a bibliography of recent literature. Monticello, Illinois, Vance Bibliographies.
ILACO B.V. 1981. Agricultural compendium for rural development in the tropics & subtropics. Amsterdam, Elseveir
IULA. 1969. Manual on wholesale markets. The Hague, International.Union of Local Authorities.
Jackson, J.N. 1963` Surveys for town and country planning, London, Hutchinson University Library.
Jacqat, C. 1990. Plants from the markets of Thailand. Bangkok, Editions Duang Kamol.
JETRO. 1981. An outline of food distribution in Japan centering on distribution through wholesale markets. Jetro Report AG-6. Tokyo.
Kader, A.A. Postharvest technology of horticultural crops. University of California, Div. of Agriculture & Natural Resources.
Kilrk, J.H. et al.1972. Retail stall markets in Great Britain. University of London, Wye College.
Koenigsberger, O.H. et al, 1973. Manual of tropical housing and building, climatic design. London, Longman.
Lee, C. 1973. Models in Planning. Oxford, Pergamon Press.
Lee, C.Y.1983. Food marketing in nine Asian countries. Bangkok, FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific.
Le Fevre, A.J. & Plekerleg, J.F. 1972 The economics of moving Covent Garden. Journal of Agricultural Economies, XXIII (2): 3548, London.
Lynch, K. & Hack, G. 1984. Site planning. Cambridge, Mass., The MIT Press.
Maxwell Fry, E. & Drew, J. 1956. Tropical architecture in the humid zone. London, B.T. Batsford Ltd.
McCracken, J.A. et al. 1988. An introduction to rapid rural appraisal for agricultural development. London, International Institute for Environment and Development.
Mittendorf, HJ. 1976. Planning of urban wholesale markets for perishable food Rome, FAO.
ODA. 1972. A guide to project appraisal in developing countries.. London, HMSO.
Parker, H. & MacGuire, J.W. 1954. Simplified site engineering for architects and builders. New York, John Wiley & Sons.
Price Gittinger, J. 1972. Economic analysts of agricultural projects. Baltimore, John Hopkins University Press.
Richey, C.B. (ed). 1961. Agricultural engineer's band-booje. New York, Mc-Graw Hill.
Roberts, M. 1974. Town planning techniques. London, Hutchinson.
Saini, B.S. 1980. Building in hot dry climates. Chichester, John Wiley & Sons.
Schubert, B. 1983. Market information services. Agricultural Services Bulletin. 57. Rome, FAO.
Senanayake, S.M P. 1980. Periodic rural markets in the Kurunegala District. Colombo, Agrarian Training Institute
Sherbini, A A. 1966. Planning fruit and vegetable wholesale marketing facilitties in developing countries Rome, FAO.
SINAC. 1991. National wholesale market system. Brasilia Companhia Brasileira de Alimentos.
Spence, R.J.S. 1983. Building materials in developing countries. Chichester, John Wiley & Sons.
Steppe, H. & Ramaswamy P. 1983. Market survey and data processing techniques. Report No. 20. Faridabad, Market Planning & Design Centre (Government of India: UNDP: FAO Joint Project).
Stewart, G.F. and Abbott, J.C. 1961. Marketing eggs and poultry. Marketing Guide No. 4. Rome, FAO.
Stern, P et al. 1985. Field engineering London, Intermediate Technology Publications.
Stulz, R. 1981. Appropriate building materials. Zurich, SKAT, Swiss Centre for Appropriate Technology.
Taylor, L. & Jenkins' P. 1989. Time to listen - the human aspect in development. London. Intermediate Technology Publications,.
Tutt, P. & Adler, D. 1979. New metric handbook - planning and design data. London, The Architects Journal.
UNDP. 1990. How to write a project document. New York, United Nations Development Programme.
USAlD. 1963. Village markets in Ghana. Washington, United States Agency for International Development.
USAID 1990. An evaluation of the financial feasibility of four new wholesale fruit and vegetable markets in the Yemen Arab Republic. Washington, United States Agency for International Development.
USDA. 1989. A warehouse layout for a fruit and vegetable service wholesaler in a terminal market. Marketing Research Report 389. Washington, United States Department of Agriculture.
USDA/Maryland Food Center Authority. 1989. Wholesale food distribution center growth and development. Washington, USDA.
Vance Jr., J.E. 1970. The merchant's world: the geography of wholesaling. Prentice Hall.
Veda, N. 1975. Designing wholesale markets for Asian cities. Bangkok, FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific.
