<title>Small-scale processing of microbial pesticides</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
The microorganisms used by industry to produce today's microbial insecticides have been developed from wild organisms isolated from nature. They have been massively modified by mutation and selection to meet overall process needs and are able to produce, under carefully controlled fermentation conditions, very large quantities of commercially viable products. Experience has shown that downstream of the fermenter, the preparation, harvesting, formulation, testing, and marketing of microbial pesticides greatly exceed the costs of the actual fermentation process itself.
Small-scale production of microbial insecticides is subject to the same manufacturing principles as large-scale production. Small-scale production in the tropics is cheaper due mainly to the fact that the requirements of energy necessary to maintain the cultivation temperature is substantially lower than in moderate climates, or even negligible. This advantage makes it clear that it is here where small-scale production can successfully compete with big-scale producers. Another advantage is that long-term storage poses fewer problems, inasmuch as the products will be implemented locally. Also, the implementation of certain entomopathogenic fungi in humid tropics is more reliable due to higher effectiveness in application.
Prague, 1990
Vladimír Táborsky
<section>2</section>
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I wish to thank Dr. R. Ctefec for the English correction of the text and for reviewing the manuscripts. I am very grateful to Miss A. Ryvová, Mrs. A. Ryvová, MCS., Mr. P. Ckoda, MSC., who helped me with the manuscripts and especially to Mr. M. Cindeláo, MCS., who helped me with transferring of the text to a wordprocessing foemat.
<section>3</section>
CHAPTER 1.
GENERAL INTRODUCTION TO PROCESSING
OF MICROBIAL PESTICIDES
1.1 The importance of microbial pesticides
Studies of natural epizootics of entomopathogenic bacteria and fungi during the latter half of the nineteenth century and the first half of the twentieth century, stimulated man`s interest in employing them as microbial pesticides and myco-insecticides to control agricultural pests. Mass production of the selected bacteria and fungi is a necessary prerequisite for any large-scale field application, and the methodology involved was developed at an early stage to suit a number of different pest-pathogen situations. However, this technology stagnated as disillusionment as to the practical value of virus, bacteria and fungi as biological control agents of arthropods and their efficacy against a range of pests became dominant in various parts of the world, following the initial overwhelming success of chemical pesticides.
The revival of interest in microbial insecticides over the last 20 years, has led to large-scale production of Bacillus thuringiensis [Berliner], a promising fungi candidate, and to the marketing of the first bacterio-insecticides DIPEL, THURICIDE, BACTOSPEINE, VECTOBAC, TECNAR, BACTIMOS, BATURIN 82 and myco-insecticides MYCOTAL, VERTALEX based on the formulation of Verticillium lecani and METAQUINO which is based on the formulation of Metarhizium anisopliae. While, the production of bacterio-insecticides is common worldwide, there is little information available on the biotechnology of entomopathogenic fungi, and their industrial production is still relatively unsophisticated.
A microbial toxin can be defined as a biological poison derived from a microorganism, such as a bacterium or fungus. Pathogenesis by microbial entomopathogens occurs by invasion through the integument or gut of the insect, followed by multiplication of the pathogen resulting in the death of the host, e.g., insects. Studies have demonstrated that the pathogens produce insecticidal toxin important in pathogenesis (Burges 1981). Most of the toxins produced by microbial pathogens which have been identified are peptides, but they vary greatly in terms of structure, toxicity and specificity.
Toxins of Bacillus thuringiensis are the most widely investigated example. The organism was first isolated in 1902 by Ishiwata, but it was not until the 1950`s that the diamond-shaped crystals or "parasporal bodies" in sporulating cells of B.t. were recognized as being involved in killing insect larvae. Later it was demonstrated that the crystals were mainly protein "polypeptides" and Angus (1956 a, b) showed that the crystal caused paralysis of the midgut and cessation of feeding in the silkworm, Bombyx mori, while the spores were necessary for the establishment of septicemia.
Many compounds, such as Beauvericin, and the destruxin of Metarhizium anisopliae, aphidicolin of Verticillium lecanii are highly toxic to insects.
The more widespread acceptance and use of myco-insecticides will depend on improvement in a number of key areas. Widespread use of myco-insecticides in China, Brazil and USSR may be repeated in the low-input labour-intensive agricultures around the world. In the short term, with our present level of knowledge, it seems likely that commercial production of myco-insecticides is going to be restricted to small-scale production in specific areas. At present there appears to be a situation in which biological control agents including fungi would provide a viable commercial option, where conventional chemical control gives insufficient control or where there is insecticide resistance; where conventional chemicals are too expensive; or where government restricts application of chemicals.
Despite these problems many of the multinationals are now pursuing projects on biological control. However, predictably, most interest appears to be focused on microbial toxins, with the view of expressing pathogen toxin genes in plants or using the toxins themselves as starter molecules for developing new chemical insecticides.
1.2 Production and Commercialization of Pathogens
The practical use of microbial agents which kill insects is being carried out by many scientists and horticulturists throughout the world. Other alternatives to chemical pesticides are also under investigation, including novel pest control systems based on parasitic and predatory insects, predatory mites, fungi, bacteria, viruses, protozoans, nematodes and pheromones which modify the behaviour of insects for man`s benefit. However, most of these novel systems have not yet been exploited in agricultural practice on a commercial scale. This is due to the series of sometimes lengthy and sometimes expensive steps which must be carried out before new pest control systems can be offered to the grower.
1.2.1 Steps Leading to Commercialization
Once any new system has been identified and characterized in the laboratory, the following steps must be completed before it can be successfully commercialized.
Process Development. A process must be developed which can be carried out on a large enough scale to ensure that an adequate amount of the material can be made. This process must be sufficiently reliable to provide a product which is both safe and effective. In addition, the production cost must allow manufacturers to make a profit.
Product Development. Many systems for controlling pests are successful in the laboratory. However they fail when tried in the greenhouse or in the field. This is one of the many problems which must be solved by product development. Products must be manufactured and formulated in a way which makes them stable for the longest possible time, as convenient as possible to use, and as immune as possible to "use and abuse" i.e. the failure of many people to store or use the product as directed and then to blame the product for poor performance.
Recommendations must be developed for the use of the product in actual agricultural practice. Normally these recommendations cannot be so novel or so complex or require such unconventional equipment that people refuse to use the product. Often the recommendations are developed in collaboration with the appropriate advisory service to ensure that they will be accepted by the trade.
For novel products, testing is necessary to establish that they are safe to use; in addition, quality control tests must be devised which will ensure that every batch will be safe and effective. Once any testing is completed and quality control protocols developed, the appropriate government authority must be approached for permission to sell the product; at present, this must be done individually for every country in the world.
Once a product has been sold, it is often helpful to visit growers who have used it, either to confirm its success or if it has failed, to investigate and determine the cause. Further development work can than be carried out to find ways of avoiding product failure in the future.
Local Marketing and Sales. Once made, the product must be sold and used if all the effort spent in development is to be worthwhile. There are many obstacles to selling alternative pesticides, especially fungi. Users are unfamiliar with how to use these types of products and how they work. Marketing requires extra efforts both to familiarize growers with the new product and to provide a substantial back-up service for the product.
The proceeding sections outline the problems which must be solved for any novel pest control system. We shall now discuss the particular problems which must be solved during the development and commercialization of fungal pathogens for the control of insects. (Quinlan, R.J. and S.G. Lisansky, 1983).
1.2.2 Process Development and Production
Before one can sell a live micro-organism as a pest control agent, a reliable method of production must be developed which yields large quantities for which a product specification can be drawn up.
1.2.2.1 Organism Storage.
The first problem in producing a micro-organism is storing it in a way that ensures the retention of desirable features. The most obvious feature to be retained is pathogenicity; the second is productivity in terms of yield in the commercial production process. This is typically measured either by total biomass, or by number of infective propagules, i.e. spores or fragments of mycelium , produced per litre-hour of fermentation time. Many microorganisms are known to lose desirable features either on storage or after repeated sub-culturing. Among insect pathogens, Beauveria bassiana has been reported to have reduced virulence after subculturing whereas both Verticillium lecanii and Metarhizium anisopliae are reported as being undiminished in virulence after many passages. Organisms which lose virulence may sometimes be restored to their former potency by passing them through their normal host, i.e. the target insect; however, such a technique would be cumbersome as a routine
part of a production process and always presents the risk of contamination. Therefore the problem is often avoided by storing a large number of elements of a single spore isolate in a deep frozen or freeze-dried condition. Samples are checked periodically to make certain that virulence and productivity have not diminished with time.
1.2.2.2 Fermentation Method
The standard method of production of microorganisms is the process of fermentation. There are many types of fermentation; the two most common are "submerged" and "semi-solid".
Submerged or deep-tank fermentation is, as the name implies, a growth of micro-organisms in a fully liquid system. There are a number of advantages to fully liquid systems which include the ability to hold temperature and pH constant, the ability to pump large quantities of air into the system and disperse it by means of stirring impellers, and the ability to generate reasonably homogeneous conditions to maximize the growth of micro-organism.
Despite the many advantages of submerged fermentation some fungi will not yield a satisfactory product by this technique. Semi-solid fermentation offers an alternative in which the fungi grow primarily on the wet surface of a solid material, often some form of processed cereal grain to which nutritional adjuvants have been added, though attempts are made frequently to use "waste" materials or media of low value, such as straw. This allows fungi to grow in conditions more similar to those found in nature; spores, the infective propagules by which the fungus survives and infects insects, are produced in the air and are consequently more durable. Semi solid fermentations are relatively easy to develop on a small scale. Scaling them up to the sizes necessary for commercial product presents numerous problems; aeration becomes a major difficulty as the volume of a semi-solid mass increases more rapidly than the available surface area. This requires either a very large area of
relatively shallow media, e.g. on trays, or in a vessel which can agitate or tumble the media. On any scale, trays are very difficult to sterilize and keep sterile. The development of large vessels for semi-solid media fermentation requires the invention of a number of techniques or pieces of equipment for:
a. keeping the media friable after sterilization. Its tendency is to set solid when it cools, rather like oatmeal.
b. inoculation with the desired fungus without contamination
c. aeration and agitation during fermentation
d. drying the material prior to opening the fermenter in order to avoid contamination, etc.
Medium Development. Which ever type of fermentation is chosen, nutrients must be provided so that the micro-organism can grow. Which nutrients are chosen will markedly affect how fast the organism grows, how much is produced and often, how infective the final product is. Nutrients to be provided include a carbon source, e.g. glucose or molasses, nitrogen source, e.g. soybean meal or yeast extract, and a "defined", in which case the precise nature and quantity of every nutrient is known, or, alternatively, they can contain ingredients of an indeterminate and occasionally variable nature e.g. molasses; most commercial media are latter type.
1.3 Theoretical Background of Industrial Processing in Biotechnology
The two main disciplines which determine the trends of small and large-scale industrial microbiology are theoretical micro-biology (including microbial genetics, physiology and bio-chemistry) which forms the theoretical ground, and microbial engineering which creates the basis for the application of engineering aspects in microbial processes. A successful microbial process on a small or large scale requires the research and development [R&D] of methods satisfying providing for the following demands:
Maintenance of stability of the production culture, both in its initial form (preservation) and as subcultures infrequently propagated via sporulation or vegetative generations.
Maintenance of suitable conditions ensuring reproducible yields. This entails the use of row materials of appropriate quality, especially complex organic compounds, and the development of analytical methods for controlling both culture processes and the quality of the raw materials used.
Application of the technology for maintaining strictly aseptic conditions; this factor is important in the biotechnology of most products, in the isolation steps, and in the conversion of the product to the final form.
Increase in production yields of a particular product by modifying the medium composition and the genetic properties of the production strain (Sikyta, 1983).
1.3.1 Laboratory Processing
1.3.1.1 Cleanliness and Safety
The normal technical procedures designed to keep cultures sterile or pure and prevent cross-infection of laboratory materials contribute considerably to the safety of the individuals an most laboratory workers observe reasonably high standards of personal hygiene and wash their hands after handling cultures of any kind and before touching the rest of their person, handling their food or smoking.
The maximum standards of safety can be achieved only if every laboratory worker has a real understanding of the basic principles and is able to apply them to reduce the risk in each particular circumstance.
Safety cabinets "FLOWBOX"
There are cabinets (Microflow Ltd.) which are fitted with filters which remove particles down to 0.01 mm and discharge their effluence into the laboratory air.
Ultra-violet light
Continuous irradiation of the air above eye level is possible and reduces the bacterial content. Ultra-violet light can be used to disinfect the insides of protective cabinets but to much reliance should not be placed on this as a disinfecting agent. Chemical methods should also be used (75 % ethylalcohol). Ultra-violet light does not penetrate surfaces.
Use of the Microscope
One important microbiological technique will be introduced: the use of the oilimmersion objective is essential to most microscopic studies of bacterial cells. The best type of microscope is with Phase-contrast.
1.3.1.2 Preparation of Dilution
Examples of Dilutions
1 x 10^-2or 1 : 100; 1.0 ml + 99.0 ml or 1.0 ml: (99 ml) = 1/100
2 x 10^-2 or 1 : 50; 2.0 ml + 98.0 ml
5 x 10^-3 or 1 : 200; 0.5 ml + 99.5 ml
2 x 10^-4 means 2/ 10.000 = 1/5.000
Dilution Plate Counting and Distribution of Bacteria
Preparation of Dilutions: Shake each stock dilution well. Using aseptic techniques, transfer 0.1 ml of the 100 stock dilution to a 9.9 ml dilution blank (1:10,000 dilution). Mix well to obtain even distribution of organisms. With a pure pipette, place 1.0 ml of the 1:10,000 dilution into a sterile Petri plate and with the same pipette transfer 1.0 ml to a 9.0 ml dilution blank (1:100,000). Discard the pipette and mix the dilution to a fresh 9.0 ml dilution blank (1:1,000,000). Mix. with a fresh pipette transfer 1.0 ml of the final dilution to a sterile Petri dish. Pour approximately 15-20 ml of nutrient agar which has been steam-pressure sterilized (autoclaved) and cooled to 45^oC in a water bath; then rotate each plate to mix the inoculum and medium.
After the agar has completely solidified (15-30 minutes) invert the plates and place in incubator space to dry off excess surface moisture. Time of incubation is 2 days at 25 or 28^oC. After incubation count the number of colonies.
1.3.1.3 Pure Culture Techniques Tube transfers
Transfers from agar plates to tubes, and from tube culture to tube is a common and simple procedure, but requires careful attention to certain details. Transfer from a colony on an agar plate to an agar slant or tube of broth may be made either a straight wire or a loop.
Pure culture
Pure cultures of different microbial species and subspecies may be isolated from the highly complex mixed populations in nature by a variety of methods, the most common of which will be used is a dilution plating. Each discrete colony which arises in or on a well prepared dilution plate is assumed to be composed of cells, all of which are descendant of a single cell. Sub-cultures from such a colony should produce colonies all of the same kind, any one of which is composed all of the same kind of cells as the original colony.
After culture purity has been established in subcultures, a stock culture of the organism is established. The stock culture may be maintained on an agar slant kept in the refrigerator, but unless it is transferred at suitable intervals to establish a fresh stock, it may loss its viability (its capacity to reproduce). Viability of agar slant cultures may be prolonged by covering the slant with a layer of sterile mineral oil to exclude oxygen and prevent evaporation. Since frequent transfers of stock cultures encourage accumulation and selection of mutations, microbiologists often preserve pure cultures virtually unchanged for identifinite periods by lyophilization (a suspension of cells is quick-frozen at about -60^oC, rapidly dried under high vacuum, then hermetically sealed in a glass tube) or by immersion in liquid nitrogen (-195^oC).
1.3.1.4 Preparation and Testing of Culture Media
Copper or zinc containers must not be used. Small quantities of these metals will dissolve in the culture media and are bactericidal and fungicidal. Large quantities of media can be made in stainless steel buckets such as are used in dairy and food trades. Smaller amounts can be made in resistance glass laboratory flasks.
Distilled water of commercial bulk supplier quality may contain substances which inhibit bacterial growth, e.g. oil materials from stripper stills attached to steam lines. Manesty-type distilled water, glass-distil water and deionized water should be used, although it must be realized that some "trace elements" necessary to bacterial growth are in fact supplied by the distilled water, by glassware, or by recognized impurities analytical quality reagents.
Dextrose, when autoclaved with salts such as phosphate may yield inhibitory substances. It is best to add this and other carbohydrates as sterile solutions after the medium has been sterilized. Excessive heating, and remelting may destroy growth factors and gelling capacity and cause darkening or pH drift of culture media.
Adjustment of pH
Pipette 10 ml of the medium into a 152 mm x 16 mm test-tube and measure pH with indicator test-paper; according to scale can be seen the pH value, and can be corrected by N/20 HCl or N/20 NaOH.
Example :10 ml of medium at pH 6.4 requires 0.6 ml of N/20 NaOH to give the required pH 7.2, than the bulk medium will require
[19. x 1000 ml]
------------ of N.NaOH per liter = 3.0 ml
20 x 10
All final readings of pH must be made with the medium at room temperature because hot medium will give a false reaction with some indicators.
1.3.1.5 Sterilization
The usual objective in heat sterilization is the destruction of all microorganisms with the least possible damage to the material being sterilized. "Sterilization", as commonly understood, is not necessarily absolute; for example, instrument sterilizers may kill all infection - causing bacteria, but not all sporeforming bacteria. The aim in sterilization of culture media is the destruction of all life without rendering the medium ineffective for cultivation because of physical and/or chemical damage to its ingredients. Methods employing moist or dry heat, or filtration are used in the sterilization of culture media and of materials and equipment used in the bacteriological laboratory.
1.3.1.5.1 Steam sterilization
Steam under pressure in a closed system (autoclave) is frequently used to sterilize heat stable culture media, heat stable chemicals, dilution blanks, rubber articles, and to sterilized heat stable culture media (antibiotic) must be sterilized before being added aseptically to be sterilized, cooled media.
A temperature of 121^oC at 1.5 MPa pressure for 15 minutes generally is required for moist heat sterilization. The most important point in the operation of the autoclave is the removal of all air from the chamber. The temperature rather than the pressure is the lethal agent. Therefore, it is important that the desired temperature is reached before timing the sterilization cycle. Adequate time must be allowed for heat convection current to penetrate the centre of the material. Preheating large quantities of media is often desirable to reduce the over-exposure to sterilization temperature. Viscosity reduces convection, and therefore, a long period of time is required for sterilization of agar than of broth. Two to five minutes must be added for agar sterilization. Never autoclave solidified agar in a flask; most of the autoclaving time is required to melt the agar. Premelt the agar in a boiling water bath prior to sterilization.
1.3.1.5.2 Flaming
Although not achieving red heat, flaming is a method commonly used for decontaminating the mouths of bottles, flasks, culture tubes, glass slides, scalpels etc. by passing them though a Bunsen flame without allowing them to become red hot.
1.3.1.5.3 Hot air
The process of sterilization by hot air ovens is simple in principle and the materials to be processed can be prepacked in craft paper or sealed in metal containers. The method is used for sterilizing such articles as glass syringe etc. Material such as dry powders, fats, oils and petroleum jelly in small shallow containers can also be sterilized by this method.
Air is not a good conductor of heat so that hot air sterilization poses problems of penetration. Special apparatus "fan" is needed to ensure that all parts of the load have been maintained at the required temperature. The hot air must circulate between the packages.
The Heating-Up Period is the time taken to reach sterilization temperature; this may take about 1 hour.
The Holding Periods at different sterilization temperatures recommended are:
160^oC for 45 min.
170^oC for 18 min
180^oC for 7 min
The Cooling-Down Period is carried out gradually to prevent glassware from cracking as a result of a too rapid fall in temperature. This period may take up to 2 hours.
The full sterilizing process from loading the oven to unloading it may therefore take about 3-4 hours, depending on the size of load.
Long exposure to a lower dry heat temperature has been a method of sterilization recommended like a dry heat cycle of 135^oC for 22 hours.
1.3.2 Preservation of Strains
Variability, one of the characteristic features of microorganisms, tends to increase with increasing productivity of producer strains. The variability can result in transient, non-hereditary changes, or in permanent changes of hereditary character. In some cases the properties of the whole culture change, in others the culture becomes heterogeneous. Heterogeneous cultures comprise a number of cell variants with diverse morphological, physiological or biochemical properties. The heterogeneity or homogeneity of a culture can usually be examined by plating individual spores or cells onto a solid medium and comparing the properties of the resulting cultures. Transient changes on the cultures are usually easily eliminated since they depend mostly on the composition of the media used for culture and on other ambient conditions.
The Development of Uniform and Stringently Defined Culture Procedures to Eliminate the Transient Variability of Production Cultures.
Close attention must be paid to the permanent, hereditary changes in the cultures. In most cases the change does not affect the whole culture and the homogeneous parent culture thus becomes heterogeneous. The strain heterogeneity is currently thought to be brought about by uncontrolled environmental factors. Its appearance depends on the ambient conditions in the broadest sense of the word; for instance, certain sporulation media give rise to a larger number of variants than others. Strain heterogeneity is more conspicuous with a spore inoculum than with a vegetative one.
The culture requires a strict regulation and control of ambient conditions (temperature, aeration and mixing intensity, composition of medium etc.); equal care should be exercised to ensure the highest yields and the highest stability of the strain. A variety of methods have therefore been developed for culture preservation.
To preserve a strain properly means to maintain it under conditions ensuring the longest possible stability of the culture; in other words, under conditions minimizing the occurrence of permanent hereditary changes leading to strain heterogeneity.
Production strains can be preserved in several ways depending on the type of microorganism:
a) Preservation of cultures on sporulation agar slopes at low temperatures.
b) Preservation of cultures on agar slopes which are, after inoculation, overlaid with sterile liquid paraffin. This technique is suitable for preserving nonsporulating fungi and yeasts.
c) Lyophilisation or freeze-drying is based on freezing vegetative cells or spores to temperatures far below the freezing point and drying them under a high vacuum. The suspension obtained by washing the culture from the surface of the medium which contains agar is transferred to test tubes containing either a protective colloid such as broth, blood serum, whey, or a mixture of soil and sand. The samples are frozen in solid carbon dioxide in ethanol and then dried in a vacuum of about 7 - 70 Pa. The test tubes are then sealed under vacuum. The resulting stock cultures so preserved (about 1 g) can serve to inoculate only a small number of subcultures.
Preservation of cultures in liquid nitrogen. Cultures sealed in glass ampoules are rapidly frozen by placing them in a container with liquid nitrogen.
1.3.3 Elaboration of a Processing
The development of a process includes three steps: elaboration on laboratory scale, small scale and pilot large scale production and finalization of product e.g. formulation of microbial pesticides.
1.3.3.1 Laboratory Scale.
The goal of the laboratory research is to develop
a) preservation of the culture,
b) culture of the strain on solid media and its propagation,
c) nutrient medium of a suitable composition,
d) techniques of laboratory submerged or semi-solid scale culture.
The medium for propagation of the strain has to meet several demands. It has to ensure perfect growth and sporulation and, at the same time, guarantee a satisfactory stability of the strain. Both the strain and its culture conditions, i.e. the composition of the nutrient medium, incubation temperature, time of incu-bation, etc., should be conceived as forming an integral system which can be severely disturbed by changing only some of the conditions. The appropriate preservation techniques are to be determined by studying the stability of the production strain preserved by different techniques, in long-term experiments. Each type of stock culture should be prepared in a sufficient amount even when the preserved strain is not yet optimal for production. This procedure ensures the supply of a uniform inoculation material for sufficient periods of time; the stability of the strain in the spectrum activity to target organisms and the efficiency of preservation must be examined in
long-term studies over several years.
The composition of the nutrient medium is determined at the initial stages of research; the medium should, above all, ensure reproducible yields. The quality and quantity of raw materials used, and the technique of media preparation (sterilization, etc.) should be adjusted accordingly.
The next step is a detailed study of the composition of the medium which should give the optimum quantitative ratios of individual components and ensure the maintenance of their optimum proportions throughout the process. Apart from productivity, a number of additional factors determine the medium composition suitable for scale-up purposes. These include the accessibility and price of individual raw materials, their sterilizability, requirements for an economical isolation procedure and final formulation of the product.
The next step is the elaboration of the process on a laboratory scale when the culture is usually grown on reciprocal or rotary shakers, the latter affording a more intensive aeration of the culture. The optimum aeration regime for laboratory cultures can be attained by using shakers with different types of motions, changing the shape of the culture flasks and the volume of the nutrient medium. The aeration intensity is to some extent inversely proportional to the amount of the medium in the flask. With optimum aeration intensity defined, other factors are determined which could affect the product yields and the length of time necessary to attain maximum yield. Another important facet is the determination of a strain stability during vegetative transfers.
Experiments conducted in flasks on laboratory shakers provide fundamental information on the production strain, the composition of the medium, suitable type of inoculum, etc., but they provide meagre data on technological factors such as the choice of construction materials, aeration, measuring and control devices, etc. All this information is obtained from experiments with laboratory and seed fermenters.
1.3.3.2 Small Scale Production
The first task in small scale production is the development of a basic culture procedure affording reproducible results. Absolute production yields are of secondary importance, the main emphasis being put on the expected standard course of the microbial process with the attendant changes in growth, pH, consumption of nutrients, production of metabolites, and in the physiological state of the microorganisms. On attaining reproducible results the search for individual optimum conditions can begin.
The first factors to be explored are usually aeration and stirring. Next to be examined is the effect of changes in the ratio of individual components of the nutrient medium, with special reference to the source of carbon and nitrogen and their mutual proportions. The effect of different types and amounts of antifoam agents is also studied since the physical action of these agents can affect the dispersion of air in the culture and respiration of the microorganisms; some antifoam agents (vegetable oils, lard oil) can be utilized by the microorganisms, thus changing the metabolism of the culture. Fluid from laboratory and small scale fermenters can be used for tentative isolation of metabolites and preliminary tests of their quality.
Fig. 1.1 Preparation of a Microbial Product
Fig. 1.1 Preparation of a Microbial Product
A-spore inoculum, B-vegetative inoculum;
1-stock culture of production strain,
2-sporulation generation I on agar slant,
3- sporulation generation II on solid medium in a Roux flask,
3a,3b- generations I and II on liquid medium in a flask,
4-preseeding fermenter,
5-seeding fermenter,
6-main fermenter (50-500 or 1,000 litres) of small scale production. Pilot plant for large-scale production have 5,000 - 50,000 litres fermenters.
1.3.3.2.1 Problems of contamination of microbial processes
Microbial contamination of fermentation processes and principles and techniques for its elimination should be appraised from several viewpoints:
a) Type of the metabolite produced;
b) Specific properties of the culture;
c) Machinery and equipment used in the process;
d) Nutrient medium and the raw materials used for its preparation;
e) Technology adopted in the process.
Contaminating microorganisms affect negative the microbial process by:
a) destroying the cells of the production strain,
b) inactivating the synthesized metabolites,
c) producing substances affecting the producer`s metabolism and thus decreasing the production of the required metabolite,
d) exhausting compounds crucial for growth and product synthesis from the medium.
However, the presence of a contaminating microorganism need not always results in a drop in metabolite or spores production; in the absence of this drop, it is often difficult to detect contamination. In semi-solid fermentation process, contamination need not always lead to failure.
The term "protected fermentation" is used for such processes in which foreign contamination is suppressed by the presence of an antimicrobial agent. This agent is added to the medium in suitable form.
1.3.3.2.2 Sterility of microbial process
Checks of the absence of alien microorganisms are required during all crucial stages of the process, culture, product isolation, and its final formulation.
Identification of microbial contamination is done by microscopic and culture methods. Microscopic examination represents a useful tool for immediate detection of massive contamination of cultures with an alien microflora. In most cases viable cells are difficult to distinguish from dead ones. The differentiation is somewhat aided by the so-called vital test which, however, is not always fully reliable. The most reliable method for identification of alien microorganisms is by culturing.
The following procedure is currently used in laboratories: Samples are transferred under aseptic conditions into sterile flasks. A volume of 1 ml serves to inoculate two tubes with 5 ml broth each and, using a loop, blood, blood agar in a Petri dish. Incubation is then carried out for 24-48 hours at 37^oC. Both microscopic and macroscopic counts of alien microorganisms are then taken. If the results are not unequivocal then 1 ml of culture from the test tubes and colonies on the Petri dishes is used to inoculate another four test tubes (2 + 2) and counts are taken again after 24 hours of incubation at 37^oC. A macroscopic indication of the presence of contaminating microorganisms is often a different growth form.
1.3.3.2.3 Sensitivity of microbial processes to and protection against contamination
From this viewpoint, microbial processes can be divided into:
1. processes that do not require stringent control and protection against the proliferation of a foreign microflora in the medium,
2. processes requiring strictly aseptic conditions - the so-called aseptic processes - microbial insecticides.
1.3.4 Pilot-Plant-Fermenters
Although crucial technological factors may be assessed in laboratory fermenters, it is often necessary to verify the laboratory results in devices more closely resembling industrial fermenters. These devices are pilot-plant fermenters; they serve to complete, modify and verify the data obtained in laboratory fermenters and to test the suitability of construction, regulation an monitoring devices. Since, with the same type of agitator with dimensions proportional to fermenter dimensions, laboratory fermenters require higher impeller speed to achieve the same aeration effect as in large fermenters, and since the aeration effect depends largely on the transfer of mechanical force into liquid via the impeller, the verification of agitation and aeration conditions is of utmost importance. Different types of agitators, their relative size, different types and dimensions of baffles, aeration systems, and the effect of their position inside the fermenter are also studied on
pilot-plant scale.
Sterility criteria. A basic feature of most microbial technology is the stringent requirement for the absence of foreign microorganism during the process (without contamination). This has to be maintained throughout the process from the moment of opening of stock culture to the termination of growth. Large fermenters offer a greater possibility of culture contamination, being much more complicated than laboratory devices. The presence or absence of contaminating microorganisms is determined by the so-called sterility test. The fermenter is supplied with a relatively rich medium but not inoculated. A conventional process is then carried out including agitation, air feed and sampling and for duration at least equal to that of the real process. Samples of medium are then subjected to sterility tests in a laboratory. These tests are necessary since each unsuccessful pilot-plant and, especially, industrial scale run represents a considerable economical loss owing to the large
volume of medium and high operating costs involved. To meet the demand for the absence of foreign microorganisms, the device has to be sterilized thoroughly and the possibility of contamination by undesirable microorganisms must be excluded.
Pilot-plant fermenters, their pipelines and fittings are sterilized prior to medium sterilization, sometimes together with air filters. After medium sterilization, the outlet valve at the bottom of the fermenter is briefly opened to remove air bubbles and the medium is cooled down. When the pressure inside the fermenter drops to 0.05 MPa, air is introduced by means of the aeration device. During sterilization all valves and connecting lines are flushed with steam. Flange packing and seals are used as rarely as possible and, wherever possible, are replaced by welding. When using flanges, the packing has to be selected carefully. The packing must not be made of porous materials but even the most common nonporous material, rubber, has to be of high quality, without textile ply, and has to be resistant to high sterilization temperatures without losing elasticity or cracking. Valves are mounted in such a way that their packing is located underneath the steam seal, usually in a
horizontal position. The mounting of valves on a fermenter deviates from conventional rules; here the streaming liquid does not flow against the valve cone. The valves are mounted so that the cone shaft packing communicates with the valve steam seal, not with the fermenter interior. This is because of the risk of microbial contamination by growth through the packing, which is especially acute in valves with large construction lengths (Fig.1.2). The valves have to be placed so that no condensate is formed on the steam-blocked side since this would prevent a through heating by steam (Fig.1.3).
Fig. 1.2 Valve mounting
Fig. 1.2 Valve mounting
Fig. 1.3 valve blocking whit sleam
Fig. 1.3 valve blocking whit sleam
Valves communicate directly with the medium in the fermenter wall, with minimum length of connecting tubes. This holds especially for medium sample collectors (Fig.1.4). It is convenient to arrange valves into a system of valve sets which take up less room and are sealed by a common steam inlet. Manometers, valves and back pressure regulators are mounted on the descending part of tubes wherever possible.
Fig. 1.4 Sampling system mounting
Fig. 1.4 Sampling system mounting
Contamination may often be caused by minute leakages in cooling coils or jackets. The localization of these leakages is often difficult, testing for them should include a thorough mechanical removal of medium residue adhering to surfaces and the use of relatively high water pressures. The test for leaks may be carried out using air or ammonia, with detection of the ammonia leakage by an appropriate reagent. The correct position of packing in a flange is tested by smearing its circumference with a soap solution and observing the formation of soap bubbles at leakages points.
The contamination of medium by Gram-positive microorganisms from the air is usually due to faulty packing or air filter failure whereas Gram-negative microorganisms come from water through leakages in the cooling system.
The design and construction of pilot-plant fermenters has to meet the following requirements:
a) No connection should exist between sterile and nonsterile parts of tubes and fittings;
b) Connection and flange packing should be made of higher-quality rubber without textile ply;
c) Wherever possible, welded construction should be used;
d) Valves and other fittings should be easy to sterilize and should remain sterile throughout the culture process;
e) After sterilization all parts and tubes that have to remain sterile should be kept at a constant positive pressure of sterile air;
f) It is necessary that every part of the device can be separately sterilized without disturbing the operation of other parts;
g) Inlet and outlet valves and tubing which are not otherwise protected should be connected to a live steam inlet;
h) Prior to each new fermentation the tightness of fermenter seal, tube connections, valves and other fittings should be tested.
REFERENCES
Angus, T.A., 1956 a: Association of toxicity with protein crystalline inclusions of Bacillus sotto Ishiwata. Canadian Journal of Microbiology, 2. 122.
Angus, T.A., 1956 b:Extraction, purification and properties of Bacillus sotto toxin. Canadian Journal of Microbiology 2, 416.
Burges, H.D. (Ed.), 1981: Microbial Control of Pests and Plant Diseases, 1970-80, pp. 949. Academic Press, London.
Ishiwata, S., 1902: Danihou Sanshi Keiho 9, 1-5.
Quinlan R.J., and S.G. Lisansky, 1983: Microbial Insecticides. In: Biotechnology, Vol. 3. Ed. H. Delweg, Verlag Chemie, Basel, pp. 233-254.
Sikyta B., 1983: Methods in Industrial Microbiology. John Wiley & Sns. pp. 348
<section>4</section>
CHAPTER 2.
STANDARDIZATION OF PRODUCTS
2.1 Define the Objectives
2.1.1 What to Produce?
Standardization is the most important process and is based on theoretical background of industrial microbiology. The selection of a fungal strain, or a species in the case of a target pest susceptible to several pathogens, is a critical step since the aggressiveness of a fungus is highly dependent on it. The assessment of pathogenicity is usually based on the results of pest, or progeny (in the case of fast reproducing insects), mortality obtained from laboratory tests. It should be stressed, however, that bioassays conducted under laboratory conditions invariably optimize the potentialities of the fungus and thus the data should be interpreted carefully. For example, bioassays are run in the absence of any microbial competitors, in ambient conditions ideally chosen for the pathogen and with in vitro reared insects, the physiology of which may be different from that of the wild types. These bioassays, which are useful to compare strains or species, should represent,
therefore, only the preliminary step before field experimentation. The latter is essential in order to determine if the microclimatic requirements of the pathogen and the host coincide and thereby to assess the true potential of an entomopathogenic fungus as a biocontrol agent. The pathogenic stability of a strain during repetitive transfers should also be checked. The media used for these transfers and for subsequent production should be chosen with care since it is known that nutrients can markedly influence conidial viability. Preferably, the strain selected should not have too narrow and specific, it being commercially advantageous if a product has a relatively wide host range within an insect group containing several pest genera. However, the host range within an insect group of several pest genera cannot be too wide and obviously must exclude beneficial insects as well as other invertebrates and vertebrates. Experiments have been carried out with several
entomopathogenic fungi to test their effects on vertebrates, specifically to evaluate any allergic, irritation or toxic properties. Only minor allergic responses have been detected amongst a few of the entomopathogenic fungi screened so far.
Strains with the highest sporulation capacities should be selected since variations both in the amount of spores produced and in their mode of production have been reported. Industry will also screen for strains with the simplest nutritional requirements.
Most strain selections have been made from wild isolates of entomopathogenic fungi from naturally infected hosts. However, recent developments in fungal genetics suggest that the natural properties of a strain can be improved through genetic manipulation. In the past, mutagenesis has been used to enhance the virulence or sporulation of Metarhisium anisopliae. Conceivably, this process could also be exploited to produce mutants resistant to the pesticides normally encountered in the crop habitat of the target pest. Recombination of selected strains, markers, has been attempted amongst the Deuteromycetes. Parasexual recombinants from heterozygous diploids, produced by hyphal anastomosis, have also been identified in M. anisopliae. Recombination by protoplast fusion has been investigated in Beauveria brongniartii, M. anisopliae and Verticillium lecanii. One of the problems typically encountered in recombination is the poor stability of the highly sporulating strain and this is
why the spectrum of insecticide activity to the target must be continuously monitored. The aggressiveness or the sporulation potential of a fungal strain should be controlled by numerous genes. Thus, genetic improvement, either by classical techniques or the new methods of genetic engineering, is fraught with difficulties. Nevertheless, it is feasible that the genes responsible for toxin excretion could be cloned and that their reinsertion into genome of another strain or species would be a method of increasing the efficiency of a mycoinsecticide.
2.1.2 Which Propagule?
All entomopathogenic fungi are characterized by a biphasic biological cycle: a mycelium vegetative phase and reproductive phase. Two spore types are usually found: asexual spores "anamorpha", for promoting rapid dissemination of the fungus and resting spores (sexual spores "telomorpha" or vegetative chlamydospores), responsible for survival of the pathogen during adverse conditions or in absence of suitable hosts. Theoretically, any of these fungal propagules could be considered for the production of mycoinsecticides.
Because of their primary role in the infection process, spores have been considered since the beginning of biological control history as the most adapted fungal propagule to produce. Conidia of the Deuteromycetes are readily mass-produced on solid media under aerated conditions. Conidia can also be obtained in liquid media, being produced on typical conidiophores arising from hyphal filaments or directly from the spore through a sporulation microcycle. This microcycle, typically induced by nutrient and/or temperature manipulation, has been developed as a model to study the biochemical events occurring during sporulation of the conidial fungi. This potential for microcyclic sporogenesis has been of particular interest in the case of entomopathogenic fungi since it shortens the culture time and increases spore yields. The other type of mass producible spore is the resting spore of the Mastigomycotina and Zygomycotina which have a role in disease carryover. These spores offer
the advantage of being highly resistant and can survive for several months both in vitro and in nature. They can also be produced in liquid culture as well as on solid media. However, these spores, like the mycelium, are not directly infectious; their pathogenicity is dependent upon their potential to produce infective spores by germination.
The production of mycelium has been also contemplated especially in the case of Oomycetes and Zygomycetes for the reasons explained above. Mycelium propagules of entomopathogenic fungi are non-infective and thus the successful use of a mycelium formulation in biological control is dependent upon the ability of the mycelium to sporulate under natural conditions. On solid media, a continuous segmented mycelium is usually produced, whilst in shake-liquid cultures, as in the insect body, fungal development is most often characterized by the formation of yeast-like cells able to reproduce by fission. The terminology applied to these propagules depends on the fungal group under consideration, being termed: blastospores (Deuteromycetes); hyphal bodies (Entomophthorales, Coleomomyces); hyphal segments or subthalli (Lageniales). The yeast-like cells are often produced by hyphal constriction and thus their wall structure is mycelial. The fungal dimorphism exhibited by entomopathogenic
fungi needs to be investigated more thoroughly in vitro since the multiplication of yeast-like forms would facilitate not only mass production but would also be an indication of the virulence of a strain as these cells are responsible for the rapid colonization of the insect haemolymph.
A further disadvantage of using mycelial propagules from in vitro cultivation, or even those formed in vivo, is their short viability in comparison with spores. However, formulation can significantly improve the longevity of the in vitro mycelium.
2.1.3 Growth Factors
Nutritional requirements
The growth requirements of most entomopathogenic fungi have been poorly defined despite the fact that this information is essential for mass production. In particular, such knowledge may permit simplification of the medium, cutting cost without affecting yield. The choice of industrial nutrients will obviously be directly related to the nutritional requirements of the selected fungus. For example, Entomophthorales do not metabolize sucrose; as a result all industrial media for the production of these fungi should exclude carbon sources extracted from sugar beet or sugar cane, which have high sucrose contents, and should be based on corn residues rich in dextrose.
Entomopathogenic fungi require oxygen, water, an organic source of carbon and energy, a source of inorganic or organic nitrogen and additional elements amongst which are minerals and growth factors. The carbon source is usually dextrose but can be replaced by polysacharides (such as starch) or lipids. Nitrogen can be supplied in the form of nitrate, ammonia or organic compounds such as amino acids or proteins. Other essential macronutrients are phosphorous (as phosphates), potassium, magnesium and sulphur, the latter supplied either in an inorganic form (as sulphate) or organic (cystein or methionine). Essential microelements usually include calcium, copper, iron, manganese, molybdenum, zinc and water soluble B-complex vitamins, especially biotin and thiamine. All these micronutrients usually occur in the raw materials included in industrial media but can be supplied as protein hydrolysate or yeast extract.
The nutritional requirements of entomopathogenic fungi vary with the fungal species or even the fungal strain under consideration. Deuteromycetes typically have low requirements and substantial growth of B. bassiana and M. anisopliae can be obtained in media containing only dextrose, a nitrate and a macromineral solution. However, semi-defined media, including protein hydrolysates, or natural undefined media rich in starch (rice, oatmeal, potato) have proved to consistently give the highest yields. Nevertheless, certain fungi, particularly those belonging to the genera Hirsutella, may have more specific requirements than the majority of this group since some species of these genera have failed to establish a culture.
The entomopathogenic Mastigomycotina and Zygomycotina have the most complex growth demands. These fungi require an organic form of nitrogen to attain substantial growth and cannot metabolize nitrates. Often vitamins and oligominerals have to be supplied to the medium. In these subdivisions of the fungi, usually considered phytogenetically less advanced than the Deuteromycotina, interconnections between the anabolic pathways are limited and the precursors of all the essential metabolic pathways, or the host, have to be added to the medium. Their absence in the culture medium is probably responsible for the lack of success in establishing in vitro cultures of any of the Coelomomyces species and many of the Entomophthorales and Trichomycetes. Most of the Mastigomycotina which have been cultured have been grown on complex media such a coagulated egg-yolk or mixtures of protein hydrolysates with a lipid or sugar source. Nevertheless, some species can be grown in relatively simply
defined media.
2.1.4 Improving Mycoinsecticides
The more wide spread acceptance and use of mycoinsecticides will depend on improvement in a number of key areas.
1) Production methods need to be cheaper. This will require greater yield over a reduced time scale. The preferred method of liquid fermentation, is at present not available for production of the most infective and/or stable spore types. This is particularly a problem for Entomophthoralean fungi. McCabe and Soper (1985, patent USA) have described a system for the production of dry viable preparations viable mycelium. The draw back with this method is that mycelial fragments are not infective; contact with water in the field stimulates required conidiogenesis. The extra step prolongs the response time.Semi-solid fermentation of Deuteromycotina using cereal grains holds much promise.
2) Develop new formulations that will extend the shelf life improve efficiency of application and field persistence. A water retaining formulation would be particularly helpful.
3) Produce stress tolerant strains which are less affected by low RH, UV, high temperatures and fungicides.
4) Produce more virulent strains which kill faster such that they could be used against larger pest population and obviate the need for prophylactic use.
5) Investigate the possibility of integrating mycoinsecticides with existing control measures e.g. Applications with low doses of insecticide have received little attention. Chitin synthesis inhibitors by weakening insect cuticle can facilitate entry of enthomopathogenic fungi.
2.1.5 Quality Assessment in Laboratory-reared Insects
Laboratory-reared insects are used in screening pesticides, and production of microbial pesticides. Their many uses, which are becoming more and more sophisticated, require that these insects be of a definite quality.
A Colony establishment
It is now known that changes in genetic variability occur during domestication of insect populations. Greater attention needs to be given to colony establishment and the changes that occur over time because the variability within a genetic pool has a significant impact on the quality of the insect.
B Standards
The basic steps in standardization are: (1) define the objective, (2) establish standards, (3) design and test the production methods, and (4) implement quality insect.
Production and Process Tests
Colony Maintenance and Stock Supply
a) Fecundity
b) Percent hatch
c) Yield of pupae or adults
d) Yield of adults/unit (amount of diet)
e) Size of larvae, pupae, or adults (weight)
f) Life history-development time for each stage
Dietetics
The quality of diet components can be controlled.
Microbial control
Microbial control during colonization of the wild insect, in dietetics, in facility maintenance, and personnel management is recognized as a part of good rearing techniques that contribute to increased efficiency of rearing (higher yields) and improved biological vigour of the insect.
Environmental control
Environmental control involves the regulation of the external conditions that affect the growth, development, and behaviour of the insect being produced. Usually the conditions that must be controlled are temperature, humidity, light, and the movement and cleanliness of air. Noise and vibration must also be considered.
Performance Tests
Ultimately, it is the degree of performance of the product in meeting its intended use that determines overall quality.
Field
a) Control
b) Release and recapture
c) Ratio of fertile/sterile
Behaviour
a) Mating competitiveness
b) Mating compatibility
c) Sterility
d) Flight ability
e) Flight capacity
f) Flight propensivity
g) Pheromone response
h) Circadian activities
i) Longevity
j) Irritability
Clinical
a) Genetic diversity
b) Electrophysiological
c) Pheromones
d) Biological chemistry
Insects rearing see Annex.
2.2 Microbial Insecticide Based on Bacillus Thuringiensis
Cultures of this species nowadays serve as the basis for large-scale production of microbial insecticides. World-wide production now constitutes a few thousand tons annually. The cultures of B. thuringiensis are closely related to those of B. cereus, which are widely distributed in nature. They differ from the former only by the formation of crystalline inclusions.
For the purpose of systematics and identification of B. thuringiensis cultures, an efficient method is serotyping by H-antigen along with some biochemical properties of the cultures. Up to now 23 serotypes have also been differentiated within some of the species. From a practical point of view it is essential that there exist certain correlations in the spectrum and activity of entomocide effect between the various subspecies as well as subserotypes (Krieg, 1986).
There are three basic questions that can be asked in any study of production of toxin by B. thuringiensis.
What toxins are produced?
In what quality?
How reproducible is the fermentation?
In this discussion of our program which follows we will direct most of our attention to ask what toxins are produced. However, our interpretation must not be confused by the quantities of toxin present in product powders.
This is important to remember. We will use several concepts, ratios, distributions of toxicities, crystal-types, H-types, etc. It is impossible to eliminate quantity as a variable. The quantity of toxin produced in a fermentation can be influenced by the isolate of B. thuringiensis used and by medium on which it is grown. Thus two powders may differ many-fold in toxicity yet still contain the same toxin. All analyses will be made in the light of this factor and will attempt to pinpoint type as differentiated from quantity of toxin.
The basic active agent, called d-endotoxin, is produced in the form of crystalline parasporal inclusions during sporulation and liberated in the medium after its completion.
Principally important especially for production purposes is that the level of endotoxin insecticide activity is not correlated with its size and quantity but is defined by subspecies and the strain. For example: the strain HD-1 belonging to the subserotype kurstaki of the subspecies alesti and having the same mass of crystalline inclusions reveals 100 times more insecticide activity than these of other strains. Industrial production of more than 30 preparations has been developed in different countries and the products have been introduced in the market under different trade names since the sixties.
The main sources for the production of B.t. preparations are strains of the subspecies kurstaki, galeriae and dendrolimus. The cultures of serotype-I berliner, thuringiensis and some other subspecies also produce soluble termostabile á-exotoxin of a nucleotide nature, beside crystalline inclusions. A number of preparations manufactured from exotoxin producing strains are characterized by a broad spectrum of entomopathogenous action. Some producers exclude exotoxin in ready-made preparative forms because of possible side effects.
2.2.1 Morphology of Bacillus thuringiensis
Bacillus thuringiensis (B.t.) is a gramm-positive bacterium forming elliptical spores, contained in unswollen sporangia, and a parasporal body (or crystal) which appears mainly as a bipyramidal shape. B. thuringiensis is a complex species divisible into subspecies and H-serotypes by serological and biochemical tests. These produce several insecticidal toxins, two of which are used in agriculture.
The relative activity of each isolate against different insect species "spectrum activity" arrives partly from the combined effects of the potencies of the varying concentrations of the different insecticides that it produces. The d-endotoxin of different isolates of B.t. can kill different insect species or differ in the degree of their activity toward them.
This variation of activity spectrum according to the B.t. isolate is very important. Failure to control a pest insect with a particular B.t. preparation does not mean that all preparations will fail; it mean just that the wrong isolate was selected for use against the target insect. Similarly, even though a pest species may be satisfactorily controlled by the toxins in the present commercial preparations, it is possible that a different isolate may be more effective and thus cheaper to use.
The picture is further complicated because different isolates can produce more or less of the same d-endotoxin than other (Dulmage 1970). Also maximum toxin production can be achieved only by careful attention to the interaction of fermentation conditions, media and the isolates involved - there is, for example, no one medium best suited to all isolates (Dulmage 1981).
2.2.1.1 Insecticidal Toxins Produced by Bacillus thuringiensis
The b-exotoxin, "heat-stable exotoxin", is a water soluble toxin highly toxic to larvae of several species of flies, while alfa-exotoxin "heat-unstable" is toxic per os to mice and to the diamond moth, Plutella xylostella (maculipennis). á-exotoxin has been defined chemically as an adenine nucleotide and ATP analogue and given the name "thuringiensin". Many regulatory authorities opted to prevent its use in agriculture, because it has a terratogenic effect in insects and has mutagenic activity.
The d-endotoxin in crystals of B.t. has a limited infectivity spectrum limited, so far as we know, to certain Lepidoptera, mosquitoes, chiromonids and blackflies. The crystalline glycoprotein is formed during sporulation, it is variously called the crystal, parasporal body or d-endotoxin. There is evidence that plasmids are related to crystal formation. Different numbers of plasmids are found in most serotypes of B.t. The plasmids DNA (CCC - covalently closed circular DNA) has different values from 2 to 32 Mda and depend on subspecies and serotype. The strains which loss the large plasmid > 32 Mda, loss insecticide activity. There are two categories of plasmids:
36. < 15 Mda.
37. > 15 Mda.
2.2.1.2 The Role of Bacteriophages
The role of phages in B.t. genetics is most important. They provide a mechanism for a specialized and generalized transduction which constitute functional genetic transmission systems. The discovery of lysogeny in B.t. has also opened the possibility that one of the toxins is coded by a prophage.
Three types of phages lyse B.t., and these are virulent, pseudolysogenic and temperate. They respectively lyse cells immediately, or form temporary or permanent associations with mitomycin C or UV light, but none have formed a lysogenic relationship with the host.
2.2.1.3 Mode of Action
The crystals from various subspecies are composed of up to four proteins with molecular weights ranging from 26 to 140 kDa. In the case of the lepidopteran-specific subspecies, the major components of this crystal is a 130 - 140 kDa protein referred to as the protoxin. Upon dissolution at alkaline pH in the mitgut of targeted larvae, the protoxin is further "activated" by specific proteolysis and the toxic moiety released. Upon its attachment to specific receptors of the columnar cells in the midgut epithelium, the cells swell and are released from the basement membrane and finally burst. The insect (larvae) stops feeding, becomes rapidly dehydrated and generally dies within the next 48 hours.
2.2.1.4 Taxonomy
Many strains of B.t. have now been isolated and classified upon biochemical, enzymatic and serological criteria. The generally accepted key for the taxonomic division of the species of B. thuringiensis is based on the antigenic properties of the flagella as developed by de Barjac and Bonnefoi (1962). However, B.t. strains can also be allocated to different subspecies or varieties based on their pathotypes or insecticidal activity for different insects.
For the purpose of the systematics and identification of B.t. cultures, an efficient method is serotyping by H-antigen along with determining some biochemical properties of the cultures. Up to now 23 serotypes have been described. Subspecies and a number of serotypes have also been differentiated within some of the species. From a practical point of view it is essential that there exist certain correlations in the spectrum and activity of insecticide effect between the various subspecies as well as subserotypes.
The cultures of a majority of serotypes of these species B.t. var. kurstaki are characterized by strong entomocide activity to Lepidoptera, products DIPEL (Abbott), Bactospeine (Philips Duphar), THURICIDE, JAVELIN (Sandoz). Some differences in the spectrum have also been observed. Thus, the cultures of serotype 5 (galleriae) are very active to Galleria mellonella, while representatives of serotype 10 (darmstadiensis-caucasicus) do not reveal any insecticide activity towards this insect. The cultures of serotype 4 are very active to Siberian silkworm and comparatively less virulent to silkworm Bombyx mori.
Of great interest was serotype 14 that was describes in 1978 as B.t. subsp. israelensis. Cultures of this serotype thus produce crystalline parasporal toxin with strong larvicide activity to mosquitoes, black fly and other insect of the Simallidae. It is worth mentioning that they are characterized by specific larvicide pathogenicity and are practically harmless to mammals, plants and useful hydrobionts.
A number of countries have organized industrial production of larvicide preparations on the basis of B.t. subsp. israelensis cultures like TECNAR, VECTOBAC, BACTIMOS and others.
Of special practical interest was the description of cultures named as B.t. var. tenebrionis with activity to Coleoptera. Other pathotype of B.t. var. san diego with insecticide activity to Coleoptera products like TRIDENT (Sandoz) and M-ONE (Mycogen) and pathotype of B.t. var. aizawai with insecticide activity to Lepidoptera and Diptera products like CERTAN (Sandoz).
In the case of B.t. , the subspecies (varieties) and H-serotypes as well as biotypes with different enzymatic features are defined on a biological and serological basis. This is the case with the serotypes H4a4b and H6, these biotypes have a different spectrum of pathogenic properties, the discovery of antigenic subfactors (fractions) in five of the serotypes of H3, H4, H5, and H11 allows for further differentiation of various subtypes or biotypes.
The first three letters of the subspecies name can be used as an abbreviation of the strain name. For instance, KUR H-3a3b (serotype) kurstaki isolated from Ephestia kuhniella (Kurstak 1962); KUR H-3a3b HD-1 kurstaki isolated from Pectinophora gossipiella (Dulmage 1970); ISR H14- israelensis.
Lepidoptera B.t. var. aizawai Certan (Sandoz) Coleoptera thuringiensis var. kurstaki (mainly HD1 and HD12 isolates) has been used for some years on a limited scale in both agriculture and forestry. It is well known that B.t. is very selective in its biological action, and kills only a limited range of insects; birds, mammals and fish are not affected. This selectivity is a key to marketable product; very favorable toxicology and environmental profile, zero pre-harvest interval on vegetable crops, "bio-rational" registration like in North America.
Table 2.1. Pathotypes of Bacillus: thuringiensis
Pathotype Example Commercial products A, B and C subspecies
Specific to
Lepidoptera B.t. var. kurstaki Dipel (Abbott)
Bactospeine (Philips Duphar)
Thuricide, Javelin (Sandoz)
Bathurin 82 (Slu1ovice) Diptera B.t. var. israelensis
Vectobac (Abbott)
Bactimos (Philips Duphar)
Teknar (Sandoz)
Moskitur (Slu1ovice)
Coleoptera B.t. var. san diego Trident (Sandoz)
M-One (Mycogen)
However B. thuringiensis var. kurstaki has drawbacks including speed and mode of action, and solar radiation sensitivity which have limited its usage. Combining these problems, B.t. application on foliage remains a challenge in most agricultural situations. Anti-feeding effects observed in various B.t. formulations combined with non-optimised application rates and spray technology especially in agriculture have decreased significantly its attractiveness to farmers.
2.2.1.5 Isolation of b-Exotoxin
Exotoxin formulations of sufficient purity can be obtained by rechromatography on DEAE-cellulose or silicagel. The purification process which does not use any adsorption on carbon makes use of the supernatant of the B.t. cultivation medium which is thickened to 1/10 of its original volume by boiling. The inactive material is then precipitated out by stepwise ethanol additions. At 90 vol. % of ethanol an active precipitate is obtained which can be further purified on cellulose or ion exchange columns.
The b-exotoxin, called thuringiensin, is a nucleotide composed of adenine, ribose, glucose, and phosphorylated allaric acid.
Mode of action of b-exotoxin
It inhibits the synthesis of ribonucleic acid by stopping off the polymeration catalyzed by DNA-dependent RNA-polymerase. The toxicity of b-exotoxin to caterpillars.
Galleria mellonella is LD[50] = 0.5 ug/g, that to mice is LD[50] = 18 ug/g. The spectrum of effectiveness of b-exotoxin is much broader than that of delta-endotoxin and it is lethal to insects of Lepidoptera, Coleoptera, Isoptera, and Orthoptera groups. Effectiveness varies depending on dose, time, and mode of application.
Application of b-exotoxin in practice
Autoclaved preparation was effective against Two-spotted mite (Tetranychus urticae), citrus mite (Panonychus citri), and Nematode Meloidogyne). Formulations containing b-exotoxin are prohibited in Europe and the U.S. A formulation called Bitoxibacillin containing 0.5-0.8 % exotoxin is in use in the USSR. In production where the bacterial mass is separated from the liquid of the cultivation medium by centrifugation, the exotoxin is removed.
Growth cycle
Living cycle of B. thuringiensis has two phases: vegetative and sporogenic.
Growth 100 % max.
Fig. 2.1. Diagram of sporulation in B.thuringiensis
Fig. 2.1. Diagram of sporulation in B.thuringiensis
Fig. 2.1. Diagram of sporulation in B.thuringiensis l
M, mesosome; CW, cell wall; PM, plasma membrane; AF, axial filament; FS, forespore septum; IF, incipient forespore; Ol, ovoid inclusion; PC, parasporal crystal; F, forespore; IM, inner membrane; OM, outer membrane; PW, primordial cell wall, E, exosporium, LC, lamella spore coat; OC, outer spore coat; C, cortex; IMC, incorporated mother cell cytoplasm; S, mature spore in an unlysed sporangium. (Bechtel and Bulla et al. 1980).
I. phase, 7 hours AF (axial filament)
II. phase, 7-8 hours FS (forespore septum)
III. phase, 8-9 hours F (forespore)
IV.- VI phase, 9-12 hours E, LC, OC, C and IMC
VII. phase, after 12 hours S and lyse sporangium
2.2.1.6 Recovery of Bacillus thuringiensis
Using the lactose-acetone technique (after Dulmage et al., 1970)
Using the lactose-acetone technique (after Dulmage et al., 1970)
2.2.1.7 Bioassay Procedures
In all assays, the powder is administrated to the insects by mixing it into their diet, with larvae being allowed to feed ad libitum on the powder-diet mixtures. 2) The effect of this exposure is judged by a single criterion: death. A severely retarded or moribund larva is considered alive if it could move. The assays measured only per cent dead. 3) Preliminary assays determined kill at two levels, usually 500 ug and 50 ug powder/unit of diet. If activity is sufficient, repeat assays with an appropriate series of dilutions to determine the LC[50].
LC[50 ]and International Unit
The first generally accepted standard was prepared in France from a fermentation of H-type thuringiensis and called "E-61". E-61 was assigned a potency of 1000 IU/mg and recommended as an international standard in 1966 (Burges, 1967). When the HD-1 strain of H-type kurstaki was selected for commercial production of B.t. in the USA, a formulation of HD-1, labelled HD-l-S-1971 was assigned a potency of 18,000 IU/mg on the basis of assays against E-61, using Trichoplusia ni as test insect (see ANNEX 5).
Calculations of potencies of dry powders of d-endotoxins of B.t.
Basic formula:
LC[50] Standard
--------------------------------- x Potency of Standard IU/mg = potency of LC[50] Test Sample,
IU/mg test sample
IU/mg = Potency of Test Sample
When HD-1-S-1971 is used as the standard, the equation
becomes:
LC[50] HD-1-S-1971
------------------------------ x 18 000 IU/mg = Potency of Test Sample,
LC[50] Test Sample IU/mg
The numerical value of the ratio gives a quantitative evaluation of the difference between a sample and a standard, and this can to further comparisons e.g. toxin with a any two insect species can form ratio, even if the assays are performed in different laboratories, as long as the assays are performed on the same powder.
References
BARJAC DE, H., BONNEFOI, A, 1962: Essai de classification biochimique et sérologique de 24 souches de Bacillus thuringiensis. Entomophaga 7:5-31.
BURGES H.D., 1967: in Insect Patholotgy and Microbial Control" (P.A. van der Laan, edd.) pp. 306-338. North-Holland Publ. Co., Amsterdam.
BULLA, L.A., BECHTEL, D.B., KRAMER, K.J., SHETHNA, Y.I., ARONSON, A.I., FITZ-JAMES, P.C. 1980: Ultrastructure, physiology, and biochemistry of Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. kurstaki. Biochem.. Biophys. Res. Commun. 9:1123:1130.
DULMAGE, H.T., 1970: Insecticidal activity of HD-1, a new isolate of Bacillus thuringiensis var. alesti. J. Invetebr. Pathol. 15: 232-239.
DULMAGE, H.T., et cooperators, 1981: Insecticidal activity of isolates of Bacillus thuringiensis and their potential for pest control. In: Microbial control of pests and plant diseases 1970-1980. Edit. Burges, H.D.,Acad. Press London-New-York 1981, pp. 193-222.
KRIEG A.,1986: Bacillus thuringiensis, ein mikrobielles Insecticid. Grundlagen und Anwendung. Acta Phytomed. Suppl. J. Phytopathol. 10, Paul Parey Berlin-Hamburg 1986, 191 pp.
KURSTAK, E.S. 1962: Données sur l`épizootie bacterienne naturelle
provoquée par un Bacillus du type Bacillus thuringiensis sur Ephestia kühniella Zeller. Entomophaga, Mem. Hors. Ser. 2:245-247.
VAOKOVA, J., 1990: Bacillus thuringiensis bakteri ln¡ insekticid. Academia Praha, 116 pp
2.3 Microbial Insecticide Based on Metarhizium Anisopliae
The first attempt at using Metarhizium anisopliae = M.a. for biological control was by Krassilstchik (1888). He was successful in destroying 55-80 % of Clones punctiventris insects in small areas. Varied results have also been obtained when M.a. was used against other insects (Picles 1945, James 1946). Presently M.a. were applied successfully against insect pests of several crops (Ferron 1981), including pests of rice in the tropics (Rombach et al. 1987). In this region annually treated about several hundred thousand hectares, and using around 2.5 x 10^12 viable spores/ha.
M.a. "Metaquino" is produced in Brazil by some 5 commercial companies as well as grower cooperatives and individual plantation owners. It is used for control of the sugarcane spittle bug, Mahanarva postica, in the NE of the country. M. anisopliae var. majus is also used for control in parts of the Pacific and SE-Asia to augment baculovirus at high larval densities (Gillespie, 1988).
According to Zimmermann and Simmons (1986) it is possible to recommend M.a. against Otiorrhynchus sulcatus in greenhouse and to lesser degree in the field. Bayer AG produce Bio 1020 granule, Chabchoul and Táborsky (1990) have also been used M.a. against Colorado beetle Leptinotarsa decemlineata.
2.3.1 Mode of Action
Adhesion of the spore to the cuticle
Adhesion appears to be a prerequisite for successful invasion as noted for hypovirulent strains of M. anisopliae. Dillon and Charnley (1989) showed that germination of M.a. is initiated by water but progress to the first overt stage of germination (swelling) is depended on an exogenous nutrient. Prior exposure to water "soaking" synchronized and accelerated swelling, germ tube and appressorial formation when a nutrient was finally provided. Soak spores were significantly more pathogenic than the controls (Hassan et al. 1989). Vegetative spores "conidia" are strong hydrophobic and keep their viability for more than two weeks after spraying on target insects. For example; larvae of L. decemlineata are compleat bay destroyed in the soil by green muscardine (Táborsky unpubl. data). For germination of conidia M.a. by the test of viability is possible put into drop on microscopy slides special nutrients like orange juice (0.05 %). Current evidence for M.a. suggests that
differentiation of appressoria is strictly governed by the concentration of low molecular weight nitrogen compounds on a conductive surface.
Penetration of the host cuticle
Penetration of host exosceleton appears to involve both mechanical and enzymic components.
Figure 2.2. Penetration of host cuticle by a Deuteromycetes entomopathogens1 = appressorial complex, 2 = penetration peg, 3 = penetration plate
Figure 2.2. Penetration of host cuticle by a Deuteromycetes entomopathogens
1 = appressorial complex, 2 = penetration peg, 3 = penetration plate
In soft cuticles e.g. caterpillars growth across the cuticle is more or less direct, in hard cuticles e.g. wireworms the fungus proceeds in a step-wise fashion. The production of cuticle-degrading endoproteases with similar modes of action by all Deuteromycetes studied suggests that it is unlikely that they contribute to host specific or virulence, though the common occurrence implies an indispensable fungi differ only in charge. However, this does have practical significance as binding to cuticle with different charge may be favorable or unfavourable to binding by individual enzymes, with consequences for the parts of the body which can be invaded by enzymic action. This can influence the speed of penetration and thus virulence.
Host defence
Deposition of oxidized phenols (melanin) in cuticle by host phenoloxidase is the first overt response to infection. Antimicrobial effects of phenols are well established, but in insect cuticles melanization appears to be primarily an effective defense against more virulent pathogens. Protease inhibitors within the cuticle may serve to restrict pathogen enzyme activity. Within the haemocoel the main cellular response of the insect is a multihaemocytic encapsulation of the fungal element following initial recognition of the fungus by the haemocytes. The yeast like blastospores, produced by Deuteromycetes in the insect haemolymph, reduce the effectiveness of the cellular defences by sheer weigh of numbers and not being as antigenic as the mycelium (Charnley, 1989). Finally the cyclodepsipeptide toxins, destruxin produced by M.a. appear to interfere with haemocyte function, specially by suppressing prophenoloxidase activation (Huxham et al., 1989). However, recent evidence is
consistent with destruxins being a determinant of virulence for M.a.. Destruxins are active in causing symptoms, principally by paralyzing muscles of caterpillars, while in other insect hosts of M.a. such as Orthoptera, whose muscles are not susceptible to destruxins, and in susceptible insects infected with low destruxins producing strains, the toxin may act indirectly to assist the pathogen to overcome host defences perhaps as stated earlier by interfering with haemocyte activity Samuels et al., 1988).
2.3.2 Strain Improvement
Deuteromycetes do not have a sexual cycle and thus recombination can only be achieved either by use of the parasexual cycle or by direct genetic manipulation (Heale et al., 1989). Recombinants from heterozygous diploids produced by hyphal anastomosis or protoplast fusion have been identified from M.a. and V. lecanii. (Heale, 1988). Frequently parasexual recombinants exhibit reduced pathogenicity in comparison with the wild-type parents due to the possibility to disrupt of clusters of pathogenicity genes.
The recent demonstrations of transformation in a number of filamentous fungi have indicated that molecular cloning techniques could be used to investigate pathogenicity determinants of entomopathogenic fungi, isolate genes coding for specific pathogenicity determinants and produce organisms with enhanced virulence. At the present time M.a. seems to be the most appropriate fungus for this approach as there are two putative pathogenicity/virulence determinants like endoprotease, chymoelastase and destruxins. The development of a transformation system and cloning vectors for M.a. is an essential prerequisite for such approach. For the future once recombinant plasmids containing genes coding for virulence factors have been identified it may be possible to use them in a programme of strain improvement, particularly as transformation in filamentous fungi is frequently accompanied by gene amplification.
2.3.3 Small-Scale Production
M.a. is possible to produce like local product in plastic fermenters (see Verticillium lecanii). The isolate M.a. must be passed through target host and then be cultivated on Sabouraud`s liquid medium. As far as the concentration of conidia was very high and reached after 8 days 3.19 x 10^10 conidia/1 g. Light and darkness have not any decisive effect on mass production of conidia. The temperature is most important for the yield of conidia. At first 6 days is the best temperature 24-25^oC and then it is possible to decrease temperature to 22-20^oC.
Submersed culture produce through 3-4 days blastospores, which are suitable like seed culture with medium for plastic fermenters.
Harvesting and Formulation
Process harvesting must be done with Tween 80 or Triton 100, and then is used Siloxyd 125 - 150 g per 1 liter mud and dry during 24 hours. Formulation WP is suitable for conidia M.a. and shelf life during storage is good at 4 - 10^oC.
Standardization
100 g of conidia powder ( 2.5 x 10^10 conidia/1 g) must be mix with Siloxyd and diluent so, that the total weight will be 500 g. The recommended dose per ha is in this case 500 g of formulated product (e.g. 2.5 x 10^12 of conidia) .
References:
CHABCHOUL H., and TABORSKY, V., 1990: Use of Metarhizium anisopliae (Metsch.) Sorokin against Colorado beetles Leptinotarsa decemlineata (Say). Agricultural Tropica et Subtropica, Universitas Agriculturae Praga, 23 (in press).
CHARNLEY, A.K., 1989: Mechanisms of fungal pathogenicity in insects. In The Biotechnology of Fungi for Improving Plant Growth. J.M.Wipps and R.D.Lumsden (Eds), Cambridge: University Press.
DILLON, R.J., CHARNLEY, A.K., 1989: Initiation on germination in conidia of the entomopathogenic fungus, Metarhizium anisopliae. in A.K. Charnley: Mycoinsecticides: Present use and Future prospects. pp.165-181. Progress and Prospects in Insect control. Monograph No.43, British Crop Protect. Council
FERRON, P., 1981: Pests control by the fungi Beauveria and Metarhisium. In: Microbial control of pests and plant diseases 1970-1980 (Ed. M.D. Burges). Acad. Press, pp.465-482.
GILLESPIE, A.T.,1988: Use of fungi to control pests of agricultural importance. In: Fungi in Biological Control Systems M.N. Burge (Ed), Manchester: University Press, pp. 37-60.
HASSAN, A.E.M., DILLON, R.M. and CHARNLEY, A.K., 1989: Influence of accelerated germination of conidia on the pathogenicity of Metarhizium anisopliae for Manduca sexta Journal of Invertebrate Pathology.
HEALE, J.B., ISAAC, J.E., CHANDLER, D., 1989: Prospect for strain improvement in entomopathogenic fungi. Pesticide Science 26: 79-92.
HUXHAM, I.M., LACKIE, A.M., MCCORKINDALE, N.J. 1989: Inhibitory effects of cyclodepsipeptides, destruxins, from the fungus Metarhizium anisopliae, on cellular immunity in insects. Journal of Insects Physiology 35: 97-107.
JAMES, H.C., 1946: The bionomics and control of Tomaspis fluvilatera Ur., The Demerara sugar cane froghopper. Proc. Brit. W.Ind. Sug.Tech., 34-79.
KRASSILSTCHIK, I.M., 1888: La production industrial des parasites végétaux pour la destruction des insects nuisibles. Bull. Scient. Fr. Belg., 19: 461-472.
PICKLES, A., 1945: Entomology. Adm. Rep. Dir. Agric. Trin. Tob., pp. 17-18.
ROMBACH, M.C., SHEPARD, B.M., and NELSON, F.R.S. 1987: Compatibility of M. anisopliae var. anisopliae with chemical pesticides. Mycopathologia, 99: 99-105.
SAMUELS, R.I., REYNOLDS, S.E., CHARNLEY, A.K. 1988: Calcium channel activation of insect muscle by destruxins, insecticidal compounds produced by the entomopathogenic fungus Metarhizium anisopliae. Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology, 90C, 403-412.
ZIMMERMANN, G. and SIMONS, W.R. 1986: Experiences with biological control of the black vine weevil Otiorhynchus sulcatus (F.). In Fundamental and applied aspects of invertebrate pathology (Ed. R.A. Samson, J.M. Vlak and D. Peters). Found. Forth Int. Colloquium Invert. Path., Wageningen, Netherlands: pp. 529-553.
2.4 Microbial Insecticide Based on Beauveria Bassiana
Beauveria bassiana = B.b. is best known as the causal agent of the disastrous muscardine in silkworms. It is the most widely distributed species of the genus and is generally found forming white dusty raised tufts on Coleoptera, Lepidoptera, Diptera and other insects in both temperate and tropical areas. B.b. is sensitive to soil-mycostatic factors. Survival in soil is favored by darkness and reductions in both temperature and soil moisture; at 8^oC and under dry conditions, 90 % of the conidia survive for over 635 days (Clark, G.C. and M.F. Mandelin, 1965, Walstad, J.D., R.F. Anderson and W.J. Stambaugh, 1970); on silica gel conidia survived up to 36 months of storage at -20^oC (Bell, J.V. and R.J. Hamalle, 1974). After spraying on the crops conidia survival only 3 days on the same level of germination before application.
Biological control experiments with it are numerous and have been directed particularly to the Colorado beetle and other Coleoptera and Lepidoptera. Various species of mosquito larvae can be killed by dusting conidia on the water surface (Clark, T.B. et al. 1968); conversely, bees larvae were not susceptible while adult bees succumbed (Toumanoff, C. 1931). It has also been isolated from the lungs of giant tortoises and box turtles affected wit a pulmonary disease (Georg, L.K. et al. 1962); an increase in the air spore has also led to allergic responses in man (Roberts, D.W., 1973). B.b. is employed on a large scale in the People`s Republic of China to control pine caterpillars (Dendrolimus punctatus), green leaf hoppers (Nephotettix spp.) and corn borer (Ostrinia nubilalis). In the USSR B.b. like "Boverin" is produced for the control of the Colorado beetle (Leptinotarsa decemlineata) and the codling moth (Laspeyresia pomonella), in CSRF "Boverol" against Colorado beetles,
Whiteflies (Trialeurodes vaporariorum) and black vine beetle Otiorhynchus sulcatus.
2.4.1 Small-Scale Production
On agar media conidiogenesis starts after six days, while in liquid culture this takes only 3-4 days (Sam1iòáková, 1966). In stirred liquid cultures employed in mass production of this fungus, so-called "blastospores" developed which are thin-walled, larger (3-5 x 2-3 mm) and less resistant than conidia (Mueller-Koegler, and Sam1iòáková , 1970); blastospores germinated in 6-10 hours at 18-24 0C, while conidia require 15-20 hours. The germination of conidia requires a saturated atmosphere and the optimal temperature for growth is in the range 25-30^oC, minimum 10^oC, and maximum 32^oC apparently depending on the geographic origin of the isolate; no germination occurs either below 10^oC or above 35^oC; the thermal death point of conidia has been determined as 50^oC for 10 min in water. The optimal pH for growth is 5.7-5.9, and for conidia formation 7-8 (Goral, Lappa, 1972).
Culture medium
Good growth occurs on maltose and sucrose and, among others, on the N sources glutamic and aspartic acids, and ammonium oxalate, citrate or tartrate. A medium recommended for optimal growth contains 2% corn steep liquor, 2.5% glucose, 2.5 starch, 0.5% NaCl, and 0.2% CaCO3. The fungus produces lipase, protease, urease, amylase, chitinase, cellulase and 1,2-á- glucanase. Chitinase can be realized into the medium during autolysis, but was also found to act jointly with other enzymes in decomposing insect integuments. The production of a toxic substance is proteins complex consisting of two fractions with different molecular weights (Kuèera and Sam1iòáková, 1968). This toxic metabolite is produced most abundantly on complex media (e.g. cornmeal, yeast or beef extract); inorganic N sources are ineffective (Kuèera, 1971). A red bibenzoquinone pigment, oosporein, with antifungal properties (Whine et al. 1962) and the yellow pigments tenellin and bassianin have been found. Small
scale production, harvesting an formulation see in Verticillium lecanii.
References:
BELL, M.R., and HAMALE, R.J. 1974: Viability and pathogenicity of entomogenous fungi after prolonged storage on silica gel at -20^oC. Can. J. Microbial, 20, 639-642.
CLARK, T.B., KELLEN, W.R., FUKUDA, R. and LINDEGREN, J.E. 1968: Field and Laboratory studies on the pathogenicity of the fungus Beauveria basiana to three genera of mosquitoes. J. Invertebrate Path. 11, 1-8.
CLARK, T.B., MANDELLIN, M.F. 1965: The longevity of conidia of three insect-parazitisms hyphomycetes. Trans.Br. Mycol. Soc. 48, 193-209
GEORG, L.K., WILLIAMSON, W.M., TILDEN, E.B., and GETTY, R.E. 1962: Mycotic pulmonary disease of captive giant tortoises to Beauvaria bassiana and Paecilomyces Fumoso-RoseusSabouraudia 2, 80-86.
GORAL, W.M., and LAPPA, N.V. 1972: The effect of medium pH on growth and virulence of Beauveria bassiana (Bals.) Vuill. Mikrobiol. Zh. 34 )4), 454-457.
KUEERA, M. and SAMSINAKOVA, A. 1968: Toxins of the entomophagous fungus Beauveria bassiana. J. Invertebr. Path. 12: 316-320.
KUCERA, M., 1971: Toxins of entomophagous fungus Beauveria bassiana. 2. effect on nitrogen sources on formation of the toxic protease in submerged culture. J. Invertbr. Path. 17: 211-320.
MULLER-KOGLER, E., SAMSINAKOVA, A. 1970: Zur Massenkultur des Insektenpathogenen Pilzes Beauveria bassiana. Experientia 26, 1400.
ROBERTS, D.V., 1973: Means for insect regulation - Fungi. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 217: 76-84.
SAMSINAKOVA, A., 1966: Growth and sporulation of submerged cultures of the fungus Beauveria bassiana in various media. J.Invertebr.Path. 8: 395-400.
TOUMANOFF, C., 1931: Action des champignons entomophytes sur les abeilles. Annls Parasit. Hum.Comp. 9: 464-482.
VINING, L.C., KELLEHER, W.J., and SCHWARTING, A.E. 1962: Oosporein production by a strain of Beauveria bassiana originally Identified as Amanita muscaria. Can.J.Microbiol. 8: 931-933.
WALSTAD, J.D., ANDERSON, R.F., STAMBAUGH, W.J. 1970: Effect of environmental conditions on two species of muscardine Fungi (Beauveria bassiana and Metarhizium anisopliae). J.Invertebr. Path., 16: 221-226.
2.5 Microbial Insecticides Based on Verticillium Lecanii
Verticillium lecanii is a well documented entomopathogen of insect order Homoptera, most commonly aphids, scale insects and whiteflies in tropical and subtropical regions. Also, V. lecanii sometimes hyperparasitizes phytopathogenic fungi, mostly rusts and powdery mildews.
Laboratory culture is possible on all conventional mycological media, but the best growth is on Sabouraud`s agar (Khalil at al.1983). On solid media, conidia are produced and in submerged culture are produced blastospores. Colonial growth rate was optimal at 23^oC - 24^oC. Both germination and growth declined steeply above 25^oC and ceased above 30^oC. Sporulation responded over slightly narrower temperature range than growth or germination, ceasing at 30^oC.
2.5.1 Effect of Humidity.
Virtually all fungi require humidity for spore germination, growth and sporulation. Thus, to ensure maximum germination of spores and hence highest possible levels of infection of insects, spore sprays should be synchronized with optimal humidity, which for most crops should occur in the evening as ambient temperature falls.
2.5.2 Virulence and Strain Specific.
Virulence of V. lecanii spores can be measured by bioassay LD[50] for a 100 % viability conidia suspension in which adult, apterous Macrosiphoniella sanborni are immersed briefly in to the concentrations ca. 10^5 spores/ml and that blastospores is slightly lower. However, when untreated aphids are placed on still wet spore-treated chrysanthemum leaves, the LD[50] is increased by a factor of 100. Furthermore, after drying, spores are preasumatly not readily dislodged from the leaves by the aphids. This suggests that a prophylactic spore-spray applied to an aphid-free crop may be wasted and ineffective when aphids invade.
Virulence of single and multi-spore isolates of the strain remained remarkably stable on most artificial media. Passaging of V. lecanii through an aphid host according Hall (1981) did not increase virulence, but there are many data, according Passaging through an aphid host or white fly increased virulents.
2.5.3 Longevity Spores
The half-life of conidia in distilled water varies, both at 2^oC (110 - 160 days) and -17^oC (60-120 days), blastospores on the whole are even shorter-lived and more variable (100-150 days at 2^oC). When conidia were equilibria at a range of humidities at 20^oC, only high humidity permitted good survival. In contrast, dried conidia (whether in slime-heads separated from their parent mycelium or washed) at 58 % R.H. died in less than 24 hours. However, conidia in slime heads still attached to the parent mycelium on aphids or on culture mycelium (without agar) survived for up to 13 days at 58 R.H. A favorable microclimate humidity was probably responsible for good survival of spores on aphid bodies killed by V. lecanii in glasshouses; 80/90 of conidia survived for at least 30 days after death of aphids despite daytime air temperatures of well over the upper temperature limit for growth.
Spread of infection
Fungal spores in slime/heads adhere firmly to the mycelium when dry V. lecanii conidia did not become airborne from dried cultures or from V. lecanii killed aphids. Presumably, infection of a new aphid population on a new crop originates from soil.
2.5.4 Control of aphids
Control of Aphids and Scale Insect 0.02 % Triton X-100 or Tween 20 in the same concentration are used as wetting agent with concentration (5 x 10^7 blastospores/ml). Concentrations (10^7-10^8 blastospores/ml) died 2-3 times faster (LD[50] 1.9-2.3 days) than those treated with a lower concentration, 10^5 spores/ml (LD[50] 4.8 - 6.2 days). Aphis gossypii is controlled within 14 days.
2.5.5 Mode of Action Penetration of the Host Integument
Once the spore has attached to the insect, it must germinated to produce a germ tube which will then penetrated the host cuticle. However, highly pathogenic strains germinate quicker and penetrate the epicuticle directly whilst strains of low pathogenicity took longer to germinate and grew extensively over the cuticle surface with only limited penetration. Virulence of V. lecanii has been associated with high extracelluar chitinase activity.
Development of the fungus inside the host.
Most entomopathogenics are also able to excrete toxins; mycelium of V. lecanii can contain a cyclodepsipeptide.
Production and storage of V. lecanii
The choice of infectious material is between conidia and blastospores. Production of conidia on agar is too expensive and it is also difficult to ensure culture purity. Alternatively, conidia can be produced on a cheap granular solid media such as grain, jack seeds (Arthocarpus) pearl millet or potato extract for 5-6 days in aerated vessels.
2.5.6 Small-Scale Production
Kybal and Vlèek (1976) used polyethylene cushions made of large thin walled, polyethylene tubing sealed into sections which were partially filled (1 cm high layer absolutely horizontal) with submerged culture of V. lecanii after 2 + 1 days cultivation and inflated with sterile air. Product was harvested (ca. after 14-16 days) by discarding the medium and retaining the mad. Yield from a 0.8 % peptone, 1 % sorbitol medium was 1 x 10^12-13 conidia/1 m^2.
2.5.7 Formulated Product
Harvesting of mud is done by mixing it with Siloxyd (ca. 100-125 g/ 1 liter of mad and wetting agent (Tween 80) and, after predrying at 30^oC one day, the wet cake is crushed using a meat-mincer, and the product if dry to perfection at 30^oC can be stored or milled (Condux Universal Mühle Typ 150/S-D) and packaged like water-dispersable powders which is prepared for dilution with water into a final spray. The application dose per hectare or meter square is determined depending of the conidia content.
2.5.8 Standardization
Despite theoretical strain stability, a commercial product must be shown to have constant potency. This should be measured by viable spore count and bioassay. The viability of V. lecannii conidia and blastospores can easily be assessed by an agar-slide technique (Hall, 1976).
Pathogenicity of production batches of spores should be measured by bioassay in comparison with a standard since variation between consecutive assays is often significant.
V. lecanii is a clearly promising biological control agent against aphids, scales, thrips under glass, humid tropic and as mycofungicide against rust diseases.
2.5.9 Registration
The absence of records of V. lecanii in man and other vertebrates is an impressive evidence for its innocuity. All V. lecanii strains so far examined by Hall (1981) cannot grow at 37^oC and so the likelihood of infecting warm-blooded vertebrates internally is exceedingly remote. As reaction to the dose of 10^6 conidia injected intravenously, no adverse symptoms were observed and, 28 days later, no gross pathological changes were apparent in the internal organs and no signs of the fungus could be found either in sectioned organs or in agar cultures from these. Safety tests are being carried out preparatory to commercial exploitation.
In the field, critical parameters like temperature and humidity cannot be readily manipulated. Temperate weather is often unpredictable and often unfavourable to fungi, except perhaps where the pest occupies a moist micro-climate. However, great potential may exist in tropical and subtropical zones where high humidity is normal for prolonged periods.
Verticillium lecanii strains were first introduced commercially in the U.K. for the control of aphids "Vertalex" and
whitefly "Mycotal" on protected ornamental and vegetable crops. The products were discontinued in 1986.
References:
HALL, R.A.,1976: A bioassay of the pathogenicity of Verticillium lecanii conidiospores on the aphid Macrosiphoniella sanborni. Journal of Inv.Pathology 27: 41-48.
HALL, R.A., 1981: The fungus Verticillium lecanii as a Microbial Insecticide against Aphids and Scales. In: Microbial Control of Pests and Plant Deseases 1970-1980. Acad. Press 1981, Ed. Burges H.D., p.482-498.
KHALIL, S.K., BARTOS, J. and TABORSKY, V. 1983: Effect of temperature, pH of the medium and sugar on the germination of spores, development of mycelium and sporulation of the entomopathogenic fungus, Verticilium lecanii (Zimm.) Viìgas. Agric. Trop. et Subtr., Universitas Agriculture Praga, 16: 255 - 274.
KYBAL, J. and VLEEK, V. 1976: A simple Device for Stationary Cultivation of Microorganisms. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 18: 1713 - 1718.
<section>5</section>
CHAPTER 3.
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCESSING
The main task of a microbial small scale production is the verification of laboratory procedures and their modification to permit the scale-up of the pilot plant procedures to commercial scale.
The tasks of a microbial pilot plant include:
a) Scale-up of results from laboratory to pilot plant level. A pilot plant procedure should be elaborated so that the process can be tested on industrial scale.
b) Modification of technology ensuring an increased production of the substance under study, minimum cultivation time of the production strain and an economical cultivation and isolation procedure.
c) Standardization of the product is the most important part of pilot scale production. Every rank of the product must be tested for biological activity and compared with international standard.
3.1 Small-Scale Processing of Submerged Fermentation
3.1.1 Growth Kinetics in Submerged Culture
The use of stirred fermenters with automatic control of the culture environment is the most suitable technique to evaluate bacterial or fungal kinetics. Cultures can be discontinuous (batch cultures).
Fig. 3.1 Batch growth curve with six phases; g = generation time
Fig. 3.1 Batch growth curve with six phases; g = generation time
The batch culture growth curve of a microorganism can be divided into six phases (Fig. 3.1); log phase; accelerating growth; exponential growth; declearing growth; stationary; lytic decline phase. Growth has been often represented by mathematical models. In the case of media limitation, the equation of Monod is most often used (Fig.3.1)
S
u = um ----------------
Ks + S
um = u maximum specific growth rate
K = Saturation constant
S
If Ks <<S, ---------------- ~ 1 and the growth is exponential;
K + S
if the value of Ks is relatively high in comparison to S, when S decrease, a decelerating growth phase is reached. Values of u are dependent on the combination media-fungus but are most often between 0.1 and 0.4 h^-1.
Values Ksa can be determined by plotting 1/m against 1/S. The equation becoming 1/m = Ks/mm. 1/S + 1/mm.
fig. 3.2
fig. 3.2
In the case of nonexponential growth the Ks value can be approximated from the curve m = f(s) (Fig.3.2). Within fungi in batch culture, it is difficult to observe exponential increases in biomass for more then five doubling times. After a certain growth time, the fungus will eventually modify the physicochemical condition of its environment and corresponding growth slow down will occur due to limitation in nutrient concentration or oxygen transfer or accumulation of staling products. Morphologically, linear growth can be correlated with a blockage of the branching whereas branching of the mycelium or the fermentation of blastospores "yeast-like cells" induce an exponential increase of the biomass.
3.1.2 Factors Governing Sporulation
It is well documented that conditions favouring spore formation are usually different and more restricted than those controlling mycelial growth (Hawker, 1966). Although spores are the main target propagule in the production of mycoinsecticides, the environmental factors governing the sporulation of entomopathogenic fungi have been poorly studied. In particular, the optimum conditions for sporulation and for enhancing the pathogenicity or viability of the spores produced need to be determined, since it has been established that the environmental factors during fermentation influence both the aggressiveness of the spores and their survival (Aoki, 1967; Fargues, 1981).
A period of vegetative growth invariably precedes sporulation and the production of a large number of spores normally requires a well-nourished mycelium. The nutrient concentration and quality that favour sporogenesis are often highly specific. For Beauveria bassiana, maximum sporulation is attained with glucose and vegetable oil plus either glutamine, lysine or serine. Starvation or reduction in food supply usually stimulates sporulation, nitrogen being the first nutrient to be exhausted, which appears to be a defence against autolysis or the formation of nonviable spores. However, sporulation can occur without any starvation of the mycelium, the production of conidia of Hirsutella thompsonii and blastospores of Verticillium lecanii in batch culture being parallel to mycelia growth (Lattgé et al. 1986.)
A sexual spores are formed predominantly in aerated conditions and this has led to classic two-step production procedure for most of the Deuteromycotina: submerge culture of the mycelium and solid media fermentation for sporulation. Nevertheless, there are no rules concerning the degree of aeration in order to reach a satisfactory sporulation level amongst the entomopathogenic fungi. Conidia of B. bassiana and Hirsutella thompsoni can all be obtained in submerged culture (Lattgé et al., 1988).
3.1.3 Mass Production
After the growth and sporulation processes have been thoroughly investigated and tested at laboratory level, mass production of the fungus can be undertaken on an industrial scale with various raw materials. Until now, entomopathogenic fungi have been produced in liquid or solid media.
Production in Liquid Media
Three types of reactors or fermenters are commonly used: the stirred tank; the tower and the loop fermenters (Kristiansen & Chamberlein, 1983). The stirred tank fermenter has the form of a vertical cylinder with the agitator mechanism centrally placed (Fig.3-3A). These reactors produce a violent agitation of the culture medium with good homogenization of the broth and a high gas transfer coefficient whilst at the same time avoiding mycelial aggregation and subsequent pellet formation. One drawback is damage to the mycelium on contact with the stirring mechanism. Stirred tank fermenters have been employed for the production of the production of both mycelium and yeast-like cells of all the common entomopathogenic fungi. Blastospores of Deuteromycotina, conidia of B.bassiana and H. thompsoni and resting spores of Conidiobolus obscurus, C. thromboides and Lagenidium giganteum have also been produced in such tanks (Lattgé et al.,1977). The tower fermenter is a vertical cylinder
with a height/diameter ratio greater than six and lack any mechanical agitation (Fig. 3-3B). Nutrient mixing is promoted by the injection of gas at the base of the reactor. Most fungi produce mycelial aggregates in this type of fermenter, which can also be used for those species producing spores by conjugation. The loop fermenter is a modification of the latter in which the culture medium is forced back down to the bottom of the reactor. The recycling of the medium is achieved by the incorporation of a draught tube (internal recirculating, (Fig. 3-3C) or by a pipe (external recirculating, (Fig. 3-3D) in the design. The mass transfer at the gas-liquid interface can be as efficient as the stirred tank fermenter but with an important saving of energy. Resting spores of C. obscurus can be produced in this type of fermenter.
The presence of oxygen could not be detected more than 0,2 mm from the pellet surface.
Fig. 3.3.: Diagram of fermenters suitable for the production of entomopathogenic fungi.
Fig. 3.3.: Diagram of fermenters suitable for the production of entomopathogenic fungi. A - Stirred tank fermenter, B - Tower tank fermenter, C and D loop fermenter with internal (C) or axternal (D) recirculating of medium, E - Tray reactor, F - homogeneous solid reactor, G - rotating disk fermenter: a - motor, b - air sparger, c - heating ang cooling system, d - impeller, e - baffle, f - foam breaker, g - rotating discs, h - granular media.
3.1.4 Production of Bacillus thuringiensis
B.t. is an ideal microorganism for large scale cultivation. Present commercial production turns out B.t. based formulations in submerged cultivation conditions, in fermenter or chemostats.
3.1.4.1 Storage of Production Strain
Conserved cultures of B.t. can be kept in lyofilized condition in sealed ampoules for decades. The culture is suspended into sterile skimmed milk, is filled into ampoules drop by drop (cc 0.2 ml), and is lyofilized. The sealed ampoule is vacuum tested. When revitalizing the culture the outside of the ampoule is wipedwith disinfectant solution (e.g., 70% ethyl alcohol) to preventpossible contamination on opening the ampoule. Then the ampouleis cut to facilitate rupture, and 1-2 ml of sterile nutrientmedium is added into it. The suspension obtained is transferredonto the surface of slanted agar or of Petri dish agar, and isallowed to cultivate for 24 - 48 hours at 28^oC.
3.1.4.2 Cultivation Media
The selection of nutrients for cultivation depends onavailability, price, and suitability for B.t. The media used,however, represent only a small share of the costs of equipment,servicing, and utilities required for operation.
Source of carbon
When formulating the nutrient medium, carbon is provided by mono,di, and polysaccharides such as glucose, starch, molasses, etc.If their concentration is too high the pH will drop below 5.6 -5.8, and acidity may prevent growth. It depends on balancing thelevel of saccharides and the sources of nitrogen, inasmuch as B.t. is producing alkaline components from the nitrogen-bearingmaterial and these can neutralize the acidic products. As long asthe medium is properly chosen the initial pH will drop fromneutral to 5.8 - 6.0 and then will rise slowly toward 8.0 - 8.3.
Sources of nitrogen
In the fermentation of B.t. there are variegated sources ofnitrogen; these can include albuminous materials containing vitamins and various factors such as yeast autolyzate, yeast extract, dried yeasts, peptone, soya meal, maize meal, maize extract, residues from the production of alcoholic beverages,fish meal, etc.
Trace elements
Some ions which supplement nutrition are indispensable for the growth and sporulation of B.t. Mostly, they are supplied in the form of MgSO4.7H2O, MnSO4[.]4H2O, FeSO4.7H2O, ZnSO4.7H2O, CaCO3(0.001-0.005 %).
Agar medium for B. thuringiensis (pH 5.7 ...8.1)
Tryptosephosphate agar (TPA) g/l
Tryprose 20.0
Dextrose 2.0
NaCl 5.0
Na[2]HPO[4] 2.5
Agar 20.0
Accord. Dulmage, 1982 NYSMA g/l Bactopepton 3.0
Beef extract 5.0
Yeast extract 0.5
MnCl[2] 0.006
CaCl[2] 0.08
MgCl[2] 0.7
Agar 20.0
Beef pepton agar BPA SEVAC g/l
Beef extract 10.0
Bactpepton 10.0
NaCL 5.0
Agar 20.0
According de Barjac (1979) Yeast extract 0.5%
Wheatmil 1.5%
Dextrose 1.0%
K[2]HPO4. 7H2O 0.01%
MgSO4 . 7H2O 0.05%
NaCl 0.3%
FeSO[4] 0.01%
3.1.4.3 Laboratory Scale Cultivation
For cultivation on a shaker, 500 ml flasks are used, filled with 50 - 100 ml of nutrient medium (e.g., tryptosophosphate media) containing tryptose 20.0 g, glucose 2.0 g, NaCl 5.0 g, Na[2]HPO[4 ]2.5 g per 1 liter of distilled water. The flasks are inoculated with culture from slant agar and are put on a shaker for 24 hoursat 28-32^oC.
The first passaging follows, and inoculation is done using 2% of volume of the flask contained culture. After 12-24 hours theinoculum thus obtained is used to inoculate the seed fermenter. Even the flasks from the first passaging can be used for that. The final development of the culture on the shaker, i.e., for sporulation and liberation of the spores and of crystalline inclusions, takes 24-48 hours.
3.1.4.4 Cultivation in Fermentation Tanks
In the beginning of small scale processing the fermenters used are the seed fermenters of 20-40 litres capacity which contain 10-25 litres of nutrient medium. Culture from the shaker or from laboratory fermenter (1-3 litres), to the amount of 1-3% of volume of the medium, serves for inoculation.
The seed tanks can be made of glass or stainless steel; the fermentation tanks are made of stainless. An aeration ring isused to aerate the culture, together with an agitator or an air outlet under a propeller. The air volume used for aeration should correspond to between 1/2 and full volume of the cultivation medium.
The changes of pH during fermentation depend on the composition of the medium used. After sterilization of the fermentation medium the pH should be 6.8-7.2. After inoculation, with acids being formed from the saccharides, pH will drop to 5.8-6.0 (after 10-12 hours) and then will rise again to about 7.5 (25 hours) and further on to 8.0 (ca 30 hours) and, ultimately, 8.8 (50-60 hours).
Defoaming
Unless foam suppressing agents are used, the fermentation liquid will be subject to intensive foaming at the beginning of fermentation and also at the sporulation time (after about 24 hours). Silicone defoaming agents can be used to mitigate foam formation.
Growth phases
After B.t. inoculation and the lag phase there follows the exponential phase where an intensive growth and separation of the culture takes place. This phase persists up to the 16th - 18th hour. At the end of the exponential phase, spores start appearing within the cells, together with inclusions of crystalline toxin. Sporulation is complete after 20-24 hours. Subsequently, the sporangia become subject to lysis, liberating spores an crystalline inclusions of the fermentation liquid. Some 90-98 %of all spores and inclusions are liberated after 32-42 hours. Prior to stopping the fermentation, it is recommended to add another 10-12 hours in order to maximize toxin production.
3.1.4.5 Harvesting of Active Biomass
Separation and drying
The sporulated culture of B.t. consisting of spores and crystal inclusions must be separated from the fermentation media with its residues of nutrients, dissolved metabolites, enzymes and possibly exotoxins. From small volumes the B.t. can easily be separated by precipitation with acetone, using a procedure described by Dulmage et al. (1970). The biomass is centrifuged from the fermentation liquid and is suspended in 1/10 - 1/20 of volume of 4-6 % lactose. Under constant stirring, 4 - 5 parts of acetone are added and the mix is blended in dish for 30 minutes. The product is kept on hold for 10-30 minutes and is filtered by suction (using a water vacuum pump) in a Buchner filter using filtering paper. The biomass on the paper filter is triply flushed with acetone. The second and third filtrations with acetone serve to remove water from the biomass. Then the biomass is allowed to dry on the filter overnight. On the next day the dry powder is transferred into a dish and
aggregates are removed by slight wiping action. The culture grown and sporulated on solid agar medium can be processed in the same way after being transferred into acetone by a wire scraper.
From large volumes the B.t. is separated by spray drying. This drying can be preceded by thickening of the fermentation liquid with the biomass, in order to reduce volume. The solution can be thickened by centrifugation or by evaporation. In either process the temperature must not be allowed to rise above 80 ^oC. In the spray drier the liquid is sprayed in droplets onto heated walls of the drying chamber, and the dry particles are collected at the bottom. The drying time on the walls is no more than several seconds, so that no overheating occurs even with entry temperatures of 150-200^oC. The outlet temperature should be less than 80^oC.
3.1.4.6 Final Adjustment
The final product, a microbial insecticide of B.t., is of the form of wettable powder, aqueous or oil concentrate (flowable),spraying powder, or granulate. The formulation is so prepared as to afford optimum efficiency toward a specific pest on a specific host (crop).
The formulations contain inert filler for adjustment to the desired activity level. Further, they contain wetting agents and adhesives. The wettable powders contain wetting agents such ascasein, gelatine, lactose, NaCl, Triton-100, soaps, and modern detergents. Inasmuch as these substances also accelerate flushing of the preparations by rainfall or dew, adhesives must also be added such as molasses, syrups, methyl cellulose dried milk, dried blood, latexes, dextrins etc. The objective is to form a water-resistant film on the plant. In no case must these substances repel the pests as this would impair the pathogenicity of the bioinsecticide. Substances added for taste include glucose, lactose, Gustol, molasses, etc.
The emulsified preparations are either water concentrates or oil concentrates. On completion of the fermentation, the spores and crystal are thickened and stabilized by addition of various protective and conserving such as sorbitol, sodium benzoate, xylol, etc. The oil emulsions are suitable for low-volume spray apparatuses. These oil formulations make use of edible oils which are harmless when sprayed onto vegetables and fruits. Granulates represent yet another form of the B.t. formulations. Granulates are made by impregnation of organic or inorganic granules with a thick suspension of bacteria, with or without emulsifier. In water or dew the bacteria will liberate from the granules and exert a long term effect. The media for organic granules can be grains or coarse particles of maize; as mineral granules are used crushed polystyrene or polypropylene or sifted zeolites (bentonite, diatomaceous earth).
In case of field application, the granules will fall into leaf troughs and there they will serve as a permanent source of infection to caterpillars (e.g., corn borer) which tend to penetrate the stalk near the bottom of a walled-in leaf. When applied against mosquitoes, the preferred granules are those anorganic media which will stay on the surface of water fora period of time and later, at the bottom, is used for nutrition by larvae which will thus become infected. Quality inspection, in the form of an assay of biological effectiveness, e.g., against Trichoplusia caterpillars, is done prior to separation by centrifugation, at the time when the semi-product is scaled-down for standard efficiency, i.e., prior to formulating the final product.
3.2 Small-Scale Processing of Semi-Solid Fermentation
Small-Scale Processing in Plastic Fermenters
Small-scale processing of microbial pesticides based on filamentous fungi can be done in plastic fermenters with surface cultivation. The aerial spores "conidia" realized on the surface of the mycelial mat are a homogeneous population of vegetative cells.
3.2.1 Production
The fungi Metarhizium anisopliae = M.a., Beauveria bassiana =B.b. and Verticillium lecanii = V.l. can successfully be culti-vated using the surface technique on a liquid nutrient medium, in polyethylene bags additionally aerated by sterile air.
The production strain is obtained by reverse passaging via a target pest (e.g., with V.l. = Aphids, White fly; with B.b. and M.a. = larvae of beetles - Leptinotarsa decemlineata, Otiorr-hynchus sulcatus) and its cultivation is done on slantagar or on agar in Petri dish.
3.2.1.1 Laboratory Cultivation of Inocula (seed culture)
The strain being passaged is cultivated on agar media and then inoculated into a liquid nutrient medium in Erlenmeyer flasks; then it is cultivated for 3-5 days on a shaker at the temperature of 22 - 25^oC or in a laboratory fermenter (1 - 3 litres) by submerged fermentation for the same time and at the same temperature. The contents of the laboratory fermenter is transferred under sterile conditions into a larger inoculating fermenter (15 - 20 litres) where submerged fermentation takes place on another nutrient soil, for the same period of time.
The contents of these inoculation fermenters (submerged blastospores and mycelium) serve for the inoculation of small-scale fermenters of 250 - 1000 litres capacity. In these latter fermenters, prior to inoculation, the nutrient medium is sterilized at 130^oC for 30 minutes, whereupon it must be cooled down to 35^oC C over about 2 hours; only then can the inoculation take place where the nutrient media is inoculated in small-scale fermenters. The submerged cultivation proper takes place there for 3 to 4 days. The inoculated nutrient medium from the fermenters is transferred to the plastic fermenters via sterile tubing.
Fermentation in plastic fermenters takes place without aeration for the first two days and starting the third day, air is introduced by plastic piping; then the cultivation takes 14- 16 days, at temperatures of 22 - 25^oC. The plastic fermenters must be positioned absolutely horizontally, because the layer depth to which they are filled is 1 cm.
3.2.1.2 Small-Scale Processing
(a) The nutrient medium in fermenters is sterilized directly by steam at 130^oC for 30 minutes.
(b) Then the sterile nutrient medium is cooled down to 35^oC over 2 hours.
(c) Fermenter inoculation using submerged inoculum (1-3%) from seed fermenters.
(d) Submerged fermentation in the fermenters, for 3-5 days.
(e) Sterilization of the tubing whereby the inoculated medium is to be transferred from above fermenters to the plastic fermenters
(f) Pumping the inoculated nutrient medium from above fermenters into plastic fermenters.
(g) Surface air fermentation in polyethylene bags (cushion) for the first two days, without aeration. Subsequently, surface fermentation for 14-16 days at daylight.
(h) "Recovery" harvesting where a platform 3-5 meters long is tilted and the nutrient medium discharged at the other end. The plastic bag is splitted longitudinally and a wetting agent added (Tween 80), whereupon the contents is centri-fuged using a dense filter cloth. The slurry is mixed with "Siloxyde" filler/dispergator of which the individual particles, of 10 nm in size, are adsorbed on the surface of the conidia having the size of 15-25 æm.
(i) Drying either in air at 25-30^oC or in an oven where the temperature of about 35^oC is alternated with undercooling; this will condense out the atmospheric humidity thus accelerating the drying on such days when the relative atmospheric humidity is high.
(j) Grinding/milling, taking place in a meat mincer while the harvested conidia with filler still are wet; after-drying in air. This produces coarse granules dispersible in water. Fine milling of the granules to obtain wettable powder is done using a milling machine by CONDUX Co. (Universal Mühle Type 150/S-D) which prevents any heating up of the particles, incl. the conidia. The contents of declared bioactive units is adjusted before packaging the finished product.
(k) Quality inspection (i.e., check on the biological activity) is done after fermentation in the plastic fermenter, in the case of standardization before final formulation, and with the formulated product. The germination and count of the conidia are examined.
3.3 Small-Scale Processing of Microbial Insecticides
The mass production of entomopathogenic fungi is usually undertaken using primitive reactors, in which the solid media is stirred only weekly, or not at all. The media used industrially are mainly cereal grains, broken or not, supplemented with specific nutrients or inert clays, such as vermiculite, impregnated with the culture medium.
Tray reactors consist of several trays containing the media, with or without stage wise transport from one tray to another (Fig. 3-3E). Constant temperature and humidity are maintained by the addition of water or nutrient and the system can be illuminated if this is essential for sporulation. Conidia of B. bassiana, H. thompsonii are produced in such tray fermenters, the inoculum liquid coming from stirred tank reactors. This technology has been adopted in Brazil for the large scale production of M. anisopliae, where rice is fermented in autoclavable plastic bags (Margues et al. 1981).
There are two major disadvantages of the tray reactors: because of the long fermentation cycle (3-4 weeks), the risk of contamination is high; media utilization is inefficient. The homogeneous solid reactors are temperature-controlled vessels in which the medium is mixed by means of a simple rotating arm (Fig. 3-3F). The homogenization of the media is superior to that of the tray but the illumination is lower. Rotary fermenters have been used for the mass production of V. lecanii. The rotating disc fermenter (Fig. 3-3G) allows the development of a fungal biofilm on a series or partially submerged discs which rotate slowly in a trough of medium, exposing the film to the nutrient solution and air. Film thickness is self-regulating since excess growth sloughs from the carrier surface (Anderson, 1983). These fermenters would be suitable for the large scale production of sexual spores but costs would be high.
3.3.1 Processing of Microbial Insecticide on Solid Media
3.3.1.1 Introduction
The fungi Beauveria bassiana and Metarhizium anisopliae have been known for a long time as insect pathogens with rather high pathogenous effect on diverse species of different Genus of insects. Amount the few examples of practical application could be named Leptinotarsa decemlineata, Mahanarva posticata, Othiorhynchus sulcatus and a products called "Boverin" and "Metaquino".
It is possible to produce B. bassiana and M. anisopliae quite simply on solid and sterilized media containing conidia. However, this technique is hardly applicable for industrial processing of "large-scale" type. Both fungi species grow successfully on liquid media, but they produce blastospores showing shorter viability than conidia.
The aim of production is technology processing for production of a sufficient amount of conidia B. bassiana and M. anisopliae to enable application in the field by smallholders.
3.3.1.2 Preparing Seed Inoculum
M. anisopliae a B. bassiana must be obtained from Research Stations or must be isolated from the nature where this fungi caused an endemic epidemic on the pest.
Both fungi are growing on Sabouraud`s agar. In the case of self isolation from green muscardine streptomycin (500 mg/l) must be added to agar, as soon as the temperature of the sterilizer medium dropped to approx. +40 ... 50^oC. This treatment is sufficient to obtain a pure culture fully clear of any bacteria.
Seed inoculum is better prepared as a submersion culture in seed fermenter or in Erlenmeyer flasks on shaker.
3.3.1.3 Processing by Cultivation
B. bassiana is cultivated on different media: wheat bran, wheat hybrid, oat semolina.
The mass of 30g of media with 45 ml water was poured to glass bowls. The treatment was in a sterilizer for 30 minutes at 120^oC and pressure 1 mPa/cm2. The media, after cooling to approx. 35^oC, is inoculated by the spores from the agar or by blasto-spores and mycelium from a seed fermenter. The culture is stored in a thermostat at 25^oC +/- 1^oC and ca. 75 % R.H.
M. anisopliae is cultivated on rice or wheat bran: Rice should give good results and could be used in all following cultures. The mass of 300 g boiled rice (for 10 min.) is put into a bag with a synthetic sponge in its opening to enable air circulation. The bags are treated twice in a sterilizer in the interval of two days under the above mentioned conditions. The rice in bags is then inoculated by a single use syringe. The spores were taken from agar in Petri dish or from seed fermenter. To prevent tearing of a bug it is necessary to attach a piece of adhesive plastic tape at the place of injection, another piece being required to cover the hole after inoculation to prevent contamination. The bags are opened after sporulation (approx. after 15 ....20 days) and dried it at 30oC at 30 % R.H. for three days. After this treatment the cultures are stored in a refrigerator at approx. + 8^oC before being counted and used. The test of germination of conidia is possible to be done
on microscopy slides in a wet chamber. Orange juice (O.02 %) in a drop suspension in dist. water and conidia support the germination of conidia (Táborsky, unpubl. data).
3.3.1.4 Formulation of Product
(a) The "Tween 80" of 0.02 or 0.05 % concentration in dist. water is added to culture.
(b) The dist. water with Tween 80 is poured into bags and is shaked in a shaker for 30 min.
(c) The suspension is filtered using a cloth filter.
(d) The liquid containing spores is centrifuged for 15 minutes at 1500 R.P.M..
(e) Superrnatan is discarded and the sediment containing conidia is resuspended in dist. water, mixed with Siloxyl, and dried for 24 or 48 hours at 30^oC. The spores powder in 1 gram contains 109 of conidia. The so called Burker chamber is used for counting of spores.
M. anisopliae is cultivated much more easily than B. bassiana on rice broth, without serious difficulties. Contamination can be avoided in most cases due to the fast growth of these fungi. The spores production of M. anisopliae is more than twice that of B. bassiana.
The cultivation in plastic bags is very practical and easily manageable when the bags are carefully handled to avoid tearing. The bags also enable an even division of the mycelium, easily transferred from one place to another. However, the flasks cultivation brings the advantage of an absolutely aseptic work, since the inoculation is carried out directly from agar tablets into flasks. On the other hand, the use of plastic bags requires first to get a water suspension of spores and then make use of disposable syringe as described above. Yet, this technique increases risk of contamination. The mixture of raw rice and water from water supply system at the rate of 2:1 was found sufficient, after sterilizing, to provide good growth and sporulation. Further, the suspension of spores is almost completely cleared of rice remainders thus making the drying of spores easier.
The powder production of spores is successful only in the case when we get a clear suspension of spores from the rice particles. The filling by dry and inert substances as kaolin, talc, Siloxyl makes the handling with the powder easier. The storage of spores` mixture with rice is also possible.
References
ANDERSON, J.G., 1983: Immobilized cells and film reactor systems for filamentous fungi. In: The filamentous fungi Vol. 4 Fungal Technology (Ed. J.E. Smith, D.R. Berry and Kristiansen), Edward-Arnold Publ., London, pp. 145-170.
AOKI, J., 1967: Some considerations on the infection mechanisms of insect pathogenic fungi: nitrogen utilization of Beauveria bassiana, Isaria farinosa and Isaria fumosa-rosea.Proc. US-Jap. Sem. Microbial Contr. Pests, pp. 107-113.
DULMAGE, H.T., 1970: (See chapter 2. )
FARGUES, J., l981: Spécificité des Hyphomycétes entomopathogénes et réesistance interspécifique des larves d`insectes. Doct. D`Etat., Univ. Paris 6, 2 vol.
HAVKER, L.E., 1966: Environmental influences on reproduction. In: The fungi; an advanced treatise (Eds. G.C. Ainsworth and A.S. Sussman), Acaddemic. Press. New York and London., pp. 435-469.
KRISTIANSEN, B. and CHAMBERLEIN, H.E. 1983: Fermenter design. In: The filamentous fungi. Vol. 4 Fungal technology (Eds. J.E.Smith, D.R. Berry and B. Kristiansen), Edward Arnold Publ. London, pp. 1-19.
LATTEG, J.P., SOPER, R.S., MADOR, C.D. 1977, Media suitable for industrial production of Entomophthora virulenta zygospores. Bio. Bioengin.. 19: 1269-1269-1284.
LATTGE, J.P., COLE, G.E., HORISBERGER, M. and PREVOST, M.C., 1986: Ultrastructure and chemical composition of the ballistospore wall of Conidiobolus obscurus. Exp. Mycol. 10:99-113.
LATTGE, J.P., CABRERA-CABRERA, R.I. and PREVOST, M.C. 1988: Microcycle conidiation in Hirsutella thompsoni. Can.J. Microbiol
MARGUES, E.J., VILLASBOAS, A.M., and PEREIRA, C.E.F. 1981: Orientacoes tecnicas para a producao do fungo entomogeno Metarhizium anisopliae em laboratorios setoiaris. Boletim tecnico Planalsucar, Piracicaba 3:5-23.
PIRT, S.J., 1975: Principles of microbe and cell cultivation. Blackwell Sc. Publication, Oxford, 274 pp.
SAMSON, R.A., EVANS, H.C. and LATTGE, J-PAUL. 1989: Atlas of Entomopathogenic Fungi. Springer Verlag. pp. 187. Sinclair,
MAVITUNA, C.G. AND F. 1983: Mass and energy transfer. In: The filamentous fungi. Vor 4. Fungal technology (Eds. J.E. Smith, D.R. Berry and B. Kristiansen). Edward Arnold Publ. London. pp. 20-76.
<section>6</section>
CHAPTER 4.
PRODUCT HARVESTING AND FORMULATION
OF MICROBIAL INSECTICIDES
4.1 Product Harvesting
Harvesting microorganisms from submerged fermentation is often difficult due to the low concentration of the products, their thermolabile nature and in some cases their poor stability. Stabilizing adjuvants may have to be incorporated immediately post-harvest to prevent spore death and/or germination. Rapid drying or the addition of specific biocidal chemicals may be required to prevent growth of microbial contamination in the broth or centrifuge slurry (Soper and Ward, 1981).
Spore-forming Bacillus thuringiensis are usually concentrated prior to drying by centrifugation or filtration. Centrifugation using a continuous centrifuge concentrates the product from 2-3 % suspended solids to 15-20 %. Centrifugation may result in some loss of suspended solid as well as loss of dissolved materials. Such losses may not be acceptable and concentration using this technique can often be omitted. Following concentration, one of the technique mixes the crystal/spores slurry with lactose, adjuvants such as wetting agents, spreader-stickers or dispersing agents, and the whole product is spray-dried at 175^oC (Dulmage, 1981). The dry product is blended and/or mixed with additional formulation adjuvants before packaging and/or use. The lactose added may act as a cryoprotectant or it may help to prevent clumping Dulmage and Rhodes, (1971). Dulmage at al. (1970) (see chapter 2) developed an alternative drying technique for laboratory preparations where spray drying
facilities are not available; this technique of recovery of B. thuringiensis is based on the lactose-acetone processing (see 2.1.1). Many patents exist such as a foam flotation process for separating B.t. sporulation products.
Fungal blastospores obtained in submerged culture are much less stable than conidia and are consequently difficult to process after harvesting. Laboratory cultures are frequently freeze-dried with or without protectants, but even dried product may have short viability. Verticillium lecanii freeze-dried blastospores, for example, have a half-life at 5, 20 and 30^oC of 11, 4 and 2 days, respectively. Blachere et al.(1973) harvested Beauveria brongniartii by centrifugation before mixing with silica powder, osmotically active materials (such as sucrose and sodium glutamate), anti-oxidizing agents (sodium ascorbate) and a mixture of liquid paraffin-polyoxyethylene glycerin oleate. The resultant paste was then dried at 4^oC in ventilated drying closet. Blastospores dried in this fashion were viable for 8 months at 4^oC (Blachere et al., 1973).
Belova (1978) dried Beauveria bassiana product in five different ways: vacuum, freeze, spray-drying, drying by mixing with an inert filler, and in a fluidized bed with an inlet temperature of 40^oC and an outlet of 30^oC. The virulence of the fluidized bed-dried material is enhanced and the process accelerated by precipitation using a calcium carbonate, surfactant, silica gel mixture. In addition, a sulphite liquor is mixed in. Drying in a vacuum desiccator produced samples of high viability and virulence, some remaining active for 1 year at 4^oC storage. Spray-dried B. bassiana spores together with the culture media led to a complete loss of viability. However, using a 2 % molasses mixture as a protective medium permitted retention of viability and efficacy, although to a lesser extent than for the freeze-dried product.
Globa (1980) recovered Beauveria bassiana from fermenter broth by precipitation with calcium carbonate. Fargues et al. (1979) spray-dried B. brongniartii conidiospores coated with bentonite clay, yielding 50-70 % viable spores. However, blastospores were too sensitive for this technique and these were lyophilized with powdered milk and glycerin. The spray-dried conidia showed no loss of viability after 18 months storage at 5^oC: lyophilized blastospores were still viable after 8 months.
4.2 Formulation
Angus and Luthy (1971), Couch and Ignoffo (1981) mentioned that the development of microbial insecticide formulation closely paralleled that of chemical insecticides. Pesticide formulation is the process of transforming a pesticide chemical into a product which can be applied by practical methods to permit its effective, safe and economic use. Important specific differences, of course, do exist because microbial insecticides do not directly depend on the effect of a poisonous chemical but exploit the activity of living (or self-replicating) entities. An exception is the enterotoxinosis caused by Bacillus thuringiensis where a pre-formed toxic glycoprotein is essential for infection to occur.
The aim of the formulator then is to avoid practices that might inhibit or harm the pathogen and wherever possible to enhance the possibility of infection. Thus, not only must one avoid agents in any way antimicrobial but also, with B. thuringiensis, any compounds capable of denaturing the glycoprotein comprising the toxic crystal. Any attempts to utilize a particular species of micro-organism in an insecticide formulation should be based on an intimate knowledge of the host-parasite relationships. Generally, however it is the multi-plication of a microorganism in the host tissues that leads to disease and death.
4.2.1 Definitions
A microbial pesticide formulation is a physical mixture of living entities with inert ingredients which provides effective and economic control of pests.
Formulation of a pathogen product with an extensive shelf-life (>18 month) is critical to industrialization.
In commercial development of a basic formulation of an entomopathogen, technology concerns maintaining pathogen viability and virulence during the production process and developing a product form which preserves or enhances these properties. To do this, knowledge of the biology of pathogen and target insect is essential. Effect of temperature, humidity and media (inert carrier) on the entomopathogen can turn out to be the most important.
4.2.2 Additives
Spreaders
Spreaders or wetting agents are added to the water diluent to ensure "wetting" of the surface to be sprayed. Many materials have been used including dried milk, powdered casein, gelatin, saponins, soaps etc. In so far as microbial insecticides are concerned, it is essential that the compound used should encourage premature growth or germination and that it should not inhibit successful establishment of the pathogen. Some factors are likely to be rather subtle, e.g. although detergents such as sodium dodecyl sulphate do not inactive the crystal toxin of B.t, they open up the structure of the crystal and make it more sensitive to destruction by other means.
Table Additives that have been added to preparations of microbial insecticides.
Diluent (dust) pathogen Adhesives and Stickers pathogen
Talc B.t., Tung oil B.t.
Celite B.t., Molasses B.t.
Starch B.t., Powdered skin milk B.t., V
Synthetic silicates B.t., F Methocel B.t., V
Bentonite B.t., Corn syrup B.t., V
Lactose B.t., V Latex D B.t.
Microcell B.t., Casein B.t.
Attagel B.t., Neosil A B.t., F
Pyrax B.t., Folicote B.t.
Wetting agents and spreaders Emulsifiers
Alkyl fenols B.t., Tween 80 B.t., V, F
Sandovit B.t., 9 D 207 B.t., V
Novémol B.t., Pinolene 1882 B.t.
Petro AG B.t., Span 80 B.t., V
Colloidal X77 B.t., V Triton N60 B.t., F
Triton X100 V Triton GR7M B.t., F
Triton 155 B.t., Atlox 848 B.t.
Tween 20 F Atlox 849 B.t.
Tween 80 F Atlox 3404/849 F
Triton X45 V Atplus 448 F
Triton X114 B.t., Atplus 300 F, V
Liquid Vehicles Botanicals
Water Citrus pulp
Preformed oil in water emulsion Corn cob
Preformed water in oil emulsion Corn meal
Edible oil, Wheat bran
Corn oil, Grape pomace
Crude sorbitol Apple pomace
Aromatic spray oils, Rice hulls
Emulsified cottonseed oil, Cracked corn
Suspending agents for B.t.
Bentone 38
CAB-O-SIL
SOLOID
4.3 Oil Suspension Formulation
Uniform suspension is prepared by preliminary wetting of the dry microbial insecticide with an emulsifer water mixture before final dispersion in oil carrier. Edible oil is suitable for microbial pesticide formulation. The storage of fungal spores under edible oil preserve its viability for sufficient time. Advantage of edible oil is its nonphytotoxicity and its residua might be acceptable.
4.4 Dusts or Wettable Powder
In the case of one B.t., Formulation, the pathogen is cultured on a semi-solid medium so that it is preferable to process it as a dust or wettable powder rather than attempt to separate the spores and crystals from the medium solids. When grinding and mixing material containing the pathogens to obtain a sufficiently fine powder, care should be taken to avoid increase in temperature or physical damage that would harm the pathogen.
The choice of the filler for use in a dust formulation is subject to the general provision that it is nontoxic to the pathogen being used.
The decision as to the most desirable form (spray or dust) varies with the crop being protected, the target insect, climatic conditions and, of course, the particular pathogen being used.
4.5 Suspension Concentrates (sc)
Are also known as flowable emulsions, colloidal suspensions or dispersions. Biological agents are not soluble and dispersing medium is edible oil, which is not aggressive to biological agents.
A flowable must have a satisfactory viscosity for handling purposes; it should disperse spontaneously or with slight stirring when poured into water before application.
4.5.1 Processing
Simplest method to produce flowables is by adding thickeners and thixotropic agents to biological agent in powder form. The use of thixotropic agents enables the production of flowables which at the application point do not exceed 2,000 MPa`s. Commercially available flowables have viscosities ranging from 200 to 2,000 MPa`s. This results then in an excellent self dispersibility. Flowables should disperse spontaneously when poured into water, but roping my be tolerated if the flowable disperses rapidly upon agitation.
The coarse and wide range of particle sizes produced by this technique may cause sedimentation and ultimately claying or cauling, due to the absence of interfacial forces preventing close packing.
In commercial flowable production, "wet milling" techniques are preferred as they provide the most economical and direct means of producing the desired average particle size of 1-5 microns in diameter. Possible mills include attritors, sand mills, and ball (roller) mills for batch or continuous process. The use of an attritor or sand-mill requires the preparation of a premixture, which usually consists of all the ingredients (such as siloxyl) at their required concentrations.
4.5.2 Function of the Surfactants
Surfactants play an important role as basic component in flowable formulations. They are responsible for wetting of the pesticide particles before and during the milling process. They help to liquefy the unmilled premixture in the milling chamber. They help to stabilize the micronised particles in the dispersing medium. The role of the surfactant in every step of the production process can be described as follows:
4.5.3 Wetting
When a dry pesticide is mixed with water during flowable production process, the surfaces of individual particles must be wet and the air between the particles must be displaced to make efficient wet milling possible. As little air entrainment as possible is desired by the formulator, because the air remaining on the surfaces after milling, causes flocculating when bubbles of the neighbouring particles coalesce. This coalescence reduces the dispersion stability.
The most widely used wetting agents are ethoxylated alcohols and ethoxylated nonylphenols, which should have very low foaming properties. Foam formulation should always be avoided during the production process and also during spraying on the field. Foaming can reduce the uniformity and the effectiveness of the pesticide in the field.
The concentration on wetting agent varies usually from 0.5 % to 3 % depending on the concentration, the morphology and the surface properties of the active ingredient.
4.5.4 Milling Aid
During the milling process, surfactants help to rewet and disperse the newly formed particles. Bad rewetting will result in paste formulation and the whole milling chamber will be blocked. During the milling process, the temperature can easily rise up to 60^oC. As known, desorption of the surfactant from the particles take place at the cloud point. Therefore it is necessary to use wetting and dispersing agents with a sufficiently high cloud point. Usually, nonionic surfactants are selected with a cloud point at least 10^oC above the milling temperature and the maximum required storage temperature.
4.5.4.1 Stabilization
Because of the high loading and the small particle size of the active ingredient, the dispersed particles have an inherent tendency to irreversibility flocculate due to the London-Van der Waals forces of attraction. Adsorption of a dispersing agent on the particles will generate repulsive forces between the particles or eliminate the attractive forces between the particles.
Electrostatic repulsion occurs when ionic surfactants are adsorbed onto particles. The charge imparted by the surfactant causes particles to repel each other. Electrostatic repulsion is most important in aqueous flowables.
Steric hindrance results from the adsorption on nonionic surfuctants having long chains which are soluble in the dispersing medium. When two particles approach, the solvated chains interact to prevent irreversible agglomeration. This type of repulsion is important in both aqueous and oil-based flowables.
4.5.4.2 Milling Conditions
PREMIXTURE (wet grinding mills) Ideally, the premixture should consist of all the ingredients at the required concentration and yet be pumpable. The ingredients are:
1) dispersing medium (water, edible oil)
2) active biological agent (conidia, blastospores, spores and crystals)
3) wetting agent (Atlox 4862)
4) thickening or viscosity modifying agents (Atlox 1086 or Bentone 38 [0.1-1.0 % w/v] or Rhodopol 23 [0.05-0.3 w/v] or other type of Atlox (1096, 4868 B)
5) stabilizer (if necessary)
The active biological agents
B.t. - spores and crystals
Fungi - Metarhizium anisopliae, conidia strong hydrophobic
- Beauveria bassiana, conidia medium hydrophobic
- Verticillium lecanii, conidia or blastospores hydrofility
These particles are under 20 microns but all of them aggregate and must be milled. Polyethylene glycol preserves aggregation and can be used during wet milling.
For oil based flowables can used:
Renex 702 / Atlox 1045 A Atlox 4884 / Atlox 1045 A
Atlox 4856 B / Atlox 4885 Atlox 4856 B / Atlox 3386 B
Atplus 300 F
These pairs provide:
The good emulsification of the oil when added to the water.
The required stability of the emulsion in the spray tank.
Furthermore the combination ATPLUS 300F/oil improves the efficiency and the selectivity of the applied pesticide. As a thickener "BENTONE 38" (NL Industries USA) can be used. This thickener is activated by a polar solvent to ensure a good thickening effect. The polar solvent is generally added whilst preparing the master solution.
Example of formulation of microbial insecticide:
250 - 100 g powder mix of spores and crystal B.t. (or conidia)
30 g Atplus 300F
68 g Bentone 38
to 1 litre of water or oil
4.6 Suggested Evaluation Techique of Flowables
Test of mechanical stability
The mechanical stability is tested by shaking the flowable on shaker for half an hour. A good flowable will not thicken or gel under the influence of shaking.
4.6.1 Suspensibility
Suspensibility, or dilution stability is the degree to which a flowable stays suspended when diluted in water. It is expressed as the volume percent of setting in a dilution mixture at various time intervals. The degree of flocculating is noted by the number of inversions of the test cylinder required to redisperse the sediment.
4.6.2 Storage Stability
Samples are stored in sealed bottles at -10^oC, room temperature, 40^oC for several months. Afterwards, they are periodically inspected for:
a) bleeding; the amount of liquid separation on top of the flowable is expressed as a percent of the total sample depth. The bleeding should be minimal.
b) thickening; the absence of thickening is checked by probing with a glass rod or by measuring the viscosity
c) sedimentation; the absence of packing is checked by inserting into the flowable a glass rod to check the bottom of the container for any sedimentation. Packing should be absent and any non-uniformity of the suspension should be easily correctable with mild agitation.
4.6.3 Viscosity
The viscosity is measured at one day, one week and one month intervals. A minimum variation in viscosity is tolerated. The main criterion is to maintain pourability.
4.6.4 Bloom
While conducting the suspensibility test, the bloom is observed and rated qualitatively on a three point scale: good, fair and poor I.O.U.. The scale is ranging from total spontaneity to no spontaneous dispersion.
4.6.5 Biological Activity
The biological activity is measured at one day, one week and every month intervals during storage under evaluated temperature to way: Test of germination of spores, LD50 on target pest in lab.
4.7 Evaluation of Separation Process "Recovery"
Each process for the isolation and purification of bioproduct from microorganisms consists of a sequence of individual process steps. The choice of the individual process steps is governed by the properties of the by-product to be isolated.
The yield of the step: The yield of the step, given in amounts (e.g., g or kg), or in units (or mega units = millions of units, documents the scale of the process step and the batch size and permits conclusions concerning the equipment used.
The percentage yield of a step:
units (or amount) after purification
100 . --------------------------------------------- =% of efficiency
units (or amount) before purification
The common evaluation of enrichment factor and percentage yield of the step permits a statement concerning the efficiency of the technology used in the process step. The product of purification factor times percentage yield of the step is termed the efficiency.
Economic aspects must also be included, especially the manufacturing costs of the bioproduct. For calculating these, all types of costs, such as:
- material costs - costs for waste treatment,
- personnel costs - overheads
- energy costs - costs of repair
- depreciations must be added and the result divided by the yield of the step.
The manufacturing costs are given in
total costs total costs
.------------------ or -------------------------------
kg of product mega units of bioproduct
and they integrate the economic and technical parameters of the process step.
The evaluation of the total process results from the evaluation of the individual process steps. Thus, the percentage total yield may be obtained by multiplying all the percentage step yield, and the manufacturing costs of the end product by adding all the types of costs of all process steps and dividing by the overall yield.
The technical and economic classification of a process into process steps does not only permit an optimization of the process but also an immediate adaptation to necessary changes in the process even when they are independent of the process itself.
References:
ANGUS, T.A., and LUTHY, P. 1973: Formulation of microbial insecticides. In: Burges H.D. and N.W. Hussey: Microbial control of insects and mites. Acad. Press, London and New York., pp.623-636.
BELOVA, R.N., 1978: Proc. 1st Joint US/USSR Conf. Prod. Selec Stand. Entomopath. Fungi, Jurmula (Riga) Latvia SSR, 20-21 May, pp. 102-119.
BLACHERE, H., CLAVEZ, J., FERRON, P., CORRIE, G. and PERINGER, P. 1973: Ann. Zool. Ecol. Anim. 5, 69-79.
DULMAGE, H.T. and Cooperators, 1981: In: Microbial control of pests and plant diseases. Ed. H.D. Burges,pp. 191-220. Acad. Press, London and New York.
DULMAGE, H.T. and RHODES, R.A. 1971: In:Microbial control of insects and mites. Ed. H.D. Burges and N.W. Hussey, pp. 507-540. Acad. Press, London and New York.
FARQUES J., ROBERT, P.H., and REISINGER, O. 1979: Ann. Zool.
Ecol. Anim. 11 (2) 247-257.Ferron P.,1978: Annu. Rev. Entomol. 23: 409-442.
GLOBA, L., 1980: U.S.S.R. Patent SU 73 85 71.
SOPER, R.S. and WARD, M.G. 1981: Beltsville Symposia in Agricultural Research. Vol.5: Biological Control in Crop Production, pp. 161-180.
<section>7</section>
CHAPTER 5.
LABELLING AND PACKAGING
Effective labelling and good design of microbial pesticide containers are two major factors in ensuring the viability of spores/conidia from the time of use and minimizing the loss of biological activity. The easiest way to do this is to read the label.
The label as a means of information and instruction. The label has two main functions: to describe where, when and how to use the product; and to convey warnings and instructions on action which may arise from such warnings. The label therefore needs to be designed to be able to convey such information and permanently to remain, for example by lithographic means, an integral part of pesticide container. Moreover, it must be in the local language of use.
Content of label
Name of product
The label will usually show the approved name of the product and the brand name chosen to identify it in the market-place and to provide a symbol of quality consistency.
Description of the formulation
The percentage of active and inert ingredients in the formulation must be indicated.
Purpose of the product
The label should state the purpose of the product, for example, "microbial insecticide to combat caterpillars of beet armyworm".
Directions for use
Crop information, method of application, dosage rates etc. must be included.
Storage and disposal
Each microbial insecticide label gives proper procedures for storage and disposal of the product and empty containers.
Packaging of microbial insecticide
Of special importance to the successful local packaging of formulated products is supply of locally available and good-quality packaging materials.
Package size
Package size is dependent on the market-place. However, in many developing countries, package of smaller size, in range 250 g to 0.5 kg are preferable.
Package standards
Some general packaging requirements are outlined below:
(a) The shelf life for a product should be established as two years general. If shorter than that, expired date should be shown clearly on the package;
(b) The microbial pesticide should be stored at a temperature and relative humidity optimum for its viability during storage time.
References:
UNIDO, 1983: Formulation of Pesticides in Developing Countries, UNIDO-Vienna, pp.217.
WILKINS, M.R., 1990: Controlled Delivery of Crop-Protection AgentsPubl. Taylor and Francis, London, 322 pp.
<section>8</section>
CHAPTER 6.
TYPE OF EQUIPMENT IN THE LABORATORY
6.1 Introduction
When considering the setting up of a laboratory for fermentation, a number of points should be kept in mind.
Scale of operation. Clearly, at the bench-top scale (up to 3 litres volume), little additional adaptation would be required in a standard microbiology laboratory. Larger-volume fermenters (usually mounted on skids, trolleys, or frames) require more extensive preplanning of the operational area. Such fermenters, room 5-50 litres working volume, might well be termed research scale; anything larger would come into category of a small pilot plant. Small scale processing is from 50 to several hundred litres working volume.
Type of fermenters. Type of reactor, used at every operational scale, has a much higher degree of operational flexibility then most other fermenters.
Number of fermenters. The use of one or two bench fermenters will require only a source of electric power, water, and access to a small autoclave. Operation of a number of large vessels will have considerable impact on lab design; for example, it becomes worthwhile arranging steam line to each fermenter point to allow for in situ sterilization.
Nature of fermentation process. This really relates to the type of organism to be used; the use of fungi will require equipment quite different in some respects from that employed for "traditional" microbial fermentation such as Bacillus thuringiensis.
In the description of a fermentation laboratory which follows, it should be remembered that this describes the "ideal", a lab constructed ab finite for the purposes of microbial fermentation. Such an "ideal" is rarely achieved, but is always a useful target.
6.2 Pilot Plant
6.2.1 General Description
A fermentation laboratory is primarily a microbiology laboratory incorporating advanced technology equipment, and as such should be designed to maximize efficiency while maintaining a high safety standard. The general layout of the laboratory will depend on the shape and size of the room allocated, and it is advisable for laboratory personnel and scale production.
The laboratory is divided into two or three distinct areas:
(i) Wet floor area. This houses all fermenters, stills, autoclaves, centrifuge.
(ii) General laboratory area. Used for medium preparation and basic "wet" processes, i.e. dry weights, viscosity, pH, and measurements
(iii) Formulation area.
6.2.2 Floor Areas
A fermentation laboratory has two distinct areas, the wet floor and the dry floor.
6.2.2.1 Wet Floor
All fermenters, including bench top varieties, should be situated on the wet floor area so that spillages, intentional or not, can do no damage either in the laboratory or to people and equipment situated on the floor below. Wet floor should be constructed to meet two main criteria. it should be non-slip, whether wet or dry, and should be easily cleaned. These factors are often not compatible, i.e. the rough surface required to make the floor non-slip is often ideal for harbouring dirt. The wet floor should be constructed so that it slants towards a central drainage channel (fermenters should be levelled using adjustable feet or blocks); the channel itself should slant towards the drainage output of the laboratory, and must be covered by a stainless steel or heavy-duty plastic grid to prevent accidents.
6.2.2.2 Dry Floor
The dry floor area of the laboratory should be covered with seamless sheet vinyl which has a smooth surface and does not catch dirt.
The junction between the wet and dry floor areas of the laboratory is an area of potential danger, as sheet vinyl is slippy when wet. It is advisable to introduce an area where shoes can be dried between the two floor types.
Routine cleaning of both floor areas is essential. A wide range of detergents/disinfectant is available, and the product chosen will depend on the biocidal effectiveness required. Because of the nature of equipment and fermenter contents, trained personnel only should clean the wet floor.
6.3 Laboratory Equipment
6.3.1 Shake Flasks and Bottles
Fig. 6.1. A - Standard shake flask or the Erlenmeyer flask B - "Flying saucer" shake flask C - Shake flask with baffles D - Flat bed "Thompson" or "Roux" bottle.
Fig. 6.1. A - Standard shake flask or the Erlenmeyer flask
B - "Flying saucer" shake flask
C - Shake flask with baffles
D - Flat bed "Thompson" or "Roux" bottle.
These pieces of glassware can vary in size and form and in some instances have been designed and developed for specialist application.
6.3.2 Shaker Tables
Shaker tables were designed to assist with oxygen transfer. These tables are designed to run for long periods of time and be free from vibration. The tables are driven by a motor, and normally a rotary shaking action or reciprocating shaking action is produced.
These shakers have to be robust and reliable with no vibration and silent running conditions. One can have a more sophisticated shaker by having an incubator shaking cabinet for shake-flask fermentation in a precisely defined environment. These cabinets can control the temperature, illumination, gaseous levels, and humidity.
Increasing the speed of a shaker can increase the oxygen transfer rate of a particular flask, therefore the optimum speed for that flask and culture has to be found by trial and error.
6.3.3 Shake Flask Volume
The lower the volume of medium in a shake flask, the better will be the OTR (Oxygen Transport Rate). The minimum volume that can be practically obtained (e.g. 50 ml in a 250 ml shake flask) should give the best OTR and hence the best results. This will also be dependent on sample volume. Very low volumes can only be used for short-term fermentations, otherwise the medium will evaporate and the nutrients would become too concentrated for the culture to perform satisfactorily.
6.3.4 Fermentation Glassware
The standard 250 ml Erlenmeyer flask is cheap and simple; most of the shaker tables designed to use these flasks although there are tables which can be adapted to allow other shapes or bigger flasks.
Baffles have been used in shake flasks to assist in the OTR, as well as preventing vortex formation, but there are only really suitable for low-volume short-term fermentations because of splashing which leads to the cotton-wool plug becoming damp preventing free flow oxygen.
Different plugs can be made of cotton-wool, glass wool, polyurethane foam, gauze or synthetic fibrous material. (An aluminium foil cup can sometimes be used in conjunction with these plugs). The plug has to be prevent airborne microorganisms from getting into the medium while at the same time allowing free flow of air into the flask, and for this reason it must not be allowed to become wet.
6.3.5 Stirred Fermenter
Basically, the stirred fermenter consists of a cylindrical tube a top-driven or bottom-driven agitator. The stirred fermenter with a top-drive assembly is the most commonly used fermenter because of its ease of operation, neat design, reliability, and robustness.
For smaller laboratory fermenters (bench-top), borosilicate glass is used as the cylindrical tank and a top plate of stainless steel clamped on. A motor is fixed above the top plate and is attached to the shaft. The motor can be uncoupled. The vessel, medium and probes are usually sterilized together in an autoclave, and minimizing the number of aseptic operations required (Fig. 6-2).
These glass vessels can vary in size from one liter to 20 liter capacity. The vessel itself will have a specific impeller design, baffles, an air sparger, and sample port.
The special "Rolls Royce" laboratory fermenter is constructed like hollow steel cylinder with either top or bottom drive and can be cleaned and sterilized in situ. These stirred fermenters can vary in volume from one liter to 100 litres capacity. Obviously they are more expensive than the glass vessels but they are more robust, reliable, and designed to a lifetime.
Often large samples or regular samples have to be taken for analysis during the fermentation. These volumes must be take into consideration when choosing a fermenter.
6.3.5.1 Automation and Performance
Bench-top fermenters are usually cheaper to purchase than the trolley- mounted or skid mounted fermenters. This is partly due to the fact that their instrumentation is often not as sophisticated as a laboratory or research fermenters. This latter have a sophisticated instrument control package for pH, temperature, and agitation, and this obviously costs more.
6.3.5.2 Agitation and Aeration
Most stainless steel fermenters are designed with bottom drive unit which is belt driven. This has several advantages:
It allows easy access to the top of the vessel and all the moving parts can be isolated and encased underneath the vessel, thus making it a safer piece of apparatus;
With the motor belt driving the agitator any spillage which occur will not fall onto the motor because it is not sited directly below the agitator shaft.
The agitation shaft should have a double mechanical seal which ensures that the medium does not leak out at the shaft housing. The agitation shaft will normally have two or thee impellers, each with four or six blades depending upon mixing requirements.
The air supply is filtered by one of these filter types:
Membrane type filters, containing a cellulose acetate, or nitrate membrane of known and consistent pore size, which therefore retains all particles larger than that pore size 0.2 mm or 0.45 æm pore size filters are suitable for most applications. These filters are relatively cheap, disposable, and usually readily inspected for blocking or fouling. They should be discarded after a fixed number of autoclave cycles. The manufacturer will normally indicate the number of cycles which can be withstood.
Packed-bed type filters, these filter have no uniform pore size and the mechanism of particle removal tends to be rather more complex. Typically, a filter housing is packed with glass wool or non-absorbent cotton wool. Such filters are vulnerable to compaction and to wetting which may allow channelling to occur. Sudden fluctuations in the pressure drop across the filter can cause release of particles or packing material under some circumstances. Such filters are readily constructed in-house, but their sole advantage is cheapness.
Cartridge filters are composed of a stainless steel or polycarbonate filter housing containing a removable filter element. The filter element is often composed of a hydrophobic material (e.g. PTFE) bonded in polypropylene. These filters can be steam sterilized in situ or autoclaved. They are initially more expensive than other types, but their reliability and durability make up for this.
The sterile air is than fed into the bottom of the fermenter dispersed by a sparger and thoroughly mixed into the medium by the agitation system.
Vent gases can be filtered by the same means, but one has to be aware of the risks of blockage due to carry-over of medium or foam-out. Such risks can be minimized by the use of a foam control system; either a mechanical system (offered as an option by some fermenter manufactures) or, more routinely, a system involving addition of some foam-suppressing chemicals (e.g. a silicone-based compound or polypropylene glycol). An efficient condenser fitted to the gas outlet will also reduce the likelihood of exit filter blockage.
Services
A number of essential services are required to run an efficient fermentation laboratory, namely air, steam, water, electricity, and if it is possible the gas. The level of each service required depends on the size of laboratory and the demands on that service. All services should be available 24 hours a day, seven days a week, for a dedicated fermentation laboratory; smaller laboratories housing only a small number of simple fermenters such as polyethylene cushions fermenter do not require this level of service.
6.3.6 Air
Air is required for many purposes in a fermentation laboratory, e.g. aeration of fermenters, operation of hydraulic autoclave doors, and calibration of gas analysis equipment.
Laboratory fermenters are often supplied with integral air pumps. Individual air pumps can be purchased to supply air vessels which do not have an integral air supply and which are situated in laboratories without service air. The ideal pump is the diaphragm pump. These pumps vary greatly in their capacity and should be purchased according to the demand of the vessel. It is essential that the pumps be oil free and be suitable for prolonged continuous usage. Diaphragm pumps are relatively cheap and are useful if only one or two vessels require an air supply.
For larger laboratories, a more sophisticated air supply is required and a compressor should be purchased. The type and size of compressor selected depends on the function it is to have in laboratory. The compressor should be able to meet the current demands of the laboratory with additional capacity to allow subsequent growth.
Fermentation processes require particle-free clean air that meets food grade standards, so the compressors utilized must be oil-free units. Beware of compressors which are claimed to produce oil-free air; these are not oil-free compressors and should be avoided since even when functioning well they can allow oil to escape into the system, leading to fouling of lines and contamination of the fermentation. If such a system is already installed, the air lines must have reelable protective filters downstream of the compressor which are regularly cleaned and serviced.
To ensure a constant supply of air at all times it is advisable to operate two compressors so that if one fails for any reason, the other unit will cut in and maintain the supply going. It is necessary to ensure that each compressor is used on alternate days so that the demand on each machine is equal. Incorporating an air receiver in the supply line decreases the demand on the compressor and also allows condensate to be removed from the supply.
If the compressor is to be situated in the laboratory, acoustic hoods should be fitted to reduce the noise level. Ideally the compressor(s) will be housed in a room situated adjacent to the fermentation laboratory.
The air supply is normally taken from the compressor to the fermenter via network of pipes. The pipework should be made of a non-corrosive material with a smooth interior to prevent build-up of dirt. Half-inch steel piping is excellent for this purpose and is also relative cheap. Pressure-reducing valves must, therefore, be installed downstream of the compressor along with oil and water traps (as compressed air expands in the lines a small amount of water is formed 0.025 g H[2]O per liter air at 25^oC). All reducers and traps should be regularly cleaned and serviced. All connections made in the lines must be able to withstand to pressure at which the air is to be delivered (frequently 1-2 bar g. but this depends on the fermenter(s) used). It is, therefore, necessary to have the systems of pipework installed by qualified plumber.
6.3.7 Steam
Steam is required in a fermentation laboratory for sterilizing fermenters, controlling temperature in large vessels, autoclaving, and supplying steamers. Each fermenter be should have its own steam supply which can be isolated from the vessel by means of a gate valve. The steam supply should be as dry as possible, and all lines in the laboratory should be well lagged to help prevent the formation of condensate. Lagging is also important for the protection of laboratory personnel. The lagging should be covered with an aluminium casing to give a finish that looks more presentable, is easily cleaned and prevents the lagging material getting damp.
As with the air supply it may be necessary to incorporate pressure reducers in the lines. These should be carried out by qualified personnel.
6.3.8 Water
A fermentation laboratory requires a constant supply of water to service fermenters, downstream processing equipment, and autoclaves, as well as for analytical purposes.
Mains water is normally connected to the service inlet on the fermenter chassis. Manufacturers will indicate the maximum inlet pressure a particular model of fermenter can cope with. This is often very different for different vessels, e.g. a small lab fermenter is generally serviced by water supplied at 1 bar g whereas a small-scale vessel may required up to 3 bar g. The mains water inlet pressure must be sufficient to meet the demands of the laboratory; if necessary, pressure reduction valves can be fitted on line to each vessel to allow a range of a different demands to be serviced.
The laboratory must also be supplied with good-quality water, for medium preparation and in areas where the local supply water is hard it may be necessary to install a deionizing system.
Water is also required for the basic laboratory chores of washing glassware, etc., and hand washing.
6.3.9 Electricity
Electricity is required for lighting and for supplying power to complex array of machinery and instrumentation found in a laboratory.
Many items of equipment in a fermentation laboratory draw amounts of power, e.g. small scale vessels, autoclaves, and downstream processing equipment. It is, therefore, necessary in dedicated fermentation laboratories to have a supply of three phase electricity. Installation of three phase supplies can be expensive; it is advisable, therefore, to have a supply in the laboratory and to take off lines as and when required.
Every fermenter in the laboratory will require a number of electrical sockets supplying power to fermenter, pump and additional equipment, such as portable pH and O[2] meters. A bank of six sockets per fermenter is ideal for this purpose. For larger fermenters requiring a three-phase supply it is still very useful to have a bank of single phase sockets which should be installed alongside the three-phase supply.
6.3.10 Gas
Natural gas should be supplied to the general laboratory area usage. Speciality gases, e.g. carbon dioxide, oxygen, and calibration gases, are usually provided in the form of compressed gas cylinders which should be secured with safety straps.
6.4 Fermenters
A well-equipped fermentation laboratory requires substantial capital investment for the purchase of fermenters and a wide range of ancillary equipment (see ANNEX 2.).
6.5 Ancillary Equipment
6.5.1 Autoclaves
The size and type of autoclave purchased will depend on the number of fermenters being serviced. A standard size autoclave, e.g. 450 x 800 x 1200 mm chamber dimension, will be sufficient to deal with ancillary purposes, e.g. sterilizing glassware, or preparation of small quantities of media.
6.5.1.1 Bench-top or portable autoclaves
Bench-top or portable autoclaves are useful for sterilizing small items, e.g. bottles, a small number of 500 ml conical flasks. Pressure cookers can be used for this purpose. but the life span of the portable autoclave is general longer, because it is more robust in construction.
6.5.1.2 Standard Autoclaves
Standard Autoclaves small volumes from 1 to 10 litres
6.5.2 Incubators, Shakers
Incubators are required for the cultivation of stock cultures and production of inocula.
6.5.3 Ovens
Two types of oven are useful in fermentation
(i) Hot air ovens can be used for drying glassware or dry weights and sterilizing Ovens.
(ii) Microwave Ovens are used for dry weights, drying glassware, melting agar etc.
6.5.4 Pumps
At laboratory scale, liquid pump is achieved almost exclusively by means of peristaltic pumps. The choice of pumps will depend on the application.
6.5.4.1 Minipumps
These fixed-speed pumps are normally used for addition of acid/alkali, antifoam linked to a pH/antifoam controller.
6.5.4.2 Larger Pumps
Lager pumps, used for example for nutrient addition in continuous or fed-batch culture, generally have clamps to hold tubing on the pump heads. Such pumps, which take tubing of up to 8 mm bore, can be either fixed speed or variable speed, manual or auto control.
If is often necessary to sterilize larger volumes of medium separately from the fermentation vessel, then pump the sterile medium into the pre-sterilized vessel. For such purposes, a high-speed pump, capable of delivering at least 3-5 liter min-1 using standard 5-6 mm bore tubing, is very useful.
When buying a pump, it is important to think carefully about the intended flow rate range. Due to nature of electric motors, pumps are most accurate at high speeds and least accurate at very low settings. On the other hand, tube life is much reduced at high speeds.
6.6 Medium Reservoirs
Particularly in fed-batch and continuous culture it is essential to have a number of medium supply vessels. Such vessels must be able to withstand repeated autoclaving. The volume of vessels required (and the number) will depend on the experimental programme, e.g. a 10 litre fermenter operated at a dilution rate of 0,1 h^-1 will use 24 litres per day, so 5 litre reservoirs would be inappropriate. In practice, glass (heat resistant) and polycarbonate vessels are superior to glass because they are lighter, not so dangerous if dropped, and to show distinct signs of wear before they fall, whereas an undetected fault in a glass vessels can cause a sudden failure. After autoclaving, allow vessel and contents to cool before removing them. Medium components likely to be affected by heat should be filter sterilized and added aseptically later.
6.7 Cooling System
The medium after sterilization in the pilot plant fermenters must be cooling before inoculation during two or four hours.
6.8 "O" - Rings
O-rings are in constant use in a fermentation laboratory. They are used as the compressible material when a seal is made between glass and metal or between metal and metal. O-Rings are usually composed of nitrile or butyl rubber, sometimes of silicone. Remember that items such O-rings have a finite life span dependent upon how often they are autoclaved, and whether or not they are deformed by over-compression; they will thus have to be carried out as part of the regular maintenance programme.
<section>9</section>
ANNEX 1
PROCESSING DEPARTEMENTS
Fig. A.I.1.Pilot-plant fermenter department
Fig. A.I.1.Pilot-plant fermenter department
1-laboratory fermenter 2-pilot-plant fermenters, 3-panel, 4-storage vessels, 5-continuous medium sterilizer, 6-centrifuges, 7-filter, 8-cooling chamber, 9-inoculation box, 10-constant temperature room with shakers, 11-storeroom, 12-staffroom
Fig. A.I.2. Pilot-plant harvesting and formulation department
Fig. A.I.2. Pilot-plant harvesting and formulation department
1-storage vessels,2-disintegrators,3-filter,4-extractor, 5-evaporator ,6-ion exchange unit, 7-driers, 8-lyophilis-ation, 9-laboratory, 10-staffroom, 11-milling chamber.
Other accessories:
1 - storage of raw materials, 2 - switchroom and compressor, 3 - storage of empty packs, 4 - filling area (room), 5 - storage of finished products, 6 - laboratory, 7 - bulk storage, tanks and or vessels, 8 -Changing room (with lockers, showers and toilets), first-aid and laundry, 9 - Gate house, office.
<title>Small-scale processing of microbial pesticides</title>
ANNEX 2
CHARACTERISTIC OF FERMENTERS
Major manufacturers of laboratory fermenters
Czechoslovakia Developmental Workshops, LF 2
Czech. Acad. Science
AK Slu1ovice Fermenter LF20
Laboratory fermenter LF-2 is composed of two parts, fermenter and regulation system. Volume varied from 1000 to 3000 ml.
France Biolafitte I.F. 7L5, S20L
German Federal Republic B. Braun AG
Biostat S, V Culture vessels are available with approximately 2, 6 and 12 litre total volume.
Great Britain Galenkamp CECA
L.H. Engineering Co., 500 Series II
Ltd. 2000
Uniprobe Instruments Unilink Fermenter. The six culture vessels available have volumes from 3 to 20 litre. All vessels are suitable for autoclave sterilisation, but in situ sterilisable vessels are also available.
The Netherlands Contact-Roestvrijstaal Bilthoven-unit
B.V. system NW 80, 200, 300
The firm manufactures three NW-series of laboratory fermenters (NW-80, 0.5-2 litre; NW-200, 3-40 litre; NW-300, 30-70 l).
Japan Marubishi Laboratory MSJ, MB
Equipment Co., Ltd.
Sweden Electrolux 20L
LKB-Produkter AB Ultroferm
The two culture vessels available have working volumes of 2-4 and 8-12 litre.
Switzerland Bioengineering AG 2-50L
Biologische Verfahrens- Type b 10 technik, AG
Chemap AG 7, 14, 20 l
Giovanola Freres, SA b 10, b 20, b50
USA New Brunswick Scientific F-1000, F-2000
Bench-Top, BioFlo
MicroFerm, Magna-
Ferm, Model 19
LabroFerm
Stainless Steel Products Acces-A-Bilt Co., Inc.
Virtis Co. 40,100, 40-300
NBS manufactures laboratory fermenters in a range from 350 ml to 40 litre.
Pilot-plant fermenters
BioTec AB (Sweden)
The unit FA 300 comprises two vessels, a 50 litre vessel for inoculum preparation and a 300 litre fermenter. The latter is equipped with bottom-drive agitation and a 300 litre fermenter.
Marubishi Laboratory Equipment Co., Ltd. (Japan)
The manufacturer offers a wide range of pilot-plant fermenters of different sizes - 100, 150, 200, 250, 300, 400, 500, 1000, 1500, and 2000 litre.
Chemap AG (Switzerland)
The Chemap pilot-plant fermenters are available in the following size: 150, 300, 450, 750, 1000, 1500, 3000, 4500 and 7500 litre.
<title>Small-scale processing of microbial pesticides</title>
<section>1</section>
ANNEX 3
MAMPOWER
Staff of the unit:
Total number of personnel: 7 (minimum)
University graduates: 1
Trained manpower: 2
In-house trained: 4
<section>2</section>
ANNEX 4
REARING OF HELIOTHIS ZEA / HELIOTHIS VIRESCENS
According to RAYMOND PATANA
USDA-ARS, Biological Control of Insects Laboratory, 200 East Allen Road, Tucson, AZ 85719 USA
Scientific Name: Heliothis zea (Boddie)
Common Name: Bollworm (corn earthworm) tomato fruitworm
Scientific Name: Heliothis virescens (Fabricius)
Common Name: Tobacco budworm
Order: Lepidoptera
Family: Noctuidae
<section>3</section>
ANNEX 5
REARING OF TRICHOPLUSIA NI
According to RICHARD H. GUY, N. C. LEPPLA, and J. R. RYE
Insect Attractants, Behaviour, and Basic Biology Research Laboratory, ARS-USDA, Gainesville, Florida 32604 USA.
W. GREEN, S. L. BARRETTE, AND K. A. HOLLIEN
Insect Attractants, Behaviour, and Basic Biology Research Laboratory, and Department of Entomology & Nematology,University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32611 USA
THE INSECT
Scientific Name: Trichoplusia ni (Hübner)
Common Name: Cabbage looper
Order: Lepidoptera
Family: Noctuidae
<section>4</section>
ANNEX 6
REARING OF SPODOPTERA EXIGUA
According to RAYMOND PATANA
USDA-ARS, Biological Control of Insects Laboratory, 2000 East Allen Road, Tucson, AZ 85719, USA.
THE INSECT
Scientific Name: Spodoptera exigua (Hübner)
Common Name: Beet armyworm
Order: Lepidoptera
Family: Noctuidae
