<title>Technology of production of edible flours and protein products from soybeans</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWARD
Soybean is truly a wonder plant. It provides us with cooking oil and valuable protein. It grows in temperate as well as in tropical and usb-tropical locations. Because it is a legume, it requires much less fertilizaer than other crops.
This book describes the processing of soybeans into oil and meal by both proessing and solvent extraction; the refining of the oil into deodorized and stable cooking oil; the desolventizing of the meal and its processing into flours, grits, protein concentrates (70% protein) and isolates (90% protein). It covers also the processing into texturized vegetable jprotein used as an ingredient in various food products, including "vegetarians'" meat. It also describes the process that yields soymilk, tofu, tempeh, soy sauce and miso.
It includes information on the cost of equipment for a solvent extraction plant, an extruder-expeller plant, an extruded formed products plant and a soymilk plant.
FAO will be delighted to provide any additional information that you may require. Just address your enquiry to:
The Chief
Food and Agricultural Industries Service
Agricultural Services Division
FAO of the U.N.
Room B628
Via delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy
<section>2</section>
CHAPTER 1
THE SOYBEAN
1.1 Background
The soybean [Glycine max (L.) Merrill, family Leguminosae, subfamily Papilionoidae] originated in Eastern Asia, probably in north and central China. It is believed that cultivated varieties were introduced into Korea and later into Japan some 2000 years ago. Soybeans have been grown as a food crop for thousands of years in China and other countries of East and South East Asia and constitute to this day, an important component of the traditional popular diet in these regions.
Although the U.S.A. and Brazil account today for most of the soybean production of the world (see Table 1-1), the introduction of this crop to Western agriculture is quite recent. Soybeans are, primarily, an industrial crop, cultivated for oil and protein. Despite the relatively low oil content of the seed (about 20% on moisture-free basis), soybeans are the largest single source of edible oil and account for roughly 50% of the total oilseed production of the world.
With each ton of crude soybean oil, approximately 4.5 tons of soybean oil meal with a protein content of about 44% are produced. For each ton of soybeans processed, the commercial value of the meal obtained usually exceeds that of the oil . Thus, soybean oil meal cannot be considered a by-product of the oil manufacture. The soybean is, in this respect, an exception among oilseeds.
It can be calculated that, the quantity of protein in the yearly world production of soybeans, if it could be totally and directly utilized for human consumption, would be sufficient for providing roughly one third of the global need for food protein. This makes the soybean one of the largest potential sources of dietary protein. However, the bulk of soybean oil meal is used in animal feeds for the production of meat and eggs. Despite considerable public and commercial interest in soybean products as food,the proportion of soybean protein consumed directly in human nutrition is still relatively small.
1.2 Production
World production of soybeans has increased by a factor of eight in the last half century to reach its present level of over 100 million metric tons per year (Table 1-1, Fig.1). The leading producers are the U.S.A. (45%), Brazil (20%) and China (12%). Much of this phenomenal growth was due to the sharp increase in the U.S.A. production between 1950 and 1970, and to the introduction of the soybean to Brazilian agriculture in the sixties.
An important factor in this development was the considerable improvement in the yields, through plant breeding and advanced agrotechnical practice. Consideration of the economic advantages of soybeans has led many countries to start large scale production of this crop. The consequences of these efforts are now beginning to be seen. The share of the "rest of the world" in the production scene has been growing steadily to reach the present level of 23%.(Figure 2).
Table 1.1 World production of soybeans
COUNTRY
PRODUCTION
( million metric tons )
YIELD
kilogram/hectare
U.S.A. 34.4 52.8 52.3 41.9 1721 2270
Brazil 11.2 13.3 17.0 18.0 1750 1859
China 12.1 16.6 12.2 10.9 855 1443
WORLD 62.1 94.4 100.2 92.3 1384 1909
Source: FAO Production Yearbook
1.3 Marketing
Soybeans are marketed as most other major bulk commodities. Spot and future prices are governed by offer and demand. With the exception of periods of disastrous drought in the major producing areas, supplies have been able to keep abreast of the increasing demand. Consequently, the price of soybeans on the international market has remained remarkably stable, despite inflation. (See Fig.3).
Over 25% of the world production of soybeans is traded, unprocessed, on the international market ( Table 1-2 ). Most of the trading is done by a small number of large companies. The U.S.A. is the leading exporter, with approximately 75% of the traded volume.The leading importer is Japan . In addition, very considerable quantities of soybeans are processed in the countries of production, for export as meal or oil. In fact, some countries favour the export of meal and/or oil over the export of unprocessed beans, as a matter of foreign commerce policy. As an example, exports of soybean meal from Brazil far exceed the quantity of raw soybeans exported by that country.
The peculiar meal/oil ratio of soybeans, as mentioned before, may create an exportable surplus of one of the two products. This type of imbalance between the local demands for oil and protein explains part of the international commerce of soybean meal and oil.
Figure 1: World Production of Soybeans Based on data from FAO<br> Production Yearbooks 1976 to 1988)
Figure 1: World Production of Soybeans Based on data from FAO
Production Yearbooks 1976 to 1988)
Soybeans are sold by grade and the price is adjusted accordingly. In the U.S.A., soybeans are classified as grains and as such, their grading is regulated by the U.S. Grain Standards Act. The criteria for grading are test weight (weight per unit volume, lb./bushel), damaged seeds and calor (proportion of green,brown or black beans). The purchaser may include additional quality parameters according to the end use.
Moisture content is an absolute requirement and it is always specified in the contracts and certificates, regardless of grade.
Quality standards and guidelines for grading soybeans are given in Appendix 1.
Soybean production and trade quantities are often expressed in bushels. Although the bushel is a unit of volume, it can be converted to weight, assuming a standard weight-per-bushel value. One metric ton of soybeans is normally equivalent to 36.7 bushels. Conversely, one bushel of soybeans weighs 60 pounds or 27.24 kilograms.
Table 1.2 1987 Exports of soybeans and soybean products by principal exporting countries (1000 tons)
COUNTRY SOYBEANS SOYBEAN MEAL SOYBEAN OIL
U.S.A 21328 5928 623
Brazil 3023 7802 969
Argentina 1291 3706 721
WORLD 28829 24405 3993
Source: FAO Commerce Yearbook.
Figure 2: Share of Different Countries in the World Soybean<br>(Based on FAO Production Yearbooks
Figure 2: Share of Different Countries in the World Soybean
(Based on FAO Production Yearbooks)
Figure 3: Soybean Prices , 1974 to 1988 Based on data from FAO Production Yearbooks)
Figure 3: Soybean Prices , 1974 to 1988 Based on data from FAO Production Yearbooks)
1.4 Agricultural Characteristics
Soybeans grow well on almost all types of soil, with the exception of deep sands with poor water retention. The optimal soil pH is 6.0 to 6.5, therefore liming may be required. With respect to climate, the soybean grows best in temperate zones. The soybean is a so-called short-day plant, meaning that flowering occurs when the nights begin to lengthen. The breeding of varieties with different maturation periods (maturity groups) has permitted optimal production in a wide range of latitudes. Recently, a worldwide program, known as the International Soybean Variety Experiment (ISVEX) and headed by the International Soybean Program (INTSOY) of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, demonstrated the feasibility of growing soybeans in subtropical and tropical regions as well. It was found that, given adequate variety selection and under experimental conditions, the yields obtained at tropical and subtropical locations were comparable to those observed under temperate
climate conditions (about 1950 kg. per hectare). Although the yields obtained in actual production by farmers are much lower, the results of this remarkable experiment expand considerably the limits of the potential soybean growing areas of the world.
Rainfall in the range of 500 to 700 mm. is required for good yields. Adequate water supply is especially important during the period of pod and seed development ( pod filling stage ). Irrigation is now considered an essential factor for increased profit and security to the farmer.
An important characteristic of the soybean plant is its nitrogen fixation capability through symbiosis with nodulating bacteria in the soil. It has been estimated that up to 50% of the total nitrogen of the plant may be supplied by the nitrogen fixing mechanism.
Soybeans are planted in late spring to early summer. Full maturity is reached in early-to-mid-autumn. At this point, the leaves start to yellow and drop and the seeds begin to lose moisture. The decision when to harvest is important. Ideally, soybeans should be harvested when the water content of the seed is 13%, the maximum safe moisture level for long-range storage. If the moisture content at harvest is higher, forced-air drying of the seeds will be required prior to storage. On the other hand, if the seeds are too dry, extensive splitting and cracking of the beans may occur in the course of mechanical harvesting. Another factor to be considered is the respiration losses of the seeds between maturation and harvesting. Respiration rate is strongly moisture-dependent, being higher at high moisture content. Therefore, respiration losses may be considerable if harvesting is delayed too long when, for example, the rate of natural drying of the seeds is low, due to humid
weather.
The use of heated-air dryers provides extra flexibility with respect to harvesting time and rate of harvesting, independently of weather conditions.
1.5 Physical characterisitcs and morphology of the soybean
The shape of the soybean seed varies from almost spherical to elongated and flat. The industrial varieties grown for oil are nearly spherical while the elongated varieties are the ones used as a vegetable. The colour of the seed may be yellow, green, brown or black. Industrial varieties are yellow and the presence of seeds of other colours in a lot is considered a defect. Seed size is expressed as the number of seeds per unit volume or weight. Industrial soybeans weigh 18-20 grams per 100 beans. The seeds of "vegetable" varieties are considerably larger.
Seed structure consists of the seed coat (hull) and two cotyledons, plus two additional structures of lesser weight: the hypocotyl and plumule. The cotyledon represent 90% of the seed weight and contains practically all the oil and protein in its palisade-like cells. Microscopic examination of these cells reveals the presence of protein bodies (also known as aleuron grains) and lipid bodies (or spherosomes) which constitute storage bodies for proteins and oil, respectively. Protein bodies measure, on the average, 10 microns while the lipid bodies have, typically, 0.2 to 0.5 microns in diameter.
The hull, which accounts for roughly 8% of the seed weight, holds the two cotyledons together and provides an effective protective layer. It can be removed from the seed by cracking followed by aspiration, as in the process of mechanical dehulling prior to solvent extraction.
1.6 Chemical composition
The composition of soybeans may vary somewhat according to variety and growing conditions.Through plant breeding it has been possible to obtain protein levels between 40% and 45%, and lipid levels between 18 and 20%. Usually, an increase of 1% in protein content is accompanied by a decrease of 0.5% in oil. Incidentally, this negative correlation between protein and oil is one of the reasons for the lack of interest in high-protein varieties, since the production of these varieties does not result in increased income per hectare cultivated.
The proximate composition of soybeans, in fairly representative average figures, is shown in Table 1-3. The effect of variety and growing conditions on the protein and oil contents of soybeans, within narrow limits, was also observed in the ISVEX experiment mentioned above.
Table 1.3 Representative proximate composition
Seed part % of whole seed weight % (moisture-free basis)
Protein
Nx6.25 Lipid Carbohydrate
(incl.fibre) Ash
Cotyledon 90 43 23 43 5.0
Hull 8 9 1 86 4.3
Hypocotyl 2 41 11 43 4.4
Whole seed 100 40 20 35 4.9
Source: Cheftel et al. (1985).
1-6-1 Moisture:
As the water content of soybeans may vary according to storage conditions, composition data are expressed on moisture-free basis. For good storage stability and good viability as a seed, soybeans should have a moisture content of about 12% to 13%. Above this level, serious danger of mould attack exists, especially in hot weather. Below 12%, the beans tend to crack and split extensively in the course of handling. Too large a proportion of split beans is considered a defect as this may induce increased rancidity during storage.
Figure 4: Soybean Proteins; Effect of pH on Solubility
Figure 4: Soybean Proteins; Effect of pH on Solubility
(Based on Smith and Circle, 1972)
1-6-2 Proteins:
a- Characterization: The simplest criterion used for the characterization of proteins is their solubility in various media. As in all legumes, the bulk of soybean proteins are globulins, characterized by their solubility in salt solutions. The solubility of soybean proteins in water is strongly affected by the pH,as shown in Fig.4. Close to 80 % of the protein in raw seeds or unheated meal can be extracted at neutral or alkaline pH. As the acidity is increased, solubility drops rapidly and a minimum is observed at pH 4.2 to 4.6. This is the isoelectric region of soybean proteins taken as a whole.
The pH dependence of solubility is used in the manufacture of isolated soybean protein, whereby defatted, unheated meal is extracted with water at neutral or slightly alkaline pH, and the protein is then precipitated from the filtered extract by acidification to the isoelectric region.
More precise and detailed fractionation of the proteins can be carried-out by techniques such as ultracentrifugation, gel filtration and electrophoresis.
Since the classical work of W. Wolff, it has become customary to characterize the soybean protein fractions by their sedimentation constants.
Four major fractions, known as 2 S, 7 S, 11 S and 15 S have been studied extensively. (S stands for Svedberg units. The numerical coefficient is the characteristic sedimentation constant in water at 20^oC. The figures are not exact but nominal. Thus the 11 S globulin has a sedimentation constant of 12.3). The 11 S and 7 S fractions constitute about 70% of the total protein in soybeans. The ratio 11 S/7 S is a varietal characteristic and may vary from 0.5 to 3.
The 2 S fraction consists of low molecular weight polypeptides (in the range of 8000 to 20000 daltons) and comprises the soybean trypsin inhibitors (see below). The 7 S fraction is highly heterogeneous. Its principal component is beta-conglycinin, a sugar containing globulin with a molecular weight in the order of 150000. The fraction also comprises enzymes (beta-amylase and lipoxygenase) and hemagglutinins (see below ). The 11 S fraction consists of glycinin, the principal protein of soybeans. Glycinin has a molecular weight of 320000-350000 and is built of 12 sub-units, associated through hydrogen bonding and disulfide bonds. The ability of soy proteins to undergo association-dissociation reactions under known conditions, is related to their functional properties and particularly to their texturization. The 15 S protein is probably a dimer of glycinin. Conglycinin and glycinin are storage proteins and they are found in the protein bodies within the cells of the cotyledons.
b- Nutritional quality: One way of evaluating the nutritional quality of a protein is by its chemical score, obtained by comparing its essential amino acid composition to that of a standard reference protein (e.g. whole egg protein).
The essential amino acid composition of soybean protein is shown in Table 1-4.
Table 1.4 Amino acid composition of soybeans and wheat
AMINO ACID SOYBEANS WHEAT
A B A B
I- ESSENTIAL AMINO ACIDS
Isoleucine
Leucine
Lysine
Methionine
Cystine
Meth.+Cyst. 2.59 74 4.05 116
Phenylalanine
Tyrosine
Ph.ala+Tyr. 8.08 133 7.50 124
Threonine
Tryptophan
Valine
II- NON-ESSENTIAL AMINO ACIDS
Arginine
Histidine
Alanine
Aspartic acid
Glutamic acid
Glycine
Proline
Serine
Notes:
A: g/16 g Nitrogen
B: Percentage of Provisional Amino Acid Scoring Pattern
(*): First limiting (**): Second limiting
Source: Computed from data in FAO (1970) and FAO/WHO (1973).
The limiting amino acids are the ones containing sulphur (methionine and cystine). Their percentage in soybean protein is about 70% of that of whole egg protein. Hence the "chemical score" of soybean protein would be approximately 70%. On the other hand, for a plant protein,soybean protein is exceptionally rich in lysine and can serve as a valuable supplement to cereal foods where lysine is a limiting factor. Chemical score alone is not a satisfactory measure of protein quality since it does not account for protein digestibility and the biological availability of the amino acids. Other indicators such as biological value (BV), protein efficiency ratio (PER) and net protein utilization (NPU), determined by means of rat feeding tests, are better predictors but suffer from the fact that they assess the nutritional performance of the protein under certain experimental conditions which are ,usually, very different from real-life dietary situations.
The amino acid composition of soybean protein does not differ considerably from one variety to another. Attempts do develop, genetically, soybean varieties with a higher content of sulphur containing amino acids have not been successful.
c- Enzymes: Soybeans, as all seeds, contain the enzyme systems necessary for germination. Technologically, the most important enzyme in soybeans is lipoxygenase, also known as lipoxydase. This enzyme catalyses the oxidation of poly-unsaturated fatty acids by molecular oxygen, leading to the development of rancidity and beany flavour. The importance of lipoxygenase activity in the development of the characteristic "green bean" or "paint" flavour in many soybean products will be discussed in the chapters dealing with these products. Lipoxygenase activity is also the reason for the occasional use of small amounts of unheated soybean flour as a bleaching (carotenoid oxidizing) agent in wheat flour.
The enzyme urease is frequently mentioned in connection with soybean protein products. With no technological importance to itself, this enzymes has served as an indicator for the adequacy of the heat treatment given to soybean meal. Although better tests now exist for this purpose, residual urease activity is still sometimes used as an evidence of insufficient heat treatment.
d- Antinutritional factors: Several of the soybean proteins have been found to exert specific physiological effects. These are the trypsin inhibitors and the hemagglutinins (lectins).
Protease inhibiting proteins are widespread in nature, but the trypsin inhibitors of soybeans are the best known and most thoroughly studied. Inhibition of trypsin by raw soybeans has been reported more than 50 years ago and the first soybean trypsin inhibitor was isolated and crystallized in the early forties.
Soybeans contain two types of trypsin inhibitors. Both bear the names of scientists who first isolated and characterized them. They are respectively known as the Kunitz inhibitor with a molecular weight in the range of 20000, and the Bowman-Birk inhibitor which is a much smaller polypeptide in the 8000 dalton range. Both types consist of a number of differentiable proteins.The amino acid sequence and spatial structure of these proteins have been elucidated.
It has been known for a long time that raw soybeans or unheated soybean meal will impair growth when fed to young rats or chicks. This effect is completely eliminated when the soybean component is properly heated. Since trypsin inhibitors are also heat labile, it was concluded that their presence in the diet is responsible for the suppression of growth. In fact, growth is retarded if the inhibitors are added to diets containing heat-treated soybean meal.
A logical explanation for the harmful effect of the inhibitors could be that the inhibition of trypsin in the digestive track of the animal impairs protein digestibility and utilization. This hypothesis had to be abandoned, however, when it was observed that trypsin inhibitor preparations did impair growth when fed with diets containing completely pre-digested proteins. Inhibition of trypsin is not the only physiological effect of the trypsin inhibitors. It has been observed that their ingestion can result in increased pancreatic secretion and hypertrophy of the pancreas. Increased secretion of enzymes into the digestive tube represents an internal loss of protein. Since the proteins excreted by the pancreas are particularly rich in sulphur containing amino acids, this internal loss could be specially important if the diet is marginal in methionine/cystine.
Are soybean trypsin inhibitors toxic to humans? The bulk of the available information on their biochemical, physiological and nutritional properties stems from experimentation with animals or from in vitro investigations. There is no direct evidence as to the physiological effect of the inhibitors on humans. Nevertheless, it has become customary to take the necessary precautions for the removal or inactivation of trypsin inhibitors from soybean products intended for human consumption.
The lectins, formerly known as hemagglutinins, are proteins which possess the ability to agglutinate red blood cells. They are widely distributed in plants and some, such as the castor bean lectin ricin, are highly toxic. The lectin found in raw soybeans has, apparently, no observable dietary effect, good or bad. Furthermore, it too is easily inactivated by heat .
e: Functional properties: Many of the food uses of soybean products are based on the functional properties of soybean proteins. The functional characteristics include the ability of the proteins to thicken (viscosity), emulsify, form gels, foam, produce films and sulphur, absorb water and/or fat and create meat-like texturized structures.
Functional properties are related to the amino acid composition and sequence ( primary structure) as well as the spatial configuration of the protein molecule and the inter-molecular forces (secondary and tertiary structures). Soybean protein products with unique functional properties are available and constitute important tools in the formulation of the so-called "fabricated foods".
1-6-3 Lipids:
The lipids of soybeans (crude soybean oil) consist typically of 96% triglycerides, 2% phospholipids, 1.6% unsaponifiables, 0.5% free fatty acids and minute amounts of carotenoid pigments.
The phospholipids are surface-active substances located on the surface of the oil bodies. The relatively high content of phospholipids in soybean oil ( two to three times higher than other common vegetable oils) is explained by the small size of the oil bodies, resulting in a larger surface per unit weight of lipids. Although the phospholipid fraction of soybeans contains a number of distinct substances, the technical term lecithin is used to name the entire fraction. Lecithin is a valuable emulsifier and has many food, medical and industrial uses. Because of their emulsifying power, the bulk of phospholipids must be removed from the crude oil before refining. This is done through a process known as degumming, because the phospholipids are separated as hydrated gums.
The unsaponifiables contain mainly tocopherols and sterols.They are partially removed in the course of deodorization.The free fatty acids and pigments are removed in the process of refining and bleaching. Thus the concentration of non-triglycerides is reduced in the refined oil to less than one percent.
The fatty acid composition of soybean oil depends on the variety and growing conditions. A typical composition, based on recently published data is given in Table 1-5. The unsaturated portion accounts for over 80%.
Table 1.5 Fatty acid composition of soybean oil
FATTY ACID SYMBOL WEIGHT PERCENTAGE
Lauric
Myristic
Palmitic
Stearic
Oleic
Linoleic
Linolenic
Source: Wahnon et al. (1988)
Soybean oil is classified as a semi-drying oil in view of its high linoleic and linolenic acid content. The presence of linolenic acid is responsible, in great part, for the stronger tendency of soybean oil to undergo oxidative deterioration. Advanced technologies are available for overcoming this problem and making soybean oil a good, multi-purpose and versatile edible oil. An overview of some of these techniques is included in Chapter 2.
1-6-4 Carbohydrates:
Soybeans contain about 30% carbohydrates. These can be divided into two groups: soluble sugars ( sucrose 5%, stachyose 4%, raffinose 1% ) and insoluble "fibre" (20%). Raffinose is a trisaccharide composed of galactose,glucose and fructose linked in that order. Stachyose is a tetrasaccharide with the following structure: galactose-galactose-glucose-fructose. Raffinose and stachyose are not broken down by the enzymes of the digestive track but are fermented by the microorganisms present in the intestine, with the formation of intestinal gas. Flatulence, an inconvenience associated with the ingestion of pulses in general, is a factor which must be considered, sometimes, in the use of soybean products in human nutrition.
The insoluble fraction is a complex mixture of polysaccharides and their derivatives. The major part of this fraction consists of cell wall carbohydrates:cellulose, hemicelluloses and pectic substances. The insoluble carbohydrates are not digested by the enzymes of the gastro-intestinal track and can be characterized as "dietary fibre". They absorb water and swell considerably. Unlike other legumes, soybeans contain very little starch ( less than 1% ).
1-6-5 Minerals:
The mineral content of soybeans, determined as ash, is about five percent. When soybeans are processed, most of the mineral constituents go with the meal and few with the oil. The major mineral constituents are potassium, calcium and magnesium. The minor constituents comprise trace elements of nutritional importance, such as iron, zinc, copper etc.
The biological availability of minerals may be impaired somewhat as a result of the presence of phytates in soybeans and soybean products. The mineral composition of soybeans is affected by the composition of the soil. Thus, the contamination of soils with undesirable elements such as heavy metals, as a result of irrigation with poorly treated waste water, may be reflected in the composition of the soybeans.
REFERENCES
Cheftel, J.C., J.L. Cuq and D. Lorient (1985)
"Proteines Alimentaires"
Tec & Doc Lavoisier, Paris
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations ( FAO )
Production Yearbooks (1974 to 1988).
FAO, Rome
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations ( FAO )
Commerce Yearbooks (1974 to 1987).
FAO, Rome
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations ( FAO ) (1970)
"Amino-acid Content of Foods and Biological Data on Proteins"
FAO, Rome
Kinsella J.E., S. Damodaran and B. German (1985)
Physicochemical and Functional Properties of Oilseed Proteins with Emphasis on Soy Proteins in: "New Protein Foods", Vol. V, A.M.Altschull and H.L.Wilcke, Eds.
Academic Press, Orlando, Florida.
Liener, E.I. (1989)
Antinutritional Factors , in "Legumes", p.339-382, R.H.Matthews, Ed. Marcel Dekker Inc. New York
Nielsen, N.C. (1985)
Structure of Soy Proteins in "New Protein Foods", Vol.V, A.M.Altschul and H.L. Wilcke, Eds.Academic Press, Orlando, Florida
Smith, A.K. and S.J. Circle (1972)
"Soybeans: Chemistry and Technology" Vol.1 Avi Publishing Co. Inc. Westport, Conn.
Wahnon, R., S. Mokady and U. Cogan (1988)
Proc. 19th. World Congress I.S.F. Internat. Soc. for Fat Research, Tokyo
<section>3</section>
CHAPTER 2
UTILIZATION OF SOYBEANS
2.1 Utilization options for soybeans
The objective of this chapter is to present a concise overview of the present situation of soybean utilization. Only food uses will be considered. A detailed discussion on the soybean based protein foods and the industrial processes for their manufacture will be the subject of the subsequent chapters.
The amazing number and diversity of utilization alternatives have earned the soybean the title of " the wonder bean". Active research and development efforts continue to expand the already extensive list of soybean products.
The utilization options for soybeans can be divided into two groups: those based on the utilization of the whole seed and those which start with the fractionation of the soybean into oil and meal (oil mill operations). An estimate of the quantitative distribution of the world soybean production according to these main routes of utilization is given in Figure 5. A more detailed, but by no means complete utilization chart is shown in Figure 6.
Figure 5: Main Routes of Soybean Utilization
Figure 5: Main Routes of Soybean Utilization
( From Soya Technology Systems, 1987 )
Figure 6: Soybean Utilization Chart
Figure 6: Soybean Utilization Chart
(Soya Technology Systems, 1987)
2.2 Whole bean utilization
Roasted whole soybeans and their flour are used as ingredients of traditional confectionery products and snacks in China, Japan, Korea and Indonesia. Immature whole green soybeans are also consumed as a vegetable. However, mature dry soybeans are seldom used as cooked legume ( such as navy beans, black beans, chick peas or lentils) even in the traditional areas of soybean consumption. The reason for this may have been the persistent bitterness and "green beany taste" of soybeans, the low starch content, the relatively low water adsorption (swelling) capacity, long cooking time and poor digestibility. It is interesting to note that consumption of dry soybeans as a cooked legume is more frequent in western countries than in the Orient. The quantities in question are very small and mainly connected with health food eating tendencies. On the other hand, germinated beans and soybean sprouts, long known in Oriental cookery, are quickly becoming standard vegetable items in western
countries as well.
All the traditional routes of utilization of soybeans as food involve some sort of processing or fractionation, intended to overcome the disadvantages mentioned above. Examples of such processes are:
a- Extraction with water as in the production of soymilk.
b- Precipitation from water extracts as in the preparation of soybean curd (tofu).
c- Fermentation processes as in the elaboration of soybean paste (miso), soysauce (sho-yu) , tempeh, fermented soybean curd (su-fu) etc.
Full-fat soy flour, with different degrees of heat treatment, may be considered as the modern, industrial version of the oriental "soybean powder". It is made from dehulled whole beans and used mainly in bakery and dietetic foods. Very finely ground full-fat soybean flour is being offered as an alternative to spray-dried soymilk.
Growing interest in soybean foods in the West has led to the application of modern technology to the manufacture of some of these traditional products ( e.g. novel processes for soymilk production) and the development of totally new products, such as tofu-based ice-cream and soybean yogurt.
2.3 The oil mill route
This option starts with the separation of the soybeans into two fractions: oil and meal. There are, basically,two process alternatives to achieve this purpose: pressing and solvent extraction. Each one of the fractions is then further processed to yield a multitude of products and by-products, with practically no waste. Since oil meal operations are often the starting point in the preparation of soybean protein products, they will be reviewed in some detail in Chapter 3. The processes and products associated with the oil fraction will be described here in some detail. Soybean protein products which branch-off from the meal fraction will be just mentioned here for the sake of completeness and taken up in detail in specific chapters to follow.
2-3-1 Utilization of the oil fraction:
a- Oil refining: The preparation of marketable soybean oil for human consumption from crude soybean oil requires a series of operations known as " refining ". Several alternative technologies are available for each one of these operations. Each one can be carried out in batchwise, continuous or semi-continuous fashion.
The first step in refining crude soybean oil is the removal of the phospholipids, or "degumming". Degumming is necessary in order to prevent the separation and settling of gums (sticky, viscous oil-water emulsions stabilized by the phospholipids) during transportation and storage of crude oil, to reduce oil losses in the subsequent phases of refining and to avoid excessive darkening of the oil in the course of high-temperature deodorization. Crude oil is mixed thoroughly with a small amount of water and an acid ( usually phosphoric acid ). "Gums" are formed and precipitated, carrying in the emulsion a certain amount of oil. They are separated by centrifugation, dried under vacuum and bleached. The resulting product consists approximately of 50% phospholipids and 50% oil and has the consistency of honey.
The phospholipid fraction may be separated from practically all the oil by a series of solvent extraction and precipitation processes. Oil free soybean phospholipids are solid. All these by-products of the degumming process are known as "soybean lecithin" and sold under different trade-names and in a variety of quality grades. The principal quality parameters for commercial lecithins are: phospholipid content ( measured as percent acetone insolubles ), free acidity, non-lipid impurities ( measured as hexane insolubles ), viscosity and colour. For certain applications requiring an extremely bland lecithin, the phospholipids are separated from the crude soybean oil fraction, purified and then redissolved in any desired type of refined oil. Lecithins are mainly used for their activity at the interface between fats and hydrophillic phases. They act as emulsifiers in sauces and salad dressings, as viscosity reducers and stabilizers in chocolate, as anti-spattering agents in
margarine, as pan release agents in bakery and confectionery , as dough improvers and staling retardants in bread, as wetting agents in instant food powders etc. They also have some antioxidant property.
Degumming is usually carried out at the extraction plant, even if the subsequent steps of refining are performed elsewhere. Whenever further processing of the crude gums is not economically feasible, due to insufficient plant scale or insufficient market demand, the crude gums can be added-back to the meal, increasing the bulk and caloric value of the latter.
There are two major types of processes for refining degummed oil. They differ in the way the free fatty acids are removed. In the "chemical " or "caustic" refining process,the most common process applied to soybean oil, the fatty acids are neutralized with alkali (sodium hydroxide and sodium carbonate ) to form salts ( soaps ) soluble in water. Treatment with caustic solutions also removes residues of phospholipids not removed by degumming and results in some degree of bleaching due to the destruction of some of the pigments or their adsorption by the heavy phase.
The resulting aqueous soap solution, known as "soap stock" is removed from the neutralized oil by centrifugation. The amount of alkali to be added is calculated according to the free fatty acid content of the oil plus a slight excess (about 0.1%).
Crude soybean oil contains typically 0.3 to 0.7% free fatty acids. After neutralization, the oil is thoroughly mixed with hot soft water to remove traces of soap (washing ), then centrifuged again and dried by heating under vacuum,in preparation to the next step, bleaching. Soap stock can be used for making soap or it can be converted back to fatty acids by treating with a strong mineral acid. The crude mixture of fatty acids obtained, known as "acidified soap stock" can be used as a caloric component in animal feed or for the manufacture of distilled fatty acids. In the "physical refining" process, less commonly applied to soybean oil, fatty acids are removed by steam distillation under high vacuum, simultaneously achieving deodorization. Oil for physical refining must be degummed more thoroughly than in the case of alkali refining process.
The next step of refining is "bleaching'. Its purpose is to remove the yellow-orange carotenoid pigments and the green chlorophyll of the oil. The extent of bleaching depends on market requirements. The market in the U.S.A. requires almost water-clear appearance while somewhat darker colour may be perfectly acceptable or even preferred in other markets. Bleaching is carried out by treating the oil with solid adsorbents such as Fuller's earth or activated carbon or both. The pigments and some other impurities are adsorbed on the solid surface and removed by filtration. In order to prevent oxidation, the process is carried out under vacuum. Continuous "in-flow" bleaching processes are available.
The last refining operation is "deodorization". It consists in the removal of odorous substances by steam distillation under high vacuum and at temperatures in the range of 250^0 C. Typically,the deodorizer is a vertical cylindrical vessel with internal baffles and other devices to ensure exposure of a large surface area of oil and intimate contact between the oil and steam. At the end of the stripping process, the oil must be cooled while still under vacuum to prevent oxidation. Citric acid is usually added in order to chelate any metal ions which may catalyze peroxide formation. In modern deodorizers, all the parts in contact with oil are made of stainless steel to prevent such metal contamination. While the main objective of deodorization is the removal of odour-bearing compounds such as aldehydes, ketones and hydrocarbons, other substances such as sterols and tocopherols are also distilled off. In physical refining, this operation is responsible for the removal of free
fatty acids. All these substances may be recovered from the deodorizer condensate stream, if necessary.
b- Further processing and utilization of refined soybean oil: Freshly refined soybean oil is practically odourless and bland. However, objectionable off-flavour described as "green, grassy,fishy" is known to develop quickly if the oil is heated (as in cooking and frying), or stored under conditions which expose it to light and oxygen or permits contamination with certain metals such as copper and iron.
This type of flavour deterioration has been called "flavour reversion", expressing the thought that it brings back the off-flavours of crude oil. Although this has been shown to be false, the term of "flavour reversion" is still used sometimes, when referring to the flavour deterioration of refined soybean oil. The process is apparently triggered by the oxidation of the unsaturated fatty acids and most particularly that of linolenic acid. Unlike oxidative rancidity, flavour reversion occurs at very low levels of oxidation and is not retarded appreciably by antioxidants. It can be retarded by minimizing exposure to oxygen ( bottling under nitrogen ) and to light ( opaque containers, dark glass bottles).
Another method of flavour stabilization is the reduction of the linolenic acid content by selective hydrogenation, followed by chilling ( winterization ) to remove the high melting point saturated fatty acids formed. The partially hydrogenated- winterized soybean oil is perfectly suitable as an all-purpose (salad and cooking) oil. The crystalline fraction separated after chilling is known as "soybean stearin" and used in different solidified fats.
More complete hydrogenation of soybean oil is the basis for the manufacture of shortenings, margarines and tailor-made fats used by various food industries.
2-3-2 Utilization of the meal fraction:
a- Soybean meal as animal feedstuff: By far the largest portion of the soybean oil meal and cake production is used as a protein source in animal feed. Although the terms "meal" and "cake" are often used interchangeably, meal refers to the product of solvent extraction, while cake is the product resulting from expeller pressing of soybeans. The different types of soybean meals are characterized mainly by their protein content and the extent of heat treatment applied in their production to inactivate anti-nutritional factors. If the soybeans are extracted without dehulling,or if the hulls are added back after extraction, the meal will contain about 44% protein. Meals produced from dehulled beans contains approximately 50% protein.
The extent of heat treatment or toasting is measured in terms of residual urease activity or as the solubility of the protein under specified conditions ( Nitrogen Solubility Index NDI, or Protein Dispersibility Index PDI ).
The optimal degree of toasting depends on the final application. Thus, meal for poultry rations must be toasted much more thoroughly than meal for use in cattle feeds. Considerable efforts have been made to develop in vitro laboratory tests capable of predicting the nutritional performance of soybean meal in feed rations. The most widely used methods are: urease activity, trypsin inhibitor, dye-binding, fluorescence, protein solubility in water or alkali and available lysine. All these tests refer to the heat treatment history of the meal.
b- Defatted soybean flours and grits: These products, intended for human consumption, are essentially soybean meal which has been ground to the appropriate mesh size. The starting material is dehulled beans and strict sanitary requirements are applied to processing, storage and packaging conditions, in order to secure the microbiological quality of the final product ( e.g. total microbial count ). In addition, a large variety of products, differing in their lipid content are produced by adding-back soybean oil and/or lecithin to defatted flour or grits at specified levels (refatting).
c- Soybean protein concentrates: Products containing about 70% protein are prepared from defatted meal by selective extraction of the soluble carbohydrates (sugars). Extraction with aqueous alcohol is the most common process, but other methods of production are available. The concentrates are essentially bland.
d- Soybean protein isolates: Even higher concentrations of protein, in the order of 96%, are obtained by selective solubilization of the protein ( e.g. alkaline extraction ), followed by purification of the extract and precipitation of the protein ( e.g.by acidification to the isoelectric point ). Isoelectric isolates are insoluble in water and have practically no functional features. They can be converted to sodium, potassium or calcium proteinates by dissolving isoelectric protein in the appropriate base and spray-drying the solution. Sodium and potassium proteinates are water soluble. They are used mainly for their functional properties, such as emulsification or foaming. One of the by-products of the protein isolation process, the insoluble residue, is also commercialized for its remarkable water absorption capacity and as a source of dietary fibre.
e- Extrusion-textured soybean protein: If defatted soybean flour with a specific moisture content is subjected to high shearing forces at high temperature in an extruder, a product with a peculiar laminar structure is obtained. After hydration, this product presents an elastic and chewy texture resembling that of meat. The product is known as "textured soybean protein" or "textured vegetable protein" (TVP).
TVP with higher protein content is made by extrusion of soybean protein concentrates.
f- Spun fibres of soybean protein: The well established technologies for making synthetic fibres can be applied to soybean protein. Isolated soybean protein is dissolved in strong alkali and the solution is allowed to age until it has the consistency of honey. The viscous liquid, known as "dope" is then injected into an acid bath, whereby the protein precipitates in the form of fine fibres. The fibres are stretched, washed and collected as bundles. Spun fibres of soybean protein are used in the manufacture of a variety of meat analogs, to which they impart the fibrous aspect and bite of animal muscle.
REFERENCES
Erickson,D.R., E.H.Pryde, O.L.Brekke, T.L.Mounts and R.A.Falb (1980)
"Handbook of Soy Oil Processing and Utilization"American Soybean Association, St. Louis, MO.
Snyder, H.E. and T.W.Kwon (1987)
"Soybean Utilization" Van Nostrand Reinhold Company, New York
Soy Protein Council (1987)
"Soy Protein Products" Soy Protein Council, Washington, DC
Watanabe, D.J. and A. Kishi (1984)
"The Book of Soybeans"
<section>4</section>
CHAPTER 3
OIL-MILL OPERATIONS
In this section, the processes for the separation of the protein (meal) fraction from the oil will be reviewed. At present, there are only two competitive oil-milling processes for soybeans: the screw-press (expeller) process and extraction by solvents.
3-1 The expeller (screw press) process)
3-1-1 Operation principles
Continuous pressing by means of expellers (also known as screw presses) is a widely applied process for the extraction of oil from oilseeds and nuts . It replaces the historical method for the batchwise extraction of oil by mechanical or hydraulic pressing. The expeller (Fig. 7) consists of a screw (or worm), rotating inside a cylindrical cage (barrel). The material to be pressed is fed between the screw and the barrel and propelled by the rotating screw in a direction parallel to the axis. The configuration of the screw and its shaft is such that the material is progressively compressed as it moves on, towards the discharge end of the cylinder. The compression effect can be achieved, for example, by decreasing the clearance between the screw shaft and the cage ( progressive or step-wise increase of the shaft diameter ) or by reducing the length of the screw flight in the direction of the axial movement The gradually increasing pressure releases the oil which flows out of
the press through the slots provided on the periphery of the barrel, while the press-cake continues to move in the direction of the shaft, towards a discharge gate installed at the other extremity of the machine.
Before entering the expeller, the oilseeds must be cleaned, dehulled (optional), flaked, cooked and dried. Flaking facilitates oil release in the press by decreasing the distance that the oil will have to travel to reach the particle surface. Cooking in the presence of moisture is essential for the denaturation of the proteins and, to some degree, for the coalescence of the oil droplets. Cooking plasticizes the flakes, renders them less brittle and thus reduces the extent of flake disintegration as a result of shear in the press. Extensive flake disintegration would reduce oil yield and produce a crude oil with a high content of fine solid particles (foots). After cooking, excess moisture is removed in order to avoid the formation of muddy emulsions in the press. Cooking is usually achieved by mixing the flakes with live steam. Additional heat may be provided by indirect steam, while thoroughly mixing the mass.
3-1-2 Advantages and disadvantages of the expeller process
Expellers can be used with almost any kind of oilseeds and nuts. Therefore, in a multi-purpose plant built to process different types of raw materials and not only soybeans, the expeller process may prove advantageous. The process is relatively simple and not capital-intensive. While the smallest solvent extraction plant would have a processing capacity of 100-200 tons per day, expellers are available for much smaller capacities, from a few tons per day and up.
The main disadvantage of the screw-press process is its relatively low yield of oil recovery. Even the most powerful presses cannot reduce the level of residual oil in the press-cake below 3 to 5%. In the case of oil-rich seeds such as sesame or peanuts this may still be acceptable. Furthermore, most of the oil left in the cake can be recovered by a stage of solvent extraction. Such two stage processes (pre-press/solvent extraction) are now widely applied . In the case of soybeans, however, a 5% residual oil level in the cake represents an oil loss of about 25%. Solvent extraction of the cake would not be economical, because of the bulk of material which must be processed. Pre-press/solvent extraction processes are, therefore, not applied to soybeans.
It will be recalled from Chapter 1, that in the case of soybeans, the commercial value of the meal is usually higher than the income from sales of the corresponding quantity of oil. The quality of the meal is therefore a factor of particular importance in the selection of a processing method for soybeans. In this respect, the expeller process has several disadvantages. The first is the poor storage stability of the press-cake, due to its high oil content. Furthermore,the extreme temperatures prevailing in the expeller may impair the nutritive value of the meal protein, mainly by reducing the biological availability of the amino acid lysine. At any rate, expeller press-cake is not suitable for applications requiring a meal with high protein solubility.
3-1-3 Equipment
Unlike solvent extraction equipment which is supplied by a relatively small number of manufacturers, screw presses with a widely varying degree of sophistication are available from a multitude of sources. Yet, considerable technical improvement and advanced features can be found in the models offered by the leading manufacturers. Such features include: multi-stage pressing to increase oil yield, better feed rate control, water cooled barrel and shaft, ease of maintenance and repair, improvements in the drive and transmission, sanitary construction, safety features etc. Most press manufacturers also supply cooker-dryer units, designed to operate with the press. Cooker-dryers may be horizontal (jacketed screw conveyor type), but the most common types consist of vertical stacks of round chambers (rings) equipped with paddle stirrers. (Fig. 7)
Fig 7: Oil expeller (screw press) with cooker-dryer<br>(Courtesy of FRENCH Oil Mill Machinery Co.)
Fig 7: Oil expeller (screw press) with cooker-dryer
(Courtesy of FRENCH Oil Mill Machinery Co.)
This design is indeed very common in operations for heat treating oilseed material and will be encountered in flake conditioners, desolventizers, meal dryers and coolers.
3-2 The solvent extraction process
3-2-1 Operation principles
A flow-diagram describing the solvent extraction process for soybeans is given in Fig.8. The process consists of the following stages:
a- Receiving and storage of soybeans.
b- Preparation of the raw material for extraction.
c- Solvent extraction.
d- Recovery of the solvent from the extract (micella).
e- Desolventizing/toasting of the meal.
Figure 8: Solvent extraction of soybean oil; flow diagram <br> (Courtesy Extractionstechnik G.m.b.H. )
Figure 8: Solvent extraction of soybean oil; flow diagram
(Courtesy Extractionstechnik G.m.b.H. )
3-2-2 Receiving and storage of soybeans
Nowadays, soybeans are received at the factory, almost exclusively in bulk, by truck or rail. They are weighed, unloaded and conveyed to the main storage silos. The size of the silos depend on the frequency of reception and the availability of other storage facilities in the region. Normally the main storage volume should correspond to the raw materials needed for a few months of operation at full capacity.
Pneumatic conveying is used in large installations while mechanical conveyors and elevators are more common in smaller plants. It is extremely important to maintain good sanitary conditions on and around the receiving areas and especially, to protect the seeds from contact with moisture. The receiving area, which consists of outdoors installations with a fair amount of movement of people and vehicles, tends to be one of the most critical parts of the factory, from the sanitation point of view.
As soybeans are purchased by grade, it is necessary to draw representative samples for quality evaluation from each lot at the point of reception. The samples are analyzed for moisture, foreign materials, colour, broken beans etc. in order to determine the compliance of the lot with the specified grade criteria. It is also advisable to determine oil and protein content, free fatty acids and other quality factors for the sake of proper bookkeeping, even if these criteria are not part of the standard grading and pricing system.
The typical storage facility in soybean oil plants is the vertical cylindrical silo. In recent years the conventional concrete silo is being replaced by steel silos of different types. A recent innovation in this area is a silo construction method based on the use of a steel strip wound in the form of a continuous spiral, each winding being fastened to the next one by crimping. The steel strip is supplied as compact coils, thus reducing the cost of transportation of bulky pre-fabricated constructions. One of the advantages of the metal silos is the speed of erection.
3-2-3 Preparation for extraction
This stage comprises drying, tempering, cleaning, classification (optional), cracking, dehulling (optional), conditioning and flaking. A flow diagram for the conventional preparation of soybeans prior to solvent extraction is given in Fig.9.
Figure 9: Conventinal Preparation System for Soybeans
Figure 9: Conventinal Preparation System for Soybeans
(Source: Moore 1983)
a- Drying: If the soybeans are to be dehulled before extraction, they must be dried to a moisture content below 10% in order to facilitate separation of the hulls. This is achieved in vertical gas or oil fired forced circulation driers. If the natural moisture content of the beans is 10% or less, or if dehulling is not practised, drying as a preparation step can be omitted.
b- Tempering: After cooling, the dried soybeans are stored in bins for 2 to 5 days, in order to allow for moisture equilibration by diffusion. This is called tempering. The tempering bins, which are usually outdoors silos of the vertical type, also serve as working bins (day bins), to secure uninterrupted feeding of the plant. As all the subsequent steps of processing are continuous, it is necessary to monitor the flow of soybeans from the working bins to the processing plant, in accordance with the planned processing capacity. This is done by means of automatic balances installed at the feed-end of the line.
c: Cleaning: The soybeans are subjected to a number of cleaning operations throughout the process. Tramp iron is removed by magnetic separators. In moderate capacity installations these can be magnets attached to conveyors or chutes carrying a stream of beans. For larger plants, revolving drum type magnets which permit continuous removal of tramp iron from magnet surface are used.Both permanent magnets and electromagnets can be used. Permanent magnets have the advantage of being practically maintenance-free. Furthermore, they do not consume electrical power. Since the beans may become re-contaminated with stray iron (loose nuts and bolts, nails etc.) as they pass through the machinery, magnetic cleaning is not a one-time operation but must be repeated several times along the line. It is therefore advisable to install magnetic separators at the entrance of each machine where the presence of metal particles may cause serious damage (cracking mills, flaking machines etc.)
Stones, sand, dust and other foreign materials are usually removed by conventional seed cleaners. Typically, the seed cleaner consists of a two-deck vibrating screen.(Fig. 9). The upper screen retains the stones and other coarse materials but allows whole soybeans to fall through. The lower screen retains the soybeans but lets finer particles such as sand to pass through. Light trash, free hull particles and dust are removed by aspiration and trapped in cyclones.
d: Classification: The purpose of this operation is to separate split beans from whole beans. This step is optional and it is applied only if the meal is to be processed for human consumption. Classification is carried-out by a simple sifting operation.
e: Cracking: The purpose of this operation is to break the seeds into smaller particles in preparation for flaking. If the beans have been dried to 10% moisture and tempered as described above, cracking also loosens the hulls and permits their separation by aspiration. Ideally, the seeds should be broken to 4 to 6 pieces of fairly uniform size. Production of fines should be minimized. Cracking machines consist of pairs of counter-rotating, corrugated rolls. One roll in each pair rotates faster than the other, to provide the shearing effect necessary to break the seed. Roll diameter is in the order of 25 cm. Roll length depends on the capacity. Two or three pairs of rolls are provided, mounted one on top of the other. A vibrating conveyor secures feeding of the mill at a uniform rate. The corrugations on the upper pair of rolls are coarser and deeper than those on the lower pairs.
A vibrating screen is provided at the exit from the mill. This is where the stream of broken particles is separated into hulls (removed by aspiration for further processing), oversize particles (returned to the cracking mill), meats of the correct size (sent to conditioning and flaking) and fines (usually mixed with the meats for conditioning).
The surface of cracking rolls is subject to considerable wear. After a certain service period, it may be necessary to renew the corrugations (refluting). Good quality rolls may be refluted several times before it becomes necessary to replace them.
Figure 10: Seed cleaner with multiaspirator and cyclone
Figure 10: Seed cleaner with multiaspirator and cyclone
f: Conditioning: The purpose of this operation is to increase the plasticity of the meats, in preparation for flaking. The conditioner is similar to the cooker described in connection with expellers. It can be a horizontal screw conveyor type heated reactor or a vertical stacked cooker. Heat can be provided by indirect steam or by direct steam injection, the latter being used to increase the moisture content when necessary. The meats are heated to 65-70^oC and the moisture content is brought to 10.5-11%. At this point the plasticity of the meats is such that they can be flattened by pressure in the flaker, without breaking.
g: Flaking: Flaking machines consist of a pair of horizontal counter-rotating smooth steel rolls. Typical roll sizes are in the range of 60-80 cm. in diameter. The rolls are pressed one against the other by means of heavy springs or by controlled hydraulic systems. Conditioned soybean cotyledon particles are fed between the rolls and they are flattened as the rolls rotate one against the other. The roll-to-roll pressure can be regulated and it determines the average thickness of the flakes. The main purpose of flaking is to increase the contact surface between the oilseed tissues and the solvent, and to reduce the distance that the solvent and the extract will have to travel in the process of extraction. It is also believed that flaking disrupts the oilseed cells to some degree and thus makes the oil droplets more available for solvent extraction. Typical values for flake thickness are in the range of 0.2 to 0.35 millimetres.
Flaking rolls require maintenance as they wear considerably. To maintain the smoothness of the surfaces and to secure good contact between the rolls at every point, the rolls are reground from time to time. This requires expertise and accurate machines. In order to compensate for uneven thermal expansion, the rolls are manufactured not as perfect cylinders but with a slightly curved profile, thinner at both ends and thicker in the middle. Furthermore the wear is usually not uniformly distributed and tends to be more extensive at the middle. Some manufacturers supply grinding devices which allow the roll ends to be reground without removal of the rolls.
h: Alternative processes: The processes described above are conventional oil-mill operations. Recently, improved processes have been suggested for individual steps or for the whole seed preparation line.
The " Hot Dehulling (Popping) System ", offered by Buhler-Miag Ltd. makes use of a "shock treatment" to loosen the hulls.
Soybeans with a moisture content of about 13% are preheated to 60^oC, then contacted with a stream of hot air in a fluidized bed unit. This treatment causes popping of the hull. Now the seeds are split in half by impact and the hulls are separated by air. The dehulled split beans are further cracked and flaked. The main advantage of the process is its lower energy consumption, since the multiple heating and cooling, drying and humidification steps of conventional dehulling are obviated. The short duration of the heat treatment step prevents extensive protein denaturation. The reduction in NSI (Nitrogen Solubility Index) is claimed to be essentially the same as in conventional dehulled flake preparation. A process flow-diagram for the Hot Dehulling System is given in Fig.11.
Figure 11: The BUHLER Hot Dehulling (Popping) System
Figure 11: The BUHLER Hot Dehulling (Popping) System
The "Alcon Process" (Fig. 12) offered by Lurgi GmbH, consists of a series of operations installed between the conventional preparation line (right after the flaking mill) and the extractor. The flakes are humidified and heated in a conditioner, maintained at the desired moisture content and temperature for 15-20 minutes (tempering), then dried and cooled before being led to the extractor. This is, essentially, an agglomeration process, whereby the flakes are fused into more compact, porous granules. The following benefits are claimed:
a: The bulk density of the modified granules is by 50% higher than that of the original flakes (550 against 360 kg/m^3). This results in a corresponding increase in extractor capacity.
b: The rate of percolation of micella or solvent through the granules is tripled. This results in improved extractor efficiency (see below).
c: Solvent retention in the spent granules is about 25%, while conventional spent flakes may retain as much as 35% solvent. As a result, desolventizer capacity is increased, oil yield is improved and energy is saved.
d: During preparation and extraction, certain enzymes reduce the hydratability of the phospholipids. The thermal treatment associated with the Alcon process inactivates these enzymes and improves the efficiency and yield of the oil degumming process.
e: Due to the thermal treatment mentioned above, meal toasting requirements are less severe.
Figure 12: LURGI's &quot;Alcon&quot; Process ef pre-extraction preparation
Figure 12: LURGI's "Alcon" Process ef pre-extraction preparation
In the Pellet method suggested by the FRENCH Oil Mill Machinery Company, the crushed material is extruded as pellets. The extruder which is called "the Enhanser Press", is equipped with special ports for the injection of steam or water into the barrel. The mass is pressed through the holes on a die plate, expands as a result of the sudden evaporation of water and yields firm pellets with sufficient internal porosity but a bulk density higher than that of flakes. The advantages claimed are essentially the same as those of the other agglomeration processes.
A drawing showing the FRENCH Enhancer Press is given in Fig. 13.
Figure 13: The FRENCH"Enhancer" Press
Figure 13: The FRENCH "Enhancer" Press
3-2-4 Solvent extraction:
a- Basic principles of solvent extraction: The extraction of oil from oilseeds by means of non-polar solvents is, basically, a process of solid-liquid extraction. The transfer of oil from the solid to the surrounding oil-solvent solution ( micella ) may be divided into three steps:
* diffusion of the solvent into the solid
* dissolution of the oil droplets in the solvent
* diffusion of the oil from the solid particle to the surrounding liquid.
Due to the very high solubility of the oil in the commonly used solvents, the step of dissolution is not a rate limiting factor. The driving force in the diffusional processes is, obviously, the gradient of oil concentration in the direction of diffusion. Due to the relative inertness of the non-oil constituents of the oilseed, equilibrium is reached when the concentration of oil in the micella within the pores of the solid is equal to the concentration of oil in the free micella, outside the solid. These considerations lead to a number of practical conclusions:
* Since the rate-limiting process is diffusion, much can be gained by reducing the size of the solid particle. Yet, the raw material cannot be ground to a fine powder, because this would impair the flow of solvent around the particles and would make the separation of the micella from the spent solid extremely difficult. Instead, the oilseeds are rolled into thin flakes, as described in the previous paragraph, thus reducing one dimension to facilitate diffusion, without impairing too much the flow of solvent through the solid bed or contaminating the micella with an excessive quantity of fine solid particles. The effect of flake thickness on the efficiency of solvent extraction is demonstrated in Fig.14.
* The rate of extraction can be increased considerably by increasing the temperature in the extractor. Higher temperature means higher solubility of the oil, higher diffusion coefficients and lower micella viscosity. In fact, it is customary to heat the solvent and the intermediate micella to the highest temperature which would still provide an acceptable level of safety.
* An open, porous structure of the solid material is preferable, because such a structure facilitates diffusion as well as percolation. A number of processes have been proposed for increasing the porosity of oilseeds before solvent extraction (See para. 3-2-3-h ).
* Although most of the resistance to mass transfer lies within the solid, the rate of extraction can be increased somewhat by providing agitation and free flow in the liquid phase around the solid particles. Too much agitation is to be avoided, in order to prevent extensive disintegration of the flakes.
Figure 14: Effect of Flake Thickness on Extraction Efficiency (Source: Norris 1982 )
Figure 14: Effect of Flake Thickness on Extraction Efficiency
(Source: Norris 1982 )
* Since the concentration gradient is the factor responsible for moving the oil out of the solid, it is important to keep this gradient high, at each point within the extractor. This effect is obtained most economically by the principle of counter-current multistage extraction. The process is divided to a number of contact stages . Each stage comprises means for mixing the solid and the solvent phases and for separating the two streams after extraction has been achieved. In going from one stage to the next, the flakes and the solvent move in opposite directions. Thus, flakes with the lowest oil content are contacted with the leanest solvent, resulting in high oil yield and high driving force throughout the extractor. The principle of counter-current extraction is shown in Fig.15.
Figure 15 : Principle of Counter-current Extraction Applied to the "Carrousel Extractor" (Courtesy of Extractionstechnik G.A.m.b.H.)
Figure 15 : Principle of Counter-current Extraction Applied to the "Carrousel Extractor"
(Courtesy of Extractionstechnik G.A.m.b.H.)
A detailed discussion of the theoretical basis for the design of multistage solid-liquid extraction processes is beyond the scope of the present work. We shall outline here only its principal practical consequences, as far as they provide useful criteria for the selection and operation of an extractor.
Two different methods can be used to bring the solvent to intimate contact with the oilseed material: percolation and flooding. In the percolation method, the solvent trickles through a thick bed of flakes without filling the void space completely. A film of solvent flows rather rapidly over the surface of the solid particles and efficiently removes the oil which has diffused from the inside to the surface. This mode of contact is preferable whenever the resistance to diffusion inside the flake is relatively low (thin flakes with large surface area, open tissue structure). In the flooding mode the solid particles are totally immersed in a slowly moving, continuous phase of solvent. Immersion works better with materials offering a greater internal resistance to oil transfer (thick particles, dense tissue structure).
The number of contact stages necessary to perform a given extraction operation depend on the following variables:
* Flakes/solvent ratio: If the quantity of solvent used to extract oil from one ton of flakes is increased, a smaller number of contact stages will be needed to achieve a given extraction job. However, the full micella resulting from the process would be less concentrated in oil, meaning that we would have to evaporate larger quantities of solvent for each ton of product, and hence, spend more on energy.
* Oil yield: If the number of stages is increased while all other variables are kept unchanged, the proportion of oil left in the spent flakes will be lower and therefore,the oil yield will be higher. The relationship between the number of stages and residual oil in the meal is shown in Fig. 16.
Figure 16: Effect of Number of Stages on Residual Oil
Figure 16: Effect of Number of Stages on Residual Oil
* Percolation: The quantity of solvent or micella retained within the capillaries and pores of the solid after drainage is called "bound extract" or "bound solvent". This quantity depends on the properties of the flakes and solvent as well as the drainage conditions. Easy percolation of the solvent through the solid bed leaves less extract in the capillaries after drainage and results therefore, in a reduction of the number of contact stages needed. Proper preparation and handling of the flakes are important to ensure high percolation rate.
b- Choice of solvents:
An ideal solvent for the extraction of oil from soybeans should possess the following properties:
* Good solubility of the oil.
* Poor solubility of non-oil components.
* High volatility (i.e. low boiling point), so that complete removal of the solvent from the micella and the meal by evaporation is feasible and easy.
* Yet, the boiling point should not be too low, so that extraction can be carried out at a somewhat high temperature to facilitate mass transfer.
* Low viscosity.
* Low latent heat of evaporation, so that less energy is needed for solvent recovery.
* Low specific heat, so that less energy is needed for keeping the solvent ant the micella warm.
* The solvent should be chemically inert to oil and other components of the soybean.
* Absolute absence of toxicity and carcinogenicity, for the solvent and its residues.
* Non-inflammable, non-explosive.
* Non-corrosive
* Commercial availability in large quantities and low cost.
Unfortunately, the ideal solvent possessing all these properties does not exist. Most of the requirements, with the notable exception of flammability and explosiveness, are met by low-boiling hydrocarbon fractions obtained from petroleum. A typical commercial solvent for oil extraction would have a boiling point range (distillation range) of 65 to 70^oC and would consist mainly of six-carbon alkanes, hence the name "hexane"by which these solvents are commonly known in the U.S.A.. "Hexane " solvents for the extraction of edible oil must comply with strict quality specifications. The quality parameters which make up the specifications usually include: boiling (distillation) range, maximum non-volatile residue, flash point,maximum sulphur, maximum cyclic hydrocarbons, colour and specific gravity.
The main shortcoming of light hydrocarbon solvents is their flammability and the explosiveness of mixtures of their vapours and air. Safety considerations gave led to the enforcement of special standards for buildings and installations in solvent extraction plants. All the electrical installations have to be explosion-proof. The discharge end of all vents have to be equipped with refrigerated condensers to minimize escape of solvent vapours to the atmosphere. Very strict safety measures are taken to prevent the hazard of sparks in and around the plant. All these add to the high cost of erection and operation of solvent extraction plants.Even so, accidents are not uncommon.
The continuous search for alternative solvents is, therefore understandable. One such solvent, trichloroethylene, was in commercial use for a short period in the early 1940's, but had to be abandoned when it was discovered that the meal prepared in this way was toxic to animals. Another alternative approach makes use of "supercritical extraction" with liquid carbon dioxide under high pressure. Although technically feasible, supercritical extraction of soybean oil is not commercially viable at present, due to the high cost of the equipment and the relatively poor oil dissolving capacity of carbon dioxide near its critical point. Alcohols constitute yet another class of potential solvents for oil extraction. Water-free (absolute) low aliphatic alcohols such as ethanol and isopropanol are fairly good solvents for oils at high temperature but the solubility of oils in these solvents decreases drastically as the temperature is lowered. This high dependence of solubility on
temperature is precisely the principle on which alcohol extraction processes are based. Extraction takes place at high temperature. The micella is then cooled. Saturation occurs and excess oil separates as a distinct phase which can be recovered by centrifugation. The solvent is reheated and sent back to the extractor. These alcohols are less flammable then hexane, but precautions are still necessary. Despite considerable research efforts to develop alternative solvent systems, extraction with light hydrocarbons continues to be, practically, the only commercial solvent extraction process for soybean oil.
c- Types of extractors:
Solvent extractors are of three types: batch, semi-continuous and continuous.
In batch processes, a certain quantity of flakes is contacted with a certain volume of fresh solvent. The micella is drained off, distilled and the solvent is recirculated through the extractor until the residual oil content in the batch of flakes is reduced to the desired level. Batch extractors as industrial units are now obsolete. Laboratory and pilot plant size extractors are still used for experimentation and instruction purposes.
Semi-continuous systems consist of several batch extractors connected in series. The solvent or micella flows from one extractor to the next one in the series. The material in the first extractor is the most exhausted, since it has been treated with fresh solvent. After a while, the second extractor is made "head" of the series and connected to the fresh solvent line. The spent flakes are discharged from the first extractor, which is then filled with a batch of fresh flakes and is connected to the system as the "tail" unit, and so on.
Semi-continuous systems of the type described above are seldom used for the solvent extraction of soybeans. However, the same principle is applied in one of the widely known solvent extraction systems for other oilseeds: the FRENCH Stationary Basket Extractor.
The FRENCH extractor (Fig. 17)is essentially a vertical cylindrical vessel, divided into a number of tall vertical sections or "baskets" by radial walls. The baskets are stationary. Solvent or micella is fed at the top of the basket and percolates through the deep bed of solids. Using a system of moving micella showers, the oilseed material is contacted with micella at decreasing oil content, and finally with fresh solvent, thus achieving countercurrent extraction, without moving the solid bed. In its recent version, the FRENCH stationary basket extractor is equipped with a rotating basket bottom, to achieve automatic discharge of the baskets at the correct time and to render the extractor nearly continuous. The capacities of units supplied since 1975 for soybean oil extraction, range from 100 to 3000 tons per day.
Figure 17: The FRENCH Stationary Basket Extractor
Figure 17: The FRENCH Stationary Basket Extractor
(courtesy of The FRENCH Oilmill Machinery Co.)
In continuous extraction, both the oilseeds and the solvent are fed into the extractor continuously. The different available types are characterized by their geometrical configuration and the method by which solids and solvents are moved one in relation to the other, in counter-current fashion. The most prominent types will be described in the next paragraphs.
* Belt extractors_ the DE SMET extractor: This extractor, offered by the Belgian De Smet Company and its subsidiaries in many countries, was developed in 1946 by J.A. De Smet at the "Nouvelles Huileries Anversoises" oil mill in Belgium. According to the company, since then over 450 plants using the DE SMET process have been built in various parts of the world.
A drawing describing the DE SMET Extractor is given in Fig.18. The extractor consists of a horizontal, sealed vessel in which a slowly moving screen belt is installed. Flaked soybeans are fed on the belt by means of a feeding hopper. A damper attached to the hopper outlet acts as a feed regulating valve and maintains the solids bed on the belt at constant height. This height can be adjusted according to the expected rate of percolation of the micella through the bed. Difficult percolation is compensated for by lowering bed height. For properly flaked soybeans, the height of the flake bed at the head end of the extractor is normally 6 to 8 feet (180 to 240 cm.). The throughput rate of the extractor is adjusted by changing the belt speed. There are no dividing baffles on the belt and the solid bed is one continuous mass. Yet the extractor is divided to distinct extraction stages by the way in which the micella stream is advanced. The solvent is introduced at the spent flake
discharge end ( i.e. at the end opposite to the flake feeding side of the extractor ). It is sprayed on the flakes, percolates through the bed, giving the spent flakes a last wash and removing some oil. The resulting dilute micella is collected in a sectional hopper underneath the belt, from which it is pumped and sprayed again on the flakes at the next section in the direction opposite to belt movement. This process of micella collection, pumping and spraying at the next section is repeated until the micella leaves the hopper at the head-end of the extractor, carrying the highest concentration of oil (heavy micella). The screen is washed with heavy micella at the head-end, just before the entrance of fresh flakes, and then again with fresh solvent, right after the discharge of spent flakes.Washing of the screen is essential to prevent clogging. Washing with full micella at the feed-end provides surface lubrication and prevents adhesion of the flakes to the surface of the
screen. The entire extractor vessel is maintained at a slight negative pressure so as to prevent leakage of solvent vapours to the atmosphere.
Figure 18: The DE SMET Extractor
Figure 18: The DE SMET Extractor
(Courtesy of N.V.Extraction De Smet S.A.)
According to the manufacturers, DE SMET extraction plants have been built for capacities ranging from 25 to 3000 tons of raw material per day. Solvent losses are 0.07% to 0.3% and the residual oil content of the extracted material is 0.25% to 0.6%.
* Moving basket extractors: In this class of extractors, the flakes do not constitute a continuous mass but are filled into separate, delimited elements (baskets) with perforated bottoms for draining. The baskets can be moved vertically (bucket elevator extractors), horizontally ( frame belt and sliding cell extractors), or can be rotated around a vertical axis (carrousel extractors). Vertical bucket-chain extractors are among the first industrial solvent extractors constructed for continuous operation. Many are still in operation but they are less frequently found in more recent installations.
In the horizontal moving basket extractors manufactured by the LURGI Company, the "basket" or "cell" is formed by an endless bucket belt and a separate perforated bottom. The bottom can be fixed perforated plates on which the bucket separations slide (sliding cell design) or screen belt conveyors moving with the buckets. Both types are shown in Fig.19.
Figure 19: Two Types of Basket (Cell) Extractors
Figure 19: Two Types of Basket (Cell) Extractors
(Courtesy of LURGI G.m.b.H)
Another type of horizontal basket extractor, featuring tilting baskets or trays, is manufactured by the HLS Company Ltd. The operation principle of the T.O.M. (Turning Over of Material) HLS extractor is shown in Fig.20. Each basket in the extractor can be flooded, permitting immersion and percolation in the same extractor. In order to overcome the problem of the formation of a dense surface layer of compressed fines, the trays or baskets are inverted at the end of the conveying chain. The material falls to the basket or tray below. The impermeable surface layer is broken and the oilseed material undergoes mixing in the process of its transfer from one level to the other. Extraction continues as the material moves, in reversed direction, on the lower (return) side of the conveyor. Thus, unlike most horizontal extractors, in the HLS Extractor the inlet for fresh raw material and the outlet for the spent flakes are on the same end of the shell.
Figure 20: The HLS Basket Extractor
Figure 20: The HLS Basket Extractor
(Courtesy of HLS Ltd.)
* Carrousel extractors somewhat resemble the cylindrical FRENCH extractor described above, but here, the "baskets" rotate around the axis of the cylinder while the solvent/micella circuitry is fixed. The construction principle of the Carrousel Extractor, manufactured by EXTRACTIONSTECHNIK GmbH, is shown in Fig.21. The following description of the extractor and its operation is from an article by Dr. Ing. Wolfgang Kehse:
" The extractor consists of a single-part rotor with an inner and outer cylindrical wall. The ring-shape interspace is divided by radially arranged conical partition walls into a number of chambers (10 to 20) . It is slowly rotated usually by chain drive, the larger gear rim of which is placed round the rotor. Smaller extractors may be directly driven by a central shaft. These rotation speeds vary from one rotation in 20 minutes up to one rotation in 4 to 5 hours, and are adjustable. The rotor rotates above a slitted bottom with only a few millimetres' gap. This slitted bottom is constructed of profiled rods with a trapezoidal cross-section. This profile causes the slits which are at their surface about 0.8 mm wide to become wider further down. The specific advantage of this slitted bottom, however, is that the slits are exactly concentric with the rotor shaft. The raw material is filled into the chambers and thus form a compact layer which can reach a height of from 0.5 to
2.5 meters, depending on the material to be extracted. The height of the rotor corresponds to this. Therefore, a free space of about 200 mm above the layer remains, which is filled with liquid solvent during the time that the chamber is being sprayed with solvent.
Depending on the required time for extraction, the material is moved at a speed of 1-10 mm/sec., over the concentric slits in the bottom. Because the slits are arranged parallel to the direction of movement of the material, no mechanical forces apart from the sliding resistance are exerted on the extraction material and subsequently no plugging of the slits can occur. While moving over the slitted bottom, the bed of material is percolated by micella of different concentrations, beginning with the end-micella having the highest concentration immediately after feeding of the solid material up to the pure solvent at the end of its passage. The micella passes through the bed of material and the slitted bottom and is the collected in chambers separated by weirs in the lower part of the extractor. From there it is pumped back onto the bed of material. The discharge of the extracted solid material is effected through the slitted bottom by a hole as wide as a rotor chamber and
allowing the contents to drop down into a discharge chute where it is moved on for further processing by a screw conveyor.
The partition walls of the chambers are conically widening downward so that any sticking of the chamber contents is impossible."
According to the manufacturer, Carrousel Extractors are available in capacities from 20 up to 4000 tons per 24 hours. The largest extractor (4000 tpd.) has a nominal diameter of 15 m.
Fig. 21: The &quot;CARROUSEL&quot; Extractor
Fig. 21: The "CARROUSEL" Extractor
(Courtesy of Extractionstechnik G.A.m.b.H.)
3-2-5 Post-extraction operations
Two streams leave the solvent extraction stage: an oil-rich fluid extract (full micella) and solvent-laden spent flakes. The next operations have the objective of removing and recovering the solvent from each one the two streams.
a: Micella distillation: Full micella contains typically 30% oil. Thus, for every ton of crude oil some 2.5 tons of solvent must be removed by distillation. Most manufacturers of solvent extractors also offer micella distillation systems. The characteristics of a good micella distillation system are: good energy economy, minimal heat damage to the crude oil and its components, minimal solvent losses , efficient removal of the last traces of solvent from the oil and, of course, good operation safety. The modes of solvent vaporization include flash evaporation, vacuum distillation and steam stripping.
b: Meal desolventizing: The spent flakes carry with them about 35% solvent. The removal and recovery of this portion of the solvent is also one of the most critical operations in oil mill practice, since it determines, to a large extent, the quality of the meal and its derivatives.
In desolventizing-toasting (DT) applied in the production of soybean oil meal for animal feeding, the time-temperature-moisture profile of the process permits, in addition to solvent removal, a heat treatment sufficient to inactivate the undesirable enzymes and inhibitors and to improve the palatability of the meal to animals (toasting). The most common type of desolventizer-toaster consists of a vertical cylindrical stack of compartments or "pans". Each compartment is fitted with stirrers or racks attached to a central vertical shaft. Spent flakes are fed at the top of the desolventizer-toaster. The pan floors are equipped with adjustable-speed rotating valve, to permit downward movement of the material , through the pans, at the desirable rate. Two methods of heating are used: direct steam heating and indirect steam heating. For heating with indirect steam, the pans are equipped with double bottoms acting as steam jackets. For direct steam heating, hot live steam is
injected into the mass through spargers. The rotating stirrers spread the material and provide the necessary mixing action. Direct steam is used for three reasons:
* The transfer of heat from the heated surface of the pan floor to the oilseed material is slow and difficult, especially after a considerable proportion of the solvent has been removed and no fluid medium is available for heat transfer. In this case, direct contact between the solid material and condensing steam is a more efficient method of heating. Condensation of the steam adds moisture to the flakes.
* The added moisture facilitates the protein denaturation reactions leading to the inactivation of trypsin inhibitor. It is also believed that the toasting effect accomplished by the combined action of heat and moisture enhances the palatability of the meal to animals.
* The steam distillation effect is necessary in order to remove last traces of solvent from the meal.
The various models of vertical stack type DT's differ in the sequence of direct/indirect heating zones and several other features. In the FRENCH DT shown in Fig. 22, the top pans are indirect steam heated. They constitute the pre-desolventizing zone. The bottom pans are direct steam heated and they serve as the toasting/stripping zone. The meal coming out of this DT has about 18% moisture and a temperature of about 105^oC. It has to be dried and cooled. A separate dryer/cooler (DC) is used for this purpose (see below).
Figure 22: The FRENCH Desolventizer-toaster (DT)
Figure 22: The FRENCH Desolventizer-toaster (DT)
(Courtesy of the FRENCH Oilmill Machinery Co.)
The DE SMET DT shown in Fig. 23 has 4 to 10 pans with steam heated bottoms. The apparatus is maintained at a slight negative pressure.
The meal dryer-cooler (DC) is similar to the DT in construction, but much shorter. Ambient air is used to dry and cool the meal before storage or bagging. The construction of a self-standing DC unit, offered by FRENCH, is shown in Fig. 24.
The DT and DC units can also be combined into one piece of equipment. Most manufacturers of desolventizing equipment also offer combined DTDC units. The operating principle of such a system, sold by LURGI is shown in Fig. 25.
A photograph of a 1200 ton per day desolventizer-toaster-dryer is given in Fig. 26.
Figure 23: The DE SMET Desolventizer-Toaster (DT)
Figure 23: The DE SMET Desolventizer-Toaster (DT)
(Courtesy of N.V. Extraction De Smet S.A.)
Figure 24: Self-standing dryer-cooler (DC)
Figure 24: Self-standing dryer-cooler (DC)
(Courtesy of the FRENCH Oilmill Machinery Co.)
Figure 25: Combined Desolventizer-toaster-dryer cooler (DTDC)
Figure 25: Combined Desolventizer-toaster-dryer cooler (DTDC)
(Courtesy of LURGI G.m.b.H.)
Figure 26: Desolventizer-toaster. Nominal capacity 1200 tpd.
Figure 26: Desolventizer-toaster. Nominal capacity 1200 tpd.
(Courtesy of Extractionstechnik G.A.m.b.H.)
While desolventizing-toasting is the standard method for the manufacture of soybean oil meal for animal feeding, this process is not suitable for the production of "white flakes", i.e. meal with minimum protein denaturation. As it can be seen in Fig.27, protein denaturation ( expressed as the reduction in Nitrogen Solubility Index, NSI) by treatment with live steam is very rapid. White flakes, which are the starting material for the production of soybean protein isolates, most concentrates and texturized products, must have a high NSI value.
Figure 27: Effect of Heat Treatment on Nitrogen Solubility of Soybean Oilmeal (Source: Weber, 1973)
Figure 27: Effect of Heat Treatment on Nitrogen Solubility of Soybean Oilmeal (Source: Weber, 1973)
The best method of desolventizing for the production of white flakes is flash desolventizing (FD). In this process, the solvent laden spent flakes coming out from the extractor are fluidized in a stream of superheated solvent vapours. The superheat of the vapour provides the energy for the evaporation of solvent from the flakes. The turbulent nature of the flake-vapour flow permits extremely rap[id heat and mass transfer. Protein denaturation is minimized, mainly because of the short heating time. A short stripping stage may be necessary to complete solvent removal and rapid cooling is a must for preventing undue reduction of NDI. The flow-diagram of a flash desolventizing system is shown in Fig.28.
Figure 28: Flash Desolventizing Syst</b><strong>em
Figure 28: Flash Desolventizing System
( Courtesy of H.L.S. Ltd.)
REFERENCES
DE SMET s.a. (1990)
Commercial Communication Extraction De Smet s.a., Edegem, Belgium
EXTRACTIONTECHNIK G.m.b.H. (1990)
Commercial Communication Deutsche Babcock Group, Hamburg, Germany
FRENCH U.S.A. (1990)
Commercial Communication The French Oil Mill Machinery Company, Piqua, Ohio, U.S.A.
H.L.S. (1991)
Commercial Communication H.L.S. Industrial Engineering Company, Petah-Tikva Israel
LURGI (1990)
Commercial Communication Lurgi G.m.b.H., Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Moore, N.H. (1983)
Oilseed handling and preparation prior to solvent extraction. J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. 60:141A
Norris, F.A. (1982)
Extraction of Fats and Oils in "Bailey's Industrial oil and Fat Products", D. Swern, ed. 4th edition, Vol. 2
Snyder, H.E. and T.W. Kwon (1987)
"Soybean Utilization" Van Nostrand Reinhold Company, New York
Weber, K. (1970)
Solid/liquid extraction in the Carrousel Extractor Chemiker-Zeitung/Chemische Apparatur Verfahrenstechnik 94:56-62
Weber,K. (1973)
Process technique and equipment for the production of oilseed meal with adjustable content of water soluble proteins. DFG- Meeting, Berlin
Weber, K. (1982)
Predesolventizing of soybean meal. AOCS World Conference on Oilseed and Edible Oil Processing The Hague Japan Publications Inc. Tokyo and New York
<section>5</section>
CHAPTER 4
EDIBLE SOYBEAN FLOURS AND GRITS
4.1 Introduction
Flours and grits are the simplest of all edible soybean protein products. The extent of processing which goes into their production is minimal. The cost of extra processing, starting with the dehulled clean beans (for full fat flour) or with dehulled white flakes (for defatted flour), has been estimated at 60 to 100 U.S.$ per ton. The total cost of the product, in the bag, at the production site, would then be less than $ 400 per ton. Recently (January 1991) a leading supplier in the U.S. has quoted soybean flour at $14.00/cwt. ( approximately $ 308 per metric ton), ex factory. This makes soybean flour one of the most economical sources of edible protein. Specialty flours, produced in smaller quantities, may be more expensive.
The annual production of edible soybean flours and grits increased from some 60,000 tons in 1960 to about 2,000,000 tons today.
The production of edible soybean flours and grits may take place either as an independent industrial activity or as a natural sequel of oil-mill operations. In fact, many oil-mills, recently erected in various parts of the world, feature production lines or departments for edible products, in addition to the usual oil and meal lines. The principal differences between processing for meal and processing for edible flour are in the quality of the raw material, the need for dehulling and the more rigorous control of the sanitary conditions of the plant and the process. Frequently, oil-mill operators prefer to produce only edible products or only meal, in alternate fashion rather than simultaneously.
4.2 Defintions, composition and quality parameters
4-2-1 Definition and classification of edible soy flours and grits
Soy flours are products obtained by finely grinding full-fat dehulled soybeans or defatted flakes made from dehulled soybeans. To be called soy flour, at least 97% of the product must pass through a 100-mesh standard screen.
Soy grits have essentially the same composition as flour, but coarser granulation. They are usually classified into three groups, according to particle size:
Coarse 10 to 20 mesh
Medium 20 to 40 mesh
Fine 40 to 80 mesh
Circle and Smith (1972) have pointed out that the name soy flour may be misleading, since its composition is totally different from that of the popular product commonly known as flour, i.e. wheat flour. They suggested alternative names such as "defatted soy solids" (as non-fat milk solids) or "soy powder" or "soy pulverate".
Edible soy flours are made from dehulled beans, hence their relatively low crude fibre and high protein content.
Soy flours (or grits) are classified according to their lipid content as follows:
* Defatted soy flour, obtained from solvent extracted flakes, contains less than 1% oil.
* Full-fat soy flour, made from unextracted,dehulled beans, contains about 18% to 20% oil.
* Low fat soy flour, made by adding back some oil to defatted soy flour. Lipid content varies according to specifications, usually between 4.5% and 9%.The most common range is between 5% and 6%.
* High fat soy flour, produced by adding back soybean oil to defatted flour, usually at the level of 15%.
* Lecithinated soy flour, made by adding soybean lecithin to defatted, low fat or high fat soy flours in order to increase their dispersibility and impart emulsifying properties.. Lecithin content varies according to specifications, usually up to 15%.
Commercial soy flours and grits are further classified according to their Nitrogen Solubility Index (NSI), or their Nitrogen Dispersibility Index (NDI). It will be recalled that these parameters indicate the extent of protein denaturation and hence the intensity of heat treatment which has been applied to the starting material. Flours made from "white flakes" have NSI values of about 80%, while those made from toasted flakes show NSI levels of 10 to 20%. Other grades are available over the entire range of intermediate NSI values.The specification of a specific value of NSI reflects , in fact, a compromise between the need to maintain the functional properties of the soy proteins or some enzyme activity, and the desire to inactivate anti-nutritional factors and eliminate the beany taste, all in function of the end use.
4-2-2 Composition
The typical composition of different types of soy flours is given in Table 4-1. The basic composition of soybeans is added for comparison. Since the moisture content of the products may vary during storage, the percentage figures for protein, fat, fibre and ash are given on moisture free basis. A typical level of moisture content is also shown.
Table 4.1 Typical analyses of soybeans and soy flour
( Protein, fat, fibre and ash given on moisture-free basis; Protein % = N% x 6.25)
Material Protein Moisture Fat Fibre Ash
Soybeans
Full-fat soy flour
Defatted soy flour
Lecithinated soy flour 42.6 11.0 20.0 5.3 5.0
Source: Circle and Smith (1972)
4-2-3 Quality standards
In addition to the identity standards and definitions mentioned above, quality standards have been formulated by official agencies (e.g. FAO/WHO/UNICEF Protein Advisory Group). Trade specifications usually exceed the official standards. The quality parameters which constitute a specification usually include:
a- Composition: 
Protein a minimum value
Fat a maximum value for defatted flour a range for others
Lecithin
a range for lecithinated flours
Crude fibre a maximum value
Ash
a maximum value
Moisture a maximum value
b- Physical parameters:
Granulation as mesh number or particle size distribution.
c- Microbiology:
Total plate count a maximum value
Coliforms a maximum value
Salmonella a maximum value (usually 0)
d- Heat treatment history: 
Protein solubility
as NSI, NDI, PSI or PDI
Tryps ininhibitor activity 
Urease activity 
Lipoxidase activity for enzyme-active flour.
Available lysine 
e- Sensory parameters: 
Colour
Taste 
Odour 
f- Defects: 
Insect parts a maximum value or total absence
Foreign material " " "
Black specks " " "
g- Commercial: 
Packaging, delivery etc. 
4.3 Full fat soy flour and grits
4-3-1 Producti on processes
a- Oil-mill related industrial production process: The process for the production of full fat soy flour and grits as a side line of large scale oil-mill operation is relatively simple. It consists of three major steps: dehulling, heat treatment and milling.
Cleaned, grade A yellow soybeans are dried, tempered, classified to separate split beans, cracked and dehulled by aspiration. These operations are essentially similar to the seed preparation steps of an oil-mill, from raw material silos up to the obtention of dehulled meats, and have been discussed in detail in the previous chapter. (Section 3-2-3, a to e ).
The dehulled meats coming out of the vibrating screen are now subjected to humid heat, to achieve the specified product NSI value. This is conveniently done in a vertical conditioner with direct and indirect steam heating sections.
This step is obviously omitted if the final product is to be unheated (enzyme active) flour. The last sections of the conditioner are used to dry the meats to a moisture content below 10%.
The properly conditioned and dried meats are cooled and then finely ground. Hammer mills, pin mills, impact turbo mills and similar pulverizers are used to grind the meats so that not more than 3% of the product will be retained by a 100-mesh screen. In practice , full fat soy flour is difficult to screen on such fine sieves, due to particle agglomeration. Air classification systems which separate the fine product and recirculate the coarse fraction through the mill are more adequate than screen sifters.
b- Alternative processes: In the framework of the efforts to promote direct consumption of soybeans in the less industrialized parts of the world, methods for the preparation of full-fat soybean flour with a minimal amount of processing have been developed. These methods permit production of flours independently of the oil industry.
One such process has been described by Mustakas et al.(1967) In this village scale production method, the soybeans are soaked in water, then cooked in boiling water, air dried, cracked by hand, winnowed to separate the hulls and finally hand ground in a mortar or any other grinding device available.
A more industrialized version of the process (Mustakas et al.(1970) is similar in most aspects to the large scale production process described above, except for the step of heat treatment. In this process the flour is submitted to a continuous high temperature-short time humid heat treatment , using an extruder-cooker. The dehulled meats are first equilibrated with moisture in a direct steam fed conditioner/ tempering bin, then cooked under pressure in a continuous extruder/cooker. The extrudate is cooled and ground as usual. The HTST treatment eliminates the beany flavour and produces a light, open structured flour. A slightly different process, also centred around extrusion cooking, known as the WENGER PROCESS , is available from the Wenger Mixer Manufacturing Co. More recently, low-cost extruders have been made available for the less sophisticated extrusion-cooking applications. "Low-cost" may mean $ 5,000, compared to $ 100,000 for a regular extrusion system. Such
low-cost extruders have been used for the preparation of full-fat soy flour. According to Lorenz et al.(1980), the total investment needed for a 550 kg./hr plant was (1980) about $120,000 including building and land. The cost of production, including raw materials, packaging materials and overhead was $ 223 per ton. Extruded full-fat soybean flour was being produced with a low-cost extruder in Mexico in 1980.
In extrusion cooking, the material reaches temperatures in the order of 150^oC. At such high temperatures, destruction of urease activity is no longer a credible indicator for the inactivation of trypsin inhibitor, which must be monitored directly.
The BUHLER PROCESS developed by Buhler Co. in Switzerland, is based on very fine grinding and fast heating. Since the resulting powder has been suggested as an alternative for soymilk solids, the Buhler Process will be described in the section dealing with soymilk (Chapter 8).
A process, based on pre-germinated beans has been described by Suberbie et al.(1981). The beans are soaked in water for 3 hours and allowed to germinate. At the end of the germination period, the soybeans are steamed, dried to 6% moisture, dehulled and ground in a cooled hammer mill. Germination resulted in flavour and odour improvement. Milling capacity was impaired by germination. Pre-germinated full-fat soybean flour has been produced commercially in Mexico.
4-3-2 Utilization
The principal use of full-fat soybean flour, as well as re-fatted and lecithinated flours, is in the bakery industry. Two types of flour are used: enzyme-active and enzyme-inactive.
Enzyme-active full-fat soybean flour is prepared without heat treatment and has a high NSI value around 80%. It is used in bakery products (white bread and rolls), mainly for its lipoxidase activity. Lipoxidase catalyses oxidative bleaching of the carotenoid pigments in wheat flour. Enzyme-active soybean flour is a valuable "natural" flour bleaching agent, especially where the use of chemical bleaching agents has been prohibited. Lipoxidase activity is also beneficial to the mechanical properties of the dough. Since the soybean product is added in relatively small quantities ( up to 0.5% on flour basis in bread and buns in the U.S.A. ) the beany flavour of unheated soybeans is not a limiting factor. Usually, enzyme-active full-fat soy flour is not sold as such, but rather in mixtures containing other ingredients such as corn flour.
With the development of successful flash desolventizing systems which permit desolventizing without appreciable enzyme inactivation, defatted enzyme-active flours have largely replaced the full-fat product, especially in the U.S.A.
Enzyme-inactivated (heated) full-fat soybean flours, alone or with re-fatted and lecithinated soy flours, is mainly used in the heavier types of cake batters, such as sponge cake and pound cake. It contributes to the richness of the cake while increasing the proportion of water that can be added to the mix. Due to their oil and phospholipid content, these flours exert egg and shortening sparing effects and act as emulsifiers. In these formulae, soybean flours are used at the level of 3-5%, based on flour weight. Full-fat or lecithinated soy flour with high nitrogen solubility (NSI of 80%) has been found to improve eating quality and reduce fat absorption in doughnuts.
4.4 Defatted soy flours and grits
4-4-1 Production processes
The processes for the manufacture of raw or heated dehulled solvent extracted flakes have been described in the previous sections (Chapter 3).
Usually, all the flakes made for edible products are flash-desolventized, then carefully steam-heated to the desired NSI value.
The final milling is critical and energy consuming. Although identity standards require milling to 97% minus 100-mesh, specialty flours (such as those used as milk solids replacement in infant formulae) are ground to a finer particle size.
At such levels of fineness, the conventional hammer mill is practically useless. Impact turbo mills or high-speed pin mills have to be used.
4-4-2: Utilization:
a- Use in bakery and other cereal products:
Nutritionally, soybean protein is an excellent complement to lysine-limited cereal protein, hence the basis for the use of soy flour as an economical protein supplement in bread, tortillas, pasta and other cereal products.Supplementation of bread and other cereal staples with defatted soy flour has been promoted in a number of countries, and even enforced in some. The use of defatted soy flour in bread does not create any appreciable technological or quality problems, as long as less than 10% of the wheat flour has been replaced by soy flour. At higher replacement levels, up to 15%, loaf volume and crumb texture may be impaired. Baking quality can be recovered, however, by means of some adjustments such as higher yeast level, use of lecithin and other emulsifying agents etc.
Another bakery related potential use of soy flour in combination with cereals is in the production of the so-called "composite flours." These are mixtures of flours, starches and other ingredients, supposed to replace wheat flour, totally or partially, in bakery products. Extensive research projects aimed at the development of such flours have been sponsored by international and national development agencies in the last 20 years or so. The main reason for developing composite flours is to relieve the economy of countries where wheat is not grown, from the burden of importing this commodity. Other reasons include the production of alternative baking flours for people who cannot tolerate wheat products (e.g. coeliac disease patients).
Considerable quantities of soy flour ( 1.5 to 2% on flour weight basis) are used in bakery products, particularly in white bread, as a replacement for nonfat milk solids. In this application, soy flour (and sometimes soy protein concentrate) is used in combination with whey solids. Milk replacer blends, consisting mainly of defatted soy flour, whey solids, caseinates and other nutritional or functional ingredients are available at protein content levels of 20% to 40%.
In many applications, especially in the U.S.A. and Europe, the largest quantity of soy flours is used in bakery products, not for nutritional reasons but rather for their functional characteristics.
Enzyme-active defatted flour is used as a bleaching and dough improving agent as discussed in the previous section dealing with full-fat flours.The characteristics of such a flour ( SOYBAR, made by Solbar Hatzor Ltd.), as reported by the manufacturer, are given below, as an example:
Product description: Enzyme active defatted soy flour, derived from high quality, dehulled soybeans. Has a mild flavour and aroma profile and a light cream colour.
Characteristics: Highly dispersible in water. Has excellent water binding properties.
Specifications:
Protein (as is) 50% min.
Moisture 10% max.
Crude fibre 4% max.
Ash 6.5% max.
Fat 1.0% max.
Particle size 95% less than 74 microns
Standard plate count 50,000/g. max.
Salmonella in 200g. Negative
E. Coli in 1g. Negative
Packaging: 20 kgs. net weight, in multi-ply, valve-pack, kraft paper bags with polyliner.
Defatted soy flours with 50-75% protein dispersibility are extensively used in bakery products. They increase the water absorption capacity of flours in bread dough and cake batters. In cakes,they improve film forming and even distribution of air cells. As a result, even cake texture and more tender crumb structure are achieved. In hard cookies, soy flour improves machining. In all these products, soy flour is used at the level of 2-5%.
More thoroughly toasted flours and grits are used to impart a pleasant nutty flavour to whole-grain and multi-grain specialty breads.
An important application of defatted soybean flour and grits in combination with cereals is in the production of nutritionally balanced all-purpose food blends, distributed to under-nourished populations or in cases of food shortage emergencies. The best known of these blends are: CMS (corn-milk-soy), developed in the U.S.A. by the Northern Regional Research Centre in cooperation with the American Corn Millers Federation, National Institute of Health and AID, CS (corn-soy) and WS (wheat-soy). More than 1.5 million tons of CMS have been distributed between 1966 and 1979. An "instant" CMS has been also developed. CMS can be used in soups, gruels, porridges etc. typically, CMS contains 17.5% defatted soy flour, 15% non-fat milk solids, about 60% corn. CS contains 22% soy flour and 71% corn. WS has 20% soy, 53% wheat bulgur and 20% wheat protein concentrate. Another well-known blend is INCAPARINA, developed by the Instituto de Nutricion de Centro America y Panama (INCAP), to
fight children malnutrition. The oilseed protein source in the original formula of INCAP was cottonseed, but it has been replaced by soybean flour.
b- As a raw material for further processing: White flakes and defatted soy flour with a high protein solubility serve as the starting raw material for the manufacture of most protein concentrates, isolated soy protein and extrusion- texturized soy flour. They are also used, alone or in combination with whole soybeans , as a starting material for the production of soy sauce.
REFERENCES
Dubois, D.K. and W.J. Hoover (1981)
Soya Protein Products in Cereal Grain Foods J. Amer. oil Chem. Soc. 58:343
Hayes, R.E.; J.I. Wadsworth and J.J. Spadaro (1978)
Corn and Wheat Based Blended Food Formulations with Cottonseed or Peanut Flour Cereal Food World 23: 548
Lorenz, K.; G.R. Jansen and J. Harper
Nutrient Stability of Full-fat Soy Flour and Corn-Soy Blends Produced by Low-cost Extrusion Cereal Foods World, 25:161
Milligan, E.D.; J.H. Amlie; J. Reyes; A. Garcia and B. Meyer (1981)
Processing for Production of Edible Soya Flour J. Amer. Oil Chem. Soc. 58:331
Mustakas G.C.; W.J. Albrecht; G.N. Bookwalter and E.L. Griffen, Jr. (1967)
Full-fat Soy Flour by a Simple Process for Villagers ARS 71-34, U.S.D.A. , Washington D.C.
Mustakas, G.C.; W.J. Albrecht; G.N. Bookwalter; J.E. McGhee; W.F. Kwolek and E.L. Griffen, Jr. (1970)
Extruder Processing to Improve Nutritional Quality, Flavour and Keeping Quality of Full-fat Soy Flour. Food Technol. 24: 1290
SOLBAR HATZOR (1991)
Commercial Communication Solbar Hatzor Ltd., Ashdod, Israel
Suberbie, F.; D. Mendizabal and C. Mendizabal (1981)
Germination of Soybeans and its Modifying Effects on the Quality of Full-fat Soy Flour J. Amer. Oil Chem. Soc. 58:192
Thomas, G.R. (1981)
The Art of Soybean Meal and Hull Grinding J. Amer. Oil Chem. Soc. 58:194
<section>6</section>
CHAPTER 5
SOYBEAN PROTEIN CONCENTRATES (SPC)
5.1 Introduction
Edible soybean protein concentrates are relatively new products. Their availability as commercial products dates from 1959. In the last 30 years or so, these versatile products have become important ingredients, well accepted by many food industries. In many applications, they simply replace soy flours. In others, they have specific functions which cannot be performed by soy flours.
Historically,the need for the development of soybean protein concentrates stemmed primarily from two considerations: to increase protein concentration and to improve flavour.
It is very difficult to avoid the occurrence of the green-beany flavour of soybeans in untoasted full-fat or defatted soy flour, prepared in the conventional way. Beany flavour is one of the major objectionable characteristics, limiting the use of conventional soy flours. One of the objectives of the further processing of flours into concentrates is to extract the particular components which are responsible for the bitterness and beany taste.
As shown in the previous chapter, the maximum level of protein content in soy flour, even after nearly complete removal of hulls and oil, is about 55% (moisture-free basis). In certain applications, such as in meat products, a soybean protein ingredient with a higher percentage of protein is often preferable.
Soybean protein concentrates normally cost 2 to 2.5 times more than defatted soy flour. Considering the relative protein contents of these two products , the cost per unit weight of protein is about 80% higher in the concentrate.
The starting material for the production of soy protein concentrates is dehulled, defatted soybean meal with high protein solubility (white flakes). The concentration of protein is increased by removing most of the soluble non-protein constituents. These constituents are primarily soluble carbohydrates (mono, di and oligosaccharides), but also some low molecular weight nitrogenous substances and minerals. Normally, 750 kilograms of soybean protein concentrate are obtained from one metric ton of defatted soybean flakes.
There are three major methods for extracting these components in a selective manner, without solubilizing the major protein fractions. These are not different methods for manufacturing the same product, but each method produces a different type of concentrate, with distinct characteristics and specific uses. These methods are known as:
* The aqueous alcohol wash process
* The acid wash process
* Heat denaturation/water wash process
5.2 Defintion, compostion, types
The Association of American Feed Control Officials, Inc. (AAFCO), specifies soy protein concentrates as follows:
" 84.12: Soy Protein Concentrate is prepared from high quality sound, clean, dehulled soybean seeds by removing most of the oil and water soluble non-protein constituents and must contain not less than 70% protein on a moisture free basis."
( from the '89 Soya Bluebook.)
Following is the composition of a typical food-grade soy protein concentrate ( SOLCON, made by Solbar Hatzor Ltd.) as specified by the manufacturer:
Protein (mfb) .
70% min.
Moisture 8% max.
Crude fibre 4.5% max.
Ash 7% max
Particle size 95 % < 150 microns
Fat 1% max
Standard plate count 15,000/g. max
Salmonella in 200 g. Negative
E. Coli in 1 g Negative
As explained above, there are three basic types of soy protein concentrates, distinguished according to the method used for extraction of the non-protein solubles. All three types have basically the following proximate composition, on a moisture-free basis:
Protein (Nx6.25) 70%
Insoluble carbohydrates 20%
Ash 5%to 8%
Lipids 1%
Soy protein concentrates are further characterized by their protein solubility index. Soy proteins are rendered insoluble by each of the three extraction processes. However,it is possible to increase the solubility of the protein in the concentrate by further processing, for example by neutralization of acid washed concentrate with alkali. Concentrates made by heat denaturation/water leaching processes are irreversibly denatured and darker in colour. Alcohol-wash concentrate has a low NSI values (10 to 15%) due to denaturation of the protein by the aqueous alcohol. The molecular changes in the proteins caused by alcohols are, however, different from those resulting from heat denaturation. Thus, alcohol-wash concentrate retains most of the functional properties ( slurry viscosity, emulsification power etc.) despite its low protein solubility as determined by the standard NSI or NDI tests.
The dispersibility and functionality of alcohol-wash concentrates can be increased by steam injection or jet-cooking, and improved further by high-shear homogenization. ( Soy Protein Council 1987).
Much of the characteristic beany flavour is also usually removed by the extraction process. Soybean protein concentrates are relatively bland. The flatus-producing oligosaccharides of soybean flour,raffinose and stachyose, are also efficiently removed by the solvents used in the production of concentrates.
Soy protein concentrates are marketed in various forms: granular, flour and spray dried. In addition, texturized concentrates are also available. These texturized products will be discussed in a separate chapter.
Since some low molecular weight proteins are also extracted along with the sugars, the amino acid composition of the concentrates may differ slightly from that of the original flour. (Table 5-1).
Table 5.1 Amino acid composition of SCP and soy flour
(grams per 16g. notrogen)
AMINO ACID Soy flour Soy protein concentrate (SCP)
Alcohol wash Acid wash
Alanine
Arginine
Aspartic acid
Half-cystine
Glutamic acid
Glycine
Histidine
Isoleucine
Leucine
Lysine
Methionine
Phenylalanine
Proline
Serine
Threonine
Tryptophan
Tyrosine
Valine
Source: Campbell et al. (1985)
5.3 Production processes
5-3-1 The aqueous alcohol wash process
The process is based on the ability of aqueous solutions of lower aliphatic alcohols ( methanol, ethanol and isopropyl alcohol) to extract the soluble sugar fraction of defatted soy flour without solubilizing its proteins. The optimal concentration of alcohol for this process is about 60% by weight.
The theory of solvent extraction (see para. 3-2-4)is applicable to the extraction of defatted soy flour with aqueous alcohol.
Starting with defatted white flakes as raw material, the process consists of the following steps: Liquid-solid extraction, removal and recovery of the solvent from the liquid extract, removal and recovery of the solvent from the extracted flakes, drying and grinding of the flakes.
a- Solid-liquid extraction: This can be carried out batchwise or continuously. Continuous extraction is justified for relatively large scale operations. According to Campbell et al.(1985), continuous processes are employed for plants with typical capacities over 5,000 tons per year. Unlike oilseed crushing industries, smaller plants are not uncommon in this branch. The batch process is, therefore, rather widely applied. The methods and types of equipment used are essentially similar to those encountered in oil extraction plants: horizontal belt and basket extractors, stationary and rotary cell extractors etc. In the case of alcohol extraction, the solvents are quite volatile and flammable. Adequate precautions for the prevention of fire and explosion are necessary.
The reason for using high-NSI white flakes as the starting material is not necessarily related to the objective of obtaining a product with high protein solubility.( As explained above, this would not help anyhow , due to the different type of protein denaturation caused by the alcohol.) The principal reason for preferring this type of raw material is due to the fact that the percentage of extractable soluble sugars in white flakes is higher than in toasted meal. Toasting renders the sugars less soluble by binding them to proteins (Maillard reaction) or by caramelization. As a result of this type of condensation reactions, the sugars are no longer extractable by the solvent and they remain in the product, lowering the protein concentration in it. Furthermore, the darker colour of concentrates made from overheated meal is also objectionable, and their nutritional value is lower (lower lysine availability.)
b- Removal and recovery of the solvent from the liquid extract: The alcohols are removed from the liquid extract by evaporation and rectified by distillation. They are then brought to the proper concentration and recycled through the extractor. The distillation residue is an aqueous solution of the sugars and other solubles. It is concentrated to the consistency of honey and sold as " soy molasses". Typically, soy molasses contain 50% total soluble solids. These solids consist of carbohydrates (60%), proteins and other nitrogenous substances (10%), minerals (10%), fats and lipoids (20%). It is mainly used as a caloric ingredient and as a binding agent in animal feeds.
c- Desolventizing the solids: After extraction, the solvent saturated flakes are desolventized . The methods are essentially the same as for the removal of hexane from soybean meal flakes. Flash desolventizing, using superheated vapours of the alcohol-water mixture can be applied to protein concentrates. Any excess water left in the flakes after desolventizing is removed by hot air drying.
d- Grinding: The methods and equipment used to grind soy protein concentrate flakes are essentially the same as those employed in the production of soy flours (see Section 4-3-1).
5-3-2 The acid-wash process
This process is based on the pH-dependence of the solubility of soybean proteins,discussed in Section 1-6-2. It will be recalled that the majority of soybean proteins exhibit minimum solubility at pH 4.2 to 4.5 (isoelectric region). Therefore, it is possible to extract the sugars, without solubilizing the majority of the proteins, using, as a solvent, water to which an acid has been added so as to keep the pH at the isoelectric region.
The acid-wash process has the obvious advantage of using a non-flammable, non-explosive, non-toxic and inexpensive solvent: water. To a certain extent, this is also the disadvantage of the process. Separation of the solid from the solvent is more difficult and less complete, due to the fact that the flakes absorb considerable quantities of water and swell. Gravity draining is not suitable for efficient solid-extract separation. Rotary vacuum filters or decanting centrifuges must be used instead.
A batch process using horizontal decanting centrifuges is shown in Fig. 29. Defatted soy flakes or flour are mixed with acidified water in an agitated vessel. The slurry is then fed to the decanter centrifuge which separates the extracted solids from the extract (whey). The solids are discharged continuously at approximately 30% dry matter content. The solids can be dried at this stage, to yield an "isoelectric" concentrate of low protein solubility. If a more functionally active, neutral concentrate is desired, the isoelectric solid cake is resuspended in water and the acidity is neutralized. A second step of centrifugal separation gives a cake of neutral concentrate with a protein content of 75% on dry matter basis. This cake also retains about 70% water, by weight.
The cake is usually wet-milled to a fine slurry and spray dried. The protein solubility of the neutralized product is quite high, giving NSI values above 60%, provided that white flakes were used as the starting material.
The liquid extract containing sugars ,minerals, the protein fractions which are soluble at pH 4.5, and other soluble components is usually known as "whey", in analogy to the process of cheese making. Unlike cheese whey, however, soy whey has no use and must be discarded as waste. The reasons for not using soy whey for animal feeding will be discussed in the next chapter, dealing with isolated soybean protein.
5-3-3 Heat denaturation/ water extraction process
In this process, the proteins of defatted soy meal are first rendered insoluble by thermal denaturation, using humid heat. The heat-treated meal is extracted with hot water, which dissolves the sugars.
Figure 29: SCP Production Using Decanter Centrifuges
Figure 29: SCP Production Using Decanter Centrifuges
( Courtesy: Alfa-Laval)
Since the process is based on solid-liquid extraction using water as the solvent, the operations and equipment systems are essentially similar to those used in the acid-wash process, discussed in the previous paragraph.
5.4 Utilization
5-4-1 Basic considerations
Just as with soy flours, soy protein concentrates are used in food products for their nutritional characteristics or for their functional properties or for both.
Nutritionally, the attractive features of concentrates include: their high protein content, the near-absence of anti-tryptic and other anti-nutritional factors, the absence of flatulence and the substantial "dietary fibre" content. The nutritional value of the protein in the concentrates of different types, expressed as Protein Efficiency Ratio (PER) is slightly lower than that of soy flour protein. (Table 5-2). This is probably due to the slight fractionation effect of the extraction process, mentioned above.
Table 5.2 Per * value of soy protein products
PRODUCT Protein Efficiency Ratio (PER)
Soy flour (defatted and toasted)
+ 1.0% Methionine
Soy Protein Concentrate
+ 1.5% Methionine
Soy Protein Isolate
+ 1.5% Methionine
2.2 to 2.3
2.25 or higher
2.0 to 2.2
2.5 or higher
1.1 to 1.7
2.0 or higher
(*) The PER values corrected to: casein = 2.5
Source: Soy Protein Council (1987)
The most important functional characteristics of soy protein concentrates are: water binding (water adsorption) capacity, fat binding capacity and emulsification properties.
5-4-2 Use in bakery products
Unless higher protein fortification levels are necessary, there is no special reason for using soy protein concentrates in bakery products. Nutritionally and functionally, soy flours do the same job, more economically.
5-4-3 Meat products
This area probably represents the most important application of soy protein concentrates in the food industry. SCP is used mostly in comminuted meat, poultry and fish products ( patties, emulsion type sausages, fish sticks etc.) to increase water ant fat retention. The nutritional contribution of soy protein in low-meat, high-fat, low-cost products may also be significant. Typical usage levels, on moisture-free basis, are: 5-10% in patties, 2-8% in chili, 2-12% in meatballs, 3.5% max. in sausages, 5-10% in fish sticks. (Campbell et al. 1985).
5-4-4 Other uses
Soybean protein concentrates have been used as stabilized dispersions in milk-like beverages and simulated dairy products such as sour cream analog. Campbell et al.(1985) present a formula for a milk-like beverage, suggested by A.E. Staley Mfg. Co., producers of the soy protein concentrate and the corn syrup solids components in the formula. The formula and directions for the preparation of the beverage are given below:
Formula for "Soy Concentrate Milk":
Soy protein concentrate
Sucrose 0.6 %
Corn syrup solids 2.0 %
Fat 
Mono-and di-glycerides 0.1 %
Salt 0.05 %
Water 88.25 %
The SCP is hydrated with water in a high-shear mixer, then all other ingredients, except the fat are added and mixed thoroughly. The mixture is heated to 65-70^oC. The fat (apparently a hydrogenated, well deodorized oil) and flavouring agents are added. The mixture is homogenized, cooled and packaged.
Non-dairy coffee whiteners can also be made, using the same principle, but different ingredients and proportions.
REFERENCES
ALFA-LAVAL, (1990)
Commercial Communication Alfa-Laval Sharpless Ltd., Camberley, U.K.
Campbell, M.F.; C.W. Kraut; W.C. Yackel and Ho Seung Yang (1985).
"Soy Protein Concentrates", in "New Protein Foods", A.M. Altschul and H.L. Wilke, Editors. Vol. 5, p. 301. Academic Press, Inc. Orlando, Florida.
Ohren, J.A. (1981)
Process and Product Characteristics for Soya Concentrates and Isolates. J. Amer. Oil Chem. Soc. 58: 333
Sair, L. (1959)
U.S.Patent 2,881,076
SOLBAR HATZOR (1991)
Commercial Communication Solbar Hatzor Ltd., Ashdod, Israel.
Soy Protein Council (1987)
"Soy Protein Products, Characteristics, Nutritional Aspects and Utilization."Soy Protein Council, Washington DC
Soya Bluebook (1989)
Soyatech, Inc. Bar Harbor, ME.
Waggle, D.H., C.D. Decker and C.W. Colar (1981)
Soya Products in Meat, Poultry and Seafood J. Amer. Oil Chem. Soc. 58: 341
<section>7</section>
CHAPTER 6
ISOLATED SOYBEAN PROTEIN (ISP)
6.1 Introduction
Isolated soybean proteins, or soybean protein isolates as they are also called, are the most concentrated form of commercially available soybean protein products. They contain over 90% protein, on a moisture free basis.
Soy protein isolates have been known and produced for industrial purposes, mainly as adhesives for the paper coating industry, well before World War II. ISP's for food use, however, have been developed only in the early fifties.
The basic principles of ISP production are simple. Using defatted soy flour or flakes as the starting material, the protein is first solubilized in water. The solution is separated from the solid residue. Finally, the protein is precipitated from the solution, separated and dried. In the production of ISP for food use, in contrast to ISP for industrial use, care is taken to minimize chemical modification of the proteins during processing. Obviously,the sanitary requirements are also much more demanding.
Being almost pure protein, ISP can be made to be practically free of objectionable odour, flavour, colour, anti-nutritional factors and flatulence. Furthermore, the high protein concentration provides maximum formulation flexibility when ISP's are incorporated into food products. These and other advantages have been the source of highly optimistic forecasts regarding the widespread use of ISP. Although the volume of production increased and although several production facilities have been erected in the U.S.A., Europe, Japan, India and Brazil, the tonnage figures are far from those predicted when food grade ISP was first marketed.
The principal reasons for this situation are: the relatively high production cost (see below), nutritional and regulatory limitations , the inability of ISP-based texturized products to compete with texturized soy flour and texturized SPC, and finally,the competition of other abundant "isolated proteins", particularly casein and caseinates. Nevertheless, it should be noted that many novel isolated proteins,such as those obtained from cottonseed, peanuts, fish, squid etc. have been much less successful than ISP. Many of these did not reach the stage of commercial production.
Although actual trade figures are not disclosed, the growth in sales of concentrates and isolates is said to be, at present, stronger than that of flours.
ISP can be further modified and processed into more sophisticated products. These include: spun fibres from ISP as an ingredient for muscle food analogs, proteinates and enzyme modified ISP.
The cost of isolated soybean proteins is five to seven times higher than that of defatted soy flour. On an equal protein weight basis the cost ratio of these two products is nearly 3:1. The main reasons for the added cost will become evident from the description of the manufacturing methods for ISP.
6.2 Defintion, composition, types
The specification of the Association of American Feed Control Officials, Inc. (AAFCO) defines ISP is as follows:
"Soy Protein Isolate is the major proteinaceous fraction of soybeans prepared from dehulled soybeans by removing the majority of non-protein components and must contain not less than 90% protein on a moisture-free basis." (from '90 Soya Bluebook).
There are no official standard definitions or specifications for the various types of isolates. ISP is bought and sold on the basis of specifications formulated by the manufacturer or the user.
The typical composition of an isolated soy protein is shown in Table 6-1.
Table 6.1 Typical composition of ISP
(Moisture-free basis)
COMPONENT
WEIGHT PERCENT
Protein
Fat
Ash
Total carbohydrate
Source: Kolar et al. (1985)
The conventional procedure for ISP production is based on protein solubilization at neutral or slightly alkaline pH, and precipitation by acidification to the isoelectric region, near pH 4.5. The resulting product is "isoelectric ISP". It has low solubility in water and limited functional activity. Different "proteinates" can be produced by resuspending isoelectric ISP in water, neutralizing with different bases and spray-drying the resulting solution or suspension. According to the base used for neutralization sodium, potassium, ammonium or calcium "proteinates" are produced. The first three are highly soluble in water, producing solutions with very high viscosities, foaming, emulsification and gel forming properties. Calcium proteinate has low solubility. Low-solubility (inert) ISP's are used where the formulation calls for a high level of protein incorporation without excessive viscosity of other functional contributions.
Since spray-drying is the common drying method in the production of ISP, the primary physical form of ISP in commerce, is that of fine powders. Structured forms, such as granules, spun fibres and other fibrous forms are made by further processing. These forms will be discussed in a separate chapter, dealing with texturized products.
6.3 Production processes
6-3-1 The conventional process
This is the process commonly described in the literature and suggested by suppliers of equipment and complete plants. Exact processing conditions and the type of equipment used may vary from plant to plant.
An outline of the process is given in Fig.30.
Figure 30: Isolated Soybean Protein. Production Process Outline
Figure 30: Isolated Soybean Protein. Production Process Outline
a- Starting material: Dehulled, defatted, edible grade white flakes or meal with the highest possible protein solubility index are used. Although the rate of protein extraction from finely ground flour would be faster, flakes permit easier separation after extraction. In batch extraction, particle size has no effect on protein extraction yield, if extraction time is over 30 minutes.
b- Protein extraction: The flakes are mixed with the extraction medium in agitated, heated vessels. The extraction medium is water to which an alkali such as sodium hydroxide, lime, ammonia or tri-basic sodium phosphate has been added, so as to bring the Ph to neutral to slightly alkaline reaction. Under these conditions, the majority of the proteins go into solution. The sugars and other soluble substances are also dissolved.
* Alkalinity: More protein can be extracted at higher pH. However, the extracted proteins may undergo undesirable chemical modifications in strongly alkaline solutions. These include protein denaturation and chemical changes in amino acids. Excessively high pH also favours protein-carbohydrate interaction (Maillard reaction) which results in the formation of dark pigments and in loss of nutritive value. Furthermore, proteins precipitated from highly alkaline media tend to retain too much water, and do not settle well. In practice, the range between pH 7.5 and pH 9.0 is most commonly preferred.
One of the chemical reactions of amino acids in alkaline media has attracted particular attention. That is the destruction of the amino acid cystine, with the formation of dehydroalanine. In addition to the nutritional implications resulting from the loss of cystine, there might be also a toxicological aspect to consider. Dehydroalanine can react with free epsilon-amino groups of lysine, to produce lysinoalanine. This compound has been found to cause kidney lesions in rats under certain experimental conditions. The toxicity of lysinoalanine for man is still an open question.
* Extraction time: The course of nitrogen extraction from white flakes , using 0.03 molar calcium hydroxide as extractant is shown in Fig. 31. The amount of nitrogen extracted under these conditions increased steadily during the first 30 minutes and reached a nearly constant level after 45 minutes. The extraction time in industrial operation is, probably, in the order of 1 hour.
* Temperature: Protein extraction yield is considerably increased by raising the temperature, up to 80C.
* Solid/liquid ratio: Protein extraction yield is improved as the quantity of liquid medium used to extract a given weight of flakes is increased. After extraction and separation by filtration or centrifugation, the extracted flakes retain a considerable proportion of extract, about 2.5 times the weight of solid. In single-stage batch extraction, if the more liquid is used for extraction, the protein concentration in the extract is lower and the quantity of protein associated with the retained portion of the extract is smaller. On the other hand, larger volumes of liquid have to be handled per unit weight of protein produced. This means larger extraction vessels, centrifuges etc. and a larger volume of "whey" for disposal.
The choice of a solid/liquid ratio for extraction is, therefore, a matter of economical optimization. The ratios used in industry range apparently between 1:10 and 1:20.
* Heat treatment history of the meal: The NSI value of the starting material is the most important factor affecting isolation yield. (Fig. 32)
Figure 31: The Course of Soy Protein Extraction(0.03M Ca(OH)2, 55 C.) Source: Cogan et al.(1967)
Figure 31: The Course of Soy Protein Extraction
(0.03M Ca(OH)[2], 55^o C.) Source: Cogan et al.(1967)
Figure 32: Distribution of Nitrogen in the Three Streams of Soybean Protein Isolation, according to NSI of the meal. (Source: Cogan et al. 1967)
Figure 32: Distribution of Nitrogen in the Three Streams of Soybean Protein Isolation, according to NSI of the meal. (Source: Cogan et al. 1967)
* Agitation: As in any extraction operation, agitation increases the rate of protein solubilization. However, within the practical values of extraction time for batch operations (about one hour), little is gained by increasing the turbulence beyond that provided by moderate agitation. Furthermore, strong agitation causes excessive flake disintegration, increases the proportion of fine particles in the extract , rendering solid/liquid separation more difficult. Moderate agitation can be defined as any mixing operation that would keep the flakes in suspension within the extraction medium.
c- Solid-liquid separation after extraction: The extract contains considerable amount of fine particles of extracted flour, the elimination of which, prior to precipitation, is necessary in order to obtain a "curd" of acceptable purity.
Table 6-2 shows the effect of fine solids separation on the purity of the final product.
Table 6.2 Effect of extract clarification on the purity of ISP curd
Mesh # of sieve used for separation of solids
%Protein (N x 6.25) in dry curd
Centrifugation
Source: Cogan et al. (1967)
In industrial scale operation, it may prove convenient to carry out the extract clarification process in two steps: screening (vibrating screen, rotary screen or the like) to separate most of the solids, followed by centrifugal clarification of the extract. The wet solids can be pressed to remove as much entrapped extract as possible. All these operations can also be carried out in one step, using decanter centrifuges. A flow diagram of decanter-based process for the production of ISP is shown in Fig. 33.
Figure 33: ISP Production Using Decanter Centrifuges
Figure 33: ISP Production Using Decanter Centrifuges (Courtesy of Alfa-Laval)
d- Extract treatment: The clarified extract can be treated so as to remove certain impurities, thus improving the blandness, colour and nutritional quality and modifying the functional properties of the final product. Extract treatment may include: ion exchange to remove phytate and reduce the ash content, treatment with activated carbon to remove phenolic substances, ultrafiltration for concentration and removal of low molecular weight components etc. Although such processes have been suggested in the literature it is not known whether they are practised in the industrial production of ISP. The use of membrane processes for extract purification and concentration have been reported to be industrially applied in Europe and Japan. (Elias, 1979).
e- Precipitation: The protein is precipitated from the extract by bringing the pH down to the isoelectric region. The type of acid used or the temperature of precipitation do not affect the yield or purity of precipitated protein.
f- Separation and washing of the curd: The precipitated protein (curd) is separated from the supernatant (whey) by filtration or centrifugation. Desludger or decanter centrifuges can be used for this purpose. The curd must be washed in order to remove residues of whey solubles. This can be done by resuspending the curd in water and re-centrifuging, or continuously on a rotary or belt filter. Thorough washing is most important for the obtention of high purity ISP.
g- Drying: The usual method for drying the washed curd is spray-drying.
6-3-2 Problems in conventional processing
a: Process losses: The conventional process separates the soy solids into three fractions: extraction residue, curd (ISP) and whey.
Extraction residue (okara) is the insoluble solid material left behind after extraction and separated from the extract by filtration or decanting. It represents approximately 40% of the solids in the raw material and carries away 15% of the protein entering the process. It is usually pressed, dried and sold as a by-product of ISP manufacture. It can be used as a protein source for animal feeding rations or as a source of dietary fibre in human nutrition. It has been also used in food products for its exceptional water adsorbing capacity.
Whey is the liquid supernatant, after the protein is precipitated from the extract. It contains the sugars and the nitrogenous substances not precipitated by acidification.
Approximately 25% of the dry matter of the raw material and 10% of its nitrogen content is found in this fraction. Early investigations ( Hackler et al. 1963) indicated that soybean "whey" may be toxic to animals. This finding has been reconfirmed often since then. Furthermore, ISP whey is a highly diluted stream, containing 1 to 3% solids depending on the solvent:flake ratio used for extraction. Concentration and drying of ISP whey would be too costly. ISP whey is , therefore, a waste stream of the isolation process.
The curd is the precipitate obtained by acidification of the extract. After washing and drying, it becomes the final product: isoelectric ISP. It contains 75% of the protein of the starting material. Nearly 3 tons of defatted soybean are needed to produce one ton of protein isolate.
This low yield explains, to a large extent, the relatively high cost of ISP.
b: Quality: ISP obtained by the conventional process contains several types of impurities ( e.g. phytates and phenolic substances) which may somewhat impair its functional,sensory and nutritional quality. More complete dehulling of the beans , thorough extract clarification and repeated washing of the curd reduce the impurities but does not eliminate them completely.
6-3-3 Alternative processes
Several alternative processes for the isolation of soy protein have been reported in the literature. These include:
a: Solubilization of the soy proteins in the salt solutions (salting-in) followed by precipitation by dilution with water.
b: Precipitation from the extract at near-boiling temperature, using calcium salts ( as in the production of Tofu).
c: Ultrafiltration of the extract so as to remove the low molecular weight components of the whey , leaving a concentrated solution of protein which may be spray-dried.
d: Physical separation of the intact protein bodies from very finely ground soy flour by density fractionation (flotation).
e: Purification of the extract by ultrafiltration, filtration through activated carbon and ion exchange, in order to increase curd purity.
6.4 Utilization
6-4-1 Meat products
In this paragraph, only the use of non-texturized ISP and proteinates will be discussed. It should be remembered, however, that the major application of ISP in connection with meat and related product is based on the use of texturized ISP, in one form or another, to replace meat. This application will be dealt with in a separate chapter.
In emulsion type sausages, such as frankfurters and bologna, ISP and proteinates are used for their moisture and fat binding properties and as emulsion stabilizers. Typical usage levels are 1% to 4% on a prehydrated basis. The use of ISP in these products permits reducing the proportion of expensive meat in the formulation, without reducing the protein content or sacrificing eating quality.
Methods for incorporating soy protein products into whole muscle meat have been developed recently. Isolated soybean protein is dispersed in specially formulated meat curing brines and injected into whole muscle using stitch pumps. It is also possible to incorporate the protein by surface application of the protein containing brine, followed by massaging or tumbling, as practised in the cured meat industry. Typical brine formulations contain salt, sugars, phosphates, nitrite and/or ascorbic acid.
6-4-2 Seafood products
The most important of application in this category is the use of ISP in fish sausage and surimi based restructured fish products in Japan. Surimi is extensively washed, minced fish flesh.
6-4-3 Cereal products
ISP is sometimes used instead of, or in combination with isolates and soy flour, in the formulation of milk replacer mixtures in bakery products. ISP has been used for protein fortification of pasta and specialty bread. In these applications, the high protein content and blandness of ISP are clear advantages.
6-4-4 Dairy-type products
Soybean protein isolates are used in non-dairy coffee whiteners, liquid whipped toppings, emulsified sour cream or cheese dressings, non dairy frozen deserts etc. The basis for these applications is, demand for non-non-dairy (all-vegetarian, cholesterol-free, allergen-free) food products, as well as economy.
Imitation cheeses have been produced from isolated soy proteins, with or without milk whey components. The types of cheeses which can be produced include soft, semi-soft, surface-cultured (imitation Camembert) and ripened hard cheeses.
6-4-5 Infant formulas
Infant formulas where milk solids have been replaced by soy products are well established commercial products. ISP is the preferred soy ingredient, because of its blandness, absence of flatus-producing sugars and negligible fibre content.The principal market for these products are lactose-intolerant babies. However, soy protein based dietetic formulas are finding increasing use in geriatric and post-operative feeding as well as in weight reduction programs.
6-4-6 Other uses
Partially hydrolysed soy proteins possess good foam stabilization properties and can be used as whipping agents in combination with egg albumen or whole eggs in confectionery products and deserts.
Isolated soybean protein has been shown to be an effective spray-drying aid in fruit purees. In this application, it can replace maltodextrins, with the advantage of contributing protein to the final product. A nutritious "shake" base was produced by spray-drying ripe banana puree containing up to 20% ISP on dry matter basis. (Mizrahi et al.,1967).
REFERENCES
Cogan U., A. Yaron, Z. Berk and S. Mizrahi (1967)
Isolation of Soybean Protein: Effect of Processing Conditions on Yield and Purity. J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. 44: 321
Elias S. (1979)
Food Eng. 51(10), 81
Kolar C.W., S.H. Richert, C.D. Decker, F.H. Steinke and R.J. Van der Zanden (1985)
Isolated Soy Protein in "New Protein Foods", A.M. Altschul and H.L. Wilke eds. Academic Press Inc. Orlando, Florida.
Mizrahi S., Z. Berk and U. Cogan (1967)
Isolated Soybean Protein as a Banana Spray-drying Aid. Cereal Sci. Today 12: 322
Morr C.V. (1990)
Current Status of Soy Protein Functionality in Food Systems J.Amer. Oil Chem. Soc. 67: 265
Soy Protein Council (1987)
"Soy Protein Products" Soy Protein Council, Washington, D.C.
Soya Bluebook (1990)
Soyatech Inc. Bar Harbor, ME.
<section>8</section>
CHAPTER 7
TEXTURED SOY PROTEIN PRODUCTS
7.1 Introduction
For many years, the newly developed soy protein products did not make much progress in occupying a central position in the global protein nutrition picture. The first processed soy protein products were mainly flours or powders which had to be "concealed" in existing foods such as bread, pasta or beverages. The objective of a great part of the research effort was to render these powders sufficiently flavourless and white, and to counteract any change in the accepted characteristics of the "host" food caused by the incorporation of soy protein products at nutritionally and economically significant levels. A breakthrough in the utilization volume occurred in the 1960s, when textured soy protein products of acceptable quality became increasingly available.
Applied to soy protein products, the terms "texturization or texturing" mean the development of a physical structure which will provide, when eaten, a sensation of eating meat. Meat "texture" is a complex concept comprising visual aspect (visible fibres), chewiness, elasticity, tenderness and juiciness. The principal physical elements of meat which create the texture complex are: the muscle fibres and the connective tissue.
A voluminous patent and research literature on vegetable protein texturization has accumulated.( See e.g.Gutcho, 1977). In fact, a meat analog based on wheat gluten was being used for institutional feeding already before the start of our century. A concept of a soy protein based chewy gel and processes for its production have been described in several patents in the late 1950s. ( e.g. Anson and Pader 1957). These inventions produced homogeneous, isotropic ( unoriented, of equal structure in all directions) gels, which had only one of the elements of meat texture: chewiness. They had limited commercial success.
The more successful approaches to soy product texturization can be classified in two categories. The first approach tries to assemble a heterogeneous structure comprising a certain amount of protein fibres within a matrix of binding material. The fibres are produced by a "spinning" process, similar to that used for the production of synthetic fibres for the textile industry. The second approach converts the soy material into a hydratable, laminar, chewy mass without true fibres. Two different processes can be used to produce such a mass: thermoplastic extrusion and steam texturization.
It should be noted that the term "meat" is used here in the wide sense of "flesh food", and includes not only red meat but also poultry, fish and seafood.
The starting material for spun fibres is isolated soybean protein. In contrast, extrusion or steam texturized soy products can be made from flour, concentrate or isolated protein.
7.2 Spun-fibre based texturizationn
The process for the production of textured soy products containing spun protein fibres was first described in a 1954 patent issued to Boyer. Since then many additions to and modifications of the basic concept have been suggested. The basic flow-diagram of the process is shown in Fig. 34.
Figure 34: Production of Spun Fibers from Soy Prote in Source: Horan 1974)
Figure 34: Production of Spun Fibers from Soy Protein Source: Horan 1974)
The first part of the flow diagram describes the steps for the production of isoelectric isolated soybean protein. These steps can be omitted if commercial ISP is used as the starting material. A concentrated protein solution is prepared by adding alkali to the ISP slurry. The solution , containing approximately 20% protein at pH 12 to pH 13 is "aged" ( to permit unfolding of the protein molecules) until its viscosity rises to the consistency of honey (50,000 to 100,000 centipoise).This viscous concentrated protein solution is technically known as "dope".
The next step is the transformation of the dope into distinct, stretched fibres (spinning) by coagulating fine jets of the solution in an acid bath.The "dope" is pumped into the coagulating bath through a spinneret, which is a plate with thousands of fine holes (about 75 microns in diameter). The bath contains a solution of phosphoric acid and salt, maintained at pH of about 2.5. As the jet of "dope" contacts the acid medium, the oriented protein molecules are suddenly coagulated and form a fibre. The fibres are picked up as a "tow" and stretched to enhance molecular orientation and increase fibre strength. Stretching reduces the diameter of the fibre well below that of the holes on the spinneret.
The tows of fibre pass through a step of washing, to remove excess acidity and salt. The subsequent operations depend on the final product. Soy protein fibres are only one ingredient of the meat-like structure. The other ingredients include fat, binders, colouring and flavouring additives etc. The nature of these ingredients, the proportion of fibres and their orientation in the binder matrix depend on the type of flesh food to be imitated. The binder matrix contains heat-coagulable components, commonly egg albumen and the final structure is usually stabilized by thermal setting.
Spun fibre based textured soy products have been used as "total" meat analogs (i.e. to replace meat totally) and as meat extenders ( i.e. to replace part of the meat in ground meat, patties etc.) Some of the products have been used in institutional feeding (hospitals) and in school lunch programs.
The main shortcoming of spun fibre type texturized products is their cost. In the first place, the process requires an expensive starting material: isolated soybean protein. Furthermore,t he process in itself is also costly, both in initial capital investment and in running expenses.
Today, there are very few producers of spun soy protein fibres and textured products containing them. The most successful spun fibre based meat analog has been the imitation bacon chip. This is a shelf-stable low-moisture product with the bite, chewiness and flavour of fried or roasted bacon bits and is used extensively in salads, snacks and garnishes. At present, however, this product too faces the competition of imitation bacon made by the less expensive extrusion texturization technique.
7.3 Extrusion texturization
Extrusion has been long used as a central unit operation in the plastic polymer industry. Their use for continuous pressure-cooking of flours and particulate feed materials has been advocated in the 1950s. A decade later, Mc.Anelly (1964) described a process for the production of spongy, elastic particles from soy flour. A mixture of defatted flour and water was extruded through a food grinder. The extruded strands were heat-set in an autoclave, chopped, leached with hot water and dried. Although this invention can be considered as the forerunner of the extrusion texturization processes, the breakthrough in this field was the disclosure of a continuous cooking-extrusion process, for which a patent was awarded to Atkinson in 1970. In this process, defatted soy flour containing a certain amount of water is passed through a high-pressure extruder-cooker to produce an expanded, porous, somewhat oriented structure described as "pleximellar". Although devoid of true fibres, the
product possessed the textural characteristics of chewiness and elasticity, and was deemed to imitate meat in this respect. Extrusion texturized soy flour soon became an established food ingredient known as TVP ( Textured Vegetable Protein ) or TSP (Textured Soy Protein).
The extruder consists basically of a sturdy screw or worm rotating inside a cylindrical barrel (Fig. 35). The barrel can be smooth or grooved. The screw configuration is such that the free volume delimited by one screw flight and the inside surface of the barrel decreases gradually as one goes from one end of the screw shaft to the other.
Figure 35: Cooker-extruder used for texturing soy flour
Figure 35: Cooker-extruder used for texturing soy flour
(Courtesy: Wenger Manufacturing Co.)
As a result of this configuration, the material is compressed as it is conveyed forward by the rotating screw. Screws having different compression ratios are used for different applications. The barrel is usually equipped with a number of sections of steam heated jackets or induction heating elements or cooling jackets. A narrow orifice or "die" is fitted at the exit end of the barrel. The shape of the die opening determines the shape of the extruded product.
Defatted soy flour with a high protein solubility index is first conditioned with live steam, before entering the extruder proper. Well controlled conditioning is essential for good texturization and product uniformity. The moisture content of the feed is very important. A moisture level of about 20-25% is used for texturization. The conditioned flour usually assumes the form of small spheres.
The flour-water mixture is next fed into the extruder and picked up by the screw. As it advances along the barrel, it is rapidly heated by the action of friction as well as the energy supplied by the heating elements around the barrel. The high pressures attained through the comression mechanism explained above permits heating to 150-180C. This rapid "pressure cooking" process transforms the mass into a thermoplastic "melt", hence the name of "themoplastic extrusion" by which the process isalso known. The directional shear forces causes some alignment of the high molecular weight component while the proteins undergo extensive heat denaturation. The sudden release of pressure causes instant evaporation of some of the water and "puffing". The result is a porous, laminar structure. Puffing and therefore porosity can be controlled by monitoring melt temperature at the die. If a dense product is desired, the melt is cooled at the final section of the barrel, just before entering
the die.
The extrudate is cut continuously by a rotating knife as it emerges from the die. It may be dried and sold as a shelf-stable product, or it can be hydrated, flavoured, mixed with other ingredients, shaped and marketed, usually, as a frozen food.
While texturizing the soy material, extrusion cooking also provides the heat treatment necessary to reduce the microbial load and to inactivate the trypsin inhibitor. It should be noted that, despite the high temperatures in the extruder, trypsin inhibitor inactivation may be incomplete, due to the relatively short processing time.
The so-called low-cost extruders which have been mentioned in connection with the continuous heat treatment of full fat soy flour or corn-soy-milk (CSM) food supplements are not suitable for texturization. These extruders work with low-moisture feeds and provide heat mainly by friction. The extrusion-cooking machines used for texturization are more sophisticated and expensive. Recently, double-screw food extruders have been replacing the older single-screw models in food processing applications. In double-screw extruders a considerable part of the mixing and friction-heating effect takes place between the screws. The shafts can be fitted with interchangeable screw elements, providing different processing profiles along the extruder.
Extrusion texturized soy flour has been called "the first generation TVP". Being made of flour, it has the composition and flavour of heat treated soy flour. The flavour is intensified by retorting. It contains the sugars of soy flour and presents the problem of flatulence. Usage directions usually prescribe a reconstitution step of soaking in water and pressing to remove the soluble components. More recently, processes have been developed for the texturization of soy protein concentrates. Textured concentrates (second generation TVPs) are now widely available.
Table 7-1 compares the characteristics of texturized soy products, according to the starting materials from which they are made.
Table 7.1 Characteristics of textured soy products
Characteristic Product based on:
Soy flour Soy concentrate Soy isolate
Flavour
Retort stable
Flavour development on retorting
Flatulence
Form/shape
Cost (dry basis)
Recommended hydration level
Cost of hydrated protein
Fat retention
Optimum usage level in meat extension
(% hydrated level)
Moderate to high
Yes
High
Yes
Granules or chunks
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Yes
Low
No
Granules or chunks
Low
Low
High
Low
Yes
Low
No
Fibres
High
High
Moderate
Source: Campbell (1981)
Since nothing is removed or added in extrusion texturization, the composition of texturized products , on a dry matter basis, is essentially the same as that of the starting material. Shelf stable dry products are usually marketed at a moisture level of 8%. Texturized soy products made from concentrate do not need to be leached and can be used directly, after proper hydration.
7.4 Steam texturization
Several processes have been described in the patent literature for texturizing soy protein by thermal coagulation coupled with some form of shear induced orientation to provide a fibrous-like structure. In one of these processes, patented by Stromer and Beck (1973), moistened soy flour is fed continuously into a pressurized reactor where it meets high pressure steam (at about 7-8 atmospheres). The thick mass flows, under the action of pressure, through a cylindrical barrel the discharge end of which is open to the atmosphere. The process was sold to one of the leading manufacturers of soy protein products and commercially applied for some time. According to Snyder and Kwon (1987), it is no longer being used.
7.5 Utilization
7-5-1 Meat extenders
The principal use of texturized soy protein products is as a meat extender in comminuted meat product such as patties, fillings, meat sauces, meat balls etc. In such products, as much as 30% of the meat can be replaced by hydrated texturized soy products without loss of eating quality. The cost of textured soy flour is approximately 0.60 U.S. Dollars per kilogram. About 3.5 kilograms of hydrated base is obtained from each kilogram of textured flour. Thus, the cost of meat replacement is only 17 cents of a dollar for each kilogram of meat saved. Furthermore, textured soy products offer not only economic savings but also certain types of product improvement. Their ability to absorb water and fat results in increased product juiciness and permits the use of meat with higher fat content.
Ground beef extended with TVP has been used extensively in school lunch programs, with good results.
The property of TVP to withstand cooking in a retort (retortability, retort stability) is relevant to its use in canned luncheon meat, meat loaf and similar products.
7-5-2 Meat analogs
Chunks of extrusion texturized soy protein products and spun fibre based preparations are marketed as "imitation meat" or "meat analogs". The market for these products was, at first, limited to the relatively small sector of vegetarians. Recently there is a marked trend to reduce the consumption of red meat, associated with the demand for low-cholesterol foods. At the same time, the industry has been successful in developing more attractive meat analogs made from rehydrated textured soy proteins, alone or in combination with wheat gluten. These products are marketed as flavoured, fully prepared, frozen ready-to eat entres. The present marketing strategy for meat analogs is to present them to the public as new, high quality products, and not as inexpensive substitutes for meat. So far, this strategy seems to be successful. The market for these sophisticated (and by no means inexpensive) products is rapidly expanding, particularly in Western Europe.
7-5-3 Other applications
Imitation bacon bits based on texturized soy protein products have been mentioned earlier. The price range for this product is 1.50 to 2 U.S. Dollars per kilogram.
A pasta product containing texturized soy protein granules is being offered on the retail market, in addition to its use in institutional feeding.
REFERENCES
Anson, M.L. and M. Pader (1957)
U.S. Patent 2,813,025.
Atkinson, W.T. (1970)
U.S. Patent 3,488,770.
Boyer, R.A. (1954)
U.S. Patent 2,682,466.
Campbell, M.F. (1981)
Processing and Product Characteristics for Textured Soy Flours, Concentrates and Isolates. J. Amer. Oil Chem. Soc. 58: 336
CARGILL INC. (1991)
Commercial Communication Cargill, Incorporated, Cedar Rapids, Iowa
Gutcho, M.H. (1977)
"Textured Protein Processing" Noyes Data Corp. Pea Ridge, N.J.
Horan, F.A. (1974)
Meat Analogs in "New Protein Foods", Vol. 1A, 367. M. Altschul, Ed. Academic Press, New York
Horan, F.A. (1976)
Meat Analogs, a Supplement in "New Protein Foods", Vol. 2, 260 , M. Altschul, Ed. Academic Press, New York
McAnelly, J.K. (1964)
U.S. Patent 3,142,571.
Snyder, H.E. and T.W. Kwon (1987)
"Soybean Utilization" Van Nostrand Reinhold Co. New York
Strommer, P.K. and C.I. Beck (1973)
U.S. Patent 3,754,926.
<section>9</section>
CHAPTER 8
SOYMILK AND RELATED PRODUCTS
8.1 Introduction
Strictly speaking, "soymilk" is a water extract of whole soybeans. It is an off-white emulsion/suspension containing the water soluble proteins and carbohydrates, and most of the oil of the soybeans. Soymilk has been produced traditionally in China, and to a lesser extent elsewhere in East Asia, but was never a predominant element in the popular diet. The concept of a milk-like food from soybeans was introduced to Europe in the beginning of our century. A patent for soymilk production was issued in 1910, to Li Yu-ying, a Chinese living in France. Small-scale industrial production of "artificial milk" was started soon after, with limited commercial success.
Soymilk was "re-introduced" to China, in the 1930s, by an American physician-missionary, Dr. Harry W. Miller, in an attempt to improve the nutritional status of the population, and particularly of infants and small children. Consumer resistance to this "substitute food" was apparently not easy to overcome, despite the food shortage and Dr. Miller's enthusiasm. Production was discontinued, due to the destruction of the plant in 1937, in the China-Japan war.
A different marketing approach was more successful in Hong Kong. A soymilk plant, the Hong Kong Soymilk Factory, was established in 1940 by K.S. Lo. After World War II, the company, now named the Hong Kong Soya Bean Products Co. Ltd., started to market its product, under the name of Vitasoy, not as an artificial milk, but rather as a soft beverage. The marketing channels and even the shape of the bottle, clearly indicated that Vitasoy was competing with the popular "sodas", not with milk. By 1974, sales of Vitasoy exceeded those of Coca Cola in Hong Kong.
Attempts to reproduce the "Vitasoy Story" outside East Asia ( e.g. Saci by Coca Cola in Brazil ) failed to attain the same level of market penetration. It should be noted that Vitasoy has a marked beany taste, which is apparently not objectionable to the consumer in Hong Kong, but is unacceptable to the general public in the West.
"Beany" flavour is indeed the principal inconvenience of traditional soymilk. This objectionable flavour comes from some ketones and aldehydes, particularly hexanals and heptanals, produced through lipoxidase-catalyzed oxidation of soybean oil. These compounds are not present in sound, dry soybeans but are produced as soon as the beans are wetted and ground.
Several approaches have been used to overcome the problem of off flavours in soymilk. These are:
a: Heat inactivation of lipoxidase in the whole dry bean or during the wet grinding process.
b: Starting with defatted materials ( defatted soy flour, soybean protein concentrates or even isolated soybean protein).
c: Removing the flavour compounds by evaporation (deodorization) , after they have been formed in the soymilk.
d: Masking the bitterness and off-flavour by sweetening and flavouring ( e.g. with chocolate or coffee flavour ).
e: Developing through genetic engineering varieties of soybeans devoid of lipoxidase activity.
A new wave of technology development based on some of these or similar approaches occurred since the late 1970s. The technology packages being offered today range from cottage-industry operations to fairly large-scale soymilk factories, featuring the most modern techniques of dairy technology.
Today, the manufacture of soymilk and related products constitutes an important part of the edible soy protein industry. It is difficult to obtain up-to-date production statistics. World production in 1983 was estimated to be close to one million tons of soymilk, representing approximately 130,000 tons of soybeans. Since then, consumption has risen considerably. The largest growth has occurred in Japan, where soymilk manufacture is primarily in the hands of gigantic companies who are also in the dairy industry business.
8.2 Composition and classification
With the exception of Japan where a Japanese Agricultural Standard defines and classifies soymilk, there is no widely accepted official standard of identity for this product. The custom to write "soymilk" in one word is probably based on the need to avoid involvement in the heavily regulated area of dairy product nomenclature. Soymilks and related products can be formulated rather freely and may have widely differing compositions.
Commercial soymilks and related products may be classified, according to their composition, as follows:
a- Plain (or traditional) soymilk: Made by water extraction of whole soybeans, using a bean to water ratio of 1:5. Contains approximately 4% protein.
b- Dairy-type soymilk: Formulated so as to have a composition roughly similar to that of dairy milk. Bean to water ratio 1:7. Protein content 3.5%. Slightly sweetened, contains added oil, salt. May contain imitation milk flavour.
c- Soy beverages: Sweetened and flavoured drinks, containing about 1% protein. Bean to water ratio 1:20.
d- Cultured products: Any of the above type after lactic fermentation or acidification with lactic acid.
e- Blends: Mixtures of soymilk and other vegetable or dairy milks.
In addition, a product made by grinding dehulled, heat-treated soybeans to an ultra-fine powder has been suggested as a solid soymilk base. It contains all the insoluble components of dehulled soybeans and its composition is therefore, markedly different from that of soymilk preparations made by water extraction.
Composition and nutritional value date for a European soymilk , as advertised by the manufacturer,is given in Table 8-1. The emphasis on the absence of cholesterol and the preponderance of poly-unsaturated fatty acid hints to the health implications of soymilk composition.
Table 8.1 Composition and nutritional data for soymilk
Nutritional value per 100 g Cow's milk 
Soymilk
Whole Semi-skimmed
Protein
Fat
Carbohydrate
kJ
kcal 3.4 g
3.5 g
4.6 g
64 3.5 g
1.5 g
5.4 g
49 3.6 g
2.3 g
3.4 g
Cholesterol 10 mg 5 mg 0
Lactose 4.6 g 5.4 g 0
Fatty acid composition
Saturated
Poly-unsaturated
Mono-unsaturated 63.5%
Source: Vandermoortele (UK) Ltd. (ALPRO soymilk)
8.3 Production processes
8-3-1 The traditional process
This is the method by which soymilk is made for daily consumption , particularly in China. The soybeans are washed, soaked overnight and then ground to a slurry. Cold water is added. after thorough mixing, the dilute slurry is strained through cheese cloth and pressed. The extract (soymilk) is boiled, strained again and filled into various types of containers. This is a heavy, quite gritty suspension and has a strong beany flavour and chalky mouthfeel.
8-3-2 The Soya Technology Systems (STS) Process
This is a complete technology-package making use of modern techniques of the dairy processing technology. A flow diagram of the process is shown in Fig. 36. Following is a description of the process principles, reproduced from the STS publication entitled "Soymilk in Brief" ( STS 1986 ).
Figure 36: Pictorial Layout of SDS Soymilk Plant
Figure 36: Pictorial Layout of SDS Soymilk Plant
(Courtesy: Danish Turnkey Dairies Ltd.
"Producing a nutritious tasting soymilk for human consumption is thus considerably more complicated than just grinding the soybeans with water.
Certain factors have to be controlled during the process, such as:
- cleaning and dehulling without damaging the soybeans
- destruction of the lipoxidase enzymes which cause off- flavour development.
- elimination of flatulence-causing oligosaccharides
- inactivation of the trypsin inhibitors which are present in the raw soybeans......
- maintenance of high-protein efficiency ratio
- removal of undesirable smell
- removal of sedimentable solids. "
Soybean Varieties:
Any organization contemplating large scale production of soymilk should make a survey of the available types of soybeans in order to select those that will give those that will give soymilk with the best flavour and colour, and the best recovery of protein, solids, and fats. These factors vary widely from one soybean variety to another. High grade beans generally produce the best soymilk, and the large-seeded soybeans are considered to be the superior type.
Storage:
Moulds and insects are the primary causes of quality deterioration in stored soybeans. Both are favoured by high moisture, warm temperatures and the presence of damaged soybeans and foreign material. This being the case, it is important that the soybeans be essentially sound, clean and dry if they are to be stored for any period of time. Moisture control is the key to successful storage.
Cleaning:
Commercial soybeans contain varying amounts of foreign material such as dirt, dust, stones etc. It is vital for the production of high quality soymilk that this foreign material be removed.
Just as important is the elimination of damaged soybeans from the supply to the soymilk processing plant. This is necessary because the enzyme lipoxidase ... will have acted on the fatty acids in the damaged soybean cell tissue, producing compounds with the characteristic beany flavour.
Dehulling:
Soybean hulls contain unwanted substances. Also the hulls are an obstruction to continued processing, especially in the decanter. Soil bacteria are present in the soybean hulls. The hulls should therefore be removed to reduce bacteria count in the soymilk, resulting in better flavour and shelf-life. Soybean hulls contain polysaccharides which should be removed to avoid off-flavours and processing problems caused by foaming. The holding time for heat treatment of the soybeans to inactivate undesired enzymes can be shortened when using dehulled soybeans. This will decrease protein denaturation and browning of the soymilk.
Dehulled soybeans produce a white, attractive, appetizing soymilk.
Blanching/Enzyme Inactivation:
Blanching of the soybeans in a solution of sodium bicarbonate at high temperature starts the inactivation of the bitter taste causing enzyme lipoxidase. This treatment also washes out water soluble oligosaccharides (flatulence causing) and starts the inactivation of trypsin inhibitor (reducing digestibility).
Grinding:
Grinding in a hot water solution of sodium bicarbonate converts the soybeans into a colloid solution (soyslurry) without unwanted enzyme activity.
Fibre Separation (decanting):
In order to avoid chalkiness and obtain a good mouthfeel of the soymilk, the insoluble fibres are filtered away. To achieve optimal results, a decanter centrifuge is used....
Deodorization:
To remove unwanted volatile off-flavours the clarified soymilk base is deaerated by means of vacuum and parboiling in the deodorizer.
Standardization:
Water is added to the soymilk base to obtain the desired protein content of the soymilk...
Flavouring and Formulation:
One of the keys to widespread acceptance of soymilk is proper formulation, using sweetening and flavouring agents of the types and in the amounts suited to local tastes. The addition of oil to soymilk results in increased richness and creaminess (good mouthfeel) and adds calories....
Fortification:
Soymilk for school-feeding programs in developing countries is preferably fortified with vitamins and minerals, e.g. vitamin B-12 and calcium. Soymilk has only 1/5 of the calcium in cow's milk (but 1/2 of that in mother's milk).
Homogenization:
Homogenization breaks down fat globules into very fine particles by forcing them under great pressure through minute valve openings, and distributes them evenly throughout the soymilk. Otherwise the fats would tend to lump together, rise to the surface, and separate as a distinct layer. Homogenization gives soymilk a creamier, more uniform consistency.
UHT (Ultra-high temperature) Treatment:
Direct method UHT treatment of soymilk serves two purposes:
(1) to inactivate bacteria thereby prolonging shelf life.
(2) to deodorize the soymilk..........
....The UHT treated product should be aseptically packed."
As it seen from the above description, the STS process makes use of advanced dairy processing techniques, such as Ultra-high temperature (UHT) sterilization and aseptic packaging. It is not surprising, therefore, that the process has been adopted by the Danish Turnkey Dairies Ltd., a company specializing in the supply and erection of dairy and related plants on a world wide basis. Fig. 37 shows a tri-dimensional layout of a standard 4,000 litre per hour soymilk plant supplied by the company.
Figure 37: Economic Feasibility of Adding a Second Decanter to Soymilk Production Line
Figure 37: Economic Feasibility of Adding a Second Decanter to Soymilk Production Line
(Courtesy: Danish Turnkey Dairies Ltd.)
The "dairy type" approach is widely applied in Japan. It has been reported that more than 75% of the soymilk in Japan is UHT processed and aseptically packaged. The price of soymilk in Japan is 25% higher than that of cow's milk.
As in all water extraction based processes for the production of soy milk, the STS process generates a by-product, namely the insoluble extraction residue or "pulp". This material comes out of the solids discharge of the decanter and contains the insoluble proteins and fibre as well as an entrapped portion of the extract. The yield of soy milk can be increased by providing an additional stage for the extraction of the residue with water, followed by an additional stage of separation in a second decanter. The economic feasibility of this second stage depend on the cost of a decanter against the price of soybeans. The determination of the break-even point is illustrated in Fig. 38. The pulp is not a waste but a useful by-product which can be sold as a feedstuff or a food ingredient with a high dietary fibre content and a good protein concentration.
The distribution of protein between the product and the residue is shown in Fig. 39. ( In this diagram, the residue is called by its Japanese name: "Okara".)
Figure 38: Economic Feasibility of Adding a Second Decanter to Soymilk Production Line
Figure 38: Economic Feasibility of Adding a Second Decanter to Soymilk Production Line
(Courtesy: Danish Turnkey Dairies Ltd.)
Figure 39: Protein Balance in Soymilk Manufacture
Figure 39: Protein Balance in Soymilk Manufacture
(Courtesy: Danish Turnkey Dairies Ltd.)
8-3-3 The INTSOY (Illinois) process
The development of this process resulted from research done at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in the early 1970s and was picked up later by INTSOY (International Soybean Program). INTSOY is a program supported by U.S. and international agencies and managed by the University.
The "Illinois process" is basically similar to the STS process described above. Actually, the basic process of lipoxidase inactivation by blanching the whole beans in a hot dilute solution of bicarbonate originated in Illinois. The soybeans are cleaned, sized, oven dried by forced air, split and dehulled. The cotyledons are blanched in boiling water containing sodium bicarbonate, drained and ground in boiling water . After thorough mixing, the slurry is strained. The filtrate (milk) is heated, homogenized, pasteurized and packaged.
In contrast to the STS Process,the INTSOY process has been designed for small-scale plants. These plants are sold by BAR Export/Import, Inc. a company based in Urbana, Illinois. A price quotation for a complete plant for 220 litres of soymilk per hour is appended. (See Annexes).
8-3-4 The BUHLER Process for Soy Micro-powder
Buhler Ltd. from Switzerland presents its patented process for the manufacture of dehulled, micro-milled, full-fat soy flour as an alternative or as a supplement to conventional soymilk production. Two features distinguish the process from ordinary full-fat soy flour manufacturing : the hot dehulling process and micromilling of the cotyledon particles to an impalpable powder by means of a six-roller mill. Hot dehulling, mentioned and described in Chapter 3, is said to reduce bitterness. Micromilling is claimed to break the cells, liberating the protein bodies and fat globules and making them more available for extraction.
A flow diagram of the Buhler Process is shown in Fig. 40.
Figure 40: The BUHLER Process For Micromilled Soya Powder<br></b><strong>Source: Gawin and Wettstein (1990)
Figure 40:
The BUHLER Process For Micromilled Soya Powder
Source: Gawin and Wettstein (1990)
According to Buhler publications, the fine powder is easily dispersed in beverages such as chocolate drinks and can replace milk solids in such products. A suspension of the micro-pulverized full-fat soy powder in water is referred to as "soymilk", although it has all the fibre of dehulled soybeans. If a fibre-free normal soymilk is desired, the micro-milled flour can serve as the starting material . It is claimed that the yield of soymilk per unit weight of soybeans is almost doubled, due to the fact that micro-milling releases the proteins and fats, rendering their extraction more complete. The residue (okara) now consists of a relatively small amount of cell-wall debris, its quantity being only 1/8 of that of okara in the traditional extraction process. ( Fig. 41).
Figure 41: Soybean Consumption and Quantity of Residue Produced per 1000 litre of Soymilk,<br> in various processes Source: Gawin and Wettistein (1990)
Figure 41: Soybean Consumption and Quantity of Residue Produced per 1000 litre of Soymilk,
in various processes Source: Gawin and Wettistein (1990)
8.4 Soymilk related products
Following the commercial success of soymilk, imitation dairy products based on soymilk or mixtures of soy and cow's milk have been developed.
Soymilk is curdled when acidified by natural lactic acid fermentation or by adding acid. Through careful acidification it is possible to obtain gel like products resembling cultured dairy products such as yogurt. Since soymilk does not contain lactose, the normal lactic acid bacteria cultures used in the dairy industry do not ferment soymilk. This difficulty can be overcome by adding lactose, whey solids or cow's milk. Another approach, still at the research stage, is to develop , through genetic engineering, strains of bacteria that will ferment the natural carbohydrates of soymilk and produce lactic acid. Soy yogurts of acceptable quality are now available in various countries.
Another soymilk derivative is soy "ice cream". This product is being well accepted by the vegetarian and cholesterol-conscious population.
REFERENCES
Anon. (1987)
INTSOY Develops New Techniques for Commercial Soymilk Processing INTSOY Newsletter No. 36 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Gavin M. and A. Wettstein (1990)
"Soymilk and other soya products- From the Traditional Method of Production to the New Manufacturing Processes." Buhler Ltd. Uzwil, Switzerland
Hauman, B.F. (1984)
Soymilk. New Processing, Packaging Expand Markets J. Amer. Oil Chem. Soc. 61: 1784
Nelson, A.I., M.P.Steinberg and L.S. Wei (1976)
Illinois Process for Preparation of Soymilk J. Food Sci. 41: 57
STS-Soya Technology Systems Ltd. (1986)
"Soymilk in Brief" STS Ltd. Singapore
<title>Technology of production of edible flours and protein products from soybeans</title>
CHAPTER 9
TOFU, TEMPEH, SOYSAUCE AND MISO
9.1 Introduction
The differences in consumption patterns for soy protein foods between the West and the Orient were outlined by D. Fukushima of Kikkoman Foods, Inc. (U.S.A.), who wrote: " There are significant differences in the use of soy proteins for human consumption in the U.S. and in the Orient. In the U.S., the soy proteins are used as ingredients of a wide variety of foods, e.g. hamburgers, sausages, meat loaves, dairy products, breads, pastries and cookies. In the Orient, however, soy proteins have been consumed for thousands of years, not as an ingredient, but as characteristic, unique soy protein foods." (Fukushima, 1981).
A detailed discussion of the multitude of traditional soy foods of the Orient is beyond the scope of the present work. Only four traditional products and their production technology will be described. These four products were selected, not only because of their leading position in the Orient, in terms of consumption levels, but also in view of the growing interest that they have recently created among Western consumers and food manufacturers.
Traditional soy protein foods are usually divided into two groups: fermented and non fermented. Miso, soysauce and tempeh are representatives of the first group. Tofu, together with soymilk discussed in the previous chapter, belong to the second. Nevertheless, fermented varieties of tofu and soymilk also exist.
It should be stressed that each one of the four foods is, in fact, a group in itself, comprising many distinct variations.
Historically, most traditional soy protein foods originated in China and were introduced later to other countries in East and Southeast Asia. At present, however, Japan occupies the leading position in this field, with respect to industrialization, technology development, equipment manufacture and worldwide marketing.
9.2 Soy sauce
Soy sauce is a dark brown salty liquid with a peculiar aroma and a meaty taste. It is the chief savory seasoning agent in Oriental cookery, but it is becoming increasingly popular in many other regions of the world. Once a home-made staple, it has become an important industrial product. Industrialization has altered the production process, changed the raw materials used, standardized the products and modified somewhat their characteristics.
The main ingredients of soy sauce are soybeans (or defatted soybean meal), wheat, salt and water. The heart of the manufacturing process is a complex fermentation whereby the carbohydrates are fermented to alcohol and lactic acid and the proteins are broken down to peptides and amino acids. Chemical reactions between the original components and the fermentation products create the colour , consistency and aroma of soy sauce. Formulations and processing conditions differ from one country to another and in function of the type of soy sauce to be produced.
The process of manufacturing soy sauce can be divided into three stages: preparation of the "koji", fermentation in brine and product refining.
Fig.42 describes the basic outline of the manufacturing process of "koikuchi" sauce, a representative type of Japanese soysauce. Soybeans and/or defatted soybean meal are cooked in continuous pressure-cookers and mixed with roasted and coarsely broken wheat. The mass is inoculated with a mould- Aspergillus orizae (or A. sojae) and incubated in shallow vats with perforated bottoms and air is forced through the mass. After three days of incubation under controlled conditions of temperature and moisture, mould growth covers the entire mass which turns greenish as a result of sporulation. This mass is called "koji". Koji is the essential ingredient of most fermented products of the Orient. It is a concentrated source of amylolytic and proteolytic enzymes necessary for the decomposition of the carbohydrates and proteins.
Figure 42: Production of &quot;koikuchi&quot; Soysauce </b><strong>Source: Fukushima (1981)
Figure 42: Production of "koikuchi" Soysauce Source: Fukushima (1981)
The koji is mixed with a brine containing 22 to 25 % salt (weight by volume) and transferred to deep fermentation tanks.Lactic acid bacteria and osmophilic yeast cultures are added and the slurry ( called "moromi-mash) is allowed to ferment at controlled temperature and occasional aeration. The high salt concentration effectively inhibits growth of undesirable "wild" microorganisms. The starch is transformed to sugars which are fermented to lactic acid and alcohol. The pH drops from near-neutral to 4.7- 4.8. The moromi is held in the fermentation tanks for 6 to 8 months.
In the refining stage, the fermented mash is pressed to separate the sauce from the solid residue. the sauce is filtered, clarified and heated to 70-80^o C. Heating is necessary to pasteurize the sauce and to develop the characteristic colour and aroma. After final clarification the sauce is bottled.
The use of defatted soybean meal instead of whole soybeans is justified, since most of the oil is lost in the residue.
Tamari soy sauce is popular in Southeast Asia. It contains a much lower proportion of wheat and therefore less alcohol in the final product.
In modern soy sauce plants, all the steps of the process , including the making of koji, are mechanized and the process conditions are fully controlled. Material losses are minimized through recovery operations. Thus, 90% of the raw material nitrogen is recovered in the product.
Soy sauce typically contains 28% soluble solids (18% salt and 7% protein).
9.3 Miso
Miso is a fermented soybean paste. It serves as an all-purpose seasoning, a concentrated "instant soup" and a good source of protein. The main ingredients used for its preparation are: soybeans, rice (or barley), salt and water.
As in the case of soy sauce, the production of miso is a three-step process: preparation of the koji, fermentation in the presence of salt at high concentration and finishing.(Fig. 43)
Figure 43: Flow diagram for Miso </b><strong>production Source: Fukushima (1981)
Figure 43: Flow diagram for Miso production Source: Fukushima (1981)
Koji for miso is prepared from cereal grains (most commonly, rice) alone. When the mould has grown sufficiently on rice, salt is added to arrest further growth. The salted koji is mixed with cooked, mashed whole soybeans and water is added to reduce the solids content to about 50-52%. The mass is inoculated with salt tolerant lactic acid bacteria and yeast cultures and allowed to ferment at 30^o C for two weeks to 6 months in closed tanks, under pressure.During this period, the semi-solid mash is transferred from one fermentation vessel to another for the purpose and mixing and accelerating the fermentation. When the paste is sufficiently ripe (depending on the type of miso) , it is blended, pasteurized and packaged. Benzoate and/or sorbate are sometimes added as preservatives.
Several varieties of miso are produced, differing in formulation, salt concentration and ripening time. "Mild" miso is light coloured while the ripe varieties are brownish-red.
Fat is an essential component of miso. Therefore, whole soybeans and not defatted meal are used as the starting material. A "hot" variety, flavoured with generous amounts of red hot pepper, is produced in Korea.
Dehydrated and freeze-dried miso are produced in Japan and the U.S.A. as ingredients for instant dry soups, or as seasonings.
Typically, miso contains 50-60% solids, 10-14% protein, 3-6% oil, 8-14% salt, 3% fibre. A special type of miso, made from soybeans and salt only, is produced in smaller quantities. It has a dark colour and higher protein content, over 19%.
9.4 Tempeh
Tempeh is a fermented soybean product of Indonesian origin. It consists of cooked, dehulled whole soybeans which have been fermented by Rhizopus moulds. It is a moist solid cake with a mild, pleasant taste . It is usually sliced, dipped into a salt solution and deep-fried in oil. The traditional product is highly perishable and is usually consumed the day it is made. In industrial production, it can be preserved by drying or freezing (after blanching to inactivate the mould and its enzymes.)
Production methods vary as with most traditional foods. In a typical process, soybeans are soaked in water, dehulled and then cooked in boiling water for one hour. After draining the soybeans are spread out for air-drying of the superficial moisture. Tempeh from the previous day is used as a starter. The prepared soybeans are thoroughly mixed with the starter, wrapped in banana leaves and left to ferment for one to two days. Mould growth is vigorous and the whole mass is soon covered and bound together by Rhizopus mycelium.
Typically, tempeh contains 35% dry matter, half of which is protein. Unlike the previously discussed fermented soy products, tempeh does not contain salt.
Tempeh is still, predominantly a home-made or cottage-industry product in Indonesia and Malaysia. It is practically unknown in Japan. However , it has been introduced to the U.S.A. and to Europe, mainly for the population of Indonesian origin and for the rapidly expanding Indonesian restaurant trade. It is made in modern, sanitary plants, using stainless steel equipment and sometimes, pure cultures of mould.
The traditional banana leave is replaced by suitable plastic materials or foil, perforated to provide the moderate aeration necessary for mould growth without excessive sporulation. Commercial dehulled full-fat grits can be used instead of whole soybeans.
A diagram describing a modern variation of the tempeh production process, developed at the Northern Regional Research Centre, in Peoria, Illinois, is shown in Fig. 44.
Figure 44: Flow diagram for Tempeh production Source: Wang (1984)
Figure 44: Flow diagram for Tempeh production Source: Wang (1984)
9.5 Tofu
9-5-1 Introduction
Tofu is the representative of the "bean curd" foods, the most popular type of traditional soy protein products. Bean curd (Fu Fu or Tu Fu) has been prepared and consumed in China for thousands of years and a written record of its preparation dates from the second century B.C. Bean curd is a product by itself or a starting material for a variety of related products, including fermented, salted, smoked, dried and fried derivatives. Tofu is the Japanese name for bean curd products.
Tofu has been made in the U.S.A since the beginning of the century, as an ethnic food. Its consumption in the West increased rapidly since the 1970s , mainly as a vegetarian alternative to meat and cheese or as a novel food by itself. The development of a highly successful tofu-based all-vegetable ice-cream was a significant factor in the recent growth of tofu production in the West. Today, a variety of types and brands are available in most supermarkets.
9-5-2 Regular and silken tofu
Basic regular tofu is a white, essentially bland, soft product, closely resembling pressed white milk curd. Its production starts with the preparation of soymilk, as described in the previous chapter. Soybean is boiled, then cooled to around 75^o C. The thin protein-lipid film (surface scum) formed on the surface of the milk is removed. A coagulant, which consists of a slurry of gypsum powder or a solution of magnesium salts (nigari) is added. Curdling occurs. The free supernatant whey is removed and the curd is transferred to perforated boxes and pressed until a coherent block of curd is obtained. The curd is next immersed in cold running water for several hours, with the purpose of cooling and leaching out excess coagulant and entrapped whey solids. The block is cut to retail-size portions and wrapped for marketing. Fresh tofu is stored, transported and sold as a refrigerated perishable. The analogy between tofu production and cheese manufacture is evident.
A radically different method is used for the industrial production of "silken tofu", a softer and more fragile type of bean curd. Here the production process resembles yogurt rather than cheese manufacture. Soymilk wit a high content of solids (10% instead of 5-6% in regular tofu) is heated to 100^o C., then cooled to room temperature. Glucono-delta-lactone (GDL) is added and the milk if filled into the retail containers. After sealing, the filled containers are heated in a water bath at 80-90^o C for 40 to 60 minutes. At this temperature, GDL is transformed to gluconic acid, which causes the protein to coagulate as a homogeneous gel, with no whey separation.
Silken tofu prepared in this way is a pasteurized product which keeps well for a few days under refrigeration.
A diagram describing the manufacturing process of regular and silken tofu is shown in Fig.45.
Figure 45: Tofu Manufacturing Process Diagram Source: Fukushima (1981)
Figure 45: Tofu Manufacturing Process Diagram Source: Fukushima (1981)
A more advanced variation of the process described above is used for the production of long shelf-life silken tofu, using UHT technology. Soymilk with 10% solids content is heated to 130^o C and cooled to room temperature in continuous aseptic fashion. The GDL solution is cold-sterilized by Millipore filtration and injected into the stream of the sterilized, cooled soymilk. The mixture is aseptically filled into plastic containers. The sealed containers are subjected to heating, as described below. Aseptically filled tofu keeps well for several months without refrigeration.
The production of regular tofu has also been modernized and adapted to large scale manufacture. The first part of a tofu factory is, actually, a soymilk plant, as described in the previous chapter. The second half comprises the coagulation, curd washing and finishing operations.
The equipment of a complete tofu plant is described in Figures 46, 47 and 48. Fig. 46 refers to the soymilk preparation.
Fig. 47 shows the regular fresh tofu production line. Fig. 48 describes a line for the manufacture of pasteurized silk tofu.
Fig. 49 is a suggested layout for the same tofu plant.
Figure 46: Equipment Flow-diagram of a Tofu Plant
Figure 46: Equipment Flow-diagram of a Tofu Plant
Part One: Preparation of Soymilk Courtesy of Nagasawa Co.
Figure 47: Equipment Flow-diagram of a Tofu Plant
Figure 47: Equipment Flow-diagram of a Tofu Plant
Part Two: Curdling and Curd Handling Courtesy of Nagasawa Co.
Figure 48: Equipment Flow-diagram of a Tofu Plant
Figure 48: Equipment Flow-diagram of a Tofu Plant
Part Three: Making Pasteurized Silken Tofu Courtesy of Nagasawa Co.
Figure 49: Layout of a Tofu Plan</b><strong>t Courtesy of Nagasawa Co.
Figure 49: Layout of a Tofu Plant Courtesy of Nagasawa Co.
In addition to complete automated plants with high capacities, good quality small-scale equipment is available for production at the local shop level.
Being composed of a step of extraction followed by a step of precipitation, the manufacture of tofu is, in fact, similar to that of isolated soybean protein. Just as in the case of ISP, a residue (okara) and a whey are produced. This may be an inconvenience to small tofu plants which do not have the economy of scale necessary to turn the okara into a saleable product, and to dispose properly of the whey. In this case, the use of micromilled soy flour (see Chapter 8), soy protein concentrates and isolates may be preferable to whole soybeans as starting materials.
9-5-3 Kori-tofu
Kori-tofu is a dry, shelf-stable variety of tofu. The drying technique involves a unique freeze-thaw cycle, to liberate the bound water.
First a tofu is made, using as a coagulant,calcium chloride instead of gypsum. This tofu is cut to square tablets, frozen and kept frozen for up to 3 weeks and then thawed. After the freeze-thaw cycle, a considerable proportion of the water can be pressed out, and the remaining moisture can be easily removed by air drying. The dry blocks of kori-tofu are then cured with ammonia gas and packaged.
Kori-tofu must be reconstituted in water before it is used. Reconstitution is easy, due to the sponge-like structure of the solid created by the freeze-thaw cycle, and the partial solubilization of the protein by the contact with ammonia gas.
In the traditional way of making kori-tofu, the cold nights were used to freeze the fresh curd tablets.
9-5-4 Deep-Fried Tofu
A significant proportion of the tofu production in Japan is further processed to a large variety of deep-fried products, such as "aburage". Deep frying changes the characteristics of tofu and renders it elastic and chewy. Two step frying methods (first step at 120^o C, second step at about 200^o C) cause considerable puffing of the tofu. The change in texture is so marked that some varieties of deep-fried tofu may be regarded as meat analogs.
9-5-5 Fermented Tofu
Fermented varieties of bean curd are made in China and called Su Fu . To prepare Su Fu, a tough textured tofu with a moisture content of less than 70% is made first. The curd is cut to small (3 cm.) cubes,heated, cooled and inoculated with mould (usually Mucor sp.). After the surface is covered with mycelium (about a week), the pieces are cured for several months in brine containing soy sauce, soy paste, spices and rice wine.
Su Fu is usually packaged in earthenware jars, in a mixture of brine, rice wine and condiments.
Su Fu is a white, creamy food resembling a semi-soft cheese.
REFERENCES
Anon. (1990)
Bean Machines Install Three New Systems in North America Soya International 4, No.3, 4.
Escueta, E.E., M.C. Bourne and L.F. Hood (1986)
Effect of Boiling Treatment of Soymilk on the Composition, Yield, Texture and Sensory Properties of Tofu Can.Inst. Food Sci. Technol. J. 19, 53
Fukushima, D. (1981)
Soy Proteins for Foods Centering around Soy Sauce and Tofu J. Amer Oil Chem. Soc. 58: 346
MIYAKO Inc. (1991)
Commercial Communication Miyako Oriental Foods Inc. Baldwin Park, California
NAGASAWA Co. (1990)
Commercial Communication Nagasawa Kikai Seisakusho Co.,Ltd. Kawaguchi, Japan
Wang, H.L. and C.W. Hesseltine (1982)
Coagulation Conditions in Tofu Processing Process Biochemistry, Jan./Feb. 1982, 7.
Wang, H.L. (1984)
Tofu and Tempeh as Potential Protein Sources in the Western Diet J. Amer. Oil Chem. Soc. 61: 528
Yung-Shung, C. (1981)
Soybean Protein Food in China J. Amer. Oil Chem. Soc. 58: 96A
<title>Technology of production of edible flours and protein products from soybeans</title>
<section>1</section>
APPENDIX I
STANDARDS & SPECIFICATIONS
Reprinted from the '90 Soya Bluebook , by permission of Soyatech Inc.
A. NATIONAL OILSEED PROCESSORS ASSOCIATION (NOPA)
(The following sections are reprinted from NOPA's Yearbook and Trading Rules).
Section 2: Standard Definitions:
A. Soybean Cake or Soybean Chips is the product after the extraction of part of the oil by pressure or solvents from soybeans. A name description of the process of manufacture, such as expeller, hydraulic, or solvent extracted shall be used in the brand name. It shall be designated and sold according to its protein content.
B. Soybean Meal is ground soybean cake, ground soybean chips, or ground soybean flakes. A name descriptive of the process of manufacture, such as expeller, hydraulic, or solvent extracted shall be used in the brand name. It shall be designated and sold according to in protein content.
C.(1) Soybean Mill Feed is the by-product resulting from the manufacture of soybean flour or grits and is composed of soybean hulls and the offal from the tail of the mill. A typical analysis is 13% crude protein and 32% crude fibre, and 13% moisture.
C.(2) Soybean Mill Run is the product resulting from the manufacture of dehulled soybean meal and is composed of soybean hulls and such bean meats that adhere to the hull in normal milling operations. A typical analysis is 11% crude protein and 35% crude fibre, and 13% moisture.
C.(3) Soybean Extracted Soybean Flakes is the product obtained after extracting part of the oil from soybeans by the use of hexane or homologous hydrocarbon solvents. It shall be designated and sold according to its protein content.
Section 3. Standards Specifications:
A. Soybean Flakes and 44% Protein Soybean Meal are produced by cracking, heating and flaking soybeans and reducing the oil content of the conditioned product by the use of hexane or homologous hydrocarbon solvents. The extracted flakes are cooked and marketed as such or ground into meal. Standard specifications are as follows:
Protein
Minimum 44.0%
Fat Minimum 0.5%
Fibre Maximum 7.0%
Moisture Maximum 12.0%
B. Soybean Flakes and High Protein or Solvent Extracted Soybean Meal are produced by cracking, heating and flaking dehulled soybeans and reducing the oil content of the conditioned flakes by the use of hexane or homologous hydrocarbon solvents. The extracted flakes are cooked and marketed as such or ground into meal. Standard specifications are as follows:
Protein
Minimum 47.5% - 49.0%*
Fat Minimum 0.5%
Fibre Maximum 3.3% - 3.5%*
Moisture Maximum 12.0%
(* As determined by Buyer and Seller at time of sale.)
C. Any of the above meal products (listed in Section 3 above) may contain a non-nutritive inert, non-toxic conditioning agent to reduce caking and improve flowability, in an amount not to be exceeded that is necessary to accomplish its intended effect and in no case to exceed 0.5% or 10 lbs. per ton by weight of the total meal product. The name of the conditioning agent must be shown as an added ingredient.
B: ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN FEED CONTROL OFFICIALS, INC.(AAFCO)
(The following section is reprinted from the AAFCO Official Publication 1990.)*
84. SOYBEAN PRODUCTS
a. OFFICIAL
84.1 Ground Soybeans is obtained by grinding whole soybeans without cooking or removing any of the oil. (Adopted 1933). IFN 5-04 -596 soybean seeds, ground.
84.2 Ground Soybeans Hay is the ground soybean plants including the leaves and beans. It must be reasonably free of other crop plants and weeds and must contain no more 33% crude fibre. (Adopted 1944, Amended 1964). IFN 1-04-559 Soybean Hay sun-cured ground.
84.3 Soybeans Hulls consist primarily of the outer covering of the soybean (Adopted 1948). IFN-1-04-560 Soybean seed coats (hulls).
84.4 Soybean Feed, Solvent Extracted, is the product remaining after the partial removal of protein and nitrogen free extract from dehulled solvent extracted soybean flakes. (Adopted 1948, Amended 1960, 1964). IFN 5-04-613 Soybean seeds low protein low carbohydrates meal solvent extracted.
84.5 Soy Grits is the granular material resulting from the screened and graded product after removal of most of the oil from selected, sound, clean and dehulled soybeans by a mechanical or solvent extraction process. Is must contain not more than 4% crude fibre (Proposed 1978, Adopted 1980). IFN 5-12-176 Soybean grits mechanical extracted. IFN 5-04-592 Soybean grits solvent extracted.
84.7 Soybean Meal, Dehulled, Solvent Extracted is obtained by grinding the flakes remaining after removal of most of the oil from dehulled soybeans by a solvent extraction process. It must contain not more than 3.3% crude fibre. It may contain an inert non-toxic conditioning agent either nutritive or non-nutritive or any combination thereof, to reduce caking and improve flowability in an amount not to exceed that necessary to accomplish its intended effect and in no-case to exceed 0.5% . The name of the conditioning agent must be shown as an added ingredient. When listed as an ingredient in a manufactured feed, it may be identified as "dehulled Soybean Meal". (Proposed 1978, Adopted 1980). IFN 5-04-612 Soybean seeds without hulls meal solvent extracted.
84.8 Soybean Mill Feed is composed of soybean hulls and the offal from the tail of the mill which results from the manufacture of soy grits or flour. It must contain not less than 13% crude protein and not more than 32% crude fibre. (Proposed 1960, Adopted 1961, Amended 1964). IFN 4-04-594 Soybean Flour by-product.
84.09 Soybean Mill Run is composed of soybean hulls and such bean meats that adhere to the hulls which results from normal milling operations in the production of dehulled soybean meal. It must contain not less than 11% crude protein and not more than 35% crude fibre. (Proposed 1960, Adopted 1961, Amended 1964). IFN 4-04-595 Soybean mill run.
84.10 Soy Phosphate or Soy Lecithin is the mixed phosphatide product obtained from soybean oil by a degumming process. It contains lecithin, cephalin and inositol phosphatides, together with glycerides of soybean oil and traces of tocopherols, glucosides and pigments. It must be designated and sold according to conventional descriptive grades with respect to consistence and bleaching. (Proposed 1958, Adopted 1961). IFN 4-04-562 Soybean lecithin.
84.11 Heat Processed Soybeans (Dry Roasted Soybeans) is the product resulting from heating whole soybeans without removing any of the component parts. It may be ground, pelleted, flaked or powdered. It must be sold according to its crude protein content. (Proposed 1960, Adopted 1964). IFN 5-04-597 Soybean seeds heat processed.
84.12 Soy Protein Concentrate is prepared from high quality sound, clean, dehulled soybean seeds by removing most of the oil and water soluble non-protein constituents and must contain not less than 70% protein on a moisture-free basis. (Proposed 1965, Adopted 1968). IFN 5-088-038 Soybean protein concentrate more than 70% protein.
84.13 Kibbled Soybean Meals is the product obtained by cooking ground solvent extracted soybean meal, under pressure and extruding from an expeller or other mechanical pressure device. It must be designated and sold according to its protein content and shall contain not more than 7% crude fibre.(Proposed 1969. Adopted 1971). IFN 5-09-343 Soybean seed kibbled solvent extracted.
84.14 Condensed Soybean Solubles is the product obtained by washing Soy Flour or Soybean Flakes with water and acid at a pH of 4.2-4.6. The wash water is then concentrated to a solid content of not less than 60%. (Proposed 1969, Adopted 1971). IFN 5-09-344 Soybean solubles condensed.
84.15 Ground Extruded Whole Soybeans is the meal product resulting from extrusion by friction heat and/or steam, whole soybeans without removing any of the component parts. It must be sold according to its crude protein, fat and fibre content. (Proposed 1974, Adopted 1975). IFN 5-14-005 Soybean seeds extruded ground.
84.16 Protein Modified is a Soybean Product that has been processed to primarily modify the natural protein structure by utilizing acids, alkalies or other chemicals and without removing significant amounts of any nutrient constituent. The defined name under section 84 of the applicable soybean product so modified shall be declared in the product name. (Proposed 1982, Adopted 1983). IFN 5-26-010 Soybean protein product chemically modified.
84.51 Soy Flour is the finely powdered material resulting from the screened and graded product after removal of most of the oil from selected sound cleaned and dehulled soybeans by a mechanical or solvent extraction process. It must contain not more than 4.0% crude fibre. (Proposed 1978, Adopted 1980). IFN 5-12-177 Soybean flour mechanical extracted. IFN 5-04-593 Soybean flour solvent extracted.
84.60 Soybean Meal Mechanical Extracted, is the product obtained by grinding the cake or chips which remain after removal of most of the oil from soybeans by a mechanical extraction process. It must contain not more than 7% crude fibre. It may contain an inert, non-toxic conditioning agent either nutritive or non-nutritive or any combination thereof, to reduce caking and improve flowability in an amount not to exceed that necessary to accomplish its intended effect and in no-case exceed 0.5%. The name of the conditioning agent must be shown as an added ingredient. The words "Mechanical Extracted" are not required when listing as an ingredient in a manufactured feed. (Proposed 1978, Adopted 1980). IFN 5-04-600 Soybean seeds meal mechanical extracted.
84.61 Soybean Meal, Solvent Extracted, is the product obtained by grinding the flakes which remain after removal of most of the oil from soybeans by a solvent extraction process. It must contain not more than 7% crude fibre. It may contain and inert non-toxic conditioning agent either nutritive or non-nutritive and any combination thereof, to reduce caking and improve flowability in an amount not to exceed that necessary to accomplish its intended effect and in no-case exceed 0.5%. The name of the conditioning agent must be shown as an added ingredient. The words "Solvent Extracted" are not required when listing an ingredient in a manufactured feed. (Proposed 1978, Adopted 1980). IFN 5-04-604 Soybean seeds meal solvent extracted.
b. TENTATIVE
T84.14 Soybean Solubles, Condensed, the product resulting from the washing of soy flour or soybean flakes with water and acid; water, alkali and acid; or water and alcohol. The wash water is then concentrated to a solids content of not less than 50%. (Proposed 1983). IFN 5-09-344 Soybean solubles condensed.
T84.17 Soybean Solubles, Dried, is the product resulting from the washing of soy flour or soybean flakes with water and acid; water, alkali and acid; or water and alcohol. The wash water is then dried. (Proposed 1983). IFN 5-16-733 Soybean solubles dehydrated.
T84.62 Soy Protein Isolate is the major proteinaceous fraction of soybeans prepared from dehulled soybeans by removing the majority of non-protein components and contains not less than 90% protein on a moisture-free basis. (Proposed 1988). IFN Number _____________IFN Name_________________
T84.12 Soy Protein Concentrate is prepared from high quality sound, dehulled soybean seeds by removing most of the oil and water soluble non-protein constituents and must contain not less than 65% protein on a moisture-free basis. (Proposed 1988). IFN Number ____________ IFN Name ______________
C: UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
(The following sections are reprinted from the Official United States Standards for Grain*)
UNITED STATES STANDARDS FOR SOYBEANS
(Revised Effective May 1, 1988)
Subpart A - General Provisions
Terms Defined
# 810.101 Grains for which standards are established:
Grain refers to barley, corn, flaxseed, mixed grain, oats, rye, sorghum, soybeans, sunflower seeds, triticale and wheat. Standards for these food grains, feed grains, and oilseeds are established under the United States Grain Standards Act.
# 810.102 Definition of other terms
Unless otherwise stated, the definitions in this section apply to all grains. All other definitions unique to a particular grain are contained in the appropriate subpart for that grain.
(a) Distinctly low quality. Grain that is obviously of inferior quality because it is in an unusual state or condition, and that cannot be graded properly by use of the other grading factors provided in the standards. Distinctly low quality includes the presence of any objects too large to enter the sampling device; i.e., large stone, wreckage or similar objects.
(b) Moisture. Water contained in grain as determined by an approved device according to procedures described in FGIS instructions.
(c) Stones. Concreted earthy or mineral matter and other substances of similar hardness that do not disintegrate in water.
(d) Test weight per bushel. The weight per Winchester bushel (2,150.42 cubic inches) as determined using an approved device according to procedures prescribed in FGIS instructions. Test weight per bushel in the standards for corn, mixed grain, oats, sorghum and soybeans, is determined on the original sample. Test weight per bushel in the standards for barley, flaxseed, rye, sunflower seed, triticale and wheat is determined after mechanically cleaning the original sample. Test weight per bushel is recorded in whole and tenth pounds to the nearest tenth pound for wheat, rye, and triticale. Test weight per bushel for all other grains is recorded in whole or half pounds, with a fraction of a half pound disregarded.
(e) Whole kernels. Grain with 1/4 or less of the kernel removed.
Principles Governing the Application of Standards
# 810.103 Basis of determination
(a) Distinctly low quality. The determination of distinctly low quality is made on the basis of the lot as a whole at the time of sampling when a condition exist that may or may not appear in the representative sample and/or the sample as a whole.
(b) Certain quality determinations. Each determination of rodent pellets, bird droppings, other animal filth, broken glass, castor beans, cockleburs, crotalaria seeds, dockage, garlic, live insect infestations, large stones, moisture, temperature, an unknown foreign substance(s), and a commonly recognized harmful or toxic substance(s) is made on the basis of the sample as a whole. When a condition exists that may not appear in the representative sample, the determination maybe made on the basis of the lot as a whole at the time of sampling according to procedures prescribed in FGIS instructions.
(c) All other determinations. The basis of determination for all other factors is contained in the individual standards.
# 810-104 Percentages
(a) Rounding. Percentages are determined on the basis of weight and are rounded as follows:
1. When the figure to be rounded is followed by a figure greater than or equal to 5, round to the next higher figure; e.g., report 6.36 as 6.4, 0.35 as 0.4 and 2.45 as 2.5.
2. When the figure to be rounded is followed by a figure less than 5, retain the figure; e.g., report 8.34 as 8.3 and 1.22 as 1.2.
(b) Recording. The percentage of splits in soybeans, and the percentage of dockage in barley, flaxseed, rye and sorghum are reported in whole percents with fractions of a percent being disregarded.
Dockage in triticale is reported in whole and half percent with a fraction less than one-half percent being disregarded. Dockage in wheat is reported in whole and tenth percent to the nearest tenth percent. Foreign material in sunflower seed is reported to the nearest one half percent. Ranges of sunflower seed foreign material are reported as follows: 0.0 to 0.24 is reported as 0.0 percent; 0.25 to 0.74 as 0.5 percent; 0.75 to 1.24 as 1.0 percent, and the like. Foreign material and fines in mixed grains is reported in whole percent. The percentage when determining the identity of all grains is reported to the nearest whole percent. Also reported to the nearest whole percent are the classes and subclasses in wheat; flintcorn, flint and dentcorn; waxy corn; classes in barley; and the percentage of each kind of grain in mixed grain. Plump barley shall be expressed in terms of the range in which if falls. Ranges shall be: Below 50 percent 50 to 55 percent; 56 to 60 percent; 61
to 65 percent, and the like. All other percentages are reported in tenths percent.
Grades: Grade Requirements and Grade Designations
# 810-105 Grades and grade requirements
The grades and grade requirements for each grain (except mixed grain) are shown in the grade table(s) of the respective standards . Mixed grain grade requirements are not presented in tabular form.
#810.106 Grade designations:
(a) Grade designations for grain:
The grade designations included in the following order:
(1) The letters "US"
(2) The abbreviation "No" and the number of the grade or the words "Sample grade":
(3) When applicable the subclass;
(4) The class or kind of grain
(5) When applicable the special grade(s) except in the case of bright extra heavy and heavy oats or plump rye the special grades , "bright", "extra heavy", "heavy " and "plump" will precede the word "oats" or "rye" as applicable and
(6) When applicable, the word "dockage" together with the percentage thereof.
When applicable the remarks section of the certificate will include in the order of predominance in the case of a mixed class, the name and approximate percentage of the classes; in the case of sunflower seed, the percentage of admixture; in the case of mixed grain the grain present in excess of 10.0 percent of the mixture and when applicable the words" Others grains" followed by a statement of the percentage of the combined quantity of those kinds of grains each of which is present in a quantity less 10.0 percent. In the case of barley if requested the word "plump" with the percentage range thereof; in the case of wheat if requested the percentage of protein content.
(b) Optional grade designations: In addition to paragraph (a) of this Section grain may be certificated under certain conditions as described in FGIS instructions when supported by official analysis as "US No. 2 or better (type of grain)" "US No. 3 or better (type of grain) and the like.
Special Grades, Grade Requirements and Special Grade Designations
#810.107 Special grades and special grade requirements:
A special grade serves to draw attention to a special factor or condition present in the grain and when applicable is supplemental to the grade assigned under #810.106. Except when the special grades are identified and requirements are established in each respective grain standards.
(a) Infested wheat, rye and triticale: Tolerances for live insects responsible for infested wheat, rye and triticale are defined according to sampling designations as follows:
(1) Representative sample: The representative sample consists of the work portion and the file sample if needed and when available . These grains will be considered infested if the representative samples (other than shiplots) contain two or more live weevils or one live weevil and one or more other insects injurious to stored grain, or two or more other live insects injurious to stored grain.
(2) Lot as a whole (stationary): The lot as a whole is considered infested when two or more live weevils or one live weevil and one or more other injurious to stored grain are found in, on, or about lot (excluding submitted samples and shiplots).
(3) Sample as a whole: (continuous loading/unloading of shiplots and bargelots) The minimum sample size for shiplots and bargelots is 500 grams per each 2,000 bushels of grain. The sample as a whole is considered infested when a component (as defined in FGIS instructions) contains two or more live weevils or one live weevil and one or more other live insects injurious to stored grain, or two or more other live insects injurious to stored grain.
(b) Infested barley, corn, oats, sorghum, soybeans, sunflower seeds and mixed grain: Tolerances for live insects responsible for infested barley, corn, oats, sorghum, soybeans, sunflower seed and mixed grain are defined according to sampling designations as follows:
(1) Representative sample: The representative sample consists of the work portion and the file sample if needed and when available. These grains will be considered infested if the representative samples (other than shiplots) contain two or more live weevils, or one live weevil and five or more other live insects injurious to stored grain, or ten or more other live insects injurious to stored grain.
(2) Lot as a whole (stationary): The lot as a whole is considered infested when two or more live weevils or one live weevil and five or more other live insects injurious to stored grain or ten or more other live insects injurious to stored grain are found in, on, or about the lot (excluding submitted samples and shiplots).
(3) Sample as a whole (continuous loading/unloading of shiplots and bargelots): The minimum sample for shiplots and bargelots is 500 grams per each 2,000 bushels of grain. The sample as a whole is considered infested when a component (as defined in FGIS instructions) contains two or more live weevils or one live weevil and five or more other live insects injurious to stored grain, or ten or more other insects injurious to stored grain.
# 810.108 Special grade designations
Special grade designations are shown as prescribed in #810.106 . Multiple special grade designations will be listed in alphabetical order. In the case of treated wheat, the official certificate shall show whether the wheat has been scoured, limed, washed, sulphured or otherwise treated.
SUBPART I - UNITED STATES STANDARDS FOR SOYBEANS
Terms Defined
#810.1601 Definition of soybeans:
Grain that consists of 50 percent or more of whole or broken soybeans (Glycine max (L)Merr.) that will not pass through an 8/64 round hole sieve and not more than 10.0 percent of other grains for which standards have been established under the United States Grain Standards Act.
#810.1602 Definition of other terms
(a) Classes: There are two classes for soybeans: Yellow soybeans and Mixed soybeans.
(1) Yellow soybeans: Soybeans that have yellow or green seed coats and which in cross section ,are yellow or have a yellow tinge, and may include not more than 10% of soybeans of other colours.
(2) Mixed soybeans: Soybeans that do not meet the requirements of the class of Yellow Soybeans.
(b) Damaged kernels. Soybeans and pieces of soybeans that are badly ground-damaged,badly weather-damaged, diseased, frost-damaged, germ-damaged, heat damaged, insect-bored, mould-damaged, sprout-damaged, stinkbug-stung or otherwise materially damaged. Stinkbug-stung kernels are considered damaged kernels at the rate of one-fourth of the actual percentage of the stung kernels.
(c) Foreign material. All matter that passes through an 8/64 round/hole sieve and all matter other than soybeans remaining in the sieved sample after sieving according to procedures prescribed in FGIS instructions.
(d) Heat damaged kernels. Soybeans and pieces of soybeans that are materially discoloured and damaged by heat.
(e) Purple, mottled or stained. Soybeans that are discoloured by the growth of fungus; or by dirt; or by a dirt-like substance(s) including non-toxic inoculants; or by other nontoxic substances.
(f) Sieve, 8/64 round hole sieve. A metal sieve 0.032 inch thick perforated with round holes 0.125 inch in diameter.
(g) Soybeans of other colours. Soybeans that have green, black, brown or bicoloured seed coats. Soybeans that have green seed coats will also be green in cross section. Bicoloured soybeans will have seed coats of two colours, one of which is brown or black, and the brown or black colour covers 50% of the seed coat. The hilum of the soybean is not considered a part of the seed coat for this determination.
(h) Splits. Soybeans with more than 1/4 of the bean removed and that are not damaged.
Principles governing the application of standards
#810.1063 Basis of determination.
Each determination of class, heat damaged kernels, damaged kernels, splits and soybeans of other colours is made on the basis of the grain when free from foreign material. Other determinations not specifically provided for under the general provisions are made on the basis of the grain as a whole.
Grades and Grade Requirements
#810.1604 Grades and grade requirements for soybeans:
Grade 
Minimum test weight per Bushel (pounds) Maximum Limits of:
Damaged Kernels
Foreign Material %
Splits % 
Soybeans of other Colours %
Heat Damaged % Total %
U.S. No.1
U.S. No.2 U.S. No.3 1/
U.S. No.4 2/
U.S. Sample grade
U.S. Sample Grade is soybeans that:
(a) Do not meet the requirements for U.S. Nos. 1,2,3 or 4, or;
(b) Contain 8 or more stones which have an average weight in excess of 0.2% of the sample weight, 2 or more pieces of glass, 3 or more Crotalaria seeds, 2 or more castor beans, 4 or more particles of an unknown substance(s), 10 or more rodent pellets, bird droppings or equivalent quantity of other abnormal filth per 1,000 grams of soybeans; or
(c) Have a musty, sour or commercially objectionable foreign odour (except garlic odour);or
(d) Are heating or otherwise of distinctly low quality.
1/ Soybeans that are purple mottled or stained are graded not higher than U.S. No.3
2/ Soybeans that are materially weathered are graded not higher than U.S. No.4.
* Official United States Standards for Grain, Revised May 1, 1988.
<section>2</section>
A - APPENDIX II
ORGANIZATIONS AND GOVERNMENT AGENCIES
Trade associations, Organizations and Agencies involved in Soya Market Development Trade or Education (Reprinted from the '90 SOYA BLUEBOOK by permission of SOYATECH, INC.)
AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN OILSEED CRUSHERS ASSOCIATION
6A Post Office Street, Suite 2, Pymbl 2073, N.S.W. Australia
PH: 61/2/449-5311.
Contact: Bryce Bell, Secy.
Founded: 1963
Membership: 8 firms; vegetable oilseed crushers.
Objectives & Activities: Develop the growing of oilseeds in Australia and domestic and export markets for seed, oil and meal.
AUSTRALIAN OILSEEDS FEDERATION
6A Post Office Street, Suite 2, Pymbl 2073, N.S.W. Australia
PH: 61/2/449-5311.
Contact: Bryce Bell, Secy.
Founded: 1965
Membership: 28 oilseed grower, oilseed crusher, vegetable oil and protein user organizations and
individual companies involved in the oilseed industry.
Objectives & Activities: Encourage and promote the Australian oilseed industry
THE OILSEEDS MARKETING BOARD FOR THE STATE OF NEW SOUTH WALES
56 Young Street, G.P.O. Box 2736, Sydney 2001, N.S.W, Australia
PH: 61/02/231-1511; Tlx: AA25715(OSEEDS); FAX: 022314047.
Contact: John D. Ranken, Exec. Dir.
Founded: 1973
Membership: 15 individuals comprising a statutory marketing authority for all N.S.W. oilseeds growers.
Objectives & Activities: Protect and insure best possible returns to growers; encourage production of oilseeds; encourage research and establish research priorities; act as liaison with the oilseeds processing industry and other grain marketing and bulk handling organizations; improve the distribution of grain to the domestic and export markets.
Publications: Commodity newsletters, quarterly, free.
AUSTRIA
AMERICAN SOYBEAN ASSOCIATION/EAST EUROPE
Gotterburggasse 18/2/3, Vienna A-1190, Austria
PH:368218 or 368219; TLX: 135132; FAX:43/1/369-1661.
Contact: Steven B. Nemeth, Dir.
Objectives & Activities: Country directors work with U.S. Department of Agriculture, Foreign Agricultural Service staff and local individuals and groups involved with oilseed utilization, consumption and marketing.
FERBAND der FUTTERMITTLELINDUSTRIE
Zaunergasse 1-3, Postfach 144, Vienna A-1037, Austria
PH:0222/722121; TLX:131247 (NAHRUNGA)
Contact: Dr. Klaus Smolka
Founded: 1946
Membership: 8 firms or organisations; Austrian mixed feed manufacturers.
Objectives & Activities: Represent the interests of members.
Publications: Ernahrung, monthly, OS-650
BANGLADESH
BANGLADESH SUGAR AND FOOD INDUSTRIES CORPORATION (BSFIC) (GA)
Shilpa Bhavan, Motijheel C.A.,
Dhaka 2, BANGLADESH.
Contact: Mr. Nuruzzaman, Dir. of Mkting.
Objectives & Activities: Importer of crude degummed soy oil; private refineries also import goods.
BANGLADESH VEGETABLE OIL REFINERS' and VANASPATI MANUFACTURERS' ASSOCIATION
Sharif Mansion, Third Floor, 56/57 Motijheel Commercial Area, Dhaka 2, Bangladesh
PH: 256492.
Contact: M. Nasir, Vice Chman.
Founded: 1963
Membership: 9 firms; refiners of crude degummed soybean oil and producers of vegetable ghee/vanaspati.
Objectives & Activities: Promote, protect and safeguard the interests of members.
BELGIUM
AMERICAN SOYBEAN ASSOCIATION/WEST EUROPE
Centre International Rogier, Room 2501-2506, Boite 521, Brussels 1210, BELGIUM
PH: 217-2075 or 217-9661; TLX: 846-26128 (AMSOYA B).
Contact: Dennis L. Blankenship, Dir.
Objectives & Activities: Country directors work with the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Foreign Agricultural Service staff and local individuals and groups involved with oilseed utilization, consumption and marketing.
ASSOCIATION INTERNATIONALE DE LA SAVONNERIE ET DE LA DETERGENCE (AIS)
(International Association of the Soap and Detergent Industry)
Square Marie Louise 49, Brussels B-1040, BELGIUM
PH: 32/2/230-8371; TLX: 23167 (FECHIM AIS); FAX: 32/2/230-8288.
Contact: Pierre V. Costa, Secy.Gen.
Founded:1952
Membership: 18 national associations (Western Europe & Australia) representing more than 600 companies which are active in the soap and detergent sector of industry.
Objectives & Activities: To examine all questions relating to the industry concerned with soaps, detergents and related products; to promote the common interests and knowledge of the industry represented by its member associations; to seek collective solutions to problems of common concern relating to human and environmental health; to represent the member associations in dealing with competent professional or supranational official bodies; to cooperate, as far as possible, with supranational authorities in the preparation of regulations which could affect the activities of the industry which it represents; to provide guidance for the member associations by its recommendations; to collect, exchange and disseminate all information necessary for the achievement of its objects; and in the achievement of its objects, the Association will ensure that the proposed measures will not interfere with free competition.
Publications: AIS Bulletin, bi-monthly, reserved to members; directories available from National Associations; Annual Statistical Tables, Annual, Addition 1986/1987 B.F. 6,000.
ASSOCIATION PROFESSIONNELLE DES FABRICANTS D'ALIMENTS COMPOSES (Belgian Association of Compound Feed Industry).
Gasthuistraat 31, Brussels B-1000, Belgium
PH: 32/2/512-0955; TLX: 23403 (APFACA). FAX: 32/2/514-0351.
Contact: Yuan de Jaegher, Dir.
Founded: 1944
Membership: 85 firms or organizations; animal feed factories.
Objectives & Activities: Dispatching of information regarding the sectors involved with animal feed; organizing conferences; heaving conferences with government agencies about the implementation of agricultural policy.
EEC SEED CRUSHES AND OIL PROCESSORS FEDERATION (FEDIOL)
Rue de la Loi 74, Bte. 4, Brussels 1040, BELGIUM
PH: 32/2/230-3125; TLX: 23628 (OLMA); FAX: 02/230-2274.
Contact: Andre Sieffert
Founded: 1958.
Membership: 11 national associations of the seed crushing and oil processing industry of the EC member states.
Objectives & Activities: To defend the interest, on the EC level, of the seed crushing industry and the crude oil and fat processing industry (vegetable and marine).
EUROPEAN FEED MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION (FEFAC)
Rue de la Loi, 223, Bie 3, Brussels 1040, BELGIUM
PH: 32/2/23--8715; tlx:22393 (FEFAC B); FAX: 32/2/230-5722.
Contact: Andre P. Namur, Secy, Gen.
Founded: 1959
Membership: 4 member associations & 11 correspondent members.
Objectives & activities: To promote the interests of the compound feed trade and the European livestock farmer; to ensure that the views of the compound feed trade and the represented and to enhance their reputation and that of FEFAC: to take action for the improved understanding of the role and the importance of the feed industry; to protect the industry from unfair practices & discrimination.
Publications: Feed and Food, annually, 1500, FB; Panorama, 2 times/month; Market intelligence, 2 times/month; Feed Lex, 3 times/year.
EUROPEAN VEGETABLE PROTEIN ASSOCIATION (EUVEPRO)
Leuvensestraat 29, Vilvoorde B-1800, BELGIUM
PH: 32/2/252-1052, TLX:21260 (FOODIN B); FAX: 32/2/252-4199
Contact: Amold Van Hecke, Dir.
Founded: 1977
Membership: 7 organizations representing vegetable protein producers and users.
Objectives & Activities: Provide representation and promotion of the interests of vegetable protein producers and users.
Publications: EUVEPRO Newsletter, 3-4 times/yr,free;EUVEPRO Survey of Legislations, updated when needed.
FEDERATION DES FABRICANTS D'HUILES DE BELGIQUE
(Federation of Belgian Oil Manufacturers)
74 Rue de la Loi Boite 4, B-1040 Brussels, BELGIUM
PH: 32/2/230-1192; TLX: 23628(OLMA B).
Contact: Marita Boetman, Secy.
Founded: 1945
Membership: 9 firms; oilseed processors.
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF MARGARINE ASSOCIATIONS(IFMA)
Rue de la Loi 74,Bte.3, Brussels 1040, BELGIUM
PH:32/2/230-4810;TLX:23-628(OLMA B).
Contact: Ivan Hodac, Secy. Gen.
Founded: 1958
Membership: 22 films representing margarine producers and their national associations.
Objectives & Activities: Enable member associations to collaborate on the solution of common problems of the margarine industry and promote and defend the interests of this industry.
Publications: Newsletter, 6 issues/yr, free; Annual General Meeting Report, annually BF500.
BRAZIL
ABIOVE -ASSOCIACAO BRASILEIRA DAS INDS. OLEOS VEGETALS
(Brazilian Vegetable Oil Industries Association)
Avenida Paulista, 460,4 Andar, Sao Paulo 01310, S.P., BRAZIL
PH: 55/11/287-3433; TLX: 55/11/32010 OR 36020(ABOV); FAX: 55/11/285-3365.
Contact: Raul Paulo Costa, Exec.Pres.
Founded: 1981
Membership: 62 oilseed processors or vegetable oil refineries.
Objectives & Activities: To represent and support the interests of Brazilian crushers and refiners, and to collaborate with the Brazilian Government to aid development of socio-economic policies.
Publications: Informativo ABIOVE, monthly, free.
COMPANHIA DE FINANCIAMENTO DA PRODUCAO, MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE (GA)
Av.W-3 Norte,Quadra 514,Bloco B,70760 Brasilia, D.F., BRAZIL
PH: 272-0187;TLX:061-1110.
Contact: Francisco Jose Santos, Pres.
INTERBRAS (GA)
Rua 1 de Marco,23/4 ,20010 Rio de Janeiro, R.J., BRAZIL
Contact: Gunther Heinrich Hennies.
BULGARIA
DSO ZARNENI HRANI I FURAZHNA (GA)
Promishlenost, Blvd.A.Stambollyski 9,1000 Sofia, BULGARIA.
CANADA
CENTRE DE RECHERCHE INDUSTRIELLE DU QUEBEC (CRIQ) (GA)
(Industrial Research Center of Quebec)
333 Franquet, Sainte-Foy GIV4C7, Quebec, CANADA
PH: 418/652-2228; TLX: 051-31569; FAX: 418/652-2251.
Contact: Louise Laflamme, Mkting Analyst
Founded:1970
Membership: 450 individuals; 2 organizations.
Objectives & activities: Give assistance to Canadian manufacturers; marketing information, marketing research, diversification, etc., technical information or R&D.
Publications:Innovation, 3 times/yr., no cost.
INSTITUTE OF EDIBLE OIL FOODS
1185 Eglinton Avenue, East, Suite 101, Don Mills M3C 3C6, Ontario, CANADA
PH: 416/429-1004; FAX: 416/429-1940.
Contact: Linda Reid, Mgr.
Founded: 1954
Membership: 13 Individuals, 13 firms consisting of growers, crushers and refiners of oilseeds and manufacturers of edible oil products in Canada.
Objectives & Activities: To represent members' "common interests" through government consultation and other consumer and trade issues where applicable, a nonprofit association.
ONTARIO SOYBEAN GROWERS' MARKETING BOARD
180 Riverview Drive,P.O.Box 1199, Chatham N7M5LB, Ontario, CANADA
PH: 519/352-7730; FAX: 519/352-8983.
Contact: Fred Brandenburg, Secy.Mgr.
Founded: 1949.
Membership: 25.000 individuals; soybean producers in the Province of Ontario, Canada.
Objectives & Activities: To achieve the best possible financial returns for the soybean grower and ensure the long term viability of the soybean industry in Canada.
Publications: Newsletter, bimonthly, no cost.
PLENTY, CANADA
RR#3, Lanark KOG 1KO, Ontario, CANADA
PH: 613/278-2215; FAX: 613/278-2416.
Contact: M.Jeyabalan, Ag Program Officer
Founded: 1976
Membership: 15 individuals working as volunteers in third-world countries and home office staff.
Objectives & Activities: Work on soy agriculture and processing; water and sanitation systems; and forestry. Our aim is to see a fair sharing to the world resources.
Publications: Plenty News, twice yearly.
CHINA, PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF
AMERICAN SOYBEAN ASSOCIATION/PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
Citic International Bldg., 25th Floor, Room 4, 19 Jianguomenwal Street Beijing, PEOPLES REPUBLIC OF CHINA; PH: 502-255(ext.2541): TLX: 716-22203 (USCOP CN).
Contact: Don H. Bushman, Dir.
Objectives & Activities: Country directors work with the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Foreign Agricultural Service staff and local individuals and groups involved with oilseed utilization, consumption and marketing.
COLOMBIA
IDEMA (GA
Carerra 10,#16-82, Piso 7, Bogota 1, D.E., COLOMBIA.
Contact: Guillermo P. Cardenas, Subgerente de Compras
COSTA RICA
CONSEJO NACIONAL DE PRODUCCION (CNP) (GA)
P.O.Box 2205, San Jose 1000, COSTA RICA
PH: 506/23-6033, ext.273. TLX: 376/2273 (CONAPRO): FAX: 506/339660.
Contact: Raul Gillot Fallas, Gen.Mgr.
Founded: 1948
Membership: 50 individuals; small/medium farmers and animal food producers.
Objectives & Activities: Price stabilization, production incentives and technical assistance.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
KOOSPOL A.S.(GA)
Leninova 178, Prague, CZECHOSLOVAKIA
PH:0042/2/366355; TLX: 121-121 (KOOS C).
Contact: Josef Chalupa,Dir.Gen.
Objectives & Activities: Trading of soybeans and soybean meal pellets.
ZEMEDELSKE ZASOBOVANI A NAKUP (GA)
Generalni Reditelstvi, Praha 1, Opletaloca 4, CZECHOSLOVAKIA
PH; 42/265-741; TLX: 121135.
Contact: Milos Protiva, Dir.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
INSTITUTO DE ESTABLIZATION DE PRECIOS (INESPRE) (GA)
Plaza de la Independencia, Santo Domingo, DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
PH: 533-3111 OR 533-3117; TLX: 3460296.
ECUADOR
MINISTERIO DE INDUSTRIAS, COMERCIO E INTEGRATION (MICEI) (GA)
Juan Leon Mera y Roca, P.O.Box 194-A, Quito, ECUADOR
PH: 541854; TLX: 022166(MICEI).
Contact: Ramon Recalde, Dir,Gen.
Objectives & Activities: Agency in charge of import tenders.
NACIONAL DE ALMACENAMIENTO Y COMM. DE PRODUCTOS AGROPECUARIOS (ENAC) (GA)
Edit MAG-2 Piso,Aves Amazonas y Eloy Alfaro, Quito, ECUADOR
PH: 544476; TLX: 2544.
Contact: Cevallos T.Francisco, Mgr.
Objectives & Activities: Import/export, domestic crop support, whole crop marketing.
NACIONAL de PRODUCTOS VITALES EMPROVIT (GA)
Edif MAG-3er Piso, Aves Amazonas y Elloy Alfaro, Quito, ECUADOR
PH: 237973; TLX: 2388.
Contact: Jorge R. Mora, Mgr.
Objectives & Activities: Import/export retail marketing.
EGYPT
GENERAL AUTHORITY FOR SUPPLY COMMODITIES (GA)
Ministry of Supply & Home Trade, 24 Gomhoria Street, Cairo, EGYPT
PH:937175; TLX: 2062.
EL SALVADOR
ASOCIACION DE GANADEROS DEL EL SALVADOR (AGES)
(Cattlemen's Association of El Salvador)
6a. 10a Calle Pte. No. 1833, Col. Flor Blanca, San Salvador, EL SALVADOR
PH: 503/233980; TLX: 20213 (INAGRO)
Contact: Arturo Muyshandt, Pres.
Membership: 24 Individuals & companies involved in livestock operations.
Objectives & Activities: Group all livestock owners into one organization; sell veterinary medicines, feed compounds and other livestock related products.
Publications: Revista AGES, yearly, free to members.
INSTITUTO REGULADOR DE ABASTECIMIENTOS (GA).
Edif: Prodisa, 7-A Av. Norte, Psj. 3 Cntr-Gobierno, San Salvador, EL SALVADOR.
ENGLAND
THE FEDERATION OF OILS, SEEDS & FATS ASSOCIATIONS LTD (FOSFA Int'l).
24 St. Mary Axe, London EC3A 8ER, ENGLAND
PH: 01/283-5511; TLX: 8812757 (FOSFA G); FAX: 01/623-1310.
Contact: D.A. Reffold, CEO & Secy.
Founded: 1823
Membership: 50 individuals; 500 firms or organizations. Shippers, middlemen, receivers of oilseeds, oil and fats and groundnuts.
Objectives & Activities: International contract issuing authority for the trade in oilseeds, oils and fats and HPS ground nuts. Provides regulation and arbitration services.
Publications: FOSFA Newsletter, quarterly, no cost; FOSFA manual, as required, N240; FOSFA Handbook, annual, N30.
THE GAFTA SOYA BEAN MEAL FUTURES ASSOCIATION,LTD.,
Baltic Exchange Chambers, 24/28 St. Mary Axe. London EC3A 8EP, ENGLAND
PH: 44/01/283-5146; TLX: 886984(GAFTA G).
Contact: William G. Englebright, Secy.
Founded: 1919
Membership: 680 firms associated with the worldwide food
industry.
Objectives & Activities: Promote improvements in the scientific and technical fields of the international food industry by providing routine and special analysis, long-term research, new product development. consulting, information, databases and databanks, publications, training and conferences.
Publications: Numerous publications for purchases by members and non-members; list available.
LEATHERHEAD FOOD RES.ASSOCIATION
Randalls Road, Leatherhead, Surrey. ENGLAND
PH: 44/372/376761; TLX: 929846 (FOODRA G); FAX: 44/372/386228.
Contact: J.R.Swift, Sales Mgr.
Founded: 1919.
Membership: 75 food manufacturers, and ingredient and equipment suppliers and retailers.
Objectives & Activities: Research and information services to enable member companies to operate more efficiently and with enhanced food safety.
PUBLICATIONS:Abstracts Journal, Food Science & Technology,monthly, $240/yr; Legislation manuals, regular updates, various prices; other publications available upon request.
MARGARINE & SHORTENING MANUFACTURERS' ASSOCIATIONS
6 Catherine Street, London WC2B 5JJ; ENGLAND
PH: 01/836-2460; TLX: 299388 (FDF 9); FAX: 01/836-0580.
Contact: Angela Bowden, Secy,Gen.
Membership:12 firms or organizations. All manufacturers of margarine and shortening in the United Kingdom.
Objectives & activities:Promote the interests of the margarine and shortening industry in the United Kingdom.
FRANCE
CENTRE TECHNIQUE INTERPROFESSIONNEL DES OLEAGINEUX METROPOLITAINS (CETIOM)
(Association of French Oilseed Producers)
174 Avenue Victor Hugo, 75116 Paris, FRANCE
PH: 331/4505-1423; TLX: 611-907 (SIDO)
Contact: Emile Chone
Founded: 1957
Membership: 110 Individuals representing associations of oilseed producers in France.
Objectives & activities: Perform applied production research for all oilseeds; extension and development.
Publications: Informations Techniques, 4 times/yr. f50/yr, Bulletin CETIOM, 4 times/yr, f50/yr.
CONSEIL INTERREGIONAL DU SOJA (CIS)
(Interregional Council of Soy)
17, Rue de Fleurance, 31400 Toulouse, FRANCE
PH: 61/538180
Contact: Emmanuel Prudon, Engineer
Founded: 1982
Membership: Producers and farmers.
Objectives & Activities: Soybean production in France.
Publications: L'inoculum, 4 times/yr.
GROUPE D'ETUDES DE PROTEINES VEGETALES (GEPV)
Association for the Study of Vegetable Proteins
10A, Rue de la Paix, Paris 75002, FRANCE
PH: 33/1/42965029; TLX: 1/230905 (STABILI); FAX: 1/47039878.
Contact: Aldo Uzzan, Scient.Consultant
Founded: 1976
Membership: 11 companies producing, marketing and/or using vegetable proteins in France.
Objectives & Activities: Communication and promotion for VPP uses in foods (scientific, industrial, legal, consumerism aspects); relations with other associations (within EUVEPRO)
INSTITUT DES CORPS GRAS (ITERG)
(Fats and Oils Institute)
10/A Rue de la Paix, 75002 Paris, FRANCE
PH: 42/965029; TLX: 230905 (STABILI PARIS).
Contact: Jean B.Chazan, Gen.Mgr.
Founded: 1943
Membership: 300 firms or organizations in the fats and oils industry.
Objectives & Activities: Conduct scientific and technical research and development on fats, oils and relate products, especially in the field of analytical and organic chemistry, biotechnology, technology (pilot plants).
Publications: Revue Francaise des Corps Gras, 10 times/yr, f940.
ONIDOL-SOJA
5 Bd. Mediterranee, Toulouse 31400, FRANCE
PH: 33/61/53-8180; TLX: 531477(F); FAX: 61/55-0837.
Contact: Prudon Emmanuel, Ingenieur
Founded: 1978
Membership: Families involved in oilseeds production and users/producers; industrials in seeds, seed storage and transformation.
Objectives & Activities: Organizing production; developing uses of soy products.
Publications: L'Inoculum, quarterly, 60f/yr.
ORGANIZATION NATIONALE INTERPROFESSIONNELLE DES OLEAGINEUX (ONIDOL) (National Oilseeds Organization)
12, Avenue George V,Paris 75008, FRANCE
PH: 33/1/47208055; TLX: 612575.
Contact: Guy Coudert, Mkting.Dir.
Founded: 1975
Membership: 7 organizations which represent oilseed production,processing and marketing.
Objectives & Activities: Represent the interests of the oilseed market in the framework of the EEC rules and French legislation on interprofessional organizations.
SOCIETE INTEROLEAGINEUSE D'ASSISTANCE ET DE DEVELOPPEMENT (S.I.A) SERVICE DOCUMENTATION
12, Avenue George V, Paris 75008, FRANCE
PH: 60.69.68.00; FAX: 67.23.82.30.
Contact: Sophie Criton, Documentalist
Founded: 1978
Membership: 80 individuals.
Objectives & Activities: Lobby for oleogeanous.
GERMANY
NAHRUNG EXPORT-IMPORT (GA)
Schicklerstrasse 7, 1020 Berlin, GERMANY
PH: 37/2/21480; TLX: 114893.
Contact: Manfred Wolf, Gen.Dir.
Objectives & Activities: Sole importer of soybeans and soybean products.
ZENTRAL - KOMMERZ Gmb (GA)
Parkstrasse 4-A, Berlin 1100, GERMANY
Contact: Gerhard Kuhse,Dir.Gen.
AMERICAN SOYBEAN ASSOCIATION/NORTH EUROPE
Pelzerstrasse 13, 2000 Hamburg 1, GERMANY
PH: 0049/040/330516 or 336783; TLX: 2163420 (SOYA D); FAX:49/40/327122.
Contact: Dr. Karl Fangauf, Dir.
Founded: 1960
Membership: Soybean processing industry and feed, fats and oil manufacturers.
Objectives & Activities: Marketing activities: extensive consulting, advertising, public relations addressed to consumers, industry and trade as well as research work in order to improve the quality of soybeans.
DEUTSCHE GESELLSCHAFT FUR ERNAHRUNG (DGE) (German Society of Nutrition)
Feldbergstrasse 28, D-6000 Frankfurt 1, GERMANY
PH: 069/720146
Contact: Volker Peinelt, Food Scientist
Founded: 1953
Membership: 1,700 individuals; 150 firms;
Objectives & Activities: Advise in matters of nutrition for individuals and mass catering; sponsor scientific meetings and publications.
Publications: Emahrungsuorschau, monthly, Emahrungsbericht, every 4 years, Empfehlungen Fur Die Nahrstoffzufuhr, every 5 years. Numerous publications of data and research on various matters of nutrition; list available.
DEUTSCHE GESELLSCHAFT FUR FETTWISSENSCHAFT e.V.(German Society for Fat Science)
Soester Strasse, 13, D-4400 Monster, GERMANY
PH: 0251/64745.
Contact: Heinrich Bruning, Dir.
Founded: 1936
Membership: 300 individuals; 150 firms
Objectives & Activities: Promote unity and common goals among different disciplines within the fats industry.
Publications: Fett Wissenschaft Technologie (Fat Science Technology), 14 times/yr., DM450,80.
MARGARINE-INSTITUTE FUR GESUNDE ERNAHRUNG
Friesenweg 1, D-2000 Hamburg 50, GERMANY
PH: 040/882091.
Contact: Peter A. Zanger, Dir.
Founded: 1962
Membership: 11 margarine manufacturers.
Objectives & Activities: To improve the image of vegetable premium margarine through PR activities by providing information on raw materials, manufacturing and product properties (include health aspects).
Publications: Pressedienst Margarine Institut (PDM)6 times/yr, free of charge.
VERBAND DEUTSCHER OELMUHLEN E.V.
Kronprinzenstrasse 24, D-5300 Bonn 2, GERMANY
PH: 0228-363056; TLX: 885630 (OELVB D); FAX:0228/361268
Contact: Hanno Juhe, Secy.Gen.
Founded: 1901
Membership: 1 individual, 15 firms active in the seed-crushing and oil refining business.
Objectives & Activities: Representation of the industry and its interests to national authorities, legislative bodies and trade association through membership in European and international trade associations.
VEREIN DER GETRELDEHANDLER DER HAMBURGER BORSE e.V.
Borse-Kontor 24, Adolphsplatz 1, D-2000 Hamburg 11, GERMANY
PH: 040/362025: TLX: 17/403968 (VDGH); FAX: 040/362029
Contact: Ferdinand Kemme, Dir.Gen.
Founded: 1868
Membership: 165 firms; importers' exporters and merchants of grain, feedstuffs, legumes, seeds and the respective brokers.
Objectives & Activities: Taking the interest of the trade, representing and administrating the exchange and arbitrations.
GUATEMALA
ANAVI (GA)
Av.de la Reforma 8-60 Zona 9, Edif.Galerias Reforma, 9 Nivel, Guatemala City, GUATEMALA
PH: 502/2/311381 or 311389; TLX: 6215 (ANAVI GU); FAX: 502/23476.
Contact: Mario A. Motta, Gen.Mgr.
HONDURAS
MINISTERIO DE RECURSOS NATURALES (GA)
Tegucigalpa, HONDURAS.
Contact: Cesar Noe Pino.
HUNGARY
AGRIMPEX (GA)
Munich Ferenc u.22, Budapest 1392, HUNGARY
PH: 36/1/1113-800; TLX: 225751.
Contact: A Vermes Gen.Dir.
Objectives & Activities: Soybeans, soy meal, soybean oil
AGROKOMPLEX CENTRAL SOYA TAKARMANYOZSTECHNOLOGIAL EGYUTTMUKODES
(Agrokomplex, Central Soya Cooperation for Feeding Technology)
Zichyujfalu 8112, HUNGARY
PH: 36/06-22/11145-218; TLX: 21249.
Contact: Gabor Reischl, Dir.
Founded: 1970
Membership: 355 firms including state farm and farm cooperatives.
Publications: Agrokomplex Informatio, quarterly.
GRAIN TRUST-HUNGARY (GA)
Dorottya 1, P.O.Box 232, Budapest 1368, HUNGARY
PH: 36/1/183900; TLX: 22-4451.
Contact: Daniel Lacfi, Gen.Mgr.
Founded: 1965
Membership: 19 county enterprises, 1 research institute and 1 service center.
Objectives & Activities: Grain Trust is responsible for:(1)procuring of wheat, maize & other feedstuffs; (2) milling for human consumption (100% of the country); (3) producing mixed feed for domestic animals (50% of the country)
Publications:GABONAIPAR (Grain Industry);quarterly;no cost.
MAGYAR ELELMEZESIPARI TUDOMANYOS EGYESULET (Hungarian Scientific Society for Food Industry)
Akademia Utca 1-3,P.O.Box 5, H-1361 Budapest, HUNGARY
PH: 36/1/122-859; TLX: 225792 (MITESZ)
Contact: Istvan Toth-Zsiga, Secy.Gen.
Founded: 1949
Membership: Approximately 12,000 individuals. Membership is free for scientists and practical technicians.
P
Objectives & Activities: Develop and stimulate research in all fields of the food industry; to interpret results and transmit findings to those in the practice.
INDIA
THE BOMBAY OILSEEDS & OILS EXCHANGE LTD.
Jenabai Building, Yusuf Meheralli Road, P.O.Box 13009, Bombay 400003, Maharashtra, INDIA
PH: 91/22/324361 or 321510.
Contact: Gunvant K.Shah,Secy.
Founded:1938
Membership: 500 traders/manufacturers of oilseeds, oils and oilcakes and articles manufactured out of same.
Objectives & Activities: Promote and protect the interests of the persons engaged in the trade or business of oilseeds, oils, oilcakes and articles manufactured out of same.
Publications: Oilseeds & Oils Bulletin, daily,RS.400/non-members, RS.300/members;Oils & Oilseeds Journal, Monthly, RS.240/domestic,US$35/foreign.
COOPERATIVE LEAGUE OF THE USA (CLUSA)
805 Chiransiv Tower, 43 Nehru Place, New Delhi 110019, INDIA
PH: 91/11/641-7374; TLX: 031-62584.
Contact: Thomas R. Carter, Rep.
Founded: 1916
Membership: 400 firms or organizations which are cooperative businesses of all kinds.
Objectives & Activities: The promotion of business development and trade relationships, mutual cooperation and education.
THE GRAIN RICE AND OILSEEDS MERCHANTS ASSOCIATION
72-80 Yusuf Meheralli Road Bombay 400003, INDIA
PH: 324021 or 324022.
Contact: R.J.Bhatt,Secy.
Founded: 1899
Membership: 1,049 traders dealing in wholesale foodgrains and oilseeds.
Objectives & Activities: Promote the foodgrains and oilseeds trade. Publications: Vanijya, monthly, RS.10/yr.
INDIAN OIL AND PRODUCE EXPORTERS ASSOCIATION
78-79 Bajaj Bhawan, 7th Floor, Nariman Point Bombay 400 021, Maharashtra, INDIA
PH: 91/22/202-3225 or 202-9295; TLX: 011-5637(IOPE).
Contact: G.Chandra Shekhar, Secy.
Founded: 1956
Membership: 240 processors and exporters of oilseeds, edible peanuts and castor oil; merchants, brokers, surveyors, etc.
Objectives & Activities:To promote production and export of oilseeds and edible peanuts; appointed by the government of India as the agency to monitor and promote export; dissemination of market information.
Publications: IOPEA Trade Vision, monthly,(suspended for the time being), for members only.
INDIAN VEGETABLE OIL EXPORT ASSOCIATION (IVOEA)
c/o I.O.P.E.A.78/79 Bajal Bhawan, 7th Floor, Nariman Point, Bombay 40014, Maharashtra, INDIA
PH: 022/2023225 or 2029295: TLX: 011-5637(IOPE).
Contact: G. Chandra Shekhar, Secy.
Membership: 30 manufacturers of castor oil; exporters of castor oil, meal and castor derivatives.
Objectives & Activities: Promote export of castor oil and derivatives from india.
KURNOOL OIL MILLERS' ASSOCIATION
Shop 1,Agricultural Market Yard Bellary Road, Kumool 518003, INDIA
PH: 91/08518/20598.
Contact: Chandrakant Shah, Pres.
Founded: 1973
Membership: 14 firms manufacturing groundnut, cottonseed and sunflower oil.
Objectives & Activities: Inform members of all various government orders, taxation and labour laws and work as a liaison between government and members.
THE MADRAS OIL AND SEEDS ASSOCIATION
16, Francis Street, P.O.Box. 1639, Madras 600001, Tamil Nadu, INDIA
PH: 583318 or 587893.
Contact: T.R. Thambu Reddi, Secy.
Founded: 1946
Membership: 26 individuals: 275 firms or organizations. Twelve Managing Committee Members get elected yearly by the General Body who look after administration and other matters.
Objectives & Activities: To do chamber work; act as a liaison with government and other agencies in solving problems of trade; analyze oilseeds, oils and oilcakes, etc., circulate statistics and other important matters among members.
Publications: Daily Market Report, daily, RS. 150/yr.
OILS AND SEEDS IMPORTERS ASSOCIATION OF INDIA
76-79 Bajaj Bhawan, 7th Floor. Nariman Point Bombay 400 021. Maharashtra, INDIA
PH: 91/22/202-3225 or 202-9295: TLX: 011-5637 (IOPE)
Contact: G. Ghandra Shekhar, Secy.
Founded: 1978
Membership: 150 importers and dealers in oils. oilseeds and fats; brokers, surveyors, manufacturers of oils, oilmeals, etc.
Objectives & Activities: To coordinate and monitor imports of oils, seeds and fats into India; to assist members in their import operations; to act as a liaison with the government on matters of interest to trade.
PROTEIN FOODS AND NUTRITION DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF INDIA (PFNDAI)
Mahalaxmi Chambers, 22 Bhulabhai Desai Road, Bombay 400 026, Maharashira, INDIA
PH: 91/22/492 8858 or 4938998
Contact: Hattiangadi S. Gurudas, Exec.Dir.
Founded: 1968
Membership: 40 firms or organizations and 5 individuals who are the leading manufacturers of foods, beverage and related products such as equipment, government organizations concerned with food and nutrition. R&D institutions and others interested in this field.
Objectives & Activities: Nutrition education, surveys and consultancy to national and international organizations. Assist government in the formulation of standards and legislation. Currently deeply involved in soyfood promotion in India.
Publications: PENDAI Newsletter, monthly RS. 120/yr.
THE SOYBEAN PROCESSORS ASSOCIATION OF INDIA (SOPA)
Scheme No.53 Malviya Nagar, A.B.Road, Indore-452008 M.P., INDIA
PH: 38554 or 23668; TLX: 0735-308(SOPA IN).
Contact: Dr.G.A. Sulebele, Chief Exec.
Founded: 1977.
Membership: 93 processors, exporters; 221 allied trader, brokers.
Objectives & Activities: To promote agriculture, processing and marketing of soybeans and products derived therefrom; export of soybean meal; assist exporters; monitor exports on behalf of the government of India; and to conduct R&D work with a view to advance technology for the manufacture and utilization of soybeans, soybean products & by-products.
Publications: SOPA Digest, monthly.
THE STATE TRADING CORP. OF INDIA, LTD. (GA)
Market information & Research Div. Chandralck, 36 Janpath, New Delhi 110001, INDIA
Contact: P. Kumar, Mkting. Mgr.
INDONESIA
BULOG (NATIONAL LOGISTIC AGENCY) (GA)
Jalan Jenderal, Galot Subroto Kav 49, Jakarta, INDONESIA
PH: 62/21/512209; TLX: 073-7964-4303.
Contact: Bustanil Antin, Chrman.
PT.PP. BERDIKARI (GA)
J1M.1. Ridwan Rais No.7, Jakarta 10110, INDONESIA
PH: 636633 or 634455; TLX: 41311 (BERDIK IA).
Contact: H. Ahmad Nurhani, Vice Pres.
Objectives & Activities: Domestic distribution of soybeans.
ITALY
ASSOCIAZIONE ITALIANA DELL'INDUSTRIA OLEARIA (ASSITOL)
(Italian Oil Industry Association)
3 Via del Governo Vecchio, 00186 Rome, ITALY
PH: 06/6543251; TLX:610552 (ASSIOL I).
Contact: Giorgio Gilenti, Gen.Dir.
Founded: 1972.
Membership: Approximately 100 firms involved with olive oil, seed oil, technical oils, refined olive residue oil, margarine, vegetable proteins, semi-raw materials and improvers for the bakery and confectionery industry.
Objectives & Activities: Represent members and their interests.
Publications: Bulletin, monthly, for members only.
JAMAICA
JAMAICA COMMODITY TRADING CO.,LTD.(GA)
8 Ocean Blvd.P.O.Box 47, Kingston, JAMAICA.
JAPAN
AMERICAN SOYBEAN ASSOCIATION/JAPAN
Akasaka Tokyo Building, 11 Floor, 2-14-3 Nagata-cha, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 100, JAPAN
PH:81/03/593-2501 TLX: 23-7402322 (SOYA-UC); FAX:81/3/593-9177.
Contact: Lars Wiedermann, Dir.
Founded: 1956.
Objectives & Activities: Country directors work with the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Foreign Agricultural Service staff and local individuals and groups involved with oilseed utilization, consumption and marketing.
JAPAN MARGARINE, SHORTENING AND LARD INDUSTRIES ASSOCIATION
27-8, 3- Chome Nihonbashi, Hamacho, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 103, JAPAN
PH: 03/666-6159.
Contact: Mitsuo Shimura, Man Dir.
Founded: 1947
Membership: 26 firms, manufacturers of margarine. shortening, refined lard, refined processed oils and fats, fats spreads, etc.
Objectives & Activities: Cultivate mutual friendship and exchange information; improve production technology and ensure sanitation, distribution and promotion of safety for edible processed oils and fats; improve distribution and promote consumption of edible processed oils and fats; support research and development; compile statistics and information; and to submit a report to enquiries by government and municipal offices offering the industries opinions.
JAPAN OILSEED PROCESSORS ASSOCIATION
Yushi Kogyo Kailkan Building 13-11,3-Chome, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103, JAPAN
PH: 03/271-2706; FAX: 03/271-2707.
Contact: Hiroshi Higashimon, Man Dir.
Founded: 1962.
Membership: 30 Japanese oilseed processors.
Objectives & Activities: To protect the interests of members and the industry.
Publications: Wagakuni No. Yushijiya (Report on Oil & Fets) annually, #2.200.00; Yushi Geppo (Report on Oil & Fats) monthly, #800.00.
JAPAN VEGETABLE PROTEIN FOOD ASSOCIATION
5th Floor, Yamagata Building, 1-23-10 Toranomon, Minato-ku, Tokyo 107, JAPAN
PH: 03/591-2524.
Contact: Kazuo Imalsumi, Man. Dir.
Founded: 1975
Membership: 5 firms and 1 organization representing 2,700 soy sauce manufacturers.
Objectives & Activities: Promote the international soy sauce industry.
YURYO YUSHUTSUNYU KYOGIKAL
The Japan Oil & Fat Importer & Exporters Association (JOFIEA) 6th Floor, Kyoda Building (Shinhondome), 10-12 Nihonbashi Horidome-cho, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 103, JAPAN
PH: 03/662-9821: FAX: 03/667-7667
Contact: Hideo Kaeahara, Exec. Dir.
Founded: 1951
Membership: 20 firms or organizations which are trading houses for oilseeds, oils & fats.
Objectives & Activities: To coordinate import & export transactions for soybeans, oil-bearing seeds.
Publications: Statistics of Oilseeds, Oils & Oilcakes, annual, free of charge.
ZENKOKU MARGARINE SELZO KYODO KUMIAI
(Japan Margarine Manufacturers Cooperative)
3-27-8, Nihonbashi Hamacho Chuo-ku, Tokyo 103, JAPAN
PH: 81/03/661-2561.
Contact: Shigeru Iwama, Exec.Dir.
Founded: 1955
Membership: 12 manufacturers of margarine, shortening, refined lard and/or other processed edible oil products.
Objectives & Activities: Arrange joint business transactions (purchases, sales, etc.) and financing for members; promote and protect the interests of members.
ZENKOKU TOFU ABURAGE DHKO KUMIAI RENGOKAI
(Japan Tofu & Fried Tofu Association)
1-16-22 Ueno, Taito-ku, Tokyo 110, JAPAN
PH: 81/03/833-9351.
Contact: Tetsuya Sato, Gen. Mgr.
Founded: 1939
Membership: 13,714 individuals (tofu manufacturers) who belong to 46 prefectural tofu associations.
Objectives & Activities: Support the management of member tofu shops through education program on tofu marketing, including labelling requirements; data collection of tofu industries; cooperative purchase of raw materials, cleaning and distribution of soybeans; tolu and soymilk point of sales promotions.
Publications: Zentoren Dayori, monthly, free.
<section>3</section>
B - APPENDIX II
KENYA
NATIONAL CEREALS & PRODUCE BOARD (GA)
P.O.Box 30586 Nairobi, KENYA
PH: 555288 or 555708; TLX:22769 (MARKETER)
Contact: William K.A. Kikwai, Man Dir.
KOREA, REPUBLIC OF(SOUTH KOREA)
AGRICULTURE & FISHERY MARKETING CORP. (GA)
191.2-ka Hankang-Ro, Yongsan-ku, Sedul, SOUTH KOREA
PH: 82/2/795-8201; TLX: 23297 (AAFMG K)
Contact: Jin Kyu Kim, Vice Pres.
Objectives & Activities: Soybean sprouts.
AMERICAN SOYBEAN ASSOCIATION/SOUTH KOREA
Press Center, 8th Floor, 25, Taepyung-ro 1-ka, K.P.O.Box 1704, Seoul 100-745, SOUTH KOREA
PH: 02/738-7056; TLX: K22276 (ASABEL); FAX: 82/2/736-5501.
Contact: Kyung Lee,Dir.
Founded: 1920
Membership: 550.000 individuals.
Objectives & Activities: To expand the U.S. soybean market in the world. To achieve this goal ASA operates 11 overseas offices whose activities include: consumer education, trade servicing,organizing trade teams and seminars, publishing technical papers, etc.
KOREA FEED ASSOCIATION (GA)
1581-13 Seacho-dong, Kangnam-ku, Seoul, SOUTH KOREA
PH: 82/2/581-5731; TLX: 22835 (KOFEED K).
Contact: Keel Chung Chi, Gen.Mgr., Bus. Dept.
Objectives & Activities: Soybean meal.
KOREAN SOYBEAN CURD COOPERATIVE FEDERATION (GA)
Hya Bong Bldg., Room 201 1306-1 Seo-Dong Kang nam-ku, Seoul 135, SOUTH KOREA
PH: 82/2/725-6763 or 722-1720 or 725-7273.
Contact: Jum Rak Kim, Pres.
NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL COOPERATIVE FEDERATION (NACF) (GA)
1-76 Choong Geong-Ro, Joong ku, Seoul 100, SOUTH KOREA
PH: 082/02/737-0021; TLX: 27421 (NACOA K).
Contact: Yong Sung Hah, Deputy Gen. Mgr.
Objectives & Activities: Food, soybeans.
NATIONAL LIVESTOCK COOPERATIVE FEDERATION (GA)
V17-9 Yolda-dong Youngdungpo-ku, Seoul, SOUTH KOREA
PH: 82/2/783-0051; TLX: 23517 (NALIGOF K).
Contact: Ki Kji Ghun, Gen. Mgr., Feed Dept.
Objectives & Activities: Soybean meal.
MEXICO
AMERICAN SOYBEAN ASSOCIATION/MEXICO & CARIBBEAN BASIN
Rio Sena No. 26, Col. Cuauhtemoc, Mexico City 06500, D.F., MEXICO
PH: 566-9490 or 705-1633; TLX: 023-740-7461 (SOYA UC); FAX: 52/5/705-1758.
Contact: Kenneth Shwedel, Dir.
Founded: 1946
Membership: 14 individuals.
Objectives & Activities: We represent U.S. soybean farmers providing soybean users with: technical information and assistance in processing and refining soybeans and products, marketing and promotion program for soybeans and products, as well as nutrition information and assistance in formulating livestock feeds and human diets.
Publications: Soyanoticias, quarterly, no charge.
ASOCIACION MEXICANA DE ESPECIALISTAS EN NUTRICION ANIMAL, A.C. (Mexican Association of Animal Nutrition Scientists)
Rio Goatzacoalcoalcos N^o1. Cuemavaca 62290, Morelos, MEXICO
PH: 52/73/154738; FAX: 52/73/151098.
Contact: Francisco J. Tirado, Nutr.Mgr.
Founded: 1972.
Membership: 400 individuals; 70 firms or organizations,agronomists, veterinarians, chemists at the Bachelor, Master and Ph.D. degree level of the sciences.
Objectives & Activities: Increase people's and technicians' knowledge of animal requirements husbandry, chemical analyses of raw material through modern techniques. Organizing symposiums, seminars and national and international congresses yearly in order to improve technicians' knowledge.
Publications: 4th National Congress, 1989, annual, no cost.
ASOCIACION NACIONAL DE ESPECIALISTAS EN CIENCIAS AVICOLAS DE MEXICO (ANECA)
(Mexican Association of Avian Pathologisis)
Hacienda de Canutilo No. 8-4, Col. Villa Guietud, P.O.B. 22-814, Mexico D.F. 04960, MEXICO
PH: 5/6711354.
Contact: Emesto S. Priante, Library Coordinator.
Founded: 1970.
Membership: 500 individuals, 5 organization working in the poultry industry.
Objectives & Activities: Promote the education of students and veterinarians working in the poultry industry to improve the educational grade.
MOROCCO
SERVICE DES INDUSTRIES ALIMENTAIRES DIRECTION DE L'INDUSTRIE (GA)
Minister du Commerce et de l'Industri, Rabat, MOROCCO
PH: 64502; TLX: 31872
Contact: Dir Gen.
NETHERLANDS
VERENIGING VAN NEDERLANDSE FABRIKANTEN VAN EETBARE OLIEN EN VETTEN (VERNOF)
(Dutch Seed Crushers and Oil Processors Association)
Raanweg 44, 2596 HN. The Hague, NETHERLANDS
PH: 31/70/468812; TLX: 32616 (OVEMA NL).
Contact: C.J.M.Meershoeck Exec.Dir.
Founded: 1912
Membership: 11 firms seed crushers and oil processing companies.
Objectives & Activities: Represent and defend the economic interests of member companies as well as those of the national and international industry.
NICARAGUA
EMPRESA NICARAGUENESE DE ALIMENTOS BASICOS (ENABAS) (GA)
Frente Cerveceria, Victoria Antiguo Ince, Managua, NICARAGUA
Contact: Urias Ugalde, Mgr.
NIGERIA
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE & NATURAL RESOURCES (GA)
P.M.B. 2038, Makurdi, Benue State, NIGERIA
Contact: Chief Agricultural Officer.
STATE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE (GA)
17/27 Moloney Street P.M.B. 2613, Lagos, NIGERIA
PH: 632601 or 632231;
Contact: C.C.Anojulu, Dir.
PAKISTAN
PAKISTAN POULTRY ASSOCIATION
47-A Modern Housing Society Block 788 Tipu Sultan Road P.O.Box 18108, Karachi 75350 , Sind PAKISTAN
PH: 438931; TLX: 25736 (KAYS PK) (Atth: PPA).
Contact: Moxater Islam, Central Secy.
Founded: 1979
Membership: 3500 firms or organizations; 10.000 poultry farmers; 150 hatcheries; 120 feed mills and allied members of equipment dealers; pharmaceuticals; supplies, egg & chicken dealers etc. Objectives & Activities: To provide facilities for and foster, encourage secure and maintain a good and close relationship and unanimity among members and the trade in general and to promote development of poultry farming in Pakistan.
Publications: Pakistan Poultry, monthly, US$60.
PANAMA
INSTITUTO DE MERCADEO AGROPECUARIO (IMA) (GA)
Apartado 5638 Panama City 2, PANAMA
PH: 507/61-1602
Contact: Jose Barrios.
PERU
EMPRESA NACIONAL DE COMERCIALIZATION DE INSUMOS (ENCI) (GA) EXCLUSIVE TRADING AGENCY
Camino Real 111, 5 Piso- San Isidro, Castilla 1834, Lima 27, PERU
PH: 51/14/40359. TLX: 21529/30/31/32/33 (PE-ENGIPERU); FAX: 51/14/409359.
Contact: Maria C. Rodriguez Pastor, Import Mgr.
Founded: 1973.
Objectives & Activities: To import and commercialize foodstuffs and fertilizers in the national market.
PHILIPPINES
NATIONAL FOOD AUTHORITY (GA)
Matimyas Budg. 101, E. Rodriguez Avenue. Guezon City, PHILIPPINES
PH: 63/2/712-1575; TLX: 075-742-42007 (NGA PM).
Contact: Roberto H. Goce Dir. Int'l Mkting.
Objectives & Activities: Importer of soybeans and soybean meal for emergency needs.
Soybeans, meal, soybean oil and other soybean products are also purchased by the private sector.
PHILIPPINE ASSOCIATION OF FEEDMILLERS, INC.
Maligaya Building Ill, Room 302, Quezon City 1111, PHILIPPINES
PH: 721-0906 or 722-2912.
Contact: Augusto L. de Leon Pres.
Founded: 1951.
Membership: 11 firms; manufacturers of animal feeds. Meligaya Objectives & Activities: Work together for members' common good: cooperative with government in enhancing economic progress and developing the country's liverstock industry.
POLAND
ROLIMPEX (GA)
ui. Chalubinskiego 8,P.O.Box 364, Warsaw 00613, POLAND
PH: 48/22/30-0633; TLX: 814341.
Contact: Andrzej Cieslakiewicz, Dir.
PORTUGAL
ASSOCIACAO PORTUGUESA DOS INDUSTRIALS DE ALIMENTOS
(Portugueses Association of Feed Manufacturers)
Av. 5 de Outubro 21-2 Esq. P-1000 Lisbon, PORTUGAL
PH: 351/1-535091; TLX: 42510, (IACA P); FAX: 351/1-2480217.
Contact: Luis Marques, Gen Secy.
Founded: 1975
Membership: 2 individuals and 88 firms; certified feed manufacturers.
Objectives & Activities: Promote feed production; survey markets, provide studies and information on raw materials; animal feed legislation; general economic questions.
Publications: Informacao 1, twice each month; informacao 2, irregularly.
ROMANIA
PRODEXPORT (GA)
Piatza Walter Maracineau 1-3, Bucharest, ROMANIA
TLX: 11527
Contact: Aurel Antoniu, Gen Mgr.
Objectives & Activities: Soybeans, soy meal and soybean pellets.
SAUDI ARABIA
GRAIN SILOS & FLOUR MILLS ORGANIZATION (GA)
P.O.Box 3402, Riyadh 11471, SAUDI ARABIA
PH: 464-3500; TLX: 402560 (SAWAMI).
Contact: Hamad Toaimi, Foreign Purchasing Mgr.
SINGAPORE
AMERICAN SOYBEAN ASSOCIATION/SOUTHEAST ASIA
541 Orchard Road #11-03 Lait Towers, Singapore 0923, SINGAPORE
PH: 737-6233 or 737-6561 TLX: 786-56791
Contact: David Thomason, Dir.
Objectives & activities: Country directors work with the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Foreign Agricultural Service Staff and local individuals and groups involved with oilseed utilization, consumption and marketing.
SOUTH AFRICA
OILSEED BOARD (GA)
P.O.Box 211, Pretoria 0001.SOUTH AFRICA
PH: 325-5000, TLX: 5320894 or 5321346.
Contact: Gen.Mgr.
SPAIN
AMERICAN SOYBEAN ASSOCIATION/MIDEAST IBERIA & AFRICA
Juan Alvarez Mendizabal #3,3 Madrid 28008, SPAIN
PH: 242-2900; TLX: 46008 (SOYA E) FAX: 34/1/542-6123.
Contact: Arno Partner, Regional Dir.
Founded: 1920 (main office)
Membership: 422,000 soybean farmers
Objectives & Activities: To promote market uses and policies that allow U.S. soybean farmers to produce and sell soybeans competitively and profitably; to continue increases in demand for U.S. soybeans through free and open access into wondwide markets; to assure adequate support for soybean utilization and production research.
Publications: Animal Nutrition Highlights (French/Spanish) bi-monthly, free; Human Nutrition Highlights (French/Spanish); bi-monthly; free; Animal Nutrition Research Highlights, bi-monthly, free.
ASSOCIATION ESPANOLA DE EXPORTADORES DE ACEITE DE SOJA
(Spanish Soybean Oil Exporters Association)
Galle Diego de Leon 34,3 A Madrid 28006 SPAIN
PH: 34/1/262-1431; TLX: 44092 (SOYE E); FAX: 202-1431.
Contact: George Laffaille, Gen.Mgr,
Founded: 1981
Membership: 6 major Spanish soybean crushing plants.
Objectives & Activities: To channel the soybean oil (crude & refined) exports of the Association's members to provide them with all information necessary to their activity; to maintain contacts with Spanish official entities and important international bodies related to soybean.
ASOCIACION ESPANOLA DE FABRICANTES DE MARGARINA
(Spanish Association of Margarine Manufacturers)
Apartado: 791 48080 Bilbao, SPAIN
PH: 34/4/463-4400; TLX: 32737 (AGRASA)
Contact: F. Javier Herrero Velardo Pres.
Founded: 1978
Membership: 350 individuals 15 firms
Objectives & Activities: Defends the interests of Spanish margarine manufacturers.
CONFEDERACION ESPANOLA DE FABRICANES DE ALIMENTOS COMPUESTOS PARA ANIMALES (CESFAC)
(Spanish Association of Feed Manufacturers)
Gran.Via. 68-1 , 28013 Madrid, SPAIN
PH: 1/542-0505; TLX: 27270 (GRUPL-E); FAX: 1/2480217.
Contact: Manuel G.Mendez, Dir.
Founded: 1987
Membership: 35 individuals, 15 firms or organizations.
Objectives & Activities: Defend the interests of Spanish feed manufacturers.
SWEDEN
FORENINGEN SVENSKA MARGARINTILLVERKARE
(Association of Swedish Margarine Manufacturers)
Box 5501, Stockholm S-11485 SWEDEN
PH: 08/783-8000; TLX: 19990 (SWEDING S) .
Contact: Goran Holmquist, Dir.General
Founded: 1982.
Membership: 3 firms margarine manufacturers.
NORDISKT FORUM FOR LIPID FORSKNING OCH TEKNOLOGI (LIPIDFORUM) (Scandanavian Forum for Lipid Research and Technology)
c/o SIK - The Swedish Food Institute, Box 5401, S-40229 Goteborg, SWEDEN
PH: 46/31/400120; TLX: 21651 (SIK S)
Contact: Reinhard Marcuse Secy Gen.
Founded: 1969
Membership: Approximately 500 individuals and 100 firms; individuals, scientific institutions and industrial companies.
Objectives & Activities: Arrange meetings: (1) :Scandinavian Symposia on Lipids", each second year with broad spectrum programmes alternating in the five Nordic countries, (2) specialized symposia on specific items.
Publications: Newsletters, 2 times/yr, free to members, proceedings, for purchase by members and non members; list available.
SYRIA
FOREIGN TRADE ORGANIZATION FOR CHEMICALS & FOODSTUFFS (GEZA) (GA)
P.O.Box 893 Damascus SYRIA
PH: 228521 or 225421; TLX: 411000 or 411370 (GEZA SY);
Contact: Ifat Haman Dir Vegt./Oil Dept.
GENERAL ORGANIZATION FOR FODDER (GA)
P.O.Box 4787, Damascus SYRIA
PH: 221893 or 221689; TLX: 411089 or 411124 (ALAF SY).
Contact: Omar Kholani, Dir. Gen.
Objectives & Activities: Importer of soybean meal.
TAIWAN
AMERICAN SOYBEAN ASSOCIATION/TAIWAN
Kwang Wu Building Room 603 Tun Hua Road Talpel 10099, TAIWAN
PH: 781-2110 or 781-5880 TLX: 785-19422 (USBEANS)
Contact: Steve Chen, Dir
Objectives & Activities: Country directors work with the U.S. Department of Agriculture Foreign Agricultural Service staff and local individuals and groups involved with oilseed utilization consumption and marketing.
THE ASIAN VEGETABLE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT CENTER (AVRDC)
P.O.Box 42, Shanhua Tainan 74199 TAIWAN
PH: 06/583-7801; TLX: 73550 (AVRDG); FAX: 06/583-0009
Founded: 1972
Membership: Worldwide
Publications: Annual Progress Report annual $20 U.S.; Centerpoint annual
FOOD INDUSTRY RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT INSTITUTE
331 Food Road P.O.Box 246, Hsinchu 30038 TAIWAN
PH: 886/035/223191; FAX: 886/035/214016
Contact: Paul C. Ma. Dir.
Founded: 1967.
Membership: 209 individuals and 1 firm or organization. The government agriculture economy health and service. The industry canning frozen fermentation flavour and packaging.
Objectives & Activities: To carry out basic and applied research on food science technology and microbiology to help the local food industry (including soybean, oil, tofu, soymilk, yuba and related soyfoods). Supplying market information, organizing training programs and providing chemical analysis for the food industries.
Publications: Food industry (in Chinese), monthly US$34 Annual Report (both Chinese & English) annual free; Food industry Almanac (in English) annual US$20 Research Report (both chinese & English) no periodic, US$3 Market Information (in Chinese) every 2 weeks. NT$2,000.
TAIWAN FEED INDUSTRIES ASSOCIATION
368 Fu Shing South Road Section 1, 9th Floor, Talpiel 10640 TAIWAN
PH: 886/2/702-8070.
Contact: K.G.Lin Chman
Founded: 1966
Membership: 113 feed mills and feed traders; manufacturers of mixed feeds.
Objectives & Activities: Act as a liaison between government and members on procurement and production coordinator and provide technical and market information.
TAIWAN SOY SAUCE INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION
24 Pel Ping East Road 4th Floor-3 Talpel TAIWAN
PH: 886/2/341-0739 or 351-7726.
Contact: M.C. Chang, Secy. Gen.
Founded: 1954
Membership: Manufacturers of tofu, spiced dried tofu and tofu skin or involved in soyfood production and marketing.
Objectives & Activities: Act as liaison between government and members on procurement and production; coordinate and provide technical and market information to members.
TAIWAN VEGETABLE OIL MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION
Chang An East Road 6th Floor, Pal-Fu Building 27, Section 1, Talpel 104, TAIWAN
PH: 886/561 6351.
Contact: Daniel Yang, Secy Gen.
Founded: 1952
Membership: Manufacturers of soybean oil, soybean meal, peanut oil and salad oil or those involved with vegetable oil refining.
Objectives & Activities: Act as liaison between government and members on procurement and production coordinate and provide technical and market information.
TUNISIA
BANQUE NATIONAL DE DEVELOPPEMENT (GA)
Agricole, 3, Rue Jugurtha, 1002 Tunis, TUNISIA
Contact: Forid Mokhtar, Pres.
INSTITUT NATIONAL DE NUTRITION & TECHNOLOGIE ALIMENTAIRE (GA)
Rue Aristide Briand 1006 Bab Saadoun, Tunis, TUNISIA
PH: 663770
Contact: Zouheir Kallel, Dir.
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE (GA)
30 Rue Alain Savary, 1002 Tunis, TUNISIA
Contact: Habib Najjar, Pres.
UNION TUNISIENNE INDUSTRIE DU COMMERCE ET DE L'ARTISANAT (UTICA) (GA)
103 Avenue de la Liberte, 1002 Tunis, TUNISIA
PH: 253434 or 253724 TLX: 13982.
Contact: Abdelkader Chaouch, Pres.
UNITED SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLIC (U.S.S.R)
PRODSYRIO Division of v/o EXPORTKHLEB (GA)
Smolenskaja Sennaja 32/34 G-200 Moscow U.S.S.R
TLX: 411145
Contact: V.K. Mishin Dir.
Objectives & Activities: Sole importer of oilseeds and meal.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA (U.S.A)
THE AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF CEREAL CHEMISTS (AACC)
3340 Pilot Knob Road St.Paul MN 55121 U.S.A
PH: 612/454-7250; TLX: (MCI/WUI) 6502439657; FAX: 612/454
Contact: Raymond J. Tarleton, Exec. Vice Pres.
Founded: 1915
Membership: 3,466 individuals, 234 firms or organizations: cereal science professionals throughout the U.S. and 90 other countries. Among its members are government and academic scientists as well as technically trained persons working within the cereal processing industries.
Objectives & Activities: Members share the common desire to improve themselves through broadening their understanding of cereal science, stimulating their professional contacts and increasing their potential for advancement. The unique professional services, publications, meetings and activities provided by the AACC help members to achieve their goals.
Publications: Cereal Foods World, monthly $60/yr U.S., $85/yr elsewhere; Cereal Chemistry, bi-monthly, $120/yr U.S. $135/yr elsewhere.
AMERICAN FARM BUREAU FEDERATION
225 Touhy Avenue Park Ridge, IL.600068 USA
PH: 708/395 5748; FAX: 708/389-5896.
Contact: Timothy Price, Dir. Wheat Feed Grains & Soybeans Dept.
Founded: 1919.
Membership: 3.7 million farmers and ranchers in USA.
Objectives & Activities: Independent non-governmental voluntary organization of farm and ranch families united for the purpose of analyzing their problems, formulating action to achieve educational improvement economic opportunity, social advancement and thereby promote the national well-being.
Publications: Farm Bureau News, weekly.
AMERICAN FEED INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION INC.
1701 N Ft.Myer Drive 12th Floor Arington VA,22209 USA;
PH: 703/524-0810; FAX: 703/524-1921.
Founded: 1909
Contact: Barbara Estridge, Corp Secy.
Membership: 600 firms or individuals who manufacture and/or market animal food, soil products incorporated into animal feed, sell equipment or supplies and services used in the manufacture and distribution of animal feed.
AMERICAN OIL CHEMISTS' SOCIETY (AOCS)
1608 Broadmoor Drive P.O.Box 3489 Champaign IL. 61621 USA
PH: 217/359-2344; TLX: 4938651 (AOCS UI); FAX: 217/351-8091
Contact: James C. Lyon, Exec.Dir.
Founded: 1909
Membership: 4,000 individuals, 2.000 firms or organizations AOCS is the professional home for more than 4,000 members in 80 nations working in edible fats and oils lipids, soaps surfactants and detergents oleochemicals, proteins, nutrition, plant lipids, and disciplines.
Objectives & Activities: To be a forum for the exchange of ideas information and experience among those with a professional interest in the science and technology of fats, oils, and related substances in ways that promote personal excellence and provide for high standards of quality.
Publications: Journal of the American Oil Chemists' Society (subscriber also receives INFORM) monthly, $150/yr (lib and instit.) LIPIDS, monthly, $175/yr (lib and instit) INFORM (membership pub) monthly $100/yr (lib and instit.)
THE AMERICAN PHYTOPATHOLOGICAL SOCIETY
3340 Pilot Knob Road St. Paul MN 55121 USA
PH: 612/454-7250; TLX: (MCI/WUI) 6502439657; FAX: 612/454-0766
Contact: Raymond J. Tarleton, Exec. Vice Pres.
Founded: 1908
Membership: 4,529 individuals and 59 firms or organizations representing a broad cross section of the scientific community including research scientists, teachers extension specialists, students sales representatives administrators, technician, agricultural field representatives and post management personal. Objectives & Activities: The common goal of this diversified group is to promote knowledge of plant science through publications, meetings, symposia workshops and special activities .
Publications: Phytopathology monthly $185/yr (US individuals) $220/yr (individuals elsewhere) Plant Disease monthly $65/yr (US individuals), $95/yr (individuals elsewhere).
AMERICAN SOYBEAN ASSOCIATION (ASA)
540 Maryville Centre Drive Suite 400 P.O.Box 27300 St. Louis MO. 63141 USA
PH: 314/576-1770. FAX: 31476-2786.
Contact: Dr. Kenneth L. Bader, CEO
Founded: 1920
Membership: Active members 32.000 US soybean farmers.
Objectives & Activities: Promoting soybean products; conducting research to find new or improved uses for soybeans, conducting research to increase production efficiency and formulating policies -domestic and trade - to enhance use of soybeans.
Publications: SOYBEAN DIGEST magazine 12 times/yr $20 US, $25 Canada $276 (membership in ASA) elsewhere, SOYBEAN UPDATE newsletter 40 times/yr, ASA members only.
ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN FEED CONTROL OFFICIALS (AAFCO)
P.O.Box 3160 College Station TX: 77841-3160 USA
PH: 409/845-1121; FAX 409/845-1989.
Contact: Barbara J. Sims, Secy
Founded: 1909
Membership: 56 state and federal organizations involved with commercial feeds and food ingredients.
Objectives & Activities: Establish uniform regulations, definitions and standards of feed ingredients.
Publications: AAFCO Official Publication annual $20/yr.
CARE
660 1st Avenue New York 10016 USA
PH: 212/779-7803; FAX 212/683-1099
Contact: Philip Johnston, Exec. Dir.
Objectives & Activities: Our purpose is to help the developing world's poor in their efforts to achieve social and economic well being CARE supports processes that create competence and become self sustaining over time. Our task is to reach new standards of excellence in offering technical assistance, training, food other materials resources and management in combinations appropriate to local needs and priorities. CARE also advocates public policies and programs that support these ends.
COMMERCIAL SOYBEAN BREEDERS
c/o Asgrow Seed Company R.R.1.1080 E. Highway 14, Jamesville, WI 53546 USA
PH: 5608/755-1777 FAX:608/755-0128
Contact: Alan K. Walker, Secy
Founded: 1976
Membership: 87 individuals; 34 firms or organizations who personally direct projects or programs for improving soybean cultivating through breeding and/or genetics.
Objectives & Activities: Encourage and promote a professional image and attitude among commercial soybean breeders; foster a better working relationship among private and public soybean breeders, provide more effective utilization of existing germplasm in all soybean breeding programs; represent the collective interests of members in governmental or industrial policy matters; communicate current research findings promote soybeans as a more profitable crop improve the efficiency of production and utilization of soybean protein and oil.
GOVERNMENT OF ONTARIO CANADA (GA)
221N LaSalle Street Suite 2700 Chicago IL.60611 USA
PH: 312/782-8688; FAX: 312782-5381
Contact: Kathleen Seebert, Trade Dev. Consultant
Founded: 1889
GRAIN ELEVATOR AND PROCESSING SOCIETY
301 4th Avenue So., Suite 365 P.O.Box 15026 Commerce Station Minneapolis MN.55409 USA
PH: 612/339-4625 FAX: 312/782-5381
Contact: Kathleen Seebert, Trade Dev. Consultant
Founded: 1889
Membership: 3000 individuals, dedicated to safety and efficiency in grain operations.
Objectives & Activities : To serve members by enhancing individual professionalism and fellowship and promoting sale efficient operations within the grain and processing industries.
Publication: In Grain monthly members free others $18/yr To Source (membership dir) annual members free others $50.
ILLINOIS CROP IMPROVEMENT ASSOCIATION
508 S. Broadway Urbana IL.61801, USA
PH: 217/367-4053; FAX:217/367-8032
Contact: James R. To, Mgr.
Founded: 1924
Membership: 225 firms or organizations primarily seed companies in the state of Illinois.
Objectives & Activities: To promote seed certification through field inspection ; seed quality laboratory testing record keeping and tag issuance; grain quality testing and winter farm facilities. Publications: Growers Directory annual (July publication) no cost; Growers To annual (December publication) no cost.monthly, free.
INSTITUTE OF FOOD TECHNOLOGISTS
221 N. LaSalle Street, Suite 300, Chicago, IL, 60601 USA
PH: 312\782-8424; FAX: 312\782-8348.
Contact: Daniel E. Weber, Executive Dir.
Founded: 1939.
Membership: 23,000 individuals; members are active in academic, industrial and to institutions and are concerned with food science, which attempts to understand the scientific basis underlying the efficient provision of a nutritious, safe and acceptable diet. Other work in food technology, which applies this basic knowledge to the practical development of food sources, products and processes.
Objectives & activities: The institute of Food Technologists is a professional scientific society whose purpose is to implement the professional and scientific interests of its members.
Publications: Food Technology, monthly, incl. w\membership, non-members $60 domestic, all Journal of Food Science, bi-monthly, $15 a year, non-members $60 domestic, all others $70.
INSTITUTE OF SHORTENING AND EDIBLE OILS
1750 New York Avenue, N.W., Washington DC, 20006 USA
PH: 202\783-7960
Contact: Robert M. Reeves, Pres.
Founded: 1934
Membership: 21 trade association refiners of edible fats and oils.
Objectives & activities: Improve welfare of edible fats & oils industry. Activities include public education programs, sponsorship of research and coordination of policy with trade associations.
Publication: Food Fats & Oils, every 4-5 years, free; Directory of Edible Oil industry in US; every 5 years. $10.
INTERNATIONAL SOYBEAN PROGRAM
Univ. of Illinois, Office of Intern. Agri., 113 Mumford Hall, 1301 W. Gregory Drive, Urbana, IL 61801, USA
PH. 217\333-6422; TLX: 910\250-7619 INTSOY; FAX: 217\333-5838
Contact: Harold F. Kauffman, Dir.
Founded: 1973
Membership:100 individuals and 100 firms or organizations forming a loose network of research scientists in approximately 40 developing countries and approximately 10 developed countries who share the common interest of expanding the use of soy to to improve nutrition and economic development.
Objectives & activities: The focus of the research and development activities is on the processing and utilization of whole soybeans for human food and animal feed.
Publications: INTSOY Publications Series, periodic, no cost; INTSOY Newsletter, semi-annual, no cost; misc. brochures\publications, periodic, no cost.
IOWA SOYA
162 West St. 58, Hudson, IA, 50643 USA
PH: 319\988-4187; FAX: 319\988-3922.
Contact: Dennis Strayer, Pres.
Founded: 1987
Membership: 13 individuals; 13 firms or organizations; specialty soybean producers in to.
Objectives & activities: Our members produce exclusive varieties of specialty for human foods.
IOWA SOYBEAN ASSOCIATION
1025 Ashworth Road, No 310 W. Des Moines, IA, 50265 USA
PH: 515\223-1423; FAX: 515\225-7546.
Contact: Dan Hall, Exec. Dir.
Founded: 1964.
Membership: 7,300 farmers, elevator personnel, non-grower support members, chemical representatives, commodity groups and various agriculture youth groups.
Objectives & activities: Promote a profitable soybean industry and inform to soybean producers of current production and marketing information. To lobby for to policies which benefit soybean producers.
Publications: Iowa Soybean Review (12 issues) and New Bulletin and Leader Line.
IOWA SOYBEAN PROMOTION BOARD
PR #3, IA, 50674 USA
PH: 319\578-3285.
Contact: Director
Membership: 27,000 individuals; growers and business related. Objectives & activities: A voice in soybean marketing legislation, market development and research.
Publications: Soy Bean Digest, monthly; Soy Bean Up Date, weekly; subscription included with membership.
MISSOURI SOYBEAN MERCHANDISING COUNCIL
520 Ellis Blvd., Suite N, P.O Box 104778, Jefferson City, MO, 65110-4778 USA
PH: 314\635-6701; FAX: 314\635-5122.
Contact: Kenlon Johannes, Exec. Dir.
Founded: 1979
Membership: 30,000 farmers who contribute funds to the programs at the sale of their soybeans.
Objectives & activities: To provide information and resources needed to develop markets and soybean product manufacturing plants in the State of Missouri.
Publications: Missouri Soybean Farmer, Bi-monthly, Free to Producers.
NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL LIBRARY (GA)
NAL Building, Room 204, 10301 Baltimore Blvd. Beltsville, MD, 20705, USA
PH: 301\344-3755; TLX: 710828-0506; FAX: 301\344-5472.
Contact: Joseph H. Howard, Dir.
Founded: 1862
Membership: The Library serves the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Congressional, White House and other Federal Agencies, State and local agencies, including extension services, land-grant and other universities, libraries and individuals. Clientele include scientists, administrators, nutritionists, teachers, extension workers, farmers and the general public.
Objectives & activities: The National Agricultural Library serves the public and the nation as an information provider for agriculture. The Library provides information services over a broad range of agricultural interests. The Library assists its users through a variety of specialized information. Its staff utilizes advanced information to generate new products, creating an electronic data base as it improves access to the knowledge stored in its multi-collection almost 2 million items.
Publication: Agricultural information Notes, monthly, no cost; various specialized directories, irregular, individually, no cost.
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF MARGARINE MANUFACTURERS (TO)
1101 15th St. N.W., Suite 202, Washington, DC, 20005, USA
PH: 202\785-3232; FAX: 202\223-9741.
Contact: Joseph B. Morris, Associate Dir.
Membership: 13 manufacturers of margarine in the United States.
Objectives & activities: Legislative and regulatory interest to develop, coordinate and supply the public with accurate information about margarine and margarine products.
NATIONAL GRAIN TRADE COUNCIL
1030 15th Street, N.W. Suite 1020, Washington, 20005 USA
PH: 202\842-0400.
Contact: Robert R. Peterson, Pres.
Founded: 1936
Membership: 60 firms or organizations: regular members include grain exchanges, board if trade and national grain marketing association. Associate members represent a large cross-section of the grain marketing industry.
Objectives & Activities: The Council's objectives and purposes are 1) to promote a better understanding among the grain trade, government agencies and the general public; 2) to advocate markets for the distribution of agricultural commodities.
Publications: Activity Report, monthly (no cost with membership).
NATIONAL OILSEED PROCESSORS ASSOCIATION (NOPA)
[Note: Founded in 1939 as National Soybean Processors Association; effective Aug. 1, 1989, name changed to National Oilseed Processors Association (NOPA)]
1255 23rd Street N.W. Suite 850' Washington D.C. 20037 U.S.A.
PH: 202/452-8040; TLX: 248959 (NOPA UR); FAX: 202/835-0400.
Contact: Sheldon J. Hauck, Pres.
Founded: 1929
Membership: 14 regular members, 22 associate members; processors of oilseeds and consumers of vegetable oils and meals.
Objectives & Activities To promote the domestic and international marketing of all types of oilseed products through development of equitable trading rules for buyers and sellers of such products: to foster intense research activity aimed at improving/increasing yields and productivity of oilseed crops ; to promote the sale of oilseed products internationally.
Publications: NOPA: Yearbook & Trading Rules, annually $30 non-members (add$8 for international orders).
NATIONAL WATERWAYS CONFERENCE, Inc.
1130 17th Street, N.W., Suite 200, Washington, DC. 20036 U.S.A.
PH:202/296-4415; FAX: 202/835-3861.
Contact: Henry N. Cook, Pres.
Founded: 1960
Membership: 22 individuals, 375 firms or organizations involved in waterway-related businesses, industries and agencies including bargelines, ports and terminals, waterway shippers and waterway service firms.
Objectives & Activities: To promote a better understanding of the public value of the American waterways system.
Publications: Washington Watch, monthly, $100/yr.
NEBRASKA SOYBEAN PROGRAM
301 Centennial Mail So., Fourth Floor, P.O.Box 05144, Lincoln, NE, 68509 USA
PH: 402/471-4894; FAX: 402/471-3345.
Contact: James P.Weyer, Man.Dir.
Founded: 1975
Membership: 1,100 individuals, 100 firms or organizations which are soybean producers, county extension agents, elevants, and agribusiness.
Objectives & Activities: By a 1975 declaration of the State of Nebraska soybean producers are permitted and encouraged to develop, carry out and participate in programs of research, education, market development and promotion. The Nebraska Soybean producers in this state may finance programs to achieve the overall goal of improving the profitability of soybean production.
NEW JERSEY SOYBEAN INDUSTRY ADVISORY COUNCIL (GA)
New Jersey Dept. of Agriculture ON 330, Trenton N.J. 08625 U.S.A
PH: 609/292-8853; FAX: 609/984-5367.
Contact: Logan Brown, Council Liaison
Founded: 1980
Membership: 11 individuals and 5 firms or organizations. The council members are appointed by the New Jersey State Board Agriculture and consist of 6 N.J soybean growers, 2 N.J. handlers or dealers of soybeans, 1 representative of the N.J. soybean processing industry, 1 Dean of Cook College (ex-officio) and 1 N.J. Secretary of Agriculture.
Objectives & Activities: The Council is responsible for administrating programmes designed to expand and improve methods of research , promotion and marketing of N.J. soybeans. These include establishing a marketing plan and guideline assisting in the collection of information and record keeping.
Publications: New Jersey Soybean Industry Advisory Council Summary of Activities, annual no charge.
PLENTY U.S.A.
P.O.Box 2306, Davis, CA. 95617 U.S.A.
PH: 916/753-0731; TLX: MCI Plenty USA.
Contact: Laude Praskin, Dir. Soy Programs
Founded: 1974
Membership: 3,000 donors individual member donors, volunteers, technical consultants, medical professionals indigenous representatives.
Objectives & Activities: Plenty is a non-profit non-political organization whose objectives are to improve the quality of life for those in need. We promote self-sufficiency projects implemented in cooperation with local communities. We also work to promote a network of cultural exchange. Some of our projects include primary health care, nutrition and food processing, agriculture,alternative technology, public environmental law and marketing of native crafts.
Publications: Plenty Bulletin quarterly donation $25 integrated Soy Report $5 (when available); Soy Demonstration Pamphlet not available.
THE SOAP & DETERGENT ASSOCIATION, GLYCERINE & OLEOCHEMICAL DIVISION
475 Park Avenue So., 27th Floor, New York N.Y. 10016 U.S.A.
PH: 212/725-1262; FAX: 212/213-0685.
Contact: Theodore E. Brenner, Pres.
Founded: 1952
Membership: 18 firms who produce fatty acids and/or glycerine. Objectives & Activities: Provide information to members and the public on fatty acids, glycerine and their derivatives; provide a forum for discussion of industry concerns and a vehicle for industry to regulator and/or legislative proposals.
SOY PROTEIN COUNCIL
1255 23rd Street N.W. Suite 850 Washington DC 20037, USA
PH:202/467-6610; TLX 248959 (NSPA UR); FAX: 202/833-3636.
Contact: Sheldon J. Hauck, Exec. Vice Pres.
Founded: 1971
Membership: 3 firms engaged in processing or sale of edible soy proteins or products.
Objectives & Activities: Build awareness of established nutritional properties of commercially available soy proteins and assist in creating better understanding of the role and utilization of soy proteins in the system.
SOYFOODS ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA
318 Main Street P.O.Box 920 Bar Harbour ME 04609 USA
PH: 207/288-9419; FAX: 207/288-5264.
Contact: Leslie Harlow, Exec. Dir.
Founded: 1984
Membership: 50 firms or organizations who are manufacturers, marketers suppliers, distributors and/or retailers of soyfood products.
Objectives & Activities: Provide opportunities for education and exchange of ideas among industry members; create standards, sponsor cooperative marketing and public relations programs; educate consumers regarding the nutritional value of soyfoods and encourage their consumption in the America diet.
Publications: Association Newsletter, quarterly, free to members ; Tolu Standards, free to members, discounts available on member publications.
U.S. DEPT. OF AGRICULTURE OILSEEDS & PRODUCTS DIVISION (GA)
14th & Independence Avenue S.W., Room 5646-S Washington, DC 20250-1000, USA
PH: 202/382-0138; TLX: 7108221104 FAX:202/447-7670.
Contact: Sharon McClure, Group Leader.
VENEZUELA
AMERICAN SOYBEAN ASSOCIATION/SOUTH AMERICA & CARIBBEAN BASIN
Centro Plaza Piso 18, Los Palos Grandes av. Francisco de Miranda Caracas 1062 VENEZUELA
PH: 283-2399 or 283-7566; TLX 395-29119 (USATO VC).
Contact: Jose Felix Chavez, Dir.
Objectives & Activities: Country directors work with the U.S. Department of Agriculture Foreign Agricultural Service staff and local individuals and groups involved with oilseed utilization consumption and marketing
YUGOSLAVIA
FEED MANUFACTURER'S ASSOCIATION
Gunduliceva 45 P.O.Box 609 Zagreb 41000, YUGOSLAVIA
PH: 041/445-085 or 442-215 TLX: 22411 (PZISH YU) 1
Contact: Lidja Pavesic, Mgr., B.Vet.Sc.
Founded: 1946
Membership: 130 feed manufacturers (premixes and complete feed).
Objectives & Activities: Improvement of feed manufacturing in Yugoslavia (both technology and nutritive); arrangement of congresses, meetings, lectures; trading with feed additives and components ; representing foreign firms.
Publications: KRMIVA (scientific journal) monthly 60 DEMRr.
ZAIRE
CENTRE DE RECHERCHE AGRO-ALIMENTAIRE (CRAAL)
Sur la route de l'Aeroport B.P.54 Lubumbashi ZAIRE
PH:22/2558
Contact: Nyembe Nikonzi Kalala, Dir.Gen.
Founded: 1982.
Membership: 59 firms food manufacturers.
Objectives & Activities: Conduct applied research in food technology improvement of traditional food technologies and quality control, carry out feasibility studies and act as consultant for local food industries and farmers.
ZAMBIA
NAM BOARD (GA)
P.O.Box 122 Lusaka, ZAMBIA
Contact: Gen.Mgr.
ZIMBABWE
COMMERCIAL FARMERS UNION
Exclusive trading agency
113 Moffal Street Agricultural House P.O.Box 592, Harare, ZIMBABWE
PH: 790429; TLX: 22084; (OFU-ZW)
Contact: George Hutchison, Chief Exec.
Founded: 1967
Membership: 1300 individuals; commercial soybean; groundnut (peanut) and sunflower growers in Zimbabwe.
Objectives & Activities: To promote the production of oilseed crops in Zimbabwe to assist in oilseed crop research and promote increased utilization of oilseed crops.
Publications: Oilseeds Handbook (updated every 2 yrs) US$10 Farmer Magazine, weekly, US $25Yr; Commercial Agriculture in Zimbabwe, annual US.$15.
GRAIN MARKETING BOARD (GA)
P.O.Box 8014 Causeway Harare, ZIMBABWE
PH:795681; TLX:2336
<section>4</section>
APPENDIX III
MANUFACTURERS AND SUPPLIERS OF SOYBEAN PROCESSING PLANTS AND EQUIPMENT
SELECTED ENTRIES REPRINTED FROM THE '90 SOYBEAN BLUEBOOK
BY PERMISSION OF SOYATECH, INC.
GRAIN DRYERS
Aeroglide Corporation, (U.S.A)
Agra Erectors, Inc.,(U.S.A)
Anderson International Corp.,(U.S.A)
B.N.W.Industries,(U.S.A)
W.M.Barger & Associates, Inc., (U.S.A)
BBA Group PLG, (ENGLAND)
Beard Industries, (U.S.A)
Behlen Mlg.Co., (U.S.A)
BEPEX, (U.S.A)
Blount Industrial Products Group, (U.S.A)
C.W.Brabender Instruments,Inc., (U.S.A)
Cimbria Unigrain Ltd. A/S, (DENMARK)
Cottor International, (INDIA)
Dabney-Hoover Supply Company,
Inc., (U.S.A)
Damman-Groes S.A., (BELGIUM)
Farm Fans,Inc., (U.S.A)
A.Gusmer,Inc., (U.S.A)
Hosokawa Micron Division, (U.S.A)
International Reserve Equipment
Corp., (U.S.A)
KELSA, S.A., (SPAIN)
Machinery Supply, Inc., (U.S.A)
Mannesmann Commercial S/A, (BRAZIL)
Mathews Company, (U.S.A)
Shanzer Grain Dryer. (U.S.A)
Shivvers,Inc., (U.S.A)
Simes,Inc., (U.S.A)
SKET Schwenmaschinenbau-Kombinat
Ernst Thalmann, (GERMANY)
COOKERS/EXTRUDERS/ROASTERS
Amandus Kahl Nachf. (GERMANY)
Anderson International Corp. (U.S.A.)
APV Crepaco Inc. (U.S.A.)
Bag Yaglari Sanayi ve Ticaret (TURKEY)
W.M.Barger & Associates Inc. (U.S.A.)
Bean Machines Inc. (U.S.A.)
BEPEX (U.S.A)
Blount Industrial Products Group (U.S.A.)
C.W.Brabender Instruments Inc. (U.S.A.)
Buhler Inc. (U.S.A.)
Buss (America) Inc. (U.S.A.)
W.C.Cantrell Company (U.S.A.)
Cherry-Burrell (U.S.A.)
Costruzione Meccaniche Bernardini S.p.A.(ITALY)
Cottor International (INDIA)
Crown Iron Works Company (U.S.A.)
Damman-Croes S.A. (BELGIUM)
De Smet Rosedowns Ltd. (ENGLAND)
De Smet USA Corp. (U.S.A.)
Do-Well Oil Plants Pvt. Ltd. (INDIA)
J.R.Dykes Sales & Services Inc. (U.S.A.)
EPE Incorporated (U.S.A.)
N.V. Extraction De Smet S.A. (BELGIUM)
The French Oil Mill Machinery Co. (U.S.A.)
Gem Grain Roaster Company (U.S.A.)
Goodwin Engineering & Trading Inc. (TAIWAN)
H.L.S. Ltd. (ISRAEL)
Insta Pro International Ltd. (U.S.A.)
International Reserve Equipment Corp. (U.S.A.)
KELSA S.A. (SPAIN)
Machinery Supply Inc. (U.S.A.)Maschinenfabrik Reinartz GmbH (GERMANY)
Masiero Industrial S.A. (BRAZIL)
Miura Engineering Co., Ltd. (JAPAN)
Nosawa & Company Ltd. (Japan)
C.A.Picard Inc. (U.S.A.)
Plant Maintenance Service Corporation (U.S.A.)
Rickel Inc. (U.S.A.)
Schnupp's Grain Roasting Inc. (U.S.A.)
Sikes Nachine Shop Inc. (U.S.A.)
SKET Schwenmaschinenbau-Kombinat
Ernst Thalmann,(GERMANY)
Sprout-Bauer Inc. (U.S.A.)
Ta Ti Hsing Machinery Company Ltd. (TAIWAN)
Technintegral Ltda. (COLOMBIA)
Troika Processes Pvt.Ltd. (INDIA)
Wenger Manufacturing Inc. (U.S.A.)
DEHULLING EQUIPMENT
Alpine American Corporation (U.S.A.)
APV DTD Soya Technology Division (DENMARK)
Bag Yaglari Sanayi ve Ticaret (TURKEY)
W.M.Barger & Associates Inc. (U.S.A.)
Bean Machines Inc. (U.S.A.)
Blount Industrial Products Group (U.S.A.)
Buhler Inc. (U.S.A.)
W.C.Cantrell Company (U.S.A.)
Codema Inc. (U.S.A)
Costruzione Meccaniche Bernardini S.p.A.(ITALY)
Cottor International (INDIA)
Crown Iron Works Company (U.S.A.)
Damman-Croes S.A. (BELGIUM)
De Smet USA Corp. (U.S.A.)
Do-Well Oil Plants Pvt. Ltd. (INDIA)
J.R.Dykes Sales & Services Inc. (U.S.A.)
The French Oil Mill Machinery Co. (U.S.A.)
Industrial Metal Products Company Inc. (U.S.A.)
Kice Industries Inc. (U.S.A.)
Mannesmann Comercial S.A. (BRAZIL)
N.Hunt Moore & Associates (U.S.A.)
Prater Industries Inc. (U.S.A.)
SKET Schwenmaschinenbau-Kombinat
Ernst Thalmann,(GERMANY)
Smico Manufacturing Corp. (U.S.A.)
Sulzer Escher Wyss GmbH (GERMANY)
Technintegral Ltda. (COLOMBIA)
Triple/S Dynamics Inc. (U.S.A.)
Troika Processes Pvt.Ltd. (INDIA)
FLAKING & CRACKING EQUIPMENT
Alpine American Corporation (U.S.A.)
Automatic Equipment Mfg. Co. (U.S.A.)
W.M.Barger & Associates Inc. (U.S.A.)
Gebrueder Bauermeister & Co. (GERMANY)
Blount Industrial Products Group (U.S.A.)
Carl G. Brimmekamp & Company Inc. (U.S.A.)
Buhler Inc. (U.S.A.)
California Pellet Mill Company CPM (U.S.A.)
Carver Inc. (U.S.A.)
Costruzione Meccaniche Bernardini S.p.A.(ITALY)
Cottor International (INDIA)
Damman-Croes S.A. (BELGIUM)
De Smet Rosedowns Ltd. (ENGLAND)
De Smet USA Corp. (U.S.A.)
Do-Well Oil Plants Pvt. Ltd. (INDIA)
J.R.Dykes Sales & Services Inc. (U.S.A.)
Dynequip Inc. (U.S.A.)
N.V. Extraction De Smet S.A. (BELGIUM)
The French Oil Mill Machinery Co. (U.S.A.)
Industrial Metal Products Company Inc. (U.S.A.)
Insta Pro International Ltd. (U.S.A.)
KELSA S.A. (SPAIN)
Krupp Maschinentechnik GmbH Werk Harburg (GERMANY)
Maschinenfabrik Reinartz GmbH (GERMANY)
Masiero Industrial S.A. (BRAZIL)
Metal Products International Inc. (U.S.A.)
N.Hunt Moore & Associates (U.S.A.)
Plant Maintenance Service Corporation (U.S.A.)
Prater Industries Inc. (U.S.A.)
Swabische Huttenwerke GmbH. (GERMANY)
SKET Schwenmaschinenbau-Kombinat
Ernst Thalmann,(GERMANY)
Sprout-Bauer Inc. (U.S.A.)
Sulzer Escher Wyss GmbH (GERMANY)
Troika Processes Pvt.Ltd. (INDIA)
Witt Corrugating Inc. (U.S.A.)
SCREW PRESSES
Anderson International Corp. (U.S.A.)
W.M.Barger & Associates Inc. (U.S.A.)
BEPEX (U.S.A)
W.C. Cantrell Company (U.S.A.)
Cottor International (INDIA)
Damman-Croes S.A. (BELGIUM)
De Smet Rosedowns Ltd. (ENGLAND)
De Smet USA Corp. (U.S.A.)
J.R. Dykes Sales & Services Inc. (U.S.A.)
EPE Incorporated (U.S.A.)
N.V. Extraction De Smet S.A. (BELGIUM)
The French Oil Mill Machinery Co. (U.S.A.)
A.Gusmer Inc. (U.S.A.)
International Reserve Equipment Corp. (U.S.A.)
Krupp Maschinentechnik GmbH Werk Harburg (GERMANY)
Machinery Supply Inc. (U.S.A.)
Maschinenfabrik Reinartz GmbH (GERMANY)
Masiero Industrial S.A, (BRAZIL)
Carl Aug. Picard GmbH. (GERMANY)
C.A.Picard Inc.(U.S.A.)
Ponndorf Maschinenfabrik GmbH (GERMANY)
Sikes Machine Shop Inc. (U.S.A.)
SKET Schwenmaschinenbau-Kombinat
Ernst Thalmann,(GERMANY)
Sprout-Bauer Inc. (U.S.A.)
Ta Ti Hsing Machinery Company Ltd. (TAIWAN)
Technintegral Ltda. (COLOMBIA)
Troika Processes Pvt.Ltd. (INDIA)
SOLVENT EXTRACTION EQUIPMENT
APV Crepaco Inc (U.S.A.)
Artisan Industries Inc (U.S.A.)
Bag Yaglari Sanayi ve Ticaret (TURKEY)
W.M. Barger & Associates, Inc., (U.S.A)
Bock Engineered Products Inc. (U.S.A.)
CAMECO Industries, Honiron div. (U.S.A.)
Costruzione Meccaniche Bernardini S.A. (ITALY)
Crown Iron Works Company (U.S.A.)
Damman-Croes S.A. (BELGIUM)
Davy Corporation plc. (U.S.S.R.)
Davy Corporation plc. (CHINA)
Davy Powergas India Private Ltd. (INDIA)
Davy South Africa (Pty.)Ltd. SOUTH AFRICA
De Smet Rosedowns Ltd. (ENGLAND)
De Smet USA Corp. (U.S.A.)
Do-Well Oil Plants Pvt. Ltd. (INDIA)
Davy Dravo (U.S.A.)
EMI Corporation, (U.S.A.)
Extractionstechnik G.m.b.H. (GERMANY)
Fratelli Gianazza S.p.A. (ITALY)
The French Oilmill Machinery Co. (U.S.A.)
H.L.S. Ltd. (ISRAEL)
Hayes General Technology Co. Ltd. (ISRAEL)
International Reserve Equipment Corp. (U.S.A.)
KELSA S.A. (SPAIN)
Krupp Maschinentechnik GmbH, Werk Harburg (GERMANY)
Lurgi G.m.b.H. (GERMANY)
Machinery Supply Inc. (U.S.A.)
Masiero Industrial S.A. (BRAZIL)
G. Mazzoni S.A. (ITALY)
Davy McKee Chile Ltda. (CHILE)
Davy McKee Corporation (CANADA)
Davy McKee Corporation (ENGLAND)
McKee del Plata S.A. (ARGENTINA)
Davy McKee Engenhairia S.A. (BRAZIL)
Davy McKee Ingenieria C.A. (VENEZUELA)
Davy McKee Pacific Pty. Ltd. (AUSTRALIA)
N.Hunt Moore & Associates (U.S.A.)
Nash-Kinema Inc. (U.S.A.)
Perstorp Analytical Inc. (U.S.A.)
Plant Maintenance Service Corporation (U.S.A.)
Saudi Davy Co. Ltd. (SAUDI ARABIA)
Sikes Machine Shop Inc. (U.S.A.)
SKET Schwenmaschinenbau-Kombinat
Ernst Thalmann,(GERMANY)
Superior Welding Company (U.S.A.)
Tecator Inc. (U.S.A.)
Technintegral Ltda (COLOMBIA)
Troika Processes Pvt.Ltd. (INDIA)
FLAKE DESOLVENTIZERS
a-FLASH/VAPOR
W.M. Barger & Associates, Inc., (U.S.A)
CAMECO Industries, Honiron div. (U.S.A.)
Damman-Croes S.A. (BELGIUM)
Davy Corporation plc. (U.S.S.R.)
Davy Corporation plc. (CHINA)
Davy Powergas India Private Ltd. (INDIA)
Davy South Africa (Pty.) Ltd. SOUTH AFRICA
De Smet Rosedowns Ltd. (ENGLAND)
De Smet USA Corp. (U.S.A.)
Davy Dravo (U.S.A.)
J.R.Dykes Sales & Services,Inc. (U.S.A.)
EMI Corporation, (U.S.A.)
Extractionstechnik G.m.b.H. (GERMANY)
Fratelli Gianazza S.p.A. (ITALY)
The French Oilmill Machinery Co. (U.S.A.)
H.L.S. Ltd. (ISRAEL)
Hayes General Technology Co. Ltd. (ISRAEL)
Krupp Maschinentechnik GmbH, Werk Harburg (GERMANY)
Lurgi G.m.b.H. (GERMANY)
Davy McKee Chile Ltda. (CHILE)
Davy McKee Corporation (CANADA)
Davy McKee Corporation (ENGLAND)
McKee del Plata S.A. (ARGENTINA)
Davy McKee Engenhairia S.A. (BRAZIL)
Davy McKee Ingenieria C.A. (VENEZUELA)
Davy McKee Pacific Pty. Ltd. (AUSTRALIA)
N.Hunt Moore & Associates (U.S.A.)
Saudi Davy Co. Ltd. (SAUDI ARABIA)
Techintegral Ltda. (COLOMBIA)
Troika Processes Pvt.Ltd. (INDIA)
b- NORMAL
All the above and:
Do-Well Oil Plants Pvt. Ltd (INDIA)
N.V. Extraction De Smet S.A. (BELGIUM)
Masiero Industrial S.A. (BRAZIL)
G.Mazzoni S.p.A. (ITALY)
SKET- Schwermaschinenbau-Kombinat
Ernst Thalmann (E.GERMANY)
Superior Welding Company (U.S.A.)
SOYMILK & TOFU EQUIPMENT & SUPPLIES
Alfa Laval South East Asia Pte. Ltd. (SINGAPORE)
Alfa-Laval Food & Dairy Co. (U.S.A.)
APV Crepaco Inc. (U.S.A.)
APV DTD Soya Technology Division (DENMARK)
Bean Machines Inc. (U.S.A.)
Charles B. Chrystal Co. Onc. (U.S.A.)
Cottor International (INDIA)
Dynequip Inc. (U.S.A.)
Generichem Corp. (U.S.A.)
Groen (U.S.A.)
Kawanishi Shoko Company Ltd (JAPAN)
Kawanishi Shoko Company Ltd (U.S.A.)
Mitoku Company Ltd. (JAPAN)
Nosawa & Company (JAPAN)
osawa New York Inc. (U.S.A.)
Sato & Company (JAPAN)
Ta Ti Hsing Machinery Company Ltd. (TAIWAN)
Takai Tofu & Soymilk Equipment Company (JAPAN)
SOY PROTEIN EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES
Alfa Laval South East Asia Pte. Ltd. (SINGAPORE)
Alfa-Laval Food & Dairy Co. (U.S.A.)
APV Crepaco Inc. (U.S.A.)
Charles B. Chrystal Co. Onc. (U.S.A.)
Cottor International (INDIA)
Dynequip Inc. (U.S.A.)
Generichem Corp. (U.S.A.)
Hayes General Technology Co Ltd (ISRAEL)
Seedburo Equipment Co. (U.S.A.)
SKET Schwenmaschinenbau-Kombinat Ernst Thalmann,(GERMANY)
Troika Processes Pvt.Ltd. (INDIA)
CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTORS
a-COMPLETE PLANTS
A-Lert Corporation, (U.S.A.)
Agra Erectors,Inc., (U.S.A.)
Alfa Laval Food Engineering A.B., (SWEDEN)
Alfa Laval South East Asia Pte.Ltd., (SINGAPORE)
APV Crepaco,Inc., (U.S.A.)
The Austin Company-Process Division, (U.S.A.)
Baker Rullman Mfg.Inc., (U.S.A.)
Ken Becker Associates Inc., (U.S.A.)
Borton,Inc., (U.S.A.)
Cimbria Unigrain Ltd.A/S,(DENMARK)
Conkey/KWM,Inc., (U.S.A.)
Costruzioni Meccaniche Bernardini S.p.A.,(ITALY)
Davy Corporation plc., (U.S.S.R.)
Davy Corporation plc., (CHINA)
Davy Powergas India Private Ltd., (INDIA)
Davy South Africa (Pty.)Ltd, (SOUTH AFRICA)
Davy Dravo, (U.S.A.)
N.V.Extraction De Smet S.A.,(BELGIUM)
Fluor Daniel Siting & Consulting Services, (U.S.A.)
Fratelli Gianazza S.p.A., (ITALY)
General Resource Corp., (U.S.A.)
Grain Facility Design,Inc. (U.S.A.)
Greenway Electric, Inc., (U.S.A.)
H.L.S. Ltd., (ISRAEL)
Hayes General Technology Co.Ltd., (ISRAEL)
Industrial Erectors.Inc., (U.S.A.)
Industry General Corporation, (U.S.A.)
Franz Kichled GmbH & Company KG. (GERMANY)
Krupp Mashinentechnik GmbH, Werk Harburg, (GERMANY)
Mannesmann Commercial S/A, (BRAZIL)
Davy Mackee Chiley Ltda, (CHILE)
Davy Mackee Corporation, (CANADA)
Davy Mackee Corporation, (ENGLAND)
Mackee del Plata, S.A., (ARGENTINA)
Davy Mackee Engenhairia S.A., (BRAZIL)
Davy Mackee Ingenierea C.A., (VENEZUELA)
Davy Mackee Pacific Pty.,Ltd ,(AUSTRALIA)
Metar Apartos S.A. (ARGENTINA)
Miura Engineering Company Ltd., (JAPAN)
The Nay Company, (U.S.A.)
NCI Minnesota, Inc. (U.S.A.)
Saudi Davy Co.Ltd. (SAUDI ARABIA)
Simons-Eastern Consultants Inc., (U.S.A.)
SKET-Schwermaschinenbau-Kombinat Ernst Thalmann (E.GERMANY)
Soya Tech Inc. (U.S.A.)
Stout Industrial, (U.S.A.)
Technitegral Ltda (COLOMBIA)
Troika Processes Pvt. Ltd., (INDIA)
Universal Seeds & Oil Products Ltd.,(USOP), (HONG KONG)
Younglove - Planners, Engineers, Constructors, (U.S.A.)
b-PROTEIN PLANTS
Alfa-Laval Food & Dairy Co., (U.S.A.)
Ken Becker Associates Inc. (U.S.A.)
Borton, Inc., (U.S.A.)
Conkey/KWM, Inc. (U.S.A.)
Davy Corporation plc., (U.S.S.R)
Davy Corporation plc., (CHINA)
Davy Powergas India Private,Ltd.,(INDIA)
Davy South Africa (Pty), Ltd., (SOUTH AFRICA)
Davy Dravo, (U.S.A.)
Fluor Daniel Siting & Consulting Services (U.S.A.)
General Resource Corp., (U.S.A.)
Grain Facility Design Inc. (GFD, Inc.), (U.S.A.)
Hayes General Technology Co.Ltd, (ISRAEL)
Industrial Erectors Inc. (U.S.A.)
Industry General Corporation, (U.S.A.)
Davy Mackee Chile Ltda, (CHILE)
Davy Mackee Corporation, (CANADA)
Davy Mackee Corporation, (ENGLAND)
Mackee del Plata, S.A., (ARGENTINA)
Davy Mackee Engenhairia S.A., (BRAZIL)
Davy Mackee Ingenierea C.A., (VENEZUELA)
Davy Mackee Pacific Pty.,Ltd ,(AUSTRALIA)
NCI Minnesota, Inc. (U.S.A.)
Saudi Davy Co. Ltd. (SAUDI ARABIA)
Simons-Eastern Consultants Inc., (U.S.A.)
SKET-Schwermaschinenbau-Kombinat Ernst Thalmann,(GERMANY)
Soyatech,Inc., (U.S.A.)
<section>5</section>
APPENDIX IV
SAMPLE BUDGET QUOTATIONS FOR COMPLETE SOY PROCESSING OR SOYBEAN
RELATED FOOD MANUFACTURING PLANTS
EXAMPLE 1.
Solvent Extraction Plant for 200 tpd soybeans.
Source: THE FRENCH OIL MILL MACHINERY COMPANY
PIQUA, OHIO
Date: October 4, 1990
THE FRENCH OIL MILL MACHINERY COMPANY recommends the following equipment to process 200 metric tons of soybeans per 24 hour day into hulls, high protein soybean meal, and crude soybean oil.
SECTION I - PREPARATION & MEAL GRINDING
ITEM DESCRIPTION
101. Scalper
102. Cleaner
103. Drum Magnet Separator
104. Cracking Mills
105. Dehulling Equipment
106. Hull Toaster
107. Hull Grinder
108. Bean Conditioner
109. Flaking Mills
110. Enhancer Pellet Presses
111. Pellet Dryer/Cooler
112. Meal Sifters
113. Meal Grinders
114. Dust Aspiration Equipment
115. Engineering
PRICE, SECTION I, EX FACTORY: $ 651,970.00
SECTION II - SOLVENT EXTRACTION
ITEM DESCRIPTION
201. Extractor Feed Conveyor
202. Stationary Basket Extractor
203. Spent Material Conveyor
204. Vapor Slide Gate
205. Desolventizer Toaster Dryer Cooler
206. Vapor Scrubber
207. First Stage Evaporator
208. Miscella/Oil Interchanger
209. Second Stage Evaporator
210. Final Oil Stripper
211. Stripper Condenser
212. Primary Condenser
213. Vapor Contactor
214. Final Vent Condenser
215. Mineral Oil System
216. Solvent Heater
217. Instrumentation
218. Engineering
PRICE, SECTION II, EX FACTORY: $ 916,740.00
PRICE. SECTION I & II, EX FACTORY: $ 1,568,710.00
EXAMPLE 2:
Screw-press extraction plant for 40 tpd of soybeans
Source: THE FRENCH OIL MILL MACHINERY COMPANY
PIQUA, OHIO
Date: October 4, 1990
THE FRENCH OIL MILL MACHINERY COMPANY recommends the following equipment to process, through full press extraction, 40 metric tons of soybeans or peanuts per 24 hour day into high fat meal, and crude oil.
FULL PRESS EXTRACTION EQUIPMENT
ITEM DESCRIPTION
101. Meats Bin
102. Drum Magnet Separator
103. Cracking Mills
104. Flaking Mills
105. Conditioner
106. Press
107. Oil Elevator
108. Oil Settling Tank
109. Oil Filter
110. Press Pumps
111. Press instrumentation
112. Engineering
PRICE. EX FACTORY: $ 647,240.00
EXAMPLE 3:
Extruder-Expeller Process Plant for 500-600 pounds raw material per hour.
Source: BAR EXPORT/IMPORT, INC., URBANA, ILLINOIS
Date: 1990
End Products: Unrefined Soy Oil, Soy Meal/Flour
Electrics:50/60Hz.
One Model 75 Grain Cleaner with set of 20 screens 2 H.P. $ 4,800.00
One Model 100 A Roller Mill, 5 HP hopper and
stand. Includes collector hopper for 6" screw auger. $ 6,594.00
One Model 600 Extruder, 50 HP/50-60 Hz. with
automatic feeder/blender hopper, control panel,
barrel assembly, base and stand. Spares incl. $ 22,600.00
One Model 600 Expeller, 15-20 HP with v-belt drive.
Supplied with double steel gear sets and feeder box. $ 27,000.00
One Model 400 Exhausted conditioner-cooler. Unit
is complete with revolving drum and support frame
on adjustable height casters. 1.5 HP. $ 5,500.00
One Model 5-12/CS/IP Filter Press, 2 HP. Supplied
with ratchet wrench and pressure gauge. $ 11,225.00
One Model F80 Kettle with self contained heat/steam
source, 84 amps. Model 20 Hammermill, 7.5 HP with
feed regulating table, set of screens. $ 15,650.00
Lot conveyors, 2-3 HP each, a total of 5.
Includes one extruder-expeller interface conveyor $ 9,800.00
Lot magnets. $ 2,200.00
Total volume: Approx. 1100 cu.ft.
Total weight export crated Approx. 11,000 lbs.
Total in USD. F.O.B. Seymour, Illinois. $ 112,124.00
OPTIONS: See BAR Budget Quotation for Extruded/Formed Products.
EXAMPLE 4:
Extruded/Formed Products Plant, 500/800 lbs/hr.
Source: BAR EXPORT/IMPORT,INC. URBANA, ILLINOIS
Date: 1990
End Products: Weaning foods, Soups, Breakfast foods, Animal/pet food.
Electrics: 50/60 Hz.
One Model 755 Grain Cleaner with set of 20 screens,
machine stand, charging elevator and hopper
with drive. 3/4 HP, 2000 lbs/hr capacity.
58.5"Hx53.5"x39"W. Weight-200lbs. $ 4,400.00
One Model 30 Hammer Mill with Blower Discharge
Package. Includes Basic Mil, feed regulating
table, set of screens, motor mounting bracket
with 15 HP motor, v-belt and pulleys, dust
collector and bagging attachment. Includes
a collector and bagging attachment. Includes
a magnet in feed table. Capacity varies
depending on material and screen size. Floor
space required 39"x56".
Feed opening size 12" wide x 6" deep.
Recommended operating speed 2500-3000 RPM.
Weight- 420 lbs. $ 7,200.00
One Model S-1 Mixer with ribbon agitator.
Designated to mix free flowing ingredients
which do not exceed 35 lbs per cubic feet.
Tank capacity 8 cubic feet. Mixing capacity
6 cubic feet. HP is 1.5. Drive shaft RPM is
284. Agitator RPM is 48, dimensions are
40"Lx18"Wx21"H. Loading height is 56".
Outlet size is 7"x7". Overall dimensions
are 50"Lx22"Wx56"H. Steel in tank and ends
is 16 gauge. Weight is 300 lbs. $ 6,667.00
for c/s construction
for s/s construction
One Mechanical full capacity beam scale for Si
mixer. Provides 400 lbs net weighting capacity
in addition to offsetting weight of mixer.
Beams are graduated 500 lbsx1 lb. Steel
platform is provided to fit base of mixer.
Metric version available. $ 4,469.00
One Model 600 Dry Extruder complete with
automatic feeder/blender hopper, control
panel, barrel assembly, base and stand.
Standard motor supplied with model 600
extruder is 50 hp/240v/460v/60Hz/3 phase.
Motor RPM is 1725. Extruder RPM is 550.
Amps at 240v is 120. Amps at 460v is 60.
Other voltages and 50 Hz motors also available.
Standard unit is carbon steel. Shipped
with spares for one year. $ 22,595.00
One Outboard Cutter for 600 Extruder. Unit is
powered by a 3 HP variable speed motor.
Dimensions are 45"Hx18"Wx41"L. Required amps
at 440v - 3 phase is 13.Weight is 363 lbs.
Unit on casters. $ 6,500.00
One Cooler-model 400 exhausted conditioner-cooler,
recommended for use with one model 600 extuder.
Unit is complete with revolving drum and support
frame on adjustable height casters. Unit supplied
with motors. One 1/2 hp for drum and 1/3 hp
for exhaust fan. Customer to supply ducting
to outside. $ 5,500.00
One Model 36 Scalper with ball rack screen cleaning
system, supplied with screen of choice and one
spare, complete with 1/3 hp motor. Capacity
depends on screen size, rated at 6000 lbs/hr. $ 4,200.00
1 lot interprocess and general/utility augers.
All augers have galvanized trough/tube type
housing for long service. Complete with motor
mount, motor, belt guard, auger pulley belt and
intake guard. Augers are 6". Electric motors
rated at 2 to 3 hp/1 ph/50-60 cycles. Conveyor
lengths are 11',15' or 20'. Shipping weight is
170 lbs - average. $ 6,725.00
One Water manifold with injector, for model 600
extruder. Includes pump and flow control. $ 1,200.00
Set extra spares for approx. 1 year based on
8-10 hour/day operation of equipment. $ 4,200.00
One Rotomatic JR. Vibratory fed net weighing
open mouth bag filler with rotary bucket. Unit
includes 3 section rotary bucket (aluminium),
1/2 cu.ft. capacity sections, mild steel
construction, #'Dia. spout, 45A eriez vibratory
feeder, heavy duty casters with locks. Unit
also includes sealing/sewing head and bagging
conveyor model 7000. $ 12,600.00
Lot/set of 3 dies for extruder. Standard
shapes and sizes. $ 600.00
Lot magnets $ 1,200.00
Volume: approx.-900 cu.ft. Weight approx.8000 lbs.
Total with c/s construction S-1 Mixer. $ 88,056.00
Total with s/s construction S-1 Mixer. $ 94,317.00
Options:
1. Equipment consolidation and containerization
F.O.B. closest U.S. Port of Exit $ 6,500.00
2. Training in the U.S.A. at the University of
Illinois and at BAR's pilot plant. $ 8,800.00
3. On-site start-up - $500.00 per day plus
return airfare business class from Champaign, IL USA
4. Hach food and feed analysis system for quality
control, F.O.B. Seymour, IL USA $ 9,800.00
5. Stainless Steel options recommended for human
foods production depending on local regulations.
Includes stainless steel extruder hopper, stain-
less steel cooler, stainless steel conveyors from
output of extruder up to and including out put
from cooler. (add to c/s construction quote.) $ 9,800.00
6. Pre-engineered skidded system. System can be
preassembled and prewired for continuous operation.
Consult BAR Export/Import's Engineering Coordinator.
7. If raw materials is not free of stones add
$6,500.00 for a model AS-1 Destoner.
This summary price quotation does not include the following:
a. Installation of equipment and storage/surge bins. BAR Export/Import will supply layout drawings free of charge after order is confirmed. If customer has existing building or is modifying an existing facility drawing of such must be provided to BAR Export/Import before layout drawing can be supplied.
b. Electrical panel and starters. BAR Export/Import will provide advice on the proper selection of these items.
c. Utilities and their connections.
EXAMPLE 5:
Soymilk Plant, INTSOY (Illinois) process,
220 liters/hr.
Source: BAR EXPORT/IMPORT, INC. URBANA,ILLINOIS
Date: 1990
One Model AS Destoner, 1 HP 800-1000 lbs/hr capacity
33"Hx37"Lx21"W, 148 lbs.
One Grain Cleaner Model 75, Complete with charging
hopper,tow eccentric cleaning action shoes, for
four screen separation and air system, including
all necessary power attachements, machine stand,
charging elevator with hopper and belt guard.
Supplied with set of 20 screens.
Shipping weight: Approximately 900 lbs.
Dimensions - 60"Wx40"Wx60"H. 3/4 HP motor
included with both cleaner and charging elevator.
Two Blanch kettles Model F-8, stainless steel
jacketed kettle,interior constructed of type 316
stainless steel with a No. 4 sanitary finish.
Kettle exterior constructed of type 304 stainless
steel with a buff finish. Kettle dimensions to be
approximately 32" inside diameter by 29" deep.
Jacket designed and stamped for 45 psi ASME code
and National Board registered. Kettle rim
reinforced with 3/8" wire. Outlet, threaded or
tri-clamp type. Kettle to be mounted on stainless
steel tube legs with adjustable floor flanges.
Legs attach to kettle by means of sanitary design
fully enclosed leg sockets,
Approx.Dims:48"Lx45"Wx48"H ea. WT:200 lb ea
Two Blanch Baskets. Designed for use with
Kettle F-8. Baskets are the proper mesh for soybeans.
Unit is heavy duty all welded construction, built to
the contour of the kettle. Supplied with style b lift
out handles. Units are stainless steel. Units are
shipped inside black kettles F-8.
Three Stainless Steel Seed Bucket Trays. Chip proof,
crack proof, corrosion resistant. Non-porous surface.
Sloped sides. Trays nest. Dimensions 25"Lx31"Wx5"H.
Capacity: 6 3/4 gallons. 75 lbs.
One Model 300 Grinding Mill. Unit equipped with direct
drive for standard C face motor, Hot water/steam
injection option, sanitary finish, rugged construction,
screens are circular. Includes pedestal, 2 screens,
1 spare rotor, 2 shaft seals, and 2 spare flow discs.
Unit equipped with 3 HP motor.
Approx. dims:48"Lx48"Wx48H. Approx. wt. 200 lbs.
One Hot water Kettle - same as blanch kettle .
Ten Transfer buckets - 18-8 stainless steel
transfer/stock pots with covers, seamless drawn.
60 gts. Outside diameter is 16". Outside depth is
18 3/4 inches, 19 gauge.
Approx. dims: 48"Lx48"Wx36"H. Wt: 200 lbs.
One Extractor. Unit designed to extract 5 gallons
per minute of slurry from BMT 300 Grinding Mill.
Designed to be fulled with transfer buckets of
with pump. Equipped with drive and reducer. Unit
driven from the bottom. Dimensions approximately
30" diameter x 50" high. Shipping weight
approximately 280 lbs.
Two Cookers - same as blanch kettles.
One Cooler THX model/ 8" x 30 feet, two tube heat
exchanger. The outer tube is 4" outside diameter type
304 stainless steel and the inner tube will be 1 1/2"
outside diameter, type 304 stainless steel with a
No. 4 finish. The heat exchanger will be designed
to cool 1.7 gpm of soymilk from 200 degrees to
45 degrees F using 1,452 lbs/hr of 27 degrees F R-22.
Unit complete with 15 HP R-22 unit.
Approx. dims: 20`Lx5`Wx4`H. WT: 800 lbs.
One Cooler supply tank/balance tank. Unit to feed
cooler from cooker. Equipped with return line from
cooler.
Three Pumps - USDA approved, for processing system.
Lot stainless steel piping and fittings.
Lot essential equipment. Includes mixing paddles,
thermometer, scoops, buckets and measures.
Approx. WT: 150 lbs.
SUBTOTAL BASIC PROCESS EQUIPMENT $ 135,377.50
One Homogenizer Model LAB 100 3Pa. Capacity 250
liters/hr at 3000 psi. Complete with 2 stage
homogenization valve. 50/60 Hz, 2.2 kw. $ 20,687.00
Cleaver-Brooks/Coates Model S-120-24 vertical
electric steam boiler having an electrical
rating of 24KW and an output of 820.000 BTU/hour.
oiler is constructed to ASME Boiler and
Pressure Vessel Code, Section I, with a design
pressure of 150 psi. The boiler also bears
the UL Label. The boiler is assembled on a steel
sub-base with pressure vessel insulation, sheet
metal jacket and control panel. Main lugs for
electrical connections are furnished along with
supplemental internal fusing for all heating
circuits. The boiler is also furnished with
single high pressure limit control,
McDonnell-Miller No.157 pump control and low
water cutoff, one on/off pressure switch,
control circuit transformer with circuit primary
fusing and secondary control power switch/on, high
pressure and low water, Incology heating elements
rated at 75 wpsi, ASME pressure relief valve,
pressure gauge, feedwater stop and check valves,
bottom blowdown valves, sight gauge with drain and
guards. $ 5,490.00
Cleaver-Brooks Packaged Feedwater System,
Model DP-3F-2. System will be complete with
18" diameter x 43" long, 45 gallon receiver tank.
Receiver will be furnished with a makeup valve,
gauge glass set and thermometer. Two boiler
feedwater pumps will be furnished having a
capacity of 3 GPM at 155 psi discharge pressure.
Each pump will be furnished complete with base,
coupling, 2 HP open drip proof motor, strainer
and pressure gauge. A magnetic across the line
starter will be furnished. All of the above to
be mounted , piped and wired on a structural steel
stand. On the basis of 100% makeup, we are also
including a preheat assembly to preheat makeup
water prior to pumping to boiler. $ 7,072.00
One Model 150 Pure Pack Carton Machine. Unit is
designed for one operator to form, fill and seal
gable-top cartons with automatic machine quality
liquid tight seals. Dims: 26"Wx66"Lx74"H.
Electrics: 220v/1ph/50-60 cy/10 amps.
Spares included. $ 51,425.00
TOTAL, F.O.B. Seymour Illinois,Export crated: $ 220,052.00
OPTIONS- BUDGET ONLY
Blending- for different flavours
(using the same packaging as soymilk) $ 38,000.00
Yogurt a.) 72 quarts/24 hours, manual filling $ 12,000.00
b.)144 " " " $ 22,000.00
Ice Cream- 100 Gal./hr., semi-automatic filling,
100% overrun. $ 45,000.00
For detailed economic information, including total capital requirements and operating costs, we refer you to Alfred Batholomai's "Food Factories" (VH Verlagsgesellschaft, Weinheim, Germany) which contains chapters covering a complete Soybean Oil Extraction Plant, a Soybean Oil Refinery, a Tofu Plant and Soymilk Plant.
