<title>Handbook on small-scale freshwater fish. Handbook of small-scale freshwater fish farming</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
Between 1979 and 1990 five booklets in FAO's Better Farming Series dealt with freshwater fish farming in ponds, pens and cages. Written and illustrated by Tom Laughlin, with technical contributions from many FAO headquarters and field staff coordinated by the Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service, these booklets have been popular with aquaculture training and development staff as extension tools.
Now compiled into the Handbook on small-scale freshwater fish farming, this wealth of simply presented and illustrated information becomes available in an improved format. Pond, pen and cage location, construction and management are covered in outlines that can be modified to suit local conditions.
The handbook is primarily intended for extension workers, technicians and teachers, to help them in presenting their knowledge of freshwater fish farming to small-scale farmers. For example, the handbook can be used as a trainers' aid in conjunction with the five original booklets' which can be distributed among trainees. The simple English employed in the text lends itself to easy translation into other languages, while the diagrams can be easily reproduced or enlarged for screen projection. The handbook ends with a set of questions that could be used to test the comprehension of trainees.
Requests for permission to issue this handbook in other languages and to adapt it according to local conditions and needs are welcomed, as are suggestions for its improvement when reprinted. Correspondence on these topics and requests for further copies of
the handbook and the five original booklets in the Better Farming Series should be addressed to the Director, Publications Division, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
<section>2</section>
1. Introduction
What is fish farming?
Why do we raise fish?
What do you need to raise fish?
How do we begin?
What is fish farming?
1 Fish farming is the raising of fish for personal use or profit. It is sometimes called fish culture.
Why do we raise fish?
2 By raising fish we make better use of our land and our water.
3 If you raise fish your family will have more to eat. The protein in fish will keep your family strong and healthy. Fish are tasty, like chicken, sheep and goat.
4 If your family is not too big, you will have more fish than you need for food and you can sell them at the market.
5 If your family is not too big, with more food and more money you and your family can live better.
Figure 1
6 But fish farming is not easy. To raise fish needs as much hard work as to raise anything else, such as maize, rice, cassava or groundnuts.
7 You will need to learn to do many things.
What do you need to raise fish?
8 You will need a piece of land where you can build a pond, or suitable water areas to build pens or keep cages; you will need a supply of water, baby fish to begin and food for your fish.
Figure 2
Figure 3
Figure 4
Figure 5
Figure 6
9 You will need time to build a pond and to care for it regularly.
10 Pens and cages can also be used for raising fish from the time they are babies until they are big enough to eat or to sell.
11 If you have a stream, river, lake or reservoir nearby, you may want to build a pen or a cage and raise fish there.
12 If you already have a fish pond, you may want to put in a cage so that you can raise more fish than you could in the pond alone.
How do we begin?
13 If there is a fish culture station near where you live, you may be able to get help from an extension agent.
Figure 7
14 If there is no extension agent you will need to learn many things by yourself.
15 You will need to know the type of soil best for your pond, how to dig your pond, how to fill it with water and how to fertilize it.
Figure 8
Figure 9
Figure 10
16 You will need to know what kind of fish to raise, how to put the baby fish into your pond, what to feed your fish and how to feed them.
Figure 11
Figure 12
Figure 13
17 You will need to know how to take care of the pond, how to drain it, how to harvest the fish and how to use your own baby fish to start again.
Figure 14
Figure 15
Figure 16
18 This book will help you to begin good fish farming.
19 Raising fish in pens and cages is somewhat different from raising fish in ponds. This book can help you learn both.
Figure 17
Figure 18
<section>3</section>
2. Locating your fish farm
Where to put your fish pond
Water supply
Soil quality
Testing soil
Where to put your fish pond
20 You must choose a good place to put your pond.
21 Remember that a pond for fish is only one use for your land. Be careful not to build a pond on land that could be better used for something else.
22 It is best to put a pond in a place with a gentle slope or on a hillside so you will not have to dig too much soil to build it. A pond built on a slope is also easier to drain.
23 Do not build your pond in a place that is so low that it can be flooded during the rainy season.
24 Do not build your pond on a steep hill.
Figure 19
25 Choose a sunny place for your pond, close to your home so you can take care of the fish easily and so people will not come and take your fish away.
Water supply
26 Your pond must be near a good supply of water such as a spring, stream, lake or reservoir with plenty of water all year round.
Figure 20
Figure 21
27 You must be sure that you have enough water to fill your pond when it is time to fill it and to add more water when you need it.
28 Do not depend on rainwater to fill your pond. When it does not rain, there may not be enough water to keep your pond full and the fish may die.
29 Your water must come from a place that is higher than the pond so that the water will flow into the pond by itself.
Figure 22
Figure 23
30 The water should not have a bad smell, taste or colour. It should not be too muddy.
31 The water should not have wild fish in it. You do not want wild fish in your pond because they may eat your fish or keep them from growing.
32 Water from a natural spring close to the pond site is usually good and there will not be wild fish in it.
33 Water from a stream or from a lake or reservoir is usually good but it may have wild fish in it. You will have to be careful that the wild fish do not swim into your pond.
Soil quality
34 The soil where you build your pond should not be too sandy. Soil with too much sand or gravel in it will not hold water.
35 In sandy soil the water will sink into the ground and there will not be enough water for your fish.
36 If the banks of your pond are built of sandy soil, they will not be strong enough to keep the water from flowing away.
Figure 24
37 The soil where you build your pond should have enough clay in it. Clay soil holds water very well.
38 In clay soil, very little water will sink into the ground, and banks of clay will be strong enough to hold the water in the pond.
Testing soil
39 You should test the soil to see if it is good for building a pond.
40 The first test is easy. Take a handful of soil from the surface and squeeze it into a ball.
41 Throw the ball of soil into the air and catch it.
Figure 25
Figure 26
Figure 27
42 Bad soil with too much sand or gravel in it will not stick together and the ball will fall apart.
43 If the ball sticks together well the soil may be good, but you cannot be sure. Now you should make a second test to be sure that the soil is good.
44 Dig a hole as deep as your waist. Early in the morning fill it with water. Fill it to the top.
45 By evening some of the water will have sunk into the soil.
Figure 28
Figure 29
Figure 30
46 Then fill the hole with water again. Fill it to the top. Cover the hole with boards or leafy branches.
47 The next morning if most of the water is still in the hole, the soil will hold enough water to build a fish pond there.
Figure 31
Figure 32
Summary
YOU HAVE LEARNED HOW TO LOCATE YOUR FISH FARM BEST
Locate your farm on land with a gentle slope
* where there is enough water at all times
* where there is good water
* where the soil holds water well as close to your home as possible
<section>4</section>
3. Constructing fish ponds
How large should your pond be?
How to build a 20 by 20 metre pond
Building bigger ponds
How large should your pond be?
48 It is good to start with a pond greater than 300 square metres. Such a pond will produce enough fish for food. It will also produce fish for sales and additional cash income.
49 For example, if you build a pond 20 by 20 metres, the pond will measure 400 square metres.
50 A square or rectangular pond is easiest to build, but your pond can have a different shape to fit the size and shape of your land.
Figure 33
Figure 34
How to build a 20 by 20 metre pond
51 First mark out a big square on the site you have chosen, about 26 by 26 metres. Mark the corners with pegs and run a string between the pegs to show where the outside of the banks will be.
52 Clear the big square of all trees, bushes and grass and take away as many big roots as you can.
Figure 35
Figure 36
53 Take away about 20 centrimetres of topsoil from all over the square. Put the topsoil aside. Later you will put it back on the top and outer sides of the banks.
54 Now mark out a smaller square inside the big square, about 20 by 20 metres. Mark the corners with pegs and run a string between the pegs to show where the inside of the banks will be.
55 The bottom of the bank in the shallow part of your pond and along the sides should be about 1 metre from the upper end and sides of the small square.
Figure 37
Figure 38
56 The bottom of the bank in the deepest part of your pond should be about 2 metres from the lower end of the small square.
57 Now mark out a third smaller area in the centre of your pond, about 17 by 18 metres We will call this the central area. Mark the corners with pegs and run a string between the pegs to show where the bottom of the banks will be.
58 Be sure that ail the pegs and strings marking the 26 by 26 metre square, the 20 by 20 metre square and the central area are set up as shown in the drawings.
59 Now you are ready to begin digging out soil from inside the central area to build the banks of your pond.
60 Ask your neighbours to help you dig your big pond. Then you can help them dig their ponds in turn.
Figure 39
Figure 40
61 Shared work is lighter work. When we work together with our neighbours, the work is easier and faster.
62 Begin digging inside the central square at the upper end of your pond. Dig about 20 centimetres deep. As you dig towards the lower end, dig a little deeper. When you get to the deepest part, at the 2-metre string marking the central area, you should be digging about 30 centimetres deep.
63 As you dig out the soil, put it between the lines marking the 20 by 20 metre square and the 26 by 26 metre square, where the banks will be. Put it nearest to where you are digging. This way, the banks will be higher and wider as you move toward the lower end.
64 When you come to roots, take away as much of them as you can and put them aside.
Figure 41
Figure 42
65 Whenever the loose soil you put on the banks reaches half as high as your knees, pack it down tightly. You can do this by beating the soil with a heavy plank, a length of tree trunk or an earth tamper.
66 When you are digging, keep the slope of the pond bottom as regular as you can. It should slope gently down from the upper end to the deepest part. The bottom of the pond should have slopes like those in the drawings.
67 Begin again to dig soil out of the central area. Dig 20 more centimetres from the upper end and 30 more centimetres from the deepest part. Put the soil on the banks and pack it down tightly as before.
Figure 43
Figure 44
68 Now begin again, for the third and last time, to dig soil out of the central area. Dig 20 more centimetres from the upper end and 30 more centimetres from the deepest part. Put the soil on the banks and pack it down tightly.
69 When you have finished digging out the central area and you have put on the banks all the soil that you have taken out, you will have a hole 17 by 18 metres with straight sides. Now it is time to shape the banks.
70 Dig the soil away from the edges of the central area to form the slope of the banks. Put this soil on top of the banks and pack it down tightly.
71 The inside of the banks should slope less steeply than the outside. The drawing shows you what the banks should look like when they are finished.
Figure 45
Figure 46
72 The top of the banks should be about 1.5 metres wide and should be straight and flat all the way around the pond.
73 Get the 20 centimetres of topsoil you took away when you began digging and put it on the top and outer sides of the banks. Plant grass on the banks. Banks covered with grass last longer.
74 The bottom of your pond should be about 1.1 metres (110 centimetres) from the top of the banks at the shallow upper end and about 1.4 metres (140 centimetres) from the top of the banks at the deepest part.
75 Be sure that the bottom of the pond is fairly smooth and regular.
Figure 47
Figure 48
76 Now dig a ditch in the bottom of the pond from the centre to the lower end. The ditch should be about 50 centimetres wide and about 20 centimetres deep. This ditch will help you drain out all the water when you empty your pond.
77 When the ditch is finished, remove all loose soil and other trash from the bottom of the pond.
Building bigger ponds
78 If you want a still bigger pond, you can build one of 20 by 30 metres 20 by 50 metres or even 30 by 50 metres The banks of ponds this size should also be 1.5 metres wide at the top, but because these ponds are bigger and deeper and hold much more water, the banks should be stronger at the bottom than the banks you built for your smaller ponds.
Figure 49
Figure 50
79 Since you will be digging bigger and deeper ponds, you will take out more soil. Put all the soil you dig out on the lower part of the banks. This will make them thicker and stronger.
80 The drawing below shows you what the banks should look like when you are finished.
81 However, if you build ponds of this size, you should build them a little deeper. They should be at least 0.75 metres (75 centimetres) deep at the shallow end and at least 1 to 1.2 metres deep at the deepest part.
Figure 51
Figure 52
82 If you live in a place where the temperature falls below 20°C, make your ponds 1.5 to 1.8 metres deep. The water will be warmer in the deepest part and your fish can go there during the colder part of each day.
Note: When ponds are side by side, you will need only one bank between two ponds. If you are building two ponds side by side at the same time, you can make the top of the bank between them 1 metre wide instead of 1.5 metres
Figure 53
Figure 54
Summary
YOU HAVE LEARNED HOW TO BUILD YOUR FISH PONDS
The pond should
* be greater than 300 m² to produce fish for food and cash
* have a square or rectangular shape
* be shallow, with water depth from 60 cm (upper end) to 90 cm (lower end)
The banks should
* be 50 cm higher than the water on top
* have a good slope on the sides
* be built with soil tightly packed
Build your pond in successive steps:
* clear all vegetation, rocks, etc. from the area
* remove the top soil and keep it aside
* mark the limits of the inside banks at ground level
* mark the limits of the inside banks at bottom level
* dig inside these last limits by layers of 20 cm (upper end) to 30 cm (lower end)
* use this soil to build up the banks, layer by layer and tightly packed
* form the inside slopes of the banks
* form the outside slopes of the banks
* add topsoil on top and on the outside slopes of the banks
* inside the pond, dig a small draining ditch
<section>5</section>
4. Inlets to let water into the pond
Simple inlets
A better inlet
83 You will need an inlet to let water into your pond when you want to fill it.
84 You should place the inlet at the point nearest to the water supply. Most often this will be at or near the upper end of your pond.
Simple inlets
85 Your inlet can be made from a piece of heavy bamboo or a pipe of plastic or metal. The inlet pipe should be about 10 centimetres in diameter.
86 The inlet pipe should be long enough to reach through the top of the bank from one side to the other. You will need a pipe about 3 metres long to reach through the bank at the upper end of your pond.
Figure 55
Figure 56
87 Now dig a gap in the bank where you want the inlet to be. It should be a little above the water level on the inside of your pond and a little below the level of the water that flows from the source outside your pond.
88 Put the inlet pipe in the gap in the bank and rebuild the bank over it.
89 You can also make an inlet by cutting a shallow trench through the bank to let the water into the pond.
90 If you use a shallow trench to get water into your pond, you can improve it and keep it from washing away by using a trough of roofing metal to line the bottom of the trench.
Figure 57
Figure 58
A better inlet
91 You can also build a sluice in the trench to control the flow of water into the pond.
92 This sluice has a wall on each side of the trench and a floor set into the bottom of the trench. There are slots in the walls to hold wooden boards or a screen.
93 Boards are put into the slots to keep water out of the pond or taken out to let water in. When you are filling the pond, put in a screen to keep out wild fish.
94 You can build a sluice from wood, or if you know how to build with bricks or blocks, you can use these.
Figure 59 - AN INLET SLUICE
Figure 60 - BUILDING A WOODEN INLET SLUICE
Figure 61 - HOW TO BUILD A SCREEN
Figure 62 - PARTS OF A WOODEN INLET SLUICE
Figure 63 - WHERE TO PUT AN INLET SLUICE IN THE POND BANK
Summary
YOU HAVE LEARNED HOW TO PREPARE TO BRING WATER INTO EACH POND
Provide an inlet for each pond:
* locate it through the top of the upper-end bank
* make its bottom about 10 cm above the highest level of
* pond water
* use a pipe, a shallow trench or a sluice
Dig a small, horizontal inlet ditch to each pond inlet
Build an inlet sluice
<section>6</section>
5. Outlets to let water out of the pond
Simple outlets
A better outlet
Another kind of outlet: The monk
Improving your pipe outlet
Using a siphon to drain your pond
96 You will need an outlet to let water out of your pond when you want to empty it.
97 You should place the outlet at the bottom of the bank at the lower end of your pond at the deepest part.
Simple outlets
98 The outlet can be made from a piece of heavy bamboo or a pipe of plastic or metal. The outlet pipe should be about 10 centimetres in diameter. The bank of your pond is much wider at the lower end than at the upper end, so the outlet pipe will have to be longer than the inlet pipe.
99 The outlet pipe should be long enough to reach through the bottom of the bank from one side to the other. You will need a pipe about 6.5 metres long to reach through the bank at the lower end of your pond.
Figure 64
Figure 65
100 If you cannot get a pipe that is long enough to go through the bank, you can join shorter pieces of pipe together using straight pieces of pipe like the ones in the drawing.
101 If you are using bamboo, you can join short pieces of bamboo together with pieces of smaller bamboo in the centre, but the smaller pieces should be at least 8 to 9 centimetres in diameter. Wrap the bamboo joints with rope and close them with tar to keep water from seeping out.
Figure 66
Figure 67
102 Now dig a gap in the bank where you want the outlet to be. It should reach from the deepest part on the inside of the pond through the bank to the outside of the pond.
103 If the outlet pipe is below ground level on the outside of the pond, you will have to dig a ditch to take the water away from the outlet.
104 Put the outlet pipe in the gap in the bank and rebuild the bank over it.
105 If you use an outlet of about 10 centimetres in diameter, it will take about 10 hours to empty your 400 square metre pond.
106 It is easier to place the outlet where you want it to be before you dig out the centre of the pond and build the banks. When you build another pond, you will understand this and you will be able to do it when you are building the banks. But now, when you are building your first pond, you should place the outlet in the way you have just learned because it is easier to understand.
Figure 68
A better outlet
107 If you use a plastic or metal pipe for the outlet of your pond, you can make it better by putting an upright length of pipe on the end of the outlet using an L or a T piece like the ones in the drawing. Close the T piece with a plug as shown.
108 Put the L or T piece and the upright pipe on the end of the outlet outside the pond, but protect it so that it cannot be reached by animals or other people.
109 The top of the upright pipe should reach about 3 to 5 centimetres above the water level of your pond. If the water rises above this level, it will overflow from the upright pipe.
Figure 69
Figure 70
110 Tie the upright pipe to a pole that has been pounded into the ground so that it will not slip down and let the water out of the pond before you want it to.
111 When you want to let out the water, untie the upright pipe and push it down. The water will then flow out of the pond.
112 There is still another way to let water out of your pond, using a siphon. You will learn how to use a siphon in items 122 to 133.
Figure 71
Figure 72
Another kind of outlet: The monk
113 You can build another kind of outlet to empty a bigger pond faster. It is built inside the bank at the deep end of the pond. This kind of outlet is called a monk. When the pond is filled, the monk will be in the water.
114 A monk is a tall box with two sides, a back, a front formed by wooden boards and a bottom. Each side has two slots to hold two rows of wooden boards.
115 Boards are put into the slots to keep water in the pond or taken out to let water out.
Figure 73
116 A monk has a screen that fits on top of the first row of boards. It keeps your fish from getting out when the pond is too full or when you are emptying it.
117 A monk also serves as an overflow, so you will not need to have an overflow pipe like the one shown in item 109.
118 You can build a monk from wood, or if you know how to build with bricks or blocks, you can use these.
Figure 74
Figure 75 - BUILDING A WOODEN MONK
Figure 76 - WHERE TO PUT A MONK IN THE POND
Figure 77 - PARTS OF A WOODEN MONK
Improving your pipe outlet
120 You can further improve a pipe outlet by placing a collar of cement around the centre of the pipe. The collar will hold the pipe in place in the bank and keep water from seeping through the bank outside the pipe.
121 The following drawings show you how to build a wooden form to make a cement collar.
Figure 78
Figure 79
Using a siphon to drain your pond
122 You will also be able to use a siphon to empty your pond. If you use a siphon, you will not need an outlet but you will need an overflow like the one described in items 172 to 179.
123 A siphon is a simple tube that runs from the inside of the pond over the bank and lies on the ground outside the pond.
124 A siphon can be made of plastic or rubber tubing at least 3 centimetres in diameter.
Figure 80
125 The siphon must be long enough to reach from the deepest part of the pond and run over the top of the bank and down the outside of the bank. You will need a siphon about 8 metres long to reach over the top of the bank from the deep part to the outside.
126 When you are ready to empty your pond, put ail of the siphon into the pond. It will fill with water. Be sure the tube is full of water from one end to the other. If the siphon is not full of water, it will not work.
Figure 81
Figure 82
127 While the siphon is still in the water, close one end of the tube with a plug and leave the other end open.
128 Leave the open end of the siphon below the surface of the water. You can use stones to hold the siphon under the water, but be sure that they are not so heavy that the water will be shut off.
129 Take the other end of the siphon, which is closed with the plug. Lift it over the top of the bank and put it on the ground outside the pond.
130 If the ground on the outside of the pond is higher than the pond bottom at the deepest part, you will have to dig a ditch so that the end of the siphon on the outside of the pond will be lower than the end of the siphon in the pond. The ditch will also take the water away when you empty your pond.
Figure 83
Figure 84
131 Now, take the plug out of the siphon. If the end on the outside is lower than the end in the pond and if the end in the pond is under water, water will start to flow through the tube and out of your pond.
132 If the end of the siphon in the pond comes to the surface, the water may stop flowing. If this happens, put the whole siphon into the pond to fill it with water and begin again.
133 It will take a lot more time to empty a pond with a siphon than with an outlet. If you use a siphon of about 3 centimetres in diameter, it will take about three days to empty your pond.
Figure 85
Summary
YOU HAVE LEARNED HOW TO DRAIN WATER OUT OF EACH POND
Provide an outlet for each pond:
* locate it through the bottom of the lower-end bank
* make its bottom about 10 cm below the deepest point in the pond
* use a straight pipe, an L-pipe or a monk
Or use a siphon made from a flexible tube at least 3 cm in diameter
<section>7</section>
6. Bringing water to your ponds
Raising the level of your water supply
Digging a supply ditch
Digging a return ditch
Building a sluice to control the water flow
Raising the level of your water supply
134 If the stream that supplies your water is not much higher than your ponds, it may be difficult to get the water to run down when you want to fill them.
135 By building a barrage, you can raise the level of the stream so
that water will run down more easily into your fish ponds.
Figure 86
136 You can build a simple barrage using a woven mesh of tree branches like the one shown above. You can also use loose stones or rocks or logs set into the stream bottom.
137 A barrage does not hold back all of the water that runs down the stream. Depending on how it is built, some of the water will be held back and some of the water will flow through or over the barrage.
138 If the tree branches, logs or rocks are placed tightly together, the water level behind the barrage will be higher.
139 If the tree branches, logs or rocks are not placed so tightly, the water level behind the barrage will be lower.
140 If you build a barrage and too much water flows through, you can hold back more water by putting more branches, logs or rocks on the barrage.
Figure 87
Digging a supply ditch
141 After you have built a barrage and the water behind it has reached its highest level, you will need to dig a supply ditch to take the water to your ponds.
142 Begin by digging the supply ditch just behind the barrage where the water is deepest. However, dig it in such a way that the water in the stream will not flow into the ditch.
143 You can do this by starting the supply ditch about 1 metre away from the edge of the water. When you are ready to fill your ponds, you can remove this 1 metre strip and the water will flow into the ditch.
144 The ditch should run near the shallow ends of your ponds and in the same direction as the stream that supplies your water.
Figure 88
Figure 89
145 The ditch should have very little slope. You can use a straight board and a mason's level to help you dig your ditch.
146 When you reach your highest pond, the ditch should be near the inlet. Continue to dig your water-supply ditch until you reach your lowest pond.
147 When the supply ditch is past the end of the lowest pond, continue to dig it downhill for about 10 metres
148 Then bring the ditch slowly to the surface. That way, when you fill your ponds, any extra water will flow out at ground level.
149 Now dig a small ditch to connect the inlet of each pond to the supply ditch. Keep its bottom level horizontal.
Figure 90
Digging a return ditch
150 You will also need to dig one or more ditches to take the water back to the stream when you empty your ponds.
151 These are called return ditches. How you dig them will depend on how your ponds are placed and how near they are to the stream. Try to choose the easiest and shortest path to take the water back to the stream.
152 If your ponds are near the stream, the easiest way to get the water back is to dig a return ditch from the outlet of each pond straight to the stream. You can also use one ditch for two ponds.
Figure 91
153 If your ponds are not near the stream or if you cannot dig a ditch straight to the stream, dig only one return ditch along the outlet side of your ponds, which can take all the water from all the ponds.
154 Start this ditch at the outlet of your highest pond. The ditch should run past the outlet of the lowest pond and then back to the stream.
155 Now, dig a small ditch to connect the outlet of each pond to the return ditch.
Figure 92
Building a sluice to control the water flow
156 When you have built your ditches, you will need a way to control the flow of water from the stream into your supply ditch and from your supply ditch into the inlet ditches of each of your ponds.
157 To control the flow of water into your supply ditch, you can build a sluice.
158 This sluice will have three slots in each wall. Two sets of slots are for wooden boards and the third set is for a screen to keep out wild fish.
159 Build this sluice at the top of the supply ditch just behind the 1-metre strip of soil that you left at the edge of the water when you began digging the ditch.
Figure 93
161 Pack the space between the boards with good clay soil to keep the water from leaking through.
162 Do not put in the screen until you are ready to use the sluice. Put it aside so that it will not be broken.
Figure 94 - BUILDING A WOODEN SLUICE FOR THE SUPPLY DITCH
Figure 95
163 Now, remove the 1-metre strip of soil you left at the edge of the stream. The water will flow into the ditch up to the wooden planks in the sluice.
164 Later, when you are ready to fill your ponds, you will control how much water will reach your ponds by removing some planks from the sluice.
165 For better control of the water supply to each pond, you can build smaller sluices in the supply ditch at the lower corners of each inlet ditch, as shown in the drawing.
Figure 96
Figure 97
166 With this sluice you need only one set of boards. The drawing below shows you how.
167 Slide the set of wooden boards into the slot to send ail the water into a pond, or take the boards out to let all the water flow farther down the supply ditch into another pond.
168 You can also adjust the boards in each sluice so that part of the water will go into one pond and the rest will flow down to feed the other ponds.
Figure 98 - BUILDING A WOODEN SLUICE FOR A POND INLET
Summary
YOU HAVE LEARNED HOW TO BRING WATER TO YOUR FISH FARM
Build a barrage to raise the water level of the stream, if necessary
Dig the supply ditch:
* dig it in the same direction as the flow of the water supply
* bring it along the shallow ends of the ponds
* give it very little slope
Dig the return ditch
* begin from the deeper ends of the pond
* make it as short as possible
Place a sluice at the beginning of the supply ditch
* keep it closed with two rows of boards
* pack soil between them until you need water on the farm
Place a sluice at the lower corner of each inlet ditch
<section>8</section>
7. Controlling the water in the pond
Overflow
Controlling trash and fish: Screens
Overflow
169 If there is too much water in your pond, some of the water may flow over the banks. This may wash the banks away and some of your fish may get out.
170 You can use an overflow to keep the water in your pond from rising over the banks.
171 The better outlets you learned about in items 107 to 119 will act as an overflow.
172 If you use a straight pipe outlet or a siphon to let water out of your pond, you will need another kind of overflow.
173 This kind of overflow can be made from a piece of bamboo or a pipe of plastic or metal. The overflow pipe should be about 6 centimetres in diameter.
174 The overflow pipe should be long enough to reach through the top of the bank from the inside of the pond to a place far enough on the outside to keep overflow water from washing away the bank. You will need a pipe about 4.5 metres long to do this.
175 If you cannot get a pipe that is long enough, join short pieces of pipe or bamboo together (see items 100 and 101).
176 It is best to place your overflow in the bank at the lower end of your pond right above the outlet so that the water that overflows can run off in the outlet ditch.
177 If you are going to put the overflow over the outlet, you can put it in the same gap that you dug for the outlet in item 96. The water line should be about 50 centimetres below the top of the bank, so put your overflow there as you rebuild the bank.
178 If you are going to put the overflow in another place, you will have to dig another gap in the bank about 50 centimetres deep.
Figure 99
Figure 100
179 When the pond is full, the overflow will keep the water about 60 centimetres deep at the shallow upper end and about 90 centimetres deep at the deepest part.
Controlling trash and fish: Screens
180 Your inlet should have a screen to keep out wild fish, dirt and trash when you fill the pond.
181 If you fill your pond with an inlet trench, it should have a screen, too.
182 A siphon, which is very small, usually does not have a screen.
Figure 101
Figure 102
183 Your outlet should have a screen to keep your fish from getting away when you empty your pond.
184 Your overflow should have a screen to keep your fish from getting away when the pond is too full and the water begins to overflow.
185 You can easily make screens for your inlet, outlet and overflow from fine-mesh plastic or metal or from a tin with holes in the end.
186 Screens should be placed outside the pond on the inlet pipe and inside the pond on the outlet and overflow pipes.
Figure 103
Figure 104
187 This will keep the pipes from filling with trash which could stop the flow of water.
188 Lash the screens tightly in place on the pipes, using heavy cord or light wire.
189 If you fill your pond by cutting a trench through the bank, you can screen the opening using a fish trap, split and woven bamboo, a clay pot with holes in the bottom or a piece of metal roofing with holes.
190 When you are filling or emptying your pond, clean the screens often. If you do not do this, dirt and leaves will cover them up and the water will not flow.
Figure 105
Figure 106
Summary
YOU HAVE LEARNED HOW TO CONTROL THE WATER IN THE POND
Provide an overflow for each pond to control its water level:
* provide this if you use a siphon or if your outlet is a straight pipe
* locate it through the top of the lower end bank
* make its bottom at the highest level of the water
Use screens to prevent
* fish from entering or leaving through pond inlets and outlets
* trash from blocking your pipes
<section>9</section>
8. Preparing your pond
Before filling the pond
Fertilizing the water
How to make plant compost
How to make animal compost
Building a crib
Putting fertilizer into the crib
When is your pond ready?
Before filling the pond
191 Make sure that the screens on the inlet, outlet and overflow are in place and tight.
192 Make sure that the outlet is tightly closed. To do this, wrap a wood plug with old cloth, put it in the outlet pipe on the outside of the pond and tap it lightly with a hammer so that it will stay in the pipe when the pond fills with water.
193 If you have built a better outlet with a T or an L piece, turn it to the upright position.
Figure 107
Figure 108
194 If your pond has a monk, put in the boards and put the screen on top (see items 1 13 to 1 19).
195 Put rocks on the bottom of your pond under the inlet where the water will fall when it begins to come into the pond.
196 This will keep the bottom from washing away. It will keep the water from getting too muddy. It will make the water splash when it first comes into the pond and bring air for the fish to breathe.
197 Now you are ready to fill your pond.
Figure 109
Figure 110
Figure 111 - FILLING YOUR PONDS ONE BY ONE
HOW TO FILL A POND WHEN YOU HAVE A MONK
Figure 112 - 1 put both sets of wooden boards in the slots in the monk and put the screen in place on top of the first row of boards
Figure 113 - 2 the boards should be as high as the water depth that you want in the pond
Figure 114 - 3 pack the space between them with good clay soil to keep water from leaking out
Figure 115 - 4 let water into the pond
Figure 116 - 5 when the water reaches the top of the boards, stop the flow of water
Figure 117 - 6 leave the screen in place to act as an overflow if the water becomes too high
Fertilizing the water
198 You can fertilize the water in your new ponds with
* compost made with plant and animal wastes
* animal manure
* plant material.
199 You can also fertilize your ponds by soaking bitter cassava roots in the water, at regular intervals.
How to make plant compost
200 Items 202 to 209 tell you how to make animal compost. If you do not have animal manure, you can fertilize your ponds with compost made with plant material.
201 To make compost with plant material, make a compost pile using layers of grass, chopped leaves or other plant material mixed with a little topsoil. Dampen it with water to make it rot faster.
Figure 118
How to make animal compost
202 Make a compost pile near the pond. Put it in a shady place protected from rain.
203 Make your pile in layers. Make the first layer of grass or leaves mixed with a spadeful of topsoil, and dampen it with water to make it rot faster.
204 Then make a second layer of animal manure mixed with a spadeful of topsoil and some water.
Figure 119
Figure 120
205 Use animal manure from sheep, goats, cattle, pigs, chickens or ducks.
206 In place of animal manure you can also use cotton seed, spoiled fruit, household garbage, ashes from the fireplace or night soil.
207 Then make another layer of grass or leaves, and another of manure, until you have a large pile.
Figure 121
Figure 122
Figure 123
208 Keep your compost pile damp by watering it every few days.
209 Let the compost pile rot for about a month.
210 Take compost from the bottom of the pile or the old part of the pile, where it is most rotten, to put in your ponds.
211 Add new layers to your pile every week so that you will always have compost.
212 If you have too much compost you can use some to fertilize your land.
Figure 124
Figure 125
Building a crib
213 In each pond build a crib from bamboo or wood to hold the fertilizer. Build it in one corner in the shallow part of the pond. The drawing below will show you how.
Figure 126
Figure 127
Putting fertilizer into the crib
215 When you first put fertilizer into your crib, pack it down well and fill the crib to the water line. This will be about 60 centimetres deep in the shallow part of the pond.
Figure 128
Figure 129
216 If you are going to fertilize your ponds with animal compost you will need to put in 10 kilograms of compost for each 100 square metres of pond each week.
217 If you are going to fertilize your ponds with animal manure you will need to put in
* 2 to 3 kilograms of poultry droppings for each 100 square metres of pond each week
or
* 8 to 10 kilograms of pig dung for each 100 square metres of pond each week
or
* 10 to 15 kilograms of cow dung for each 100 square metres of pond each week.
218 If you are going to fertilize your ponds with animal manure, but you do not have enough of any one kind of animal manure, you can make a mixture of several kinds.
Figure 130
Figure 131
Figure 132
219 You can make a mixture using 1 part poultry droppings, 2 parts pig dung and 3 parts cow dung.
You will need to put in
* 10 kilograms of this mixture for each 100 square metres of pond each week.
When is your pond ready?
220 If you fertilize your pond with animal compost or animal manure, the water will start to turn green in two or three days. If you fertilize your pond with plant compost or plant material, it will take one week or longer.
221 When the water begins to turn green, you will know that natural food is growing in your pond. It will take about a week to become green enough.
Figure 133
222 You can make a simple test to be sure that the water is green enough. Put your arm in the water up to your elbow. If you are just able to see the ends of your fingers, the water is green enough.
Figure 134
Summary
YOU HAVE LEARNED HOW TO PREPARE EACH POND TO RECEIVE FISH
Check the screens, close the outlet, open the inlet and protect the bank under it
Fill the pond with water
Fertilize the water:
* build a crib in the shallow end of the pond
* fill it with compost, manure or plant wastes
* pack it well under water, up to the water level
Wait until the water becomes rich in natural fish food
* the water turns green
* it becomes less transparent
<section>a</section>
9. Stocking your pond with baby fish
Growing your own baby fish
Feeding the fish in your nursery pond
Using your baby fish
Transporting your baby fish
Putting baby fish into your pond
223 When you are ready to start growing fish you may get the baby fish from a fish culture station or from another fish farmer.
224 If you build more ponds and make your farm bigger, you will need more baby fish than you did before.
225 If you are using tilapia you will need to stock two baby fish for each square metre of pond.
226 If your pond is 20 by 20 metres or 400 square metres you will need 400 x 2 = 800 baby fish.
227 To make sure that you have enough baby fish to stock your ponds, you should grow your own.
Figure 135
Growing your own baby fish
228 You may find that it is best to grow your own baby fish. It is easier and cheaper than getting them from a fish culture station or another fish farmer.
229 Also, if you are going to improve your fish farm by building more ponds, it is better to have your own supply of baby fish.
230 When you grow your own baby fish, you will always be sure to have enough of them when you need them for your big pond.
231 To grow your own baby fish, you will need a nursery pond. You can use an old small pond as a nursery pond or you can build a new nursery pond.
232 A nursery pond can be built just like a big pond, but since the nursery pond is smaller the banks need not be as high or as wide.
233 You can build your nursery pond with an inlet, outlet and overflow like those you used in your big pond.
Figure 136
234 You will also need a crib to hold the fertilizer in your nursery pond.
235 If you build your nursery pond next to your big pond so that they share a bank, you will only need to build three new banks for it.
236 If you grow baby fish near your pond, you will not have to carry them far so they will not be hurt by carrying.
237 Fill your nursery pond with water and fertilize it with compost, animal manure or plant material as you did with your big pond. Wait for the water to turn green.
238 Now you are ready to put fully grown male and female fish into your nursery pond.
Figure 137
239 Be careful to put the right number of male fish and female fish into your nursery pond. The drawing shows you how to see the difference between male and female tilapia.
240 If you are using a pond of 10 by 10 metres as a nursery pond and you are using Tilapia nilotica, you will need to put 20 fully grown male fish and 80 fully grown female fish into the pond.
Figure 138
Figure 139
Feeding the fish in your nursery pond
241 The fully grown fish in your nursery pond will get much of their food from small plants and animals grown in the green water.
242 When the baby fish are born they will be very, very small and at first they will get all of their food from small plants and animals that grow in the green water.
243 These plants and animals are so small that they can hardly be seen or they cannot be seen at all. But if the water is green in your nursery pond, you can be sure that they are there.
244 So you must always be very careful that the water in your nursery pond stays green so that your baby fish will have enough to eat.
245 To keep the water green, do not forget to put a bucket of fertilizer in the crib in your nursery pond each week. If you are using plant compost or plant material, keep the crib filled to the water line.
246 To keep the full-grown fish in your nursery pond healthy, you must also feed them other kinds of food.
Figure 140
247 When the baby fish begin to grow, they, too, will eat the other kinds of food.
248 You can give the fish in your nursery pond many things to eat. But you must be sure that this food is ground or cut very small so that the baby fish can swallow it.
249 You can give the fish in your nursery pond termites or finely ground
* grain mill sweepings
* rice bran
* beer wastes
* cottonseed or groundnut cake.
250 The bigger your baby fish grow, the more food they will need. Feed your fish well but be careful not to overfeed. Check how much they eat (see also items 287 to 297).
251 If you see that the fish do not eat all of their food, give them a little less the next day. If you see that the fish eat all of their food very quickly, give them a little more the next day.
Figure 141
Using your baby fish
252 After about three months, there will be many baby fish of different sizes in your pond. Then you can begin to take baby fish out of your nursery pond to put into your big pond.
253 Use baby fish that are 5 centimetres or longer to put into your big pond. If there are many baby fish that are 5 centimetres or longer, choose the biggest ones.
254 The easiest way to take out your baby fish is to use a seine net. If you use a seine net with a mesh size of about 1 centimetre the smaller fish will swim through and you will catch the fish of 5 centimetres or longer. But be sure to put the fully grown fish back in your nursery pond.
255 From now on, you can take baby fish out of your nursery pond each month for your own use or to sell.
256 Be careful that your nursery pond does not become too full of fish. If there are too many fish, they will not grow well and your baby fish will not be strong and healthy.
Figure 142
257 To keep your nursery pond from becoming too full of fish, drain all of the water out of the pond each year and collect all of the fish.
258 You can eat the big fish that were in the nursery pond. Items 340 to 351 will tell you what to do with the baby fish.
259 Wait until the bottom of the nursery pond is dry, then clean and repair the bottom and the banks. Items 353 to 355 will tell you how.
260 Now fill the nursery pond with water and fertilize it as you did before. When the water is green, put in the right number of fully grown female fish and male fish. Item 240 tells you how many fully grown fish to use.
Figure 143
Figure 144
261 In about three months, you will be able to take more baby fish out of your nursery pond.
Transporting your baby fish
262 You must be very careful when you carry your baby fish from one place to another. Baby fish can be hurt easily.
263 When you take the baby fish out of your nursery pond using a seine net, do not carry them in the seine net. Carry them in a container such as a clay pot with a cover a bucket with a lid a plastic bag.
264 When you carry baby fish, you must be careful to use only clean water keep the fish out of the sun or cover the container with a wet cloth to keep it cool.
Figure 145
Figure 146
265 If you carry your baby fish in plastic bags, carry the bags in a box so that they will not break. Cover the box and the plastic bags with a wet cloth to keep them cool.
266 If you see that the baby fish are gasping for air, put some air into the water from time to time by splashing the water gently with your hand. Replace some of the old water by well aerated, new water.
Figure 147
Figure 148
Putting baby fish into your pond
267 When your big pond is full of water and you have fertilized it and the water has become green enough, you are ready to put in the baby fish.
268 You already know that if you use tilapia, you will need two baby fish that are 5 centimetres or longer for each square metre of pond.
269 Put the baby fish gently into your pond.
Figure 149
Summary
YOU HAVE LEARNED HOW TO PUT BABY FISH INTO EACH POND
You will need two tilapias per m² of pond area
Use only strong baby fish at least 5 cm long
Obtain baby fish from a government station or another farmer
You can easily produce your own baby tilapias:
* build a 10 x 10 m nursery pond near your other ponds
* fertilize it well to make the water turn green
* put mature tilapias in it, 20 males and 80 females
* fertilize once a week to keep the water green
* feed the big fish once a day (see Chapter 11)
* after three months start harvesting the biggest baby fish
* once a month take them out with a 1-cm mesh seine net
* drain the nursery pond completely once a year
* clean and repair it before starting again
Transport baby fish with care:
* use a clay pot, a bucket or a plastic bag
* keep the baby fish in clean water at all times keep the water cool, in the shade
* if the babies come to the water surface to gasp for air, change some of the water with new clean water and aerate the transport water
* on arrival, check how warm the pond water is; if it is much different from the transport water, replace half of this water with pond water and wait for half an hour
Gently put your strongest baby fish in the pond.
<section>b</section>
10. Taking care of your pond
270 You must take care of your pond every day when you take food to your fish.
271 Make sure the pond remains full of water.
272 Make sure the screens are in place so that your fish cannot get away.
273 Do not let weeds cover more than one quarter of the surface. If there are too many weeds, clean your pond.
273 Cut the weeds and grass on the banks of the pond.
274 Be sure the water is not leaking through the banks. If you find leaks repair them right away with good soil.
275 Get rid of birds, frogs, turtles, rats and snakes. They can hurt your fish.
276 Do not let large animals such as cows, buffalo, horses or donkeys graze on the banks of your pond. They are too heavy and may break the banks down.
Figure 150
277 But you may let smaller animals such as goats and sheep graze on the banks and keep them clean.
278 Do not use your pond, your pond water source or your water supply ditch for bathing or for washing clothes, dishes or cooking pots.
279 Do not plant big trees near your pond. If there are already big trees there, cut any branches that hang over the pond. The water in your pond may not turn green enough if your pond is in the shade.
Figure 151
Figure 152
Summary
YOU HAVE LEARNED HOW TO TAKE CARE OF YOUR POND
Every day check the water level and screens
Keep water weeds under control
Cut the grass on the banks regularly
Repair any water leaks immediately
Get rid of fish-eating animals
Keep cattle and other heavy animals away from the banks
Do not bathe or wash in your ponds
<section>c</section>
11. Taking care of your fish
Feeding your growing fish
Providing good water for your fish
280 Take very good care of your fish. Keep the water green and feed the fish regularly. While feeding, watch them carefully to see that they are healthy and swimming strongly.
Feeding your growing fish
281 You have already learned that the big fish in your pond will get much of their food from small plants and animals that grow in the green water.
282 To keep the water green, fertilize your pond each week. If you are using plant compost or plant material, keep the crib filled to the water line. If you are using animal compost or manure, see items 216 to 219.
283 To make your fish grow more quickly you must also feed them other kinds of food. You can feed them
* termites
* tender leaves and waste of banana and cassava
* grain mill sweepings
* rice bran
* beer wastes
* cottonseed or groundnut cake
* slaughterhouse wastes
* animal wastes
* kitchen wastes
* spoiled fruit and vegetables
* left-over food
* chopped grass.
284 You should feed your fish at least once a day. But your fish will grow better if you feed them more often.
285 Always try to feed your fish at the same time every day, preferably early in the morning and late in the afternoon, when it is cooler.
Figure 153
Figure 154
286 The bigger your fish grow, the more food they will need.
287 It is not easy to know exactly how much food to feed your fish. You must watch them when they eat to learn how much food they need.
288 Feed your fish in the shallow part of the pond so that you can see them eat.
289 If you see that the fish do not eat all of their food, give them a little less the next day.
290 If you see that the fish eat all of their food quickly, give them a little more the next day.
291 If you feed your fish at the same place every day, you will see whether the fish are eating well. If you give them too much, the food that is not eaten will stay on the bottom.
292 Too much uneaten food on the bottom of the pond will make the water become bad. Do not overfeed your fish.
293 For example, if you grow tilapia and feed them with rice or wheat bran, give the following quantity daily for each 100 square metres of pond:
* first month, 360 grams
* second month, 480 grams
* third month, 720 grams
* fourth month, 960 grams
* fifth month, 1 200 grams
* sixth month, 1 440 grams.
294 Measure first how much bran a given container such as a milk powder tin can hold, for example 240 grams. From this, determine how many containers of food should be distributed daily in each pond.
295 To make it easier to see if your fish are eating well, mark several places in your pond to feed them.
296 Mark each place by making a square or a ring of light wood or bamboo. Drive a pole into the pond bottom and attach the square or ring, as shown in the drawing.
297 When you feed the fish, put the food inside the square or ring. You may be able to see any uneaten food on the bottom under the square or ring. If you cannot see the bottom, feel with your hands to find any uneaten food that may be there.
Figure 155
Figure 156
Providing good water for your fish
298 If you find any dead fish floating in your pond, take them out right away. Change some of the water in your pond.
299 To change some of the water in the pond, open the inlet and let in some new clean water. The old water will drain out of the pond at the overflow. Do this for 2 or 3 hours each day for several days until you see that your fish are well.
300 If the weather is too hot, if you feed your fish too much or if you use too much fertilizer, there may be too little oxygen in the water for your fish to breathe.
301 If you see your fish coming to the surface gasping for air, give them less food and do not use any fertilizer for several weeks.
Figure 157
Figure 158
302 Put more oxygen into the water of your pond by changing some of the water for several days, as you did in item 299.
303 When you let new water into the pond, let it in quickly so that it will come with a splash and bring more air into the water.
304 If you see any other things wrong with your fish that you do not understand, stop feeding them and stop using fertilizer. Then change some of the water in your pond every day for several days, as you did in item 299.
305 After several days if your fish are still not well, if they are not eating well, are gasping for air or are not swimming strongly, ask your extension agent or your fish culture station for help.
Figure 159
Summary
YOU HAVE LEARNED HOW TO TAKE CARE OF YOUR GROWING FISH
Fertilize the water once a week to keep it green:
* if you use compost, add about 10 kg per 100 m²
* if you use animal manure, add per 100 m² one of the following:
* 2 to 3 kg of chicken droppings
* 8 to 10 kg of pig manure
* 10 to 15 kg of cow manure
* if you use plant wastes only, keep the fertilizing crib full
* pack this material tightly in each crib
Feed your fish once a day with local by-products and wastes:
* feed early in the morning or late in the afternoon, when it is cool
* it is best to do it at the same time each day feed at the same place and mark it
* regularly check for left-over food and adjust food ration accordingly
Check that your fish keep healthy:
* they should swim strongly in mid-water
* they should eat actively when you feed them if they don't eat well, and especially
* if they stay at the water surface gasping for air
* quickly add some new water to the pond
* stop fertilizing for a week
* stop feeding for a few days until your fish look healthy again
<section>d</section>
12. Harvesting your pond
Harvesting without draining the water
Harvesting by draining part of the water
Harvesting by draining all of the water
Harvesting fish when you have a monk
Harvesting many fish
What to do with your baby fish
306 Do not take any fish out of your pond during the first five months. After five months you may catch a few big fish each week to eat with your family.
307 When most of the fish are big enough it is time to harvest all of them. Usually, they will be big enough to harvest in about six months.
308 Harvest the fish early in the morning when it is cool.
309 Have some watertight containers ready to store live fish.
310 The easiest way to harvest is by draining the water out of the pond.
Figure 160
311 But there are several ways to harvest your fish. You can harvest them
* without draining the water
* by draining part of the water
* by draining all of the water.
312 Here are some things that you should know about these different ways of harvesting your fish.
Harvesting without draining the water
313 If you do not have enough water to fill your pond again and you want to harvest only part of your fish, you can use a seine net to gather them without draining the water.
314 A seine net with a mesh of 3 to 3.5 centimetres will catch the biggest fish and allow the small fish to escape through the net.
Figure 161
315 You will need several people to harvest with a seine net. Perhaps your family can help you. Perhaps you can ask your neighbours for help, and later help them with their work or give them some fish to pay them for their help.
316 Start at the deep end of the pond and pull the seine net slowly toward the shallow end. The drawing shows you how.
317 You can also use a cast net or a lift net to harvest some of the fish from your pond without draining the water.
Figure 162
Figure 163
Figure 164
318 With a cast net or a lift net, it is easier to catch the fish while they are eating and they are all together. Keep the biggest fish and put the smaller fish back into the pond.
Harvesting by draining part of the water
319 If you have only enough water to fill part of your pond, do not drain out all of the water. Drain only part of it.
320 Pull the wood plug closing the outlet, or if you are using a siphon put the siphon in place, and begin to let the water out.
321 Let half the water flow out through the outlet or siphon. Then put the plug back in the outlet or remove the siphon.
322 Now you can begin to harvest your fish with a seine net. Do it the same way as you did in item 316. If you have a seine net with a mesh size of less than 1 centimetre, you will be able to catch all of your fish.
323 Take all the big fish and put the small fish back. If you have too many baby fish, items 340 to 351 will tell you what to do with them.
324 When you are finished harvesting, let water flow back into the pond until it reaches the level of the overflow.
Figure 165
Harvesting by draining all of the water
325 If you have enough good water to fill the pond again, it is best to drain all of the water. Then you will be sure to catch all of the fish and you can clean the bottom of your pond.
326 While the pond is being drained, use baskets or hand-nets to take the fish out of the water. After all of the water has been drained from the pond, you may still find small pools here and there on the bottom. Be careful to gather all of the fish in the pools.
Harvesting fish when you have a monk
Harvesting inside the pond
Harvesting outside the pond
327 If you have built a monk for the outlet of any of your ponds (see items 113 to 119), you can harvest your fish in two ways: You can harvest inside your pond just in front of the monk. You can harvest outside your pond after the fish have passed through the monk and the outlet pipe.
Figure 166
Harvesting inside the pond
328 To harvest your fish inside the pond, remove the wooden boards from the monk one row at a time. Each time you remove a row of boards from the monk, be sure to put the screen back on top to keep your fish from getting out.
329 When the water is partly drained from your pond, harvest part of the fish from the water just in front of the monk.
330 When you are ready to harvest the rest of your fish, continue to take out the boards one by one. However, put back the screen each time until the pond is empty. When all of the water is out, you can harvest the remaining fish. First collect the baby fish and then collect the big fish.
Note: Muddy water is bad for baby fish. If you must walk in the water to collect the baby fish, let a little clean water flow through the pond to keep it from getting too muddy.
Figure 167
Harvesting outside the pond
331 When you have a monk it is sometimes easier to harvest outside the pond, using a screened wooden box to collect the fish after they have passed through the monk.
332 The drawings below show you how to build a harvesting box, using strips of wood and screen. They also show how big it should be.
Figure 168
Figure 169
333 When you are ready to harvest your fish, put the harvesting box in the outlet ditch outside your pond at the end of the pipe from the monk. Make sure that the pipe is well inside the harvesting box so that the fish will not get out.
334 Now, take the screen out of your monk and remove the wooden boards one row at a time. The water will begin to flow out of your pond.
335 Do not put back the screen. When the level of the water in your pond is low enough, the fish will begin to pass over the boards and through the monk to the harvesting box. When they are in the box, you can collect them easily.
Figure 170
Harvesting many fish
336 With bigger ponds and more ponds, you will harvest many more fish. You must be sure, however, that you will be able to use, sell or preserve all of the fish that you harvest.
337 If you will have too many fish to use, sell or preserve if you harvest all of them at the same time, harvest them at different times. You can harvest just a few of your fish on two or three different occasions.
338 You can do this by draining part of the water from your pond and collecting only some of the fish on the first day you harvest. When you have used, sold or preserved these fish, you can harvest more of them.
339 When you are ready to harvest the last of the fish, drain all of the water from the pond and harvest the remaining fish. First collect the baby fish for your nursery pond and then collect the big fish.
Figure 171
What to do with your baby fish
340 When you harvest your pond, you may also catch baby fish that are too small to eat or to be sold at the market.
341 If you have not built a nursery pond, you may need some of these baby fish to put back into the big pond you are harvesting. You may also be able to sell some to another fish farmer. But you must take good care of the baby fish until you are ready to use them or sell them.
Figure 172
Figure 173
342 If you have another pond that is full of water, you can put these baby fish in a pen of split bamboo or net in the corner of the other pond. You can also keep these baby fish in a net pen or in a fish cage (see items 368 to 375 and 435 to 439).
343 If you do not have another pond, you should keep the baby fish alive in a special small pond nearby until you are ready to use them.
344 The small pond can be a simple hole in the ground about 3 by 3 metres and about 40 centimetres deep. You should have it ready before you begin to harvest.
Figure 174
345 Your baby fish will stay alive longer if they are out of the sun. Build the small pond in the shade under a tree or put a shelter over it. You can build a simple shelter using bamboo or wood.
346 Your baby fish will stay alive longer if they have fresh water. Build the small pond with an overflow and put the small pond near the ditch that brings water to your big pond. That way you can have fresh water running through your small pond.
347 You can also let fresh water into your small pond with a small ditch or a siphon.
348 Your baby fish will stay alive longer if you feed them a little food each day. Feed your baby fish termites or finely ground rice bran, cottonseed cake or groundnut cake when they are in the small pond.
Figure 175
Figure 176
349 If you keep your baby fish in a small pond out of the sun in fresh water and if you feed them each day, they will stay alive for about five days. This is enough time to dry and clean and repair the bottom of your big pond, to fill it with water and begin to fertilize it and to put the baby fish back into your big pond.
350 If you have built your own nursery pond, you will not need these baby fish (see items 231 to 252).
351 If you have more baby fish than you can use or sell, you can dry them in the sun. After you have dried the baby fish, grind or pound them and mix them with crushed cottonseed or groundnut cake or with rice bran. You can use this mixture as feed for your big fish, your poultry or your pigs. You can also use the baby fish to fertilize your farm garden.
Figure 177
Summary
YOU HAVE LEARNED HOW TO HARVEST YOUR FISH
After 5 months, start taking out a few big fish each week
After 6 months, take more and more fish until they are completely harvested
Harvest only what can be eaten or sold within one day
Store harvested baby fish in a cage, a net or a small pond
Sell the fish or use them yourself as soon as possible
Choose your method of harvesting according to how much water is available and how many fish you want to take out:
* don't drain any water; use a net (3-3.5 cm mesh for big fish)
* drain part of the water and use a net
* drain all the water; catch all the fish and clean pond bottom
* if you use a monk, you may harvest inside the pond near the monk or outside if you have a harvesting box
<section>e</section>
13. Beginning again
352 If you have drained all the water from your pond, you can clean the bottom of the pond.
353 But do not let your pond bottom become too dry. If the bottom of your pond becomes too dry, it may crack and will not hold water well when you are ready to fill the pond with water again.
354 Repair the banks and cut the weeds and grass on the banks around the pond.
355 If there are any water leaks in the banks or around the inlet, outlet or overflow, stop them by packing them with good clay soil.
Figure 178
356 When you are finished, let water into the pond and fertilize the water with animal compost, plant compost, animal manure or plant material, as you did before.
357 When the pond is green again, stock it again with baby fish. Use only healthy fish that are 5 centimetres or longer. Grow them as you have done before.
Figure 179
Figure 180
<section>f</section>
14. Improving farm management
Growing fish all year round
Growing only male fish
Growing fish all year round
358 If you have built several ponds, you can grow fish all year round.
359 If you put baby fish in different ponds at different times, you will harvest them at different times. This way, you will not harvest too many fish at the same time and you can harvest fish all year round.
361 If you need help, your extension agent or fishery officer will be able to give you good advice on when to put in the baby fish and when to harvest them.
Figure 181
Figure 182
Growing only male fish
362 You can further improve your fish farming by growing only male tilapia in your ponds. Male tilapia grow faster than females because all their food is used for growth only.
363 If you decide to grow male fish only, use fish at least 12 centimetres long because they are already big enough to sex. A male fish of this length can reach 200 to 250 grams within six months.
364 If you have a nursery pond, you can get male fish from it. The drawing in item 239 shows you the difference between male and female tilapia.
365 If you do not have a nursery pond, you may be able to buy male fish from another fish farmer or from a fish culture station.
366 By now you have learned how to build a fish pond and how to manage it well to produce baby fish and food fish for your family and for the market.
367 But you can also produce such fish in other ways. In the next sections, you will learn how to do this in fish pens and cages.
Figure 183
Summary
YOU HAVE LEARNED HOW TO IMPROVE THE MANAGEMENT OF YOUR FISH FARM
Produce big fish all year round:
* build at least three ponds
* stock them with baby fish at different times
* harvest them at regular intervals throughout the year
Produce more fish and bigger fish:
* sex your baby fish when they are at least 12 cm long and stock only the males in your ponds
* they should weigh 200 to 250 grams each after 6 months
<section>g</section>
15. Producing fish in pens
Locating fish pens
How large should your pen be?
Building a pen
Putting baby fish into your pen
Feeding fish in pens
Taking care of your fish in a pen
Taking care of your fish pen
Harvesting fish in pens
Starting again
Locating fish pens
368 You can build a pen in the shallow water of a stream, a river, a lake or a reservoir.
Figure 184
369 The water in a pen should be no more than 1.5 metres in the deepest part.
370 You must also be sure that the water in a pen will never be less than 1 metre even during the dry season.
371 A pen should be put in a place where the flow of water is gentle, not fast.
372 It should be protected from wind so that the surface of the water will be calm, not rough.
373 Choose a place in the stream or lake where the bottom is firm. It is not easy to build a pen if the bottom is too soft, and where the water may become muddy when you have to work in the pen.
Figure 185
374 Try to find a place where you can build a pen using very few materials, such as the corner of a reservoir or an angle in a stream.
Figure 186
How large should your pen be?
375 A pen can be small or large depending on how many fish you want to raise.
376 However, when you first begin, start by building a small pen. You will need fewer materials, and it will be easier to take care of.
377 A good size pen to begin with is 10 by 10 metres This is 100 square metres Later, when you have learned more, you can build bigger ones.
Figure 187
Building a pen
378 A pen is closed by a fence. You start to build this by driving in a row of posts. Posts can be made of either bamboo or wood.
379 If you are using wood, choose wood that does not rot quickly when it is in the water.
380 The openings in the material that you use to fence in a pen must be small enough to keep the smaller fish from getting out.
Figure 188
381 Be sure to use material with openings of 1.5 by 1.5 centimetres. This is the right size to keep in the smaller fish and also to let fresh water flow through.
382 Mark the place where you will put the fence using wooden stakes or poles and a piece of heavy line.
Figure 189
Figure 190
383 Check the bottom along the line with a long pole to see how far you will have to drive in the posts so that they will stand firmly.
Figure 191
Figure 192
384 Measure the depth of the water every 2 metres along the line.
385 All posts must reach at least 50 centimetres above the highest water level. So the length of each post must equal the depth of the water, plus the depth that each post must be driven into the bottom, plus 50 centimetres for the segment above the water.
Figure 193
Figure 194
386 Now you can cut all the posts to the proper length.
387 If you use woven material made from split bamboo, for example, or plastic mesh, drive in the posts 1 metre apart.
388 If you use a fishing net drive in the posts 2 metres apart.
Figure 195
Figure 196
389 If you use fishing net for the fence tie the edge-line of the net to the top of the posts using strong cord.
390 If you use woven material for the fence, tie it to the posts with strong cord. You can also use strong vines instead.
Figure 197
Figure 198
391 If you use plastic mesh for the fence, fasten it to the post with wire.
392 When the fence material is well fastened to the posts, you are ready to bury the material in the pen bottom.
393 You can bury fence material by pushing it into the pen bottom and putting a row of stones on either side to keep it in place.
Figure 199
Figure 200
394 You can also bury fence material by fastening it to straight poles and pushing the poles into the pen bottom with wooden stakes to keep it in place.
395 When your pen is finished, cut the weeds and grass on the banks, clean out most of the plants in the water and take away any rubbish that you find.
396 Then remove the unwanted fish, crabs or other water life in the pen. You can do this using a fine-mesh net.
Figure 201
Figure 202
397 Now you are ready to stock your pen with baby fish.
Putting baby fish into your pen
398 If you are raising Tilapia nilotica you will need to put in two baby fish for each square metre of pen. So, if you have built a small pen of 100 square metres you will need 200 baby fish.
399 The baby fish that you use should be at least 8 to 10 centimetres long or weigh about 15 to 20 grams each.
Note: If you need any help or want to raise a different kind of fish, your extension agent or fishery officer will be able to give you good advice.
400 Just before you put the baby fish in your pen, be sure that the water they are in is not hotter or colder than the water in the pen.
Figure 203
401 If the water the fish are in is hotter or colder, slowly add water from the pen to the water with the fish until it reaches the same temperature.
Feeding fish in pens
402 As you know, with a pond you fertilize the water. You add compost, animal manure or plant materials so that there will be natural food for the fish to eat.
403 In addition, fish in ponds must be given other kinds of food each day to make them grow quickly.
404 With well-fertilized water and enough additional food, the fish can swim about and find food anywhere in the pond.
405 However, with a pen built in a stream, lake or reservoir, there may be little natural food and the movement of water may carry the food that you give the fish outside the pen where the fish cannot get it.
Figure 204
406 Be sure to feed your fish well. You may use cottonseed or groundout cakes, wheat or rice bran, mill sweepings or beer wastes.
407 Follow the recommendations given for ponds (see items 284 to 297):
* feed your fish at least once a day
* feed them at about the same time of the day
* feed them always at the same place
* watch them carefully and adjust their food ration to the way they feed
* avoid overfeeding.
Taking care of your fish in a pen
408 You must always watch your fish to see that they are healthy and swimming strongly.
409 If the fish in your pen are not well, they will stop eating.
410 If this happens, stop feeding your fish for a day or two.
Figure 205
411 When you begin to feed them again, at first give them small amounts of food and then slowly more and more. When your fish begin to eat as before you will know that they are well again.
412 If you find any dead fish floating in the pen, take them out right away.
413 Then stop feeding your fish and watch them very carefully during the next days.
414 If no more fish die you can begin to feed them after a day or two.
415 If fish continue to die take them out as soon as you can and ask your extension agent or fishery officer for help.
Taking care of your fish pen
416 A pen can be easily damaged. If this happens your fish may get out.
417 Check the pen fence every day to be sure that there are no holes. At the same time, you should check that the fence is well buried in the pen bottom.
Figure 206
418 If you find any places where your fish can get out, repair them right away.
419 In addition, you must be sure that the openings in the fence are free of dirt and plants so that fresh water can flow into the pen.
420 You can clean the fence of a pen using a brush or a broom. However, do it very gently so that you do not damage the fence material.
Figure 207
Figure 208
Harvesting fish in pens
421 If you have used baby fish 8 to 10 centimetres long and have fed them well, they will be ready for harvesting in about six to seven months. At this time the fish will weigh 100 to 150 grams each.
422 If you want to harvest only some of your fish you can use a seine net with a large mesh.
423 A seine net with a mesh size of 3 to 3.5 centimetres will catch only the biggest fish and allow the medium and smaller fish to escape.
424 To harvest with a seine net you will need several people. Start at the deep end of the pen and pull the seine net slowly toward the shallow end. The drawing below shows you how.
Figure 209
Figure 210
425 If you want to harvest only part of your fish, you can also use a cast net or a lift net.
426 If you use a cast net or lift you will catch both big and small fish. Keep the fish that you want and put the others back in the pen.
Figure 211
Figure 212
427 With a cast net or a lift net it is easier to catch the fish while they are eating and they are all together. So, feed them some food first.
428 If you want to harvest all of the fish you can use a seine net with a fine mesh of less than 1 centimetre.
Note: If you do not need all of the fish, harvest only what you need and leave the rest in the pen. Fish can be left in a pen as long as you continue to feed them.
Figure 213
Figure 214
Starting again
429 After you have harvested, clean and repair your pen as quickly as you can so that you can begin again. You must cut the weeds and grass on the banks clear out most of the plants in the water and take away all rubbish clean and repair the fence and make sure that it is still buried in the pen bottom remove unwanted fish, crabs and any other water life using a fine-mesh net.
430 If you have harvested using a large-mesh seine net there will be many baby fish left in your pen.
431 In this case to begin again you will not need to put in more baby fish. However, you will have to be careful not to let the baby fish escape when you clean and repair the pen.
432 If you have harvested using a fine-mesh seine net you will have caught all of the baby fish.
433 You can hold the baby fish that you caught in a smaller pond or in a cage for small fish until you have finished cleaning and repairing the pen.
Note: The faster you can do all of these things, the sooner you will be able to raise another crop of fish.
434 When you are ready, put in two baby fish 8 to 10 centimetres long for each square metre of pen. However, be sure to choose your biggest and best baby fish to put back into your pen.
Figure 215 - CLEANING AND REPAIRING YOUR PEN
Summary
YOU HAVE LEARNED HOW TO PRODUCE FISH IN PENS
To locate your fish pens best, look for
* good quality water in a stream, river, lake or reservoir
* shallow water, from 1.5 to 1 m deep
* gentle water flow
* protection from strong winds
* a firm bottom
* an area where you can build the shortest fence possible
To begin, prefer a small pen such as 10 x 10 m
Build your pen with cheap, locally available materials:
* drive a row of posts into the bottom, at l to 2 m intervals
* keep their heads 50 cm above the highest water level
* secure fencing material to the posts
* use woven material or netting with 1.5 cm openings
* bury its lower edge well into the bottom sediments
* fix it there with wooden clamps or stones
Prepare your pen properly:
* remove aquatic plants and debris
* fish out wild fish as much as possible
Obtain baby fish and put them in your pen:
* if you use tilapias, you will need two baby fish per m²
* prefer strong baby fish, 8 to 10 cm long, 15 to 20 9 each
Feed your fish well with local by-products and wastes:
* feed once a day at about the same time and place
* regularly check for left-overs and adjust the food ration accordingly
Harvest the fish after 6 to 7 months:
* you can use a seine, a cast net or a lift net
* to harvest only part of the big fish, use large-mesh nets
* to harvest all the fish, use a small-mesh seine repeatedly
Keep the baby fish alive as you have learned earlier
Prepare your pen for another production season
Select the strongest baby fish and begin again
<section>h</section>
16. Producing fish in cages
Locating fish cages
Building a cage
Building a simple post cage
Building a simple floating cage
Building a better floating cage
Putting baby fish in the cage
Feeding fish in cages
Taking care of your fish in a cage
Taking care of the cage
Harvesting fish in cages
Starting again
Locating fish cages
435 You can build a cage and put it in a stream, a river, a lake or a reservoir. You can also put it in a pond and it will help you produce more fish there.
Figure 216
436 The water should be deep enough so that when the cage is in place it will be at least 50 centimetres from the bottom.
437 A cage should be in a place where the flow of water is gentle and not fast. In addition, it should be protected from the wind.
Building a cage
438 A cage can be of any shape. It can be round, square or long.
Figure 217
Figure 218
439 A cage can be small or large depending on the number of fish that you want to raise. However, when you first begin, start by building a small cage. You will need fewer materials and it will be easier to take care of.
440 You can begin with a cage that has about 1 cubic metre (1 metre by 1 metre by 1 metre of space for the fish. Later, when you have learned more, you can build bigger ones.
441 The best material to cover a cage is ordinary fish netting. If you cannot get fish netting, you can use either plastic mesh or woven material made from split bamboo or wooden strips.
442 The openings in the material that you use to cover a cage must be small enough to keep the smaller fish from getting out.
443 However, if the openings are too small they may become filled with dirt.
Figure 219
444 Material with openings of 1.5 by 1.5 centimetres is suitable to keep in the smaller fish and also to let fresh water through.
445 You can build a simple cage by driving four or more posts into the bottom under the water and hanging a fish net inside.
Figure 220
Figure 221
446 You can also build a simple cage by putting a square float on the water and hanging a piece of fish net inside.
447 If you want a better floating cage, you can build a frame with floats and close it with fish net, woven material or plastic mesh.
448 You can use either bamboo or wood for the posts, floats or frame. However, if you are using wood, choose a kind that does not rot quickly when it is in the water.
Building a simple post cage
449 You can build a simple post cage using bamboo or wooden posts and fishing net.
Figure 222
Figure 223
450 Find a place where the water is at least 1.5 metres deep even during the dry season.
451 Drive four posts into the bottom to form a square of 1.25 by 1.25 metres The top of the posts should reach about 50 centimetres above the water.
Figure 224
Figure 225
452 Tie a rope around the top of the posts to hold the fish net. The rope and the net should be at least 25 centimetres above the water.
453 Hang a piece of fish net over the rope inside the posts and make sure that it is at least 1 metre under the water at the deepest part.
454 Tie the net to the rope all the way around the cage using strong cord.
Figure 226
Figure 227
Building a simple floating cage
455 You can build a simple floating cage using any wood that floats well, such as bamboo. It can be covered with fishing net, woven material or plastic mesh.
456 Tie four pieces of wood together using strong cord or rope to form a float 1 metre square.
457 Hang the float about 1.5 metres above the ground so you can work on it easily.
Figure 228
Figure 229
458 Cut one long piece of material for the sides of the cage and one square piece of material for the bottom.
459 Depending on the material that you are going to use, tie or wire the long side piece around the outside of the cage.
460 Then tie or wire the square bottom piece to the lower edges of the sides in the same way.
Figure 230
Figure 231
461 If you have used fishing net or woven material, tie a length of rope to the bottom of each corner to be used to attach weights when the cage is in the water.
462 Carefully put the cage into the water.
Figure 232
Figure 233
463 Fix the cage firmly in place. Tie a piece of rope to one corner of the float and anchor the other end to a stake in the bottom.
464 Now, if you have used fish net or woven material, tie a weight to the rope at each corner; the weight should not touch the bottom.
Figure 234
Figure 235
Building a better floating cage
465 You can build a better floating cage by making a light frame of bamboo or straight pieces of wood cut from trees and covering it with either fishing net or plastic mesh.
466 Tie four pieces of wood together using strong cord or rope to make one side of the frame; it should be about 1 by 1.25 metres
467 Now make another side of the frame the same as the first.
Figure 236
Figure 237
468 Using four more pieces of wood, tie the two sides together 1 metre apart as shown below.
469 Cut one long piece of material for the sides of the cage and one square piece of material for the bottom.
Figure 238
Figure 239
470 Depending on the material that you are going to use, tie or wire the long side piece around the outside of the cage.
471 Then turn the cage on its side and tie on the bottom piece in the same way.
Figure 240
Figure 241
472 For floats you can use bamboo, banana stalks, wooden blocks or, if you can get them, plastic containers, pieces of polystyrene foam or used tyre inner tubes.
473 Tie on the floats 25 centimetres below the top of the cage.
Figure 242
Figure 243
Figure 244
Figure 245
Figure 246
474 Carefully put the cane into the water.
475 Make sure that there is a depth of at least 50 centimetres of water below the cage, and tie the cage firmly in place.
476 To do this, tie a piece of rope to one corner of the float and anchor the other end to a stake in the bottom.
477 The cage should float so that 25 centimetres of it is above the water and 1 metre of it is below the water.
Note: If the cage does not float 25 centimetres above the water, tie on more floats until it does.
Figure 247
Figure 248
478 You can build an even better floating cage like the one shown below using pieces of squared, rough-cut wood.
479 This kind of cage can also be built with a door that can be locked and with a special opening for feeding the fish.
480 A locked door makes it more difficult for people to steal your fish; however, you may need more floats for a cage with a heavy wooden door.
Figure 249
Putting baby fish in the cage
481 When your cage is ready in the water you can put baby fish in it.
482 If you are raising Tilapia nilotica you will need to put in 150 to 200 baby fish for each cubic metre of cage.
Figure 250
Figure 251
483 After the fish are in you can cover the cage with a fishing net. This will protect your fish from fish-eating birds. To do this, stretch a piece of net over the top of the cage and tie it to the top rope.
484 When you feed the fish do not remove the cover; however, you may have to open part of the cover from time to time to take out any dead fish.
Feeding fish in cages
485 In a cage, there is usually very little natural food available to the fish, especially if you put the cage in a stream, lake or reservoir.
486 Movement of water may also carry the food you give to the fish out of the cage before the fish can eat it all.
487 Feeding your fish well becomes very important when raising fish in cages.
Figure 252
488 Use rich food, for example cottonseed or groundnut cake and wheat or rice bran, mixed with fresh slaughterhouse wastes such as blood and rumen contents.
489 Mix dry food with some water to make it stick together in the form of a moist mash.
490 It is not easy to know exactly how much to feed your fish. You must watch them carefully to learn how much food they need.
491 Put the food for your fish near the centre of the cage so that they can eat it before it floats away through the holes in the sides.
492 Put in the food little by little so that you can watch the fish and see that they are eating.
493 If you see that the fish do not eat all of their food, give them a little less.
Figure 253
494 If you see that the fish eat all of their food quickly, give them a little more.
495 Remember that if you give your fish too much food it will collect on the bottom and make the water around the cage bad.
496 So, check under the cage. If you see too much uneaten food, you will know that you are feeding the fish too much. When this happens, move the cage to another place.
497 Follow the recommendations given earlier for ponds and pens: feed your fish at least once a day feed them at about the same time of the day, preferably early in the morning or late in the afternoon.
Taking care of your fish in a cage
498 You must always watch the fish to see that they are healthy and swimming strongly.
499 If the fish in your cage are not well, they will stop eating.
500 If this happens, stop feeding your fish for a day or two.
Figure 254
501 When you begin to feed them again, at first give them small amounts of food and then slowly more and more. When your fish begin to eat as before, you will know that they are well again.
502 If you find any dead fish floating in your cage, take them out right away.
503 Then, stop feeding your fish and watch them carefully for the next few days.
504 If no more fish die, you can begin to feed them after a day or two.
505 If fish continue to die, take them out as soon as you can and ask your extension agent or fishery officer for help.
Figure 255
Taking care of the cage
506 A cage can easily be damaged. If this happens you may lose fish. It is very important to check the cage every day to be sure that there are no holes where your fish can get out.
507 If you find any places where the fish can get out repair them right away.
508 In addition, you must be sure that the openings in the cage material remain free of dirt and plants so that fresh water can flow into the cage.
509 You can clean the material of a cage using a brush or a broom. However, do it very gently so that you do not damage the cage material.
Figure 256
510 Also, do not forget to check for uneaten food on the bottom under the cage from time to time.
511 If you have put your cage on posts in the water, make sure that the posts are firmly in place so that the cage cannot float away.
Figure 257
Figure 258
512 If you have a floating cage, make sure that the floats are tied firmly to the cage and that the cage is firmly tied in place so that it cannot float away.
Harvesting fish in cages
513 If you have used baby fish 8 to 10 centimetres long or weighing about 15 to 20 grams and have fed them well, they will be ready for harvesting in about five months. At this time the fish will weigh 100 to 150 grams each.
514 If you want to harvest only some of your fish, use a small hand-net and collect what you want without moving the cage.
Figure 259
Figure 260
515 If you want to harvest all of your fish and your cage is small enough, pull it into shallow water and begin to collect the fish using a small hand-net.
Figure 261
Figure 262
516 When you have collected most of the fish, you can lift the cage out of the water and collect the rest.
517 If your cage is too big to lift out of the water, pull it into shallow water as far as you can and collect the remaining fish.
Note: If you do not need all of your fish, harvest only what you need and leave the rest in the cage. Fish can be left in a cage as long as you continue to feed them.
Figure 263
Figure 264
Starting again
518 After you have harvested your fish, clean and repair your cage as quickly as you can so that you can begin again.
519 You can hold the baby fish that you have caught in a small pen or in another cage for small fish until you have finished the cleaning and repairing.
520 When you are ready to begin again, put in 150 to 200 baby fish 8 to 10 centimetres long for each cubic metre of cage. However, be sure to choose the biggest and best baby fish to put back in your cage.
Figure 265
Summary
YOU HAVE LEARNED HOW TO PRODUCE FISH IN CAGES
To locate your fish cages best, look for
* good water in a stream, river, lake, reservoir or pond
* deeper water: there should be at least 50 cm water below the cage
* gentle flow
* protection from strong winds
To begin, prefer small cages such as 1 x 1 x 1.2 m
Build simple cages with locally available materials:
* make post cages with 4 wooden posts and fencing material
* make simple cages hanging from a floating frame
* make better floating cages suspended from floats
* use woven material or netting with 1.5 cm openings
* anchor your floating cages securely
Stock your cages with 8 to 10 cm fish, 15 to 20 g each
To produce tilapias, stock each cage with 150 to 200 fish per m³
Feed your fish well:
* feed at least once a day, at the same time
* provide rich food in the form of a moist mash
* check for uneaten food under the cages and adjust food ration accordingly
Maintain your cages in perfect condition:
* keep the openings clear to maintain good water flow
* watch for holes and repair promptly
Harvest your fish after 6 to 7 months:
* use a hand-net to take out part of the fish
* bring the floating cage to shallow water to harvest them all
<section>i</section>
17. Your farm and your fish ponds
521 Today, many farmers have learned that they can manage their fish ponds together with their farm animals, gardens and fields so that they will all grow better and produce more.
522 Fish, animals and plants live and grow in different ways and produce different things that can help all of them to live and grow better.
523 You have already learned how to put animal manure into your ponds so that the water will be rich in the natural foods that your fish need to eat. In this way, the animals help the fish to live and grow better.
524 Here are some other ways to manage your farm animals, gardens and fields so that they will help each other to grow better and produce more.
525 You can raise ducks in your fish ponds so that much of their manure will go into the water. This will help your fish to grow. At the same time, the ducks will feed on the plants that grow in your ponds and help to keep your ponds free of plants, weeds and snails.
Figure 266
526 You can raise chickens or pigs near your ponds. If you build chicken houses and pig pens on the banks or over the ponds, you can sweep the manure into the ponds. Your ponds will supply water for the animals and the animals will supply fertilizer to help keep the water in your ponds rich.
Note: If you have built your ponds side by side, you can build a chicken house or pig pen on top of the bank between two ponds and sweep the manure into both ponds.
Figure 267
Figure 268
527 Begin with either four to five ducks, five to eight chickens or one to two pigs for each 100 square metres of pond. Later you may be able to keep even more.
528 You can plant vegetables on the banks of your ponds. You can plant such things as tomatoes, beans, soybeans, groundnuts or maize.
529 You can also have a garden nearby. This way, you can use the water from your ponds to water your vegetables.
530 When you drain the water from your ponds to harvest the fish, you will find a layer of soft mud on the bottom. This soft mud is a very good fertilizer to put on your garden or fields, or on your pond banks if you are growing vegetables there.
531 Spoiled vegetables or vegetable wastes such as plant leaves and stalks can be fed to your chickens, ducks or pigs or they can be put into your ponds for your fish to eat or made into compost to help keep the water green and rich.
Figure 269
532 So, you can see that with very little extra work you can manage your fish, ducks, chickens, pigs, farm fields and garden in such a way that they will help each other to produce more.
Figure 270
Summary
YOU HAVE LEARNED HOW TO MAKE YOUR FARM AND YOUR PONDS WORK TOGETHER
Raise your ducks, chickens and pigs near your ponds, and each day sweep some manure in the water to keep it green
* be careful not to put too much manure in your ponds
* per 100 m² of water use at most the manure of
* 4 to 5 ducks or
* 5 to 8 chickens or
* 1 to 2 pigs
It will be easier to water your garden if it is close to a pond
You can also raise vegetables on the banks of your ponds
You can use mud from the pond bottom to fertilize your gardens
Vegetable wastes make good compost
Vegetable wastes can also be fed to your fish and other animals
<section>j</section>
18. Keeping you and your family healthy
533 The following are some very important things that you should know to keep you and your family healthy.
534 A certain kind of mosquito and some kinds of freshwater snails carry diseases that can make you very sick.
535 If the plants or weeds in your ponds and pens or on the banks become too thick, snails and mosquitoes can live and grow very easily.
Figure 271
536 From time to time, clean out the plants in your ponds and pens and cut the weeds and grass on the banks. Do not let the weeds and grass on the banks hang into the water so that your fish will not eat the mosquitoes and the snails.
537 Never use one of your ponds or pens as a toilet, or you and your family may become sick.
Figure 272
Figure 273
538 If you have a latrine, use it. However, a latrine should be at least 10 metres away from any of your ponds or pens and from your water supply.
539 If you have to relieve yourself while you are working near your ponds or pens, near the stream that supplies your water or near your supply or inlet ditches, first walk at least 10 metres away.
Figure 274
Figure 275
540 Never relieve yourself on or near your compost pile. Use your latrine, or relieve yourself at least 10 metres away.
541 If you are careful about all of these things, it will help to keep you and your family from getting sick.
Figure 276
Summary
YOU HAVE LEARNED HOW TO AVOID SOME DISEASES FOR YOU AND YOUR FAMILY
Control snails and mosquitoes in your ponds and pens:
* keep the banks clean, cutting the grass regularly
* remove weeds, especially those growing above water level
Keep ponds clean from human wastes:
* never use ponds or pens as a toilet
* walk at least 10 m away to relieve yourself
* place latrine at least 10 m away from any water or compost pile
* teach this to all your family and neighbours
<section>k</section>
Test your knowledge
Locating your fish farm
Bringing water to your farm
Building fish ponds
Bringing water to each pond
Draining water from the pond
Preparing the pond to receive fish
Putting baby fish in
Taking care of ponds and fish
Harvesting fish
Improving management
Producing fish in pens
Producing fish in cages
Bringing farm and ponds closer together
Avoiding diseases in your family
Attention: whenever you are given choices, check only the good answers with an X.
Locating your fish farm
(a) The best location for a pond is:
on a steep hill
far from home
on clayey soil
close to home
on sandy soil
in low flooded areas
on a gentle slope
where water can flow in by itself
(b) Briefly describe how to check if the soil is good for building a pond.
Bringing water to your farm
(a) How can you raise the level of the water in a small stream?
(b) The supply ditch should be
at least 1 m deep
sloping very little
near the shallow ends of the ponds
less than 50 cm deep
(c) How do you control the water flow in the supply ditch? Where?
Building fish ponds
(a) Which size of pond should you prefer? Why?
(b) You plan to build a shallow 25 x 25 m pond. Make a sketch showing all the lines you will mark on the ground before and after removing the topsoil. Clearly indicate the dimensions.
(c) How much higher than the pond water level should the banks be?
Bringing water to each pond
(a) How much slope should you give to an inlet ditch?
(b) How do you best control the water level in the inlet ditch?
(c) At which level should the bottom of an inlet be?
Draining water from the pond
(a) Where in the pond should the outlet preferably be placed?
(b) How can you ensure that water will not seep out along the outlet pipe?
(c) How high should a monk be?
(d) Should the lower end of a siphon be higher or lower than its upper end?
(e) You need to build an overflow if you use
a siphon
a pipe outlet
an L-pipe
a monk
(f) Where should you use screens?
at the inlet:
inside the pond
outside the pond
at the outlet:
inside the pond
outside the pond
Preparing the pond to receive fish
(a) What should you check before filling a pond with water?
(b) Briefly describe how to make compost from plants and manure.
(c) Where should you place a fertilizing crib, in shallow or deep water?
(d) How do you check if the pond is ready to receive baby fish?
Putting baby fish in
(a) Where can you produce baby fish yourselves?
(b) For this you will need mature fishes. How many per 100 m²? Circle the best answer.
males: 10 20 30 40 80 100
females: 10 20 40 80 120 150
(c) How often should you take all these fish out, to start again?
(d) When is the best time of the day to transport baby fish?
(e) What should you do when baby fish stay at the water surface, gasping for air?
Taking care of ponds and fish
(a) It is good to keep the grass short on the pond banks. For this you can use grazing animals such as
sheep
oxen
cows
(b) Someone who wants to wash clothes may do it only
in the stream above the supply ditch
in the supply ditch
in the stream below the supply ditch
in a pond, near the outlet
(c) To keep the water green you should fertilize a pond once a week. Circle below how many kilograms of material you should use per 100 m².
compost 2 5 10 20 40
chicken droppings 2 5 10 15 20
pig manure 2 5 10 20 30
(d) Name four different local feeds good for pond fish.
(e) Briefly tell how to decide how much food to give each day.
(f) One day, you come to your pond and see that fish are gasping for air at the water surface. What should you do for the next days, concerning:
water supply
increase
decrease
stop
fertilizing
increase
decrease
stop
feeding
increase
decrease
stop
Harvesting fish
(a) Give two reasons why you might prefer not to drain all the water from a pond.
(b) If you have so many fish in your pond that you will not be able to use them all within one day, give two good ways to solve the problem.
(c) If you harvest too many baby fish, what can you do with them?
Improving management
(a) Describe what you need to do to harvest fish throughout the year.
(b) With tilapia, some fish grow faster than others. Which ones?
males
females
Producing fish in pens
(a) The best location for fish pens is where
water depth is
0.5-1 m
1-1.5 m
2-3 m
water flow is
slow
fast
nil
bottom is
muddy
firm
very hard
(b) Briefly describe how to build a fish pen with bamboo and netting.
(c) How many tilapia should you put in per 100 m²?
(d) How do you harvest fish from a pen? Give at least two methods.
Producing fish in cages
(a) The best location for fish cages is where
water depth is
less than 1 m
at least 2 m
water flow is
gentle
strong
very strong
winds are
gentle
strong
very strong
(b) Which mesh size should you use for netting material?
(c) Give three ways to keep the wooden frame of a cage floating.
(d) Check below how many tilapia to put in a cage, per cubic metre of water.
(e) The food should be rich. Name three kinds of good feeds.
Bringing farm and ponds closer together
(a) Give three reasons why a pond can be useful to other farm crops.
(b) To fertilize a pond you can use fresh manure from farm animals. But you must be careful not to use too much of it. For each 100 m² of pond area, it is safe to use the fresh manure of
how many ducks
chickens
pigs
Avoiding diseases in your family
(a) To control mosquitoes and snails, it is best to
let the grass grow high on the pond banks
keep the grass cut short
remove from the pond weeds that grow above the water surface
never remove these aquatic plants
keep fish in the pond
from time to time, keep the pond without fish
(b) To avoid you and your family getting sick, it is best to
at least once a day, use a pond or pen as a toilet
build a latrine on the bank at the upper end of a pond
relieve yourselves 10 m away but close to the compost pile
never use a pond or a pen as a toilet
build a latrine at least 10 m away from any water or compost
Where to purchase FAO publications locally/ points de vente des publications de la FAO/ puntos de yenta de publicaciones de la FAO
ANGOLA
Empresa Nacional do Disco e de
Publicaçöes, ENDIPU-U.E.E.
Rua Cirilo da Conceiçäo Silva, N° 7
C.P N° 1314-C
Luanda
ARGENTINA
Libreria Agropecuaria
Pasteur 743
1028 Buenos Aires
Oficina del Libro Internacional
Alberti 40
1082 Buenos Aires
AUSTRALIA
Hunter Publications
P.O. Box 404
Abbotsford, Vic. 3067
AUSTRIA
Gerold Buch & Co.
Weihburggasse 26
1010 Vienna
BAHRAIN
United Schools International
P.O. Box 726
Manama
BANGLADESH
Association of Development
Agencies in Bangladesh
House N° 1/3, Block F. Lalmatia
Dhaka 1207
BELGIQUE
M.J. De Lannoy
202, avenue du Roi
1060 Bruxelles,
CCP 000-0808993-13
BOLIVIA
Los Amigos del Libro
Perú 3712 Casilla 450, Cochabamba
Mercado 1315, La Paz
BOTSWANA
Botsalo Books (Pty) Ltd
P.O. Box 1532
Gaborone
BRAZIL
Fundação Getúlio Vargas
Praia do Botafogo 190, C.P. 9052
Rio de Janeiro
CANADA (See North Americ.)
CHILE
Libreria - Oficina Regional FAO
Avda. Santa Maria 6700
Casilla 10095, Santiago
Tel. 218 53 23
Fax 218 25 47
CHINA
China National Publications Import
& Export Corporation
P O. Box 88
100704 Beijing
COLOMBIA
Banco Ganadero
Revista Carta Ganadera
Carrera 9^a N° 72-21, Piso 5,
Bogota D.E.
Tel. 217 0100
CONGO
Office national des librairies populaires
B. P 577
Brazzaville
COSTA RICA
Libreria, Imprenta y Litografia
Lehmann S.A.
Apartado 10011
San José
CUBA
Ediciones Cubanas, Empresa de
Comercio Exterior de Publicaciones
Obispo 461, Apartado 605
La Habana
CYPRUS
MAM
P.O Box 1722
Nicosia
CZECH REPUBLIC
Artia
Ve Smeckach 30. P O Box 790
11127 Praha 1
Artia Pegas Press Ltd
Import of Periodicals
Palác Metro, P.O. Box 825
Narodni 25, 11121 Praha 1
DENMARK
Munksgaard, Book and Subscription
Service
P.O Box 2148
DK 1016 Copenhagen K.
Tel 4533128570
Fax 4533129387
ECUADOR
Libri Mundi, Libreria Internacional
Juan León Mera 851
Apartado Postal 3029
Ouito
ESPANA
Mundi Prensa Libros S.A.
Castelló 37
28001 Madrid
Tel. 431 3399
Fax 575 3998
Libreria Agricola
Fernando Vl 2
28004 Madrid
Libreria Internacional AEDOS
Consejo de Ciento 391
08009 Barcelona
Tel. 3018615
Fax 317 0141
Llibreria de la Generalitat de Catalunya
Rambla dels Estudis, 118 (Palau Moja)
08002 Barcelona
Tel. (93) 302 6462
Fax (93) 3021299
FINLAND
Akateeminen Ktrjakauppa
P.O. Box 218
SF-00381 Helsinki
FRANCE
La Maison Rustique
Flammarion 4
26, rue Jacob
75006 Paris
Librairie de l'Unesco
7, place de Fontenoy
75700 Paris
Editions A. Pedone
13, rue Soufflot
75005 Paris
GERMANY
Alexander Horn Internationale
Buchhandlung
Kirchgasse 22, Postfach 3340
D-65185 Wiesbaden
Uno-Verlag
Poppelsdorfer Allee 55
D-53115 Bonn 1
S. Toeche-Mittler GmbH
Versandbuchhandlung
Hindenburgstrasse 33
D-6100 Darmstadt
GREECE
G.C. Eleftheroudakis S.A.
4 Nikis Street g
10563 Athens
John Mihalopoulos & Son S.A.
75 Hermou Street, P O. Box 10073
GUYANA
Guyana National Trading Corporation Ltd
45-47 Water Street, P.O. Box 308
Georgetown
HAÏTI
Librairie "A la Caravelle"
26, rue Bonne Foi, B.P. 111
Port-au-Prince
HONDURAS
Escuela Agricola Panamericana,
Libreria RTAC
Zamorano, Apartado 93
Tegucigalpa
Oficina de la Escuela Agricola
Panamericana en Tegucigalpa
Blvd. Morazán, Apts. Glapson - Apartado 93
Tegucigalpa
HONG KONG
Swindon Book Co.
13-15 Lock Road
Kowloon
HUNGARY
Librotrade Kft.
P.O. Box 126
H-1656 Budapest
ICELAND
Snaebjörn Jónsson and Co.h.f.
Hafnarstraeti 9, P.O. Box 1131
101 Reykjavik
INDIA
EWP Affiliated East-West Press PVT, Ltd
G-I/16 Ansari Road, Darya Gany
New Delhi 110 002
Oxford Book and Stationery Co.
Scindia House, New Delhi 110 001
17 Park Street Calcutta 700 016
Oxford Subscription Agency
Institute for Development Education
1 Anasuya Ave., Kilpauk, Madras 600 010
IRELAND
Publications Section, Stationery Office
4-5 Harcourt Road
Dublin 2
ITALY
FAO (See last column)
Libreria Scientifica Dott. Lucio de
Biasio "Aeiou "
Via Coronelli 6
20146 Milano
Libreria Concessionaria Sansoni S.p.A.
"Licosa"
Via Duca di Calabria 1/1
50125 Firenze
Libreria Internazionale Rizzoli
Galleria Colonna, Largo Chigi
00187 Roma
JAPAN
Maruzen Company Ltd
P.O. Box 5050
Tokyo International 100-31
KENYA
Text Book Centre Ltd
Kijabe Street, P.O Box 47540
Nairobi
KOREA, REP. OF
Eulyoo Publishing Co. Ltd
46-1 Susong-Dong, Jongro-Gu
P.O. Box 362, Kwangwha-Mun
Seoul 110
KUWAIT
The Kuwait Bookshops Co. Ltd
P.O. Box 2942
Safat
LUXEMBOURG
M.J. De Lannoy
202, avenue du Roi
1060 Bruxelles (Belgique)
MAROC
Librairie "Aux Belles Images"
281, avenue Mohammed V
Rabat
MEXICO
Librería, Universidad Autónoma de Chapingo
56230 Chapingo
Libros y Editoriales S.A.
Av. Progreso N° 202-1° Piso A
Apdo Postal 18922 Col. Escandón
11800 México D F.
Only machine readable products:
Grupo Qualita
Kansas N° 38 Colonia Nápoles
03810 México D.F.
Tel.682-3333
NETHERLANDS
Roodveldt Import B.V.
Browersgracht 288
1013 HG Amsterdam
SDU Publishers Plantijnstraat
Christoffel Plantijnstraat 2
P.O. Box 20014
2500 EA The Hague
NEW ZEALAND
Legislation Services
P.O. Box 12418
Thorndon, Wellington
NlCARAGUA
Libreria Universitaria,
Universidad Centroamericana
Apartado 69
Managua
NIGERIA
University Bookshop (Nigeria) Ltd
University of Ibadan
Ibadan
NORTH AMERICA
Publications:
UNIPUB
4611/F, Assembly Drive
Lanham MD 20706-4391, USA
Toll-free 800 233-0504 (Canada)
800 274-4888 (USA)
Fax 301-459-0056
Periodicals:
Ebsco Subscription Services
P.O. Box 1431
Birmingham AL 35201-1431, USA
Tel. (205) 991-6600
Telex 78-2661
Fax (205) 991-1449
The Faxon Company Inc.
15 Southwest Park
Westwood MA 02090, USA
Tel. 6117-329-3350
Telex 95-1980
Cable FW Faxon Wood
NORWAY
Narvesen Info Center
Bertrand Narvesens vei 2
P.O. Box 6125, Etterstad
0602 Oslo 6
PAKISTAN
Mirza Book Agency
65 Shahrah-e-Quaid-e-Azam
P.O. Box 729, Lahore 3
Sasi Book Store
Zaibunnisa Street, Karachi
PARAGUAY
Mayer's Internacional-
Publicaciones Técnicas
Gral. Diaz 629 c/15 de Agosto
Casilla de Correo N° 1416
Asunción-Tel. 448 246
PERU
Libreria Distribuidora "Santa Rosa"
Jirón Apurimac 375, Casilla 4937
Lima 1
PHILIPPINES
International Book Center (Phils)
Room 1703 Cityland 10
Condominium Cor. Ayala Avenue &
H.V. dela Costa Extension
Makati, Metro Manila
POLAND
Ars Polona
Krakowskie Przedmiescie 7
00-950 Warsaw
PORTUGAL
Livraria Portugal, Dias e Andrade Ltda
Rua do Carmo 70-74. Apartado 2681
1117 Lisboa Codex
ROMANIA
Ilexim
Calea Grivitei No 64066
Bucharest
SAUDI ARABIA
The Modern Commercial University
Bookshop
P.O. Box 394
Riyadh
SlNGAPORE
Select Books Pte Ltd
03-15 Tanglin Shopping Centre
19 Tanglin Road
Singapore 1024
SLOVENIA
Cankarjava Zalozba
P.O Box 201 -IV
61001 Ljubljana
SOMALIA
"Samater's"
P.O. Box 936
Mogadishu
SRI LANKA
M.D. Gunasena & Co. Ltd
217 Olcott Mawatha, P.O. Box 246
Colombo 11
SUISSE
Librairie Payot S.A.
107 Freiestrasse 4000 Basel 10
6, rue Grenus 1200 Genève
Case Postale 3212,1002 Lausanne
Buchhandlung und Antiquariat
Heinimann & Co.
Kirchgasse 17
8001 Zurich
UN Bookshop
Palais des Nations
CH-1211 Genéve 1
Van Diermen Editions Techniques
ADECO
Case Postale 465
CH-1211 Genève 19
SURINAME
Vaco n.v. in Suriname
Domineestraat 26, P.O. Box 1841
Paramaribo
SWEDEN
Books and documents
C.E. Fritzes
P.O Box 16356
103 27 Stockholm
Subscriptions:
Vennergren-Williams AB
P.O. Box 30004
104 25 Stockholm
THAILAND
Suksapan Panit
Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue
Bangkok
TOGO
Librairie du Bon Pasteur
B.P. 1164
Lomé
TUNISIE
Société tunisienne de diffusion
5, avenue de Carthage
Tunis
TURKEY
Kultur Yayiniari is - Turk Ltd Sti
Ataturk Bulvari No. 191, Kat. 21
Ankara
Bookshops in Istambul and Izmir
UNITED KlNGDOM
HMSO Publications Centre
51 Nine Elms Lane
London SW8 SDR
Tel. (071) 873 9090 (orders)
(071 ) 873 0011 (inquiries)
Fax (071 ) 873 8463
HMSO Bookshops:
49 High Holborn, London WV 1V 6HB
Tel. (071) 873 0011
258 Broad Street
Birmingham B1 2HE
Tel.(021)643 3749
Southey House, 33 Wine Street
Bristol BS1 2BQ
Tel.(0272)264306
9-21 Princess Street
Manchester M60 8AS
Tel.(061)834 7201
80 Chichester Street
Belfast BT1 4JY
Tel.(0232)238451
71 Lothian Road
Edinburgh EH3 9AZ
Tel.(031) 228 4181
Only machine readable products:
Microinfo Limited
P.O. Box 3, Omega Road, Alton Hampshire
GU342PG
Tel. (0420) 86848
Fax (0420) 89889
URUGAY
Libreria Agropecuaria S.R.L.
Buenos Aires 335
Casilla 1755
Montevideo C P. 11000
USA (See North America)
VENEZUELA
Tecni-Ciencia Libros S.A.
Torre Phelps-Mezzanina, Plaza Venezuela
Caracas
Tel. 782 8697-781 9945-781 9954
Tamanaco Libros Técnicos S.R.L.
Centro Comercial Ciudad Tamanaco
Nivel C-2
Caracas
Tel. 261 3344-261 3335-959 0016
Tecni-Ciencia Libros, S.A
Centro Comercial, Shopping Center
Av. Andrés Eloy Urb. El Prebo
Valencia, Edo. Carabobo
Tel. 222 724
Fudeco, Libreria
Avenida Libertador-Este, Ed Fudeco
Apartado 254
Barquisimeto C.P. 3002, Ed Lara
Tel. (051 ) 538 022
Fax (051) 544 394
Telex(051) 51314 FUDEC VC
YUGOSLAVIA
Jugoslovenska Knjiga, Trg.
Republike 5/8 P.O. Box 36
11001 Belgrade
Prosveta
Terazije 16/1 Belgrade
Other countries / Autres pays / Otros países
Distribution and Sales Section, FAO
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy
Tel (39-6) 57974608
Telex 625852/625853/610181 FAO I
Fax (39-6)57973152/5782610/5745090
