<title>Fermented fish in Africa: A study on processing marketing and consumption</title>
<section>1</section>
Preparation of this document
The Fourth FAO Expert Consultation on Fish Technology in Africa, held from 25 to 28 April 1988 in Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire, recommended inter alia that research should be carried out on fermented fish in Africa including:
(i) description of the processes and products as well as an assessment of their importance;
(ii) scientific analysis of the processes; and
(iii) product development.
The Fish Utilization and Marketing Service of FAO's Fishery Industries Division commissioned Mr Kofi Manso Essuman, a fish technologist and nutritionist from Ghana, to collect information through literature research and visits to selected countries in the Sahel region and West Africa known for their fermented fish production. This work was done in November and December 1991 and Mr Essuman submitted his report in February 1992. The report was subsequently edited and printed by FAO.
Mr Essuman is presently employed by Lever Brothers (Ghana) Ltd. and can be contacted at P.O. Box 11716, Accra-North, Ghana.
The references have not been checked for conformity with the standard FAO format.
Distribution:
FAO Fisheries Department
FAO Regional Fishery Officers
Selected institutes and projects
Author
<section>2</section>
Abstract
Essuman, K.M.
Fermented fish in Africa. A study on processing, marketing and consumption.
FAO Fisheries Technical Paper. No. 329. Rome, FAO. 1992. 80p.
This report is based on surveys carried out in Burundi, Chad, Côte d'Ivoire, the Gambia, Ghana, Mali, Senegal, the Sudan and Uganda to identify the various types of fermented fishery products, their processing characteristics and economic importance. It was observed that fermented fish processing is an artisanal activity and the processes differ from one country to another. Three basic methods were identified: fermentation with salting and drying; fermentation and drying without salting; and fermentation with salting but no drying. It was also observed in the study that, unlike in Southeast Asian countries, fermented fishery products in Africa are usually whole or in cut pieces, and are not a paste or sauce. Fermented fish is used in Africa both as a condiment and as food fish. Fermented fishery products contribute to protein intake of the people especially those in the rural hinterland where fresh fish is not readily available. Curing by fermentation was found to be an
important method of preservation particularly because poor quality fish or unpopular species of fish are usually processed in this way. For this reason, fermentation helps to salvage fish which would otherwise have been thrown away. Post harvest losses in African artisanal fisheries may thus be lower than often assumed. The sanitary conditions of fermented fish production were generally found to be poor and processing methods were not standardized. In the light of the observations made, some recommendations have been suggested to improve quality in order to enhance intra-regional trade in fish and fishery products.
<section>3</section>
1. Introduction
Artisanal fish processing remains the predominant and most important method of fish preservation in Africa. The principal methods are smoking, sun-drying, salting, fermentation, grilling and frying. These processes may either be used alone or combined in order to achieve the desired product. For instance, smoking is often accompanied by drying. Similarly, salting and sun-drying are often combined to get a well preserved product. Invariably, the final product is distinguished by peculiar qualities such as aroma, flavour and colour according to the consumer's preference.
The choice of a particular processing method is greatly influenced by the area's geographical location, socio-economic factors and the food habits of the local people. For instance, due to the availability of fuel wood and solar salt in Ghana, a lot of fish is smoked, fermented or salted and dried. These cured fishery products are the most popular form in which fish is generally consumed in Ghana. A Ghanaian housewife will normally use different types of cured fishery products to prepare the family meal in order to achieve a desirable flavour in the soup or stew which is eaten with the traditional starchy staples such as cassava, plantain, yam, rice, etc.
Fermentation is one method of fish curing in which the development of a distinctive flavour in the final product is the principal objective. Therefore, this product is mainly used as a condiment in the preparation of traditional sauces.
Fermentation alone as a curing process does not preserve fish because it results in the breakdown of fish muscle. For this reason, fermentation is often combined with salting and/or drying in order to reduce water activity and retard or eliminate the growth of proteolytical and putrefying bacteria. In Southeast Asia the fermentation process often lasts for several months and the final product is usually a paste, sauce or liquid. In Africa, however, fish fermentation lasts from a few hours to about two weeks. Under such conditions, fermentation is usually partial and the muscle structure is not broken down completely. Consequently, the fish retains its original form of whole or cut pieces after fermentation and can be eaten as food fish or used as a condiment.
Fish fermentation is generally accompanied by the development of a mild or strong odour which becomes associated with the final product. Fermented fishery products in Africa may either be soft with a high moisture content, semi-dry or very dry. Some products are also heavily salted and dried whilst others are dried without any salting. Some types of fermented products have a rancid taste.
The various types of fermented fishery products consumed in Africa have not been studied in any detail. This report describes the processing characteristics of fermented fish in Burundi, Chad, Côte d'Ivoire, the Gambia, Ghana, Mali, Senegal, the Sudan and Uganda. It also evaluates the socioeconomic effects as well as consumer attitudes to fermented fish in these countries.
In this report, fermented fish includes salted and/or sun-dried fishery products in which some degree of desirable enzymatic or microbiological change has taken place in the fish muscle.
<section>4</section>
2. Literature review
2.1 Introduction
2.2 Microbiology of fermented fishery products
2.3 Chemical changes during fish fermentation
2.4 Quality and marketability of products
2.5 Safety
2.1 Introduction
Fermented fish have, for many years, been considered as a Southeast Asian product. These products are highly salted and fermented until the fish flesh is transformed into simpler components. Fish fermentation in the Southeast Asian sub-region normally lasts for several months (three to nine months) and the fish flesh may liquefy or turn into a paste (Huss and Valdimarson, 1990). Some of these products include nuoc-mam of Vietnam and Cambodia, nam-pla of Thailand, sushi of Japan and patis of the Philippines. No African fermented fishery products are mentioned in the FAO Fisheries Report No. 100 on fermented fish; however, fessiekh from the Sudan is mentioned as a Mediterranean product.
In Africa salting and drying of fish for preservation is accompanied by fermentation, but the period is short (a few days) and the product is not transformed into a paste or sauce. The products are all characterized by a strong odour and, for this reason, various authors have described the product as "sink" fish. In Ghana fermented fish is called momone, an Akan word which literally means stinking. The "stink" fish of Sierra Leone has been described (Watts, 1965) as fish which had developed a strong odour within 24 hours of capture and was salted for about four days and then dried. Watanabe (1982) described the fermented fishery products of Senegal as highly salted and semi-dried fishery products with an obnoxious odour and a cheesy but rich fishy flavour reminiscent of kusaya from Japan. The characteristic smell of fermented fish is the result of enzymatic and microbiological activity in the fish muscle. Zakhia and Cuq (1991) suggest that the organic acids produced during
the fermentation of fish in Mali are mainly acetic acids, whereas it would appear that in Asia mainly lactic acid is produced.
Fermented fish is, therefore, any fishery product which has undergone degradative changes through enzymatic or microbiological activity either in the presence or absence of salt.
2.2 Microbiology of fermented fishery products
Fish in its natural environment has its own micro-flora in the slime on its body, in its gut and in its gills. These micro-organisms, as well as the enzymes in the tissues of the fish, bring about putrefactive changes in fish when it dies. Furthermore, the micro-organisms generally present in the salt used for salting also contribute to the degradative changes in the fish.
Figure 1 Growth Ranges of Micro-organisms with respect to Water Activity
Micro-organisms require water in an available form for growth and metabolism. Figure 1 shows that all microbial growth is inhibited at water activity (A[w]) below 0.60. Halophiles grow optimally at high salt concentrations but are unable to grow in salt-free media. Halotolerant organisms grow best without significant amounts of salt but can also grow in concentrations higher than that of sea water. Xerophiles are those organisms which grow rapidly under relatively dry conditions or below A[w] of 0.85 while osmophiles can grow under high osmotic pressure. Most food-borne bacterial pathogens are not able to grow in an A[w] range of 0.98-0.93 Table 1).
Various types of salts are used for the salting and fermentation of fish. They include solar salt, rock salt and vacuum salt and have their own micro-flora. Solar salt, which is the most widely used in fish curing, has been found to contain the largest amount of micro-organisms. The general bacterial flora of solar salt mostly comprises bacillus types (75 percent) with the remainder being micrococcus and sarcina types. The most important spoilage organisms always present in solar salt are the red halophilic bacteria.
In the degradative changes occurring during fermentation no significant changes were observed in the amino-acids particularly the essential ones. The degradation process, however, brings out certain characteristic flavours which are essential for the quality of the final product (Amano, 1962; Ito and Sato, 1963).
Table 1 - Growth of Micro-organisms in Salted Fish
Water Activity (A[w]) Sodium Chloride Concentrate (%)
Micro-organisms Grooving
Pathogens Spoilage Organisms
0.98 < 3.5 All known food-borne Most micro-organisms pathogens of concern in foods particularly the gram negative rods
0.98-0.93 3.5-10 Bacillus cereus Clostridium botulinum Salmonella spp. Clostridium perfringens Vibrio parahaemolyticus Lactobacilliaceae, Enterobacteriaceae, Bacilliaceae, Micrococcaceae, moulds
0.93-0.85 10- 17 Staphylococcus Cocci, yeasts, moulds
0.85-0.60 > 17 Mycotoxic, xerophilic moulds (no mycotoxin is produced at A[w] less than 0.80) Halophilic bacteria, yeasts, moulds (dun= Wallemia sebi)
Staphylococcus aureus grows poorly in competition with the natural micro-flora of most foods at high levels of water activity.
Source: Microbial Ecology of Foods, 1980, Vol.1, Chapter 4
Most fermented fishery products are made from fatty fish. Lean fish has sometimes been noted to give a less acceptable texture and flavour. The role of fats in the fermentation process has not, however, been studied in any detail. Fish oils are highly unsaturated and hence very prone to oxidation. Certain pro-oxidants, such as haem, in the proteins catalyze the oxidation reaction. Similarly, iron impurities in the crude solar salt used for curing also accelerate auto-oxidation (Saisithi, 1967). Oxidized fish oils have a characteristic taste and paint-like smell, but the acceptability of products having the typical taste and flavour of oxidized fats depends very much on local preferences. The products of fat oxidation take part in further reactions especially with amines (Saisithi, 1967) and with other decomposition products of proteins (Bal and Dominova, 1967) to produce coloured compounds as well as substances with odour Jones, 1966). Lipases present in the fish flesh also
hydrolyze the lipids (Lovern, 1962), but the extent is dependent on the level of salting and fermentation (Amano, 1962).
Pathogens rarely multiply at high salt concentrations, however, Karnop (1988) demonstrated that Pediococcus halophilus is able to produce histamine during long storage at ambient temperatures of 20°25°C. Toxins produced by Clostridium botulinum in poor quality fish before salting may be stable in the salted product (Huss and Rye-Petterson, 1980).
Krieg and Holt (1984) noted that the red halophiles belong to two genera of bacteria, namely Halobacterium and Holococcus. Halobacterium consists of rod-shaped bacteria and requires at least 1015 percent salt concentration for growth whilst Halococcus can thrive at 5-10 percent salt concentration. Both genera are strictly aerobic and grow optimally at about 37°C and also produce red carotenoid pigments.
In situations where brine is reused a number of times, the chemical composition of the salt solution is altered. Significant amounts of organic material are introduced and the bacterial load of the brine becomes extremely high, especially the red halophiles and the osmophilic moulds. Two common defects of salted fermented fishery products called pink and dun are the result of spoilage by red halophilic bacteria and a highly osmophilic fungus respectively. The red halophilic bacteria grows in brine solutions at temperatures ranging from 15° to 55°C. Table 1 shows that only a few pathogenic organisms can proliferate at salt concentrations higher than 10 percent. However, it is known that many of these organisms survive in saturated salt solutions. For instance, Typhus bacteria can survive in saturated salt solutions for three to six months, salmonella in 10 percent salt solutions for one to three months. Escherichia cold and Staphylococcus aureus can survive for many weeks in
salted fish (ICMSF, 1980).
A study by Knochel and Huss in 1984 on the microbiology of barrel salted herrings revealed that both aerobic and anaerobic viable counts (in media containing 15 percent sodium chloride) were low, i.e. not more than 3 x 105/g of fish. The types of micro-organisms identified were:
(i) gram-negative aerobic halophilic rods (70 percent);
(ii) gram-positive aerobic halotolerant cocci (20 percent);
(iii) yeasts (3 percent).
Villar et al. (1985) also showed that Pediococcus halophilus is the dominating organism in salted anchovies.
2.3 Chemical changes during fish fermentation
Several studies have been carried out to study the biochemical pathways followed during the degradation process of fish fermentation. Reay and Shewan (1949) reported that the strong odour in spoilt fish may be a reaction between TMAD and lactic acid producing TMA and acetic acid. Tomiyasu and Zenitani (1957) also incriminated organic acids in deteriorated fish. Pearson (1962) identified the following five chemical changes in deteriorating fish:
(i) enzymic degradation of nucleotides and nucleosides in the flesh leading to the formation of inosine, hypoxanthine, ribose, etc.;
(ii) bacterial reduction of trimethylamine oxide (TMAO), a non-volatile and non-odoriferous compound, to volatile trimethylamine (TMA) which has an amoniacal smell;
(iii) formation of dimethylamine (DMA);
(iv) breakdown of protein with subsequent formation of ammonia (NH[3]) indole, hydrogen sulphide, etc.;
(v) oxidative rancidity of the fat.
Hiltz et al. (1976) reported that the volatile bases particularly TMA, DMA and NH, are associated with changes in the organoleptic and textural quality of fish.
The development of a specific aroma in fermented fish sauces and pastes may not be due to the action of micro-organisms. In a recent study, Adams (1986) concluded that micro-organisms play little or no part in aroma production. Beddows (1985) isolated halotolerant organisms, Bacillus sp. (cocci) and used them in pure culture but none of them produced the typical Fish sauce aroma.
It can therefore be concluded that the microbiology of any salted, dried or fermented fishery product is greatly influenced by the natural micro-flora of the fish, the salt and the conditions under which processing takes place.
2.4 Quality and marketability of products
Formal quality control systems are entirely lacking in the artisanal fish processing industry. Poor quality fish (i.e. stale, heavily infested, broken or mouldy) has a low market value (Beatty, 1969; Mills, 1979). Very high quality products on the other hand do not necessarily attract a correspondingly high value in local markets. Various studies on quality in relation to prices (Disney, 1974; Breslin and Hoffman, 1975) did not show any evidence that the best cured fishery products fetch higher market prices. Watanabe and Mensah (1976) could not correlate retail prices and organoleptic quality for salted dried fish in Ghana. Hara and Mkoko (1990) considered the local (Malawi) market for traditional cured fishery products a seller's market: a market characterized by scarcity, limited price competition and cartels). Notwithstanding this observation, a good quality cured fish is relatively easy to sell at the optimum market price as compared to a similarly priced inferior
product.
It is always desirable to use good quality raw materials in the production of cured fishery products. However, the general practice, particularly with fermented fishery products, is that processors resort to fermentation as a last attempt to salvage deteriorating fish especially during periods of glut when other traditional processing methods such as smoking cannot cope with the volume of the catch.
Consequently, unwholesome or inferior quality raw fish is often processed into fermented products which are, however, acceptable by traditional quality standards.
2.5 Safety
2.5.1 Hygiene of processing
Boats, premises, fishermen, processors, equipment, water, fish and ingredients are invariably of low hygienic standards at the artisanal level of fish handling and processing. This may be attributed to a lack of facilities, services, education, standards (and their enforcement) and - most important a lack of economic support from the quality products' market.
2.5.2 Histamine poisoning
Histamine poisoning results from the ingestion of foods containing high levels of histamine (Taylor, 1983 and 1986). This poisoning has historically been referred to as scombroid poisoning because of the frequent association of the illness with the consumption of spoiled scombroid fish such as mackerels and tuna. Also sardines, herrings, pilchards, anchovies and shellfish have been implicated in histamine poisoning. Histamine poisoning has also been reported in connection with non-fish fermented foods like cheese and sauerkraut (Taylor, 1986). In Africa, data on the incidence of histamine poisoning is scanty because incidents are often not reported. Japan, the UK and the USA are countries where food poisoning from fish consumption is often reported. Less frequent incidents have also been reported in Australia, Canada, Egypt, France, Indonesia, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway and Sri Lanka (Taylor, 1986; and Abdalla, 1989). Public health officials in many other
countries, including African countries, have admitted that histamine poisoning occurs but is not officially reported.
Histamine production in foods is by the decarboxylation of histidine through a reaction catalyzed by the enzyme histidine decarboxylase. Geiger, Courtney and Schanakenberg (1944) reported that histamine was generated from autolysis. Recent research, however, indicates that the decarboxylation reaction results largely from bacterial action (Arnold and Brown, 1978; Ababouch et al., 1991a). These reports indicate that the fermentation of fish is a likely source of histamine. Various species of fish are known to have large amounts of free histidine in their muscle tissues as substrate for histidine decarboxylase. Ababouch et a!. (1991b) noted that proteolysis, whether autolytic or bacterial, may play a role in free histidine release.
Histidine decarboxylase has been found mainly in certain species of Entero-bacteriaceae, Clostridium and Lactobacillus (Taylor et al., 1978; Frank, 1985). Enteric bacteria have been found to be the most important histamine forming bacteria in fish. Morganella morganii, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Proteus vulgaris and Hafnia alvei are, however, the only histamine forming bacteria that have actually been isolated from fish implicated incidents of histamine poisoning (Frank, 1985).
The threshold toxic dose (TTD) for histamine is not precisely known and it is difficult to establish because of its varying levels in spoiled fish. In studies conducted by Simidu and Hibiki in 1955, it was estimated that the TTD for histamine in fish is approximately 60 mg/100g. Due to the . in determining the TTD, several countries have adopted maximum allowable levels of histamine in fish. The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), for instance, established a hazard action level (HAL) of 50 mg/100g in tuna products based on the investigation of previous histamine poisoning outbreaks and the defect action level (DAL) of 20 mg/100g.
The EEC 1993 Health Regulations for Fishery Products are expected to introduce a DAL of 10 mg/100g and a maximum allowable limit of 20 mg/100g (EEC, 1990), but there are no defined guidelines for histamine levels in Japan and the UK although there are many reported cases of histamine poisoning in these countries.
2.5.3 Clostridium poisoning
Since the fermentation process involves bacterial activity, it is likely that if conditions are not properly set to control pathogenic bacteria they may remain in the fermented products. This is because fermentation takes place at low temperatures. The two main factors which control the growth of pathogens such as Clostridium botulinum are high salt concentration and pH. All types of C botulinum are inhibited by 10-12 percent salt and a pH below 4.5. C botulinum types E, F and non-proteolytic type B are able to grow between 8° and 10°C but are inhibited below 4°C. From observations of the production methods of fermented fishery products, the low level of incidence of C. botulinum poisoning may be mainly attributed to the high level of salt usage. Furthermore, toxins of micro-organisms such as C botulinum are inactivated by proteolytic enzymes. Since there is some proteolytic activity in the fish fermentation process, it is therefore most likely that C bondinum toxins may be
inactivated.
Incidents of poisoning from fish consumption may be low in Africa because, despite the high initial microbial load of fermented fishery products, foods are generally cooked with intense and prolonged heat.
In a study on fessiekh processing, Abdalla (1989) reported that the pH of the product ranges from 6.4 to 6.9 and the salt level is 6-7 percent (fresh weight). These are favourable conditions for the growth of C botulinum and other proteolytic bacteria. This could possibly be the reason for fatalities involving the consumption of fessiekh in Egypt where the raw product is a delicacy among some people.
2.5.4 Salmonella poisoning
There is very little information on salmonella food poisoning arising from the consumption of fermented fish in Africa despite the unsanitary fish processing practices observed in many countries.
In a study conducted by Nerquaye-Tetteh et al. (1978) to isolate various micro-organisms, no Salmonella spp. were isolated from samples of fermented fishery products obtained from the open markets in Ghana. The absence of Salmonella spp. from fermented fishery products could be attributed to the high salt level and low water activity of the products. These conditions do not favour the growth of salmonella.
Furthermore, traditional food preparations in Africa involve a long period of cooking. Since Salmonella spp. are heat labile, they are destroyed during intense cooking.
2.5.5 Mould infestation
Moulds are able to grow under dry conditions better than bacteria. For this reason, moulds are often associated with dried fermented fishery products. Spores of moulds which are often present in the air and soil contaminate fish during processing. Insects and mites are also known to cause mould contamination by carrying the spores on their bodies.
The moulds commonly associated with dried cured fish in storage are Aspergillus halophillus; A. restrictus; Wallemia sebi; A. glaucus group; A. candidus; A. ochraceus; A. flavus and Penicillum spp. (Christensen and Kaufmann, 1974).
Dun, which is a defect associated with cured fish, results from mould growth on fish with an A[w] of 0.75 and salt concentration of 10-15 percent. It does not produce any objectionable flavour or change in texture in the fishery products. The main problems are, however, its visible growth and the discoloration product. Some strains of mould produce harmful mycotoxins in dry food products. The toxin of greatest health concern is aflatoxin produced by Aspergillus flavus and A. parasiticus. Various researchers have reported dangerous levels of aflatoxin in dried fish (Okonkwo et al., 1977). Townsend et al (1971) isolated A. flavus from Vietnamese cured fish and identified it as responsible for producing aflatoxin. Christensen and Kaufmann (1974) noted that all mould growth is influenced by temperature. The optimum temperature for mould growth is 30°C and the maximum ranges from 40° to 55°C depending on the species. These are typical ambient temperatures in tropical regions.
Reported incidents of aflatoxin poisoning in Africa are rare, probably due to the long period of heating during food preparations or lack of records.
2.5.6 Insect and mite infestation
In the early stages of curing, raw fish is particularly susceptible to infestation from blowfly maggots (larvae). Fully or partially cured fishery products are also attacked by a wide range of insect pests which include species of flies, mites and both adults and larvae of certain beetles.
Insect and mite infestation of cured fish is greatly influenced by factors such as the temperature, moisture content, ambient relative humidity and salt level of the product. Improper disposal of fish waste and offals, and unhygienic surroundings provide favourable breeding grounds for these pests.
2.5.7 Use of chemicals in fish curing
Common salt (sodium chloride) is the most widely used chemical in fish curing in many African countries. However, in the technologically advanced countries, other substances such as benzoic, boric, sorbic and acetic acids as well as sodium benzoate may be added to the salt solution to enhance preservation. Sugar and starch have also been reported as substances which are added to fish during curing to enhance fermentation.
2.5.8 Pesticides used for preservation
In recent times, fishermen and processors in Africa have resorted to the use of organic insecticides to catch or preserve fish. Azeza (1986) reports that in the Lake Chad basin substances such as Lindane, Shelltox, Gardona and DDT are used to prevent insect infestation of cured fish. Unfortunately, these chemicals are used without any strict control over the safe dosage levels, hence the product though protected from insects could be harmful to consumers.
<section>5</section>
3. Fish processing characteristics
3.1 Overview
3.2 Gender roles in fish processing
3.3 Sources of fish
3.4 Traditional methods of fish fermentation
3.5 Salting
3.6 Types of fermentation tanks
3.7 Drying of fermented fish
3.8 Solar driers
3.9 Health hazards and hygienic aspects of fermented fish processing
3.10 Quality evaluation of products
3.11 Spoilage and prevention of losses
3.12 Packaging
3.1 Overview
Many consumers in Africa prefer fish in the fresh state, however, a considerable proportion of the landed catch is preserved by artisanal methods.
The principal fish processing methods in Africa are smoking, salting, sun-drying, fermentation, grilling and frying. The predominant type of fishery product in any particular country is, however, closely related to the food habits and purchasing power of the population. Specific types of fishery products are best suited as the local staple food. Furthermore, due to the lack of a good transport infrastructure for the transportation of fresh fish to remote towns and villages, cured fish is the most convenient form in which fish can be sent to such areas.
In West Africa, hot smoking is the main method of fish processing. However, salting, fermentation and sun-drying are also important fish processing methods. It is estimated that nearly 70 percent of the total fish supply in West Africa is marketed in the smoked or dried form. In the Sudan, on the other hand, nearly 70 percent of the total fish landings is consumed fresh; the rest is cured either by salting, fermentation or sun-drying. Very little of the local fish supply is smoked, except in southern Sudan where smoked and very dry fermented fishery products are very popular among the local community.
The most important artisanal method of fish processing in Uganda is hot smoking. Hot smoked fish is produced on a large scale on the islands of Lake Victoria and distributed to the urban markets. Smaller species such as Rastrineobola argenta and Haplochromis spp. are preserved mainly by sundrying. Tilapia, Alestes spp. and small quantities of Nile perch are salted, fermented and dried along Lakes Albert and Edward in western and north-western Uganda. Salted, dried and fermented products are not particularly popular in Uganda, hence these products are transported to Zaire where there is a ready market.
The principal fishery resources in Burundi are the tiny clupeids Stolothrissa tanganicae and Limnothrissa miodon which together constitute about 80 percent of the total landed catch. The main processing method best suited for these species is sun-drying. Anchovies (Engraulis encrasicolus), which are marine clupeids of a similar small size and are abundant in Ghana, are also preserved by sun or smoke-drying.
Fried fish are very important in some countries in West, southern or central Africa. In Ghana for instance, fried fish is widely consumed with a maize-based staple (kenkey) by many of the ethnic groups living along the coast. Fried Nile perch has, in recent years, become popular in Uganda and Burundi and other fried fishery products are also gaining popularity. In both countries, fresh fish is eaten either as a delicacy served with alcoholic drinks or as a fast food.
3.2 Gender roles in fish processing
Throughout Africa, gender roles are associated with various aspects of post-harvest fish handling and processing. This division differs from one geographical region to another.
In West Africa for instance, women dominate on-shore handling and processing of fish. In Chad, Côte d'Ivoire, the Gambia, Ghana and Senegal, salting, fermentation, sun-drying and smoking are women's occupations. Some women also own fishing boats, but lease them to men for fishing while they process or market the catch. Many women also buy fresh or frozen fish for processing. Women fish processors occasionally hire young men to assist in dressing fresh fish especially during the peak periods of processing.
In Burundi, the Sudan and Uganda, fish processing is dominated by men. In Uganda for instance, a survey of fish processing activities revealed that in one district 82.6 percent of men were involved in fish frying, whilst 78 percent of men were involved in salting, fermentation and sundrying. In recent times, however, the number of women engaged in fish processing in Uganda has increased. In the Sudan, women are not only involved in fish processing but some have their own canoes and are actually involved in fishing as well as the processing of fermented fishery products.
3.3 Sources of fish
Africa is endowed with numerous lakes, rivers and seas. These water bodies constitute a rich source of numerous species of fresh fish for many people.
Smoke dried fish is the most important cured fish product in West Africa (Mali)
Hot smoked fish (Nile perch) from the islands on Lake Victoria are marketed in the urban centres (Uganda)
Fermented and dried fish is a popular product in many West African countries
Fried fish is widwly consumed in southern Ghana
Sun-dried small pelagic fish are popular in Ghana (anchovies, Engraulis encrasicolus), Uganda (Rastrineobola argentea) and Burundi (dagaa, Stolothrissa tanganicae)
Over 80 percent of the fish landings in West Africa comes from the Atlantic Ocean. Theremainder comes from freshwater sources such as River Niger, Lake Chad, Lake Volta and River Shari.
In Burundi, the Sudan and Uganda, freshwater bodies provide the bulk of fish supply. Although the Sudan has a marine coastline, only 3 percent of the annual fish catch comes from the sea. The River Nile (including the Blue Nile and White Nile) provides most of the fish supply. Lake Victoria constitutes the main source of fish supply in Uganda. Considerable quantities are also derived from Lakes Edward, Albert and George. Fish from these lakes is normally salted, fermented and dried for consumption within the locality and also for export (Table 2).
Table 2. Source and Type of Fish used for Fermentation
Country 
Sources
Fish Species Processed
Artisanal Fisheries (%) Industrial Fisheries (%) Cold Stores (Frozen Fish) (%) Filleting Factories (%)
Burundi 90 10 0 0 Limnothrissa spp., Stolothrissa spp., tilapia, Nile perch
Chad 100 0 0 0 Alestes spp., tilapia, Nile perch, Hydrocynus spp.
Côte d'Ivoire 60 25 10 5 Tuna, bonito, shark, ray, octopus, sole, seabream, catfish, croaker, meagre, skate, triggerfish, mullet
The Gambia 85 10 5 0 Same as for Côte d'Ivoire
Ghana 70 20 10 0 Same as for Côte d'Ivoire
Mali 100 0 0 0 Tilapia, Clarias spp., Schilbe spp., Alestes spp., Hydrocynus spp.
Senegal 70 15 10 5 Same as for Côte d'Ivoire
The Sudan 95 5 0 0 Same as for Chad
Uganda 95 0 5 negligible Tilapia, Nile perch, Bagrus spp., Rastrineobola argenta, Haplochromis spp.
In West Africa women play a dominant role in on-shore handling, pocessing and marketing of fish...
but in Uganda this is predominantly a male activity.
The major marine species of fish found in West Africa can be classified into three broad categories. The fish of category "A" consists of highly-valued demersal species such as barracuda, threadfin, croakers, grouper, grouper sole, mullet, red snapper, shrimps, lobsters, squid and tuna. This group constitutes about 20 percent of the total annual fish landings. Due to their high value, they are usually chilled or frozen at sea before landing and are normally exported either as whole fish or fillets.
In West Africa, small quantities of these species, which are unsaleable in the fresh form, are fermented. Tuna is not commonly cured into fermented fishery products, however, small quantities of fermented tuna were seen in Côte d'Ivoire. Fermented high-value fish were found to be in a stale or semi-deteriorated state when they had not been chilled at the landing beach or markets.
Over 70 percent of the fish landings in West Africa consists of small to medium-sized pelagic species. The main types being sardinella, horse mackerel, Spanish mackerel, anchovies and shad. These are generally classified as category B fish and their prices are often lower than those of category "A.. This group (category B constitutes the main source of cheap food fish for a large section of the population. Most of these species are smoked or grilled; only small quantities are sometimes salted, partially fermented and dried. At peak fishing season, however, sardinella and other pelagic species contribute the largest proportion of fish landings and large quantities may be salted and fermented.
The species of fish classified as category "C" are hake, kingfish, bonito, skate, scad, mackerel, triggerfish, catfish, sharks, flyingfish, guitarfish, rays, anchovies and other trawl by-catch.
These species are generally cheaper than the others and constitute another source of cheap fish. A considerable quantity of category C fish is salted, partially or fully fermented, and dried. During periods of scarcity, these species become an important source of fish either in the fresh state or cured into salted, fermented and dried products (e.g. triggerfish in Ghana). Fish in this category are not usually preserved with ice at all before landing and may be in a poor state by the time they are purchased for curing. The main source of raw fish processed into fermented products in West Africa derives from this category.
Artisanal fishermen dominate the fishing industry throughout Africa. In Burundi, Chad, Mali, the Sudan and Uganda where fishing is carried out mainly on inland water bodies, almost the entire fish catch is landed by artisanal fishermen. Traditional fishing is also the most important method used on the seas of West Africa. In recent years, however, there has been an increase in the number of medium-sized semi-industrial boats and industrial vessels engaged in off-shore and inshore seining and trawling in West Africa. Artisanal fishermen and inshore boats land the low value, cheaper pelagic species (categories B and C), most of which are cured into smoked or fermented products. The industrial fleets are mainly engaged in trawling for high-value species, usually for export. Their fishing methods lead to the production of a lot of trawl by-catch e.g. squids, sea snail, octopus, triggerfish, etc. which are either discarded at sea or sold as low-grade fish often in a poor state of
quality. Consequently, a large percentage is salted, fermented and dried. The high-grade demersal species such as seabream, snapper, croaker, etc. are normally expensive and are sold in the fresh or frozen state. They are landed by both industrial and artisanal fishermen but poor quality or stale fish are down-graded and sold to processors for curing into fermented products.
Rivers, lakes and other freshwater bodies in Africa have common varieties of fish. The predominant species are Nile perch, tilapia, Alestes spp., Clarias spp., Bagrus spp., Hydrocynus spp. and other smaller species of the genera Limnothrissa, Stolothrissa, Haplochromis, Oreochromis and Rastrineobola commonly found in the lakes and rivers of East-Central Africa. In Burundi and Uganda for example, dagaa (Limnothrissa miodon) and ndagala (Rastrineabola tanganicae) are major clupeids of commercial importance. All these species are either salted, fermented and dried (e.g. koobi in Ghana) or fermented and sun-dried without salting.
(Imported) frozen fish are occasionally processed into fermented fish products.
Filleting frames from processing plants are sold to processors for fermentation (Senegal).
The final product: fermented dried filleting frames
In Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana and Senegal, processors buy low-grade frozen fish from cold stores for processing into fermented products.
Another source of raw fish for curing is offal from filleting factories. In Côte d'Ivoire and Senegal for example, offal from filleting factories is purchased and then processed into fermented fish. In Uganda, the bulk of the offal from filleting factories is usually smoked for local consumption. Swim bladders from Nile perch are, however, sun-dried and exported to the Far East.
3.4 Traditional methods of fish fermentation
Different processing techniques are employed in fish fermentation from one region to another. This is greatly influenced by factors such as availability of salt and the food habits of the local people.
Three main techniques have clearly emerged as methods commonly practiced in many African countries. These are:
(i) fermentation with salting and drying;
(ii) fermentation and drying without salting; and
(iii) fermentation with salting but without drying.
Figures 2, 3 and 4 illustrate these techniques which are further described below and also summarized in Table 3.
Examples of traditional methods of fish fermentation in Africa
Region: East Africa
Country: Burundi
Gender Role: Men are mainly involved in processing
Product: Ndagala
Raw Material: Limnothrissa miodon, Stolothrissa tanganicae
Process: The fish is sun-dried soon after harvest or purchase without any pre processing preparations. Slight fermentation takes place during sun-drying but this is pronounced when drying is delayed due to low ambient temperatures or during the rainy season.
Characteristics: The product is hard, dry and brittle with a silvery colour. Fermentation is not the objective but it occurs during drying. The product can keep for about three months. It is susceptible to insect infestation and mould growth and therefore requires periodic redrying to maintain a good quality.
Figure 2 Fermentation with Salting and Drying
Figure 3 Fermentation without Salting
Figure 4 Fermentation without Drying
Table 3. Local Name of Product and Fermentation Process
Country Local/Common Name of Product Fermentation Period Drying Period Packaging
Burundi Ndagala 2-5 days (normally during drying, no salting) 2-5 days on ground or rack Sacks, polythene bags
Chad Salanga Overnight (3-6 hours), no salting 3-7 days Baskets, sacks
Côte d'Ivoire Gyagawere, adjonfa 6 hours to3 days with salting 3-5 days on grass, nets, mats or raised platforms Baskets, sacks
The Gambia Guedj Overnight to2 days with salting 3-5 days on raised platforms Sacks
Ghana Momone, koobi, kako, ewule Overnight to3 days with salting 3-5 days on straw, nets, stones Sacks, baskets
Mali Djegue, jalan Overnight, no salting 3-7 days on grass, mats or ground Sacks, mats and ropes
Senegal Guedj, tambadiang, yeet Overnight to2 days with salting 3-7 days Sacks, baskets
The Sudan Fessiekh, kejeick, terkeen, mindeshi 10-20 days with salting No drying (fessiekh) 3-7 days (kejeick) Cartons, cans, polythene bags
Uganda Dagaa 3-6 hours without salting 2-5 days Sacks, baskets
Region: Central Africa
Country: Chad
Gender Role: Processing and marketing is dominated by women
Product: Fermented dried fish (salanga)
Raw Material: Alestes Nile perch, parch
Process: Fish for fermentation may sometimes be of poor quality and unsuitable for smoking. The fish is scaled, gutted and washed. Larger species of fish are split dorsally and opened up. In one process, the dressed fish is dried immediately after washing and fermentation takes place during drying. In another, the fish is left to ferment for 12-24 hours before drying. The fish is dried on mats or grass spread on the ground. Fish may also be dried by hanging vertically or horizontally on drying lines, either by passing a stick through the head or by tying the fish with a thread along the stick. Drying takes about three to six days depending on the weather. Previous experimental trials to introduce salt curing were not successful due to the scarcity and high cost of salt.
Characteristics: Fermented and sun-dried fish are light brown in colour with a dry, firm texture. Products made from partially spoiled fish have a characteristic strong smell. A well-dried product can be stored for at least three months. The product is susceptible to insect infestation and for this reason, some processors indiscriminately apply insecticides such as Lindane, Gammalin20, Shelltox, DDT and Gardona to the product. This practice is a health hazard to consumers.
Figure 5 Sun-drying Fermented Fish in Chad
Step 1 Drying on grass
Figure 5 Sun-drying Fermented Fish in Chad
(a) Alestes spp.
Figure 5 Sun-drying Fermented Fish in Chad
Step 2 Drying by suspending on sticks (b) Clarias angularis
Figure 5 Sun-drying Fermented Fish in Chad
(c) Lates nuiloticus
Region: West Africa
Country: Côte d'Ivoire
Gender Role: Dominated by women mainly from Ghana
Product: Adjonfa or gyagawere
Raw Material: Catfish, croaker, meagre, shark, mullet, skate, rays, triggerfish, horse mackerel, octopus, tuna, sole, Spanish mackerel, seabream, herring, African moonfish
Process: (a) Semi-dried: The fish is scaled, gutted and cut into pieces, when necessary, or split dorsally. It is then washed and dry-salted. The exudate from the fish is retained in the vats and the fish is immersed in this for fermentation from 12 hours to two days depending on the ambient temperatures. The fish may also be left to stand for about 1224 hours before salting. At the end of the salting process the fish is removed and dried for two to five days to achieve a final product with a moisture content ranging from 45 to 55 percent.
(b) Hard-dried: The raw fish is scaled, scaled and cut into pieces or split dorsally. It is then washed and dry-salted for 12-24 hours. The fish is then removed and is sun-dried for two to seven days or until a fairly dry product with a moisture content of about 35 40 percent and salt level of 7-19 percent is obtained.
Characteristics: (a) The semi-dry products usually have a very strong pungent smell and soft texture. They are susceptible to insect infestation and mould growth, with a shelf-life of up to two months.
(b) Dry fermented fishery products have a mild smell and are very susceptible to fragmentation. Under humid storage conditions, mould growth occurs and so requires periodic redrying to maintain quality. These products can be stored for at least six months if properly dried.
Figure 6 Method of Processing Guedj in Senegal Step 1 Fermentation of whole fish in brine
Figure 6 Method of Processing Guedj in Senegal Step 2 Dressing of fermented fish
Figure 6 Method of Processing Guedj in Senegal Step 3 Drying of fermented fish on improved traditional drying rack
Region: West Africa
Country: The Gambia and Senegal
Gender Role: Women dominate processing but men are also involved in marketing
Product: Guedj, tambadiang, yeet
Raw Material: (a) Guedj - Mackerel, seabream, threadfin, croaker, mullet, catfish, meagre, herrings, skate, rays, shark
(b) Tambadiang - Bonito
(c) Yeet - Sea snails (gastropods)
Process: (a) Guedj - The raw fish is often scaled, gutted and may or may not be split. It is then washed, salted and allowed to ferment for about two to three days. The salted fermented fish is dried on raised platforms for about three to five days. In another process the raw fish is dressed, washed and left overnight to ferment before salting for 12-24 hours and drying.
(b) The fish is washed and then placed in concrete vats with alternate layers of salt. It is left to ferment for one to three days before being descaled, washed and dried for three to five days on raised platforms.
(c) The flesh is removed from the shell, separated from the guts and split into two or four parts. This is placed in fermentation tanks, jute bags or polysacks and allowed to ferment for two to four days before being washed and dried on raised platforms for two to four days.
Characteristics: (a) Guedj is a semi-dry product with a strong pungent smell and a light brown colour. This product is susceptible to insect infestation, mould growth and fragmentation when poorly handled. It requires redrying to avoid spoilage and has a shelf-life of about three months if well dried.
(b) Tambadiang is a product with a grayish appearance and mild smell. It requires occasional redrying to ensure a longer shelf-life.
(c) Yeet is a semi-dry light brown product with a strong smell. It can be stored for about two months and is susceptible to a lot of mould growth. Redrying results in a hard product which is dark brown in colour.
Raw fish may be left unpreserved overnight to partially decompose before salting and further fermentation
Large species of fish (shark in this picture) are split and cut into pieces to drain...
...and then carefully washed with a sponge to remove blood clots and other materials.
Figure 7 Traditional Method of Processing Tambadiang in Senegal Step 1 Fermentation of whole fish in dry salt
Figure 7 Traditional Method of Processing Tambadiang in Senegal Step 2 Preparation of partially fermented fish before drying
Figure 7 Traditional Method of Processing Tambadiang in Senegal Step 3 Drying of whole, partially fermented fish
Figure 8 Artisanal Method of Processing Fermented Salted and Dried Fish (e.g. Momone, Ghana; Guedj, Senegal) Step 1 Preparation of fish before salting
Figure 8 Artisanal Method of Processing Fermented Salted and Dried Fish (e.g. Momone, Ghana; Guedj, Senegal) Step 1 Preparation of fish before salting
Figure 8 Artisanal Method of Processing Fermented Salted and Dried Fish (e.g. Momone, Ghana; Guedj, Senegal) Step 2 Salting and fermentation of dressed fish
Figure 8 Artisanal Method of Processing Fermented Salted and Dried Fish (e.g. Momone, Ghana; Guedj, Senegal) Step 2 Salting and fermentation of dressed fish
Figure 8 Artisanal Method of Processing Fermented Salted and Dried Fish (e.g. Momone, Ghana; Guedj, Senegal) Step 3 Drying
Figure 8 Artisanal Method of Processing Fermented Salted and Dried Fish (e.g. Momone, Ghana; Guedj, Senegal) Step 3 Drying
Region: West Africa
Country: Ghana
Gender Role: Dominated by women
Product: Momone, kako, koobi, ewurefua (triggerfish)
Raw Material: (a) Momone - Various species of fish such as catfish, barraccuda, seabream, threadfin, croaker, grouper, bonito, mackerel, herrings, squid, octopus, bumper, snapper, ribbon fish
(b) Kako and Koobi - Shark, skates, ray (for kato) and tilapia (for koobi)
(c) Ewurefua - Triggerfish
Process: The fish may or may not be scaled, gutted and have the gills removed.
(a) Momone - Larger species of fish (e.g. shark) may be cut into smaller pieces or split dorsally. The dressed fish is thoroughly washed with sea or fresh water. The raw fish is either left overnight before salting or dry salted immediately after washing. Salting and fermentation lasts for one to six days after which the fish is dried on the ground, grass, nets, stones or raised platforms for one to three days.
(b) Koobi - The raw fish is dressed and thoroughly washed. Dry salt is then rubbed into the gills, the belly cavity and on the surface. It is then arranged in alternate layers with salt and is allowed to ferment for two to three days before being dried for two to four days. More salt may be sprinkled on the fish during drying.
(c) Ewurefua - The fish is gutted by making a slit from the belly to the l ower jaw. It is then washed and transferred into brining tanks containing a small quantity of saturated brine from previous salting or from sea water. Dry salt is poured over the fish and stirred into the brine to ensure It comes into contact with the fish. The tank is then covered with jute sacks or polythene sheets and weighted down with stones or a wooden board and allowed to ferment for 12-24 hours. After fermentation, the fish is removed and is sundried for two to three days, either on the ground, grass, nets or raised racks.
Characteristics: (a) Momone - This is a soft product with a very strong pungent and sometimes offensive smell. It is susceptible to larvae infestation (maggots), mould growth and bacterial spoilage especially if the salt level is low. It can be stored for at least two to three months.
(b) & (c) Koobi/Kaka/Ewule - These are dried products with a mild to strong odour. They are susceptible to fragmentation, insect infestation and mould growth. For long-term storage (four to six months) they have to be redried periodically in order to maintain quality.
Region: West Africa
Country: Mali
Gender Role: Women are mainly involved in processing and retailing. Bulk distribution and wholesale is carried out by men
Product: Fermented dried fish, djege, djadan
Raw Material: Tilapia, Clarias spp., Alestes spp., Schilbe spp. and Hydrocynus spp.
Process: The fish is descaled and, with larger species, split open dorsally and headed. For smaller species (clupeids), the fish is dried immediately after washing and fermentation occurs during drying. Medium and larger species are put into water in an earthenware pot or oil drum and allowed to ferment for 12 hours. The fish is then removed and immersed in a solution of Gardona or K-Othrine for a few minutes to prevent it from being attacked by blowflies during drying. The fish is then dried on grass or mats for three to seven days depending on weather conditions.
Characteristics: Fermented and sun-dried fish are light brown in colour with a mild fermented odour. During storage, they are arranged on a platform and covered with a mat. The outer surface of the mat is first treated with the insecticide malathion to prevent insect attack. A well-dried product can be stored for more than six months.
Region: Central Africa
Country: The Sudan
Gender Role: Dominated by men but women are also involved
Product: Fessiekh, terkeen/mindeshi, kejeick
Raw Material: (a) Fessiekh - Alestes spp. and Hydrocynus spp.
(b) Terkeen/mindeshi - Tilapia, Nile perch, Alestes spp.
(c) Kejeick - Mixed fish, usually small species of Alestes spp. and Hydrocynus spp.
Process: (a) Fessiekh - Processing of fessiekh is typically carried out in temporary sheds (batarikh) to provide shade or a cool environment. Alestes spp. is the fish species commonly used to produce fessiekh. Whole, fresh fish is washed, covered with salt and arranged in alternate layers with salt either on a mat, in a basket or in perforated drums to ferment for three to seven days depending on ambient temperatures. Liquid exudate from the fish is allowed to drain off. After this period the fish is transferred into larger fermentation tanks where more salt and new batches of fish are added. The fermentation tanks are covered with jute sacks or polythene sheets and weights are placed on top to press the fish. Fermentation is carried out in sheds at temperatures ranging from 18° to 20°C. The fish is allowed to ferment for a further 10-15 days after which they are transferred into vegetable oil cans or kerosine cans (1015 kg) and sealed for export. The cans are covered with
polythene sheets before closing. Fessiekh is also packed in polythene bags (2-5 kg) for sale in local markets and shops.
(b) Terkeen/Mindeshi - The fish is washed and salted by arranging it in alternate layers with salt in an earthenware pot or barrel. Pepper or other spices may be added. The salt to fish ratio is 1:5. Pickling and fermentation takes place for 9-15 days after which the fermentation vat or pot is placed in the sun or near a fireplace to speed up fermentation. This process continues for about four days and the fish is stirred daily in order to break up the fish into a pasty mixture of muscle and bones which has a dark colour and strong odour.
(c) Kejeick - Large fish species are gutted, split dorsally, scaled or headed and washed. Smaller species of fish are dried whole or split at the belly to remove the guts. In northern Sudan, the fish is dried immediately after it has been washed by hanging it on sticks or laying it on stones, grass or mats. In the south, the fish may be sprinkled with salt or dipped into a strong salt solution and fermented for two to three days before drying for up to one week.
Characteristics: (a) Fessiekh is a wet salted product, soft in texture with a strong pungent smell and a shiny silvery appearance. It can be stored for more than three months. Spoilage is often due to poor quality raw fish especially if the fish is damaged through poor handling. A processing temperature above 25°C also results in a poor product. Fessiekh is highly susceptible to microbial attack and maggot infestation.
(b) Terkeen/Mindeshi - This is a wet pasty mixture of fish muscle and bones which loses moisture during storage and becomes more viscous and dark.
(c) Kejeick is a hard dried product and the colour depends on the species of fish used. It can be stored for about three months or more. The product is susceptible to insect infestation especially if it absorbs moisture. If fatty fish is used, there is rancidity due to lipid oxidation which adversely affects the flavour of the product.
Region: East Africa
Country: Uganda
Gender Role: Dominated by men
Product: (a) Salted dried tilapia, Alestes spp., Nile perch, Hydrocynus spp.
(b) Sun-dried Haplochromis spp., sun-dried Rastrineobola spp. (dagaa)
Process: (a) The fish may be gutted, split dorsally or headed and washed. Smaller species may be processed whole or split at the belly to remove the guts. The fish may be dried without salting, but when salt is used only small quantities are sprinkled on the surface. It is left to stand for three to six hours and then dried for three to seven days. Fermentation occurs during salting and drying. The fish may be dried on rocks, mats, the ground or, occasionally, raised platforms.
(b) Haplochromis spp. are usually dried by passing a stick through the eyes of 10-12 individual fish. Ten such sticks of fish are joined to form a mat which is then hung in the open air for the fish to dry. Rastineobola spp. are spread on the ground or a mat to dry. The drying process takes three to five days. Fermentation occurs during drying.
Characteristics: (a) The products may be very dry or semi-dry with a mild to moderately strong smell. They are susceptible to insect infestation and mould growth and require periodic drying to maintain quality. They can be stored from one to three months.
(b) The final products are grayish in colour, with a very hard and dry texture. They have a very mild smell which becomes pronounced if drying is inadequate. They are brittle and susceptible to insect infestation with a high incidence of fragmentation. Contamination with sand is a major problem when the fish is dried on the ground.
In West Africa processing of fermented fish is usually carried out in the open (Ghana)...
..processing of fessiekh takes place in enclosed sheds, sometimes constructed with cement blocks or wooden boards (Sudan).
Dry salt is aplied on split fish (Ghana)
Dry salt is applied on whole fish (Sudan)
Salting tanks are usually covered with a sack, wooden board or metal sheet during salting and fermentation (Ghana)
(Sudan)
3.5 Salting
The absorption of salt during fish curing results in the removal of water from the flesh to a level that impedes microbial growth and enzymatic activities. When high levels of salt are used in fish fermentation, the primary objective is to select the halophilic micro-organisms which will affect a controlled degradative process on the organic compounds in the fish muscle to bring out the desired flavours in the product.
In the coastal countries of Côte d'Ivoire, the Gambia, Ghana and Senegal, where solar salt produced by the natural evaporation of sea water is readily available and inexpensive, fermented fish is heavily salted.
The use of salt in fish processing may either be by dry salting (krenching) or wet salting. In dry salting, the granular salt is applied directly to the fish either in the gills, on the surface or, in the case of split fish, in the belly. The exudate from the fish may be allowed to drain away or be retained. In the latter case, the fish becomes immersed in the exudate and this is often referred to as "pickling".
In wet salting, the fish is immersed in brine for up to two days or dipped for a few hours. It was observed that some processors who cure fish with brine sometimes reuse the salt solution a number of times. This may be a potential source of bacterial contamination to fresh batches of fish.
Table 4 shows the price trend for salt in the countries of this survey.
Table 4. Price Trend for Salt
Country Type of Salt Price per 100 kg (US$)
Burundi Solar 30.53
Chad Solar 25.00
Côte d'Ivoire Solar 15.56
The Gambia Solar 15.63
Ghana Solar 15.39
Mali i) Rock 64.81
ii) Solar 22.22
Senegal Solar 11.11
The Sudan Solar 23.73
Uganda Solar 30.50
In the coastal countries of West Africa (i.e. Côte d'Ivoire, the Gambia, Ghana and Senegal) the price per 100 kg of salt ranges between US$ 10 and US$ 16. This is relatively cheap because the solar salt is locally produced or readily available. This accounts for the large-scale use of salt in the production of fermented fish in the sub-region.
Mali is a land-locked West African country without its own source of cheap solar salt. The locally produced rock salt is very expensive and it is valued for its medicinal properties rather than for food. Mali therefore imports limited quantities of solar salt from neighbouring coastal countries for domestic consumption. For this reason, imported solar salt which is relatively expensive is not used in fish processing. Indeed, it was noted through interviews and observations that from habit Malians consume relatively little salt in their diet and there is a prevalence of goitre in the country possibly due to the low level of iodine derived from common salt.
Chad is a land-locked country in Central Africa without any source of cheap solar salt. The domestic salt supply is therefore imported from Nigeria and Cameroon, hence fermented fish is produced without the use of salt.
The Sudan produces its own solar salt from the Red Sea coast, but due to the long distance, civil strife and the poor road infrastructure, salt is quite expensive at the major fish processing centres which are located along the River Nile. In spite of this, solar salt is used on a large scale for the production of fessiekh but not for other fermented fishery products such as kejeick.
In southern Sudan, where fermented fish is popular, small quantities of salt are sparingly applied to the fish. The raw fish may also be dipped into brine for a few hours in order to minimize the use of salt.
In the land-locked East African countries of Burundi and Uganda, salt is very expensive because it is mainly imported. As a result of this, salted fermented fishery products are not very popular. In Burundi, for instance, salt is not used at all in fish processing. In Uganda, salted dried fermented fish is only produced in the western and north-western parts of the country and most of this product is exported to Zaire. Due to the high cost of salt in Uganda, very little salt is sprinkled on fish during processing.
It can, therefore, be concluded from the above that the main factors influencing the use of salt in fish fermentation are:
(i) its availability in the country;
(ii) its cost; and
(iii) traditional food habits.
These factors also influence the type of fishery product widely consumed by the people in the countries of this survey. In countries where salt is expensive or not readily available, salted fermented fish is not popular.
3.6 Types of fermentation tanks
Various types of containers are used for the salting and fermentation of fish throughout Africa. Some of the tanks identified during the study are wooden vats, concrete-lined cane baskets, round or cone-shaped concrete tanks, rectangular concrete tanks, 200 litre oil drums, plastic or wooden barrels, metal (e.g. aluminium or iron) or earthenware cooking pots, jute or polypropylene sacks, cane or reed baskets.
In the Gambia, Ghana and Senegal, some processors pack the raw fish m sacks or bury them in the ground to accelerate fermentation. It was observed in Senegal that most of the concrete tanks located at the major processing sites were buried in the ground to simulate the traditional method of burying fish during fermentation. Raw fish may also be left on platforms or mats to go stale overnight. During fermentation and salting, the container may or may not be covered. For pickled products, the container is covered with a sack or polythene sheet and weighted down with stones or other heavy objects.
The capacity of the various tanks ranges from about 5 kg (for cooking pots and pans) to about 500 kg for the large rectangular concrete tanks which have two or three adjoining chambers. Table 5 shows some of the dimensions and capacities of different types of fermentation tanks.
<section>6</section>
3.7 Drying of fermented fish
Sun-drying is the final, yet an important, step in the traditional method of fish processing in many African countries. With the exception of fessiekh, mindeshi and terkeen in the Sudan, as well as certain types of wet fermented fish in Ghana, most fermented fishery products in Africa are sundried to reduce the water activity and therefore slow down or stop the growth of the micro-organisms responsible for fermentation or spoilage. Drying is normally combined with salting to reduce the moisture content sufficiently to ensure a longer shelf-life. Products with high moisture content (above 35 percent) are susceptible to attack by blowflies especially if the salt level in the product is low. This results in the development of maggots in some fermented fishery products during storage. At low moisture content (below 15 percent) the product is brittle and prone to fragmentation and attack by insects such as dermestes.
Table 5. Dimensions of Various Types of Fermentation Tanks
Type of Container Length (cm) Width (cm) Height (cm) Thickness (cm) Diameter (cm) Maximum Capacity (kg) Country
Cone-shaped wooden vats - - 50-80 3-5 Top: 80-100
Bottom: 40-60 200 Ghana
Rectangular concrete tanks 100-300 80-150 60-100 10-12 - 500 Ghana, Senegal, the Sudan
Round wooden or concrete vats and cement-lined baskets - - 80-100 3-5 Top: 80-100
Bottom: 40-60 200 Côte d'Ivoire, the Gambia, Ghana, Senegal
Oil drums (half or full) - - 75-200 0.1-0.15 75 200 Chad, Mali, the Sudan
Earthenware pots and metal pans - - - - 20-30 10 Chad, Ghana, Mali, Senegal
Wooden and plastic barrels - - 60-80 1-1.5 50-80 200 Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana, the Sudan
3.7.1 Equipment
The equipment used for drying is usually simple, inexpensive and locally available. The raw salted and fermented fish may be spread directly on the bare ground, grass, old mats, nets, stones or raised drying racks. In Burundi, for instance, ndagala is dried on well-designed metal drying racks at major landing centres. The driers, which consist of sloping wire mesh raised about 1 m above the ground, were introduced at the processing centres through a sponsored project. Provision is made for a polythene sheet or tarpaulin as a covering for the during bad weather, rainfall or at sunset. In Chad and Uganda, fish many be by passing a rope or stick through the head to skewer the fish and then by hanging it on wooden beams or drying lines, or placing in on the ground.
The various of artisanal raised drying racks are constructed with local materials such as bamboo, mats, old nets, plam leaves, etc. Sometime, big stones or logs may be used to construct a drying bed usually of about 20-25 cm high. Raised drying platforms may also be used to store fish for several months pending sale or distribution. A lot of locally designed platforms are used on a large scale in the Gambia and Senegal.
3.7.2. Drying process
The process of drying fish in the sun is greatly influenced by the size of fish, whether dressed or whole, and prevailing weather conditions. During hot dry periods, fermented fish may be dried within two to three days, especially if they are small species or cut pieces. Larger species may take four to five days under these conditions. In the wet season, drying is very slow and can extend beyond seven days in some instances. A lot of spoilage is experienced by processors during this period due to the humid conditions and rain falling onto the fish. During the period of drying, the processors spread, carefully arrange or hang the fish on the drying equipment (racks, stones, ground, lines or beams). The fish may be turned once or twice during the day for even exposure of the entire surface to sunlight. In the evenings, the semi-dry product may be collected in a basket or heaped together on the drying platform and covered with polythene sheets or any suitable water impermeable
material. In many countries, whole or split but uncut species such as Alestes spp., tilapia and triggerfish are arranged in a characteristic order with all the heads pointing in one direction. The orientation of the heads is changed to the opposite direction when the fish are turned. This, according to the processors, is a simple control measure to ensure that every single piece of fish has been turned.
Processors assess the rate of drying periodically by pressing the fish between the fingers to determine the texture. Fish processors use only sensory evaluation (visual appearance, odour) to determine the quality of their product.
Drying on the ground exposes the fish to pets and other domestic animals such as sheep, goats, pigs, lizards, etc. The fermented dried fishery products may also be contaminated with sand, grass and earth when they are dried on the bare ground. Drying on raised platforms, therefore, gives a better quality product.
In Côte d'Ivoire, the Gambia, Ghana and Senegal, fermented fish processors apply small quantities of edible oil (usually fish oil) over the surface of the fish during drying. Some processors claimed that this is done to give the fish a glossy appearance when it is ready for market, but other processors indicated that the oil prevents blowfly infestation.
3.8 Solar driers
A lot of research has been conducted on other forms of drying for improved results. One of these improved methods of drying is the use of solar driers which may be any of the following: solar tent drier, solar cabinet drier, solar dome drier and solar drier with a separate collecting and drying chamber.
These driers have been found to be efficient by achieving higher drying temperatures and reduced humidities. They also increase drying rates, producing lower moisture content in the final product and highly improved quality. It is possible to attain temperatures as high as 45°C inside solar driers and it has been suggested that this relatively high temperature offers some protection against attack by blowflies, beetles and other vermin. Additionally, solar driers also offer some protection against adverse weather conditions, for instance wet seasons.
Although solar driers have been successful at the experimental level, artisanal fish processors have not found them useful because of the large capital investment required for their construction. Other constraints have been the lack of robustness in most solar driers, the fairly low capacity and the technology needed for their construction which often makes them unattractive to artisanal fish processors. Furthermore, some processors have found the quality of products from solar driers different to that of traditional driers and often unacceptable to consumers.
For some time to come, these improved driers will not be favoured by the artisanal fish processors in developing countries due to the constraints mentioned above.
3.9 Health hazards and hygienic aspects of fermented fish processing
It was observed in all the countries visited that certain processing practices constitute health hazards to consumers, processors and the environment. These practices relate to dressing, washing, salting/fermentation, drying and waste disposal of the fish, as well as the use of poor quality salt and curing containers.
(i) Dressing: It was observed in Ghana and Senegal that fish may be held under the foot on the ground during dressing. This practice can cause microbial contamination of the fish and injury to the processor either from the spines of the fish or by the knife.
(ii) Washing: This is a very essential stage in fish processing but in almost all the countries visited it was noted that potable water is often not available. Therefore, water from lagoons, rivers, lakes or seas is used to wash the fish. These water bodies are often polluted by domestic waste, making them a possible source of chemical and microbial poisoning.
(iii) Salting/Fermentation: The non-use of salt results in uncontrolled fermentation. Under such conditions, the fish muscle becomes ideal for the growth of pathogenic organisms and the product may decay within a short period. Such products could pose a health hazard to consumers. The reuse of salt may also lead to contamination of fresh batches of fish with micro-organisms.
(iv) Drying: It was generally observed that fish is often dried on the ground except in the Gambia and Senegal where raised drying racks are extensively used. Drying fish on the ground is a source of contamination with sand and micro-organisms. It also renders the fish prone to attack by pets and other domestic animals such as goats, sheep, pigs and rodents. It was also observed that fish is not covered during drying which leads to attack by blowflies especially for unsalted fish or in cases where salting is inadequate. Another environmental hazard associated with drying fish is the strong offensive smell associated with fermented fish. This is pronounced during drying, hence processing sites are often located near fish landing sites or further away from living places.
A typical fermented fish processing site in Senegal
Fish is sometimes allowed to remain immersed in the brine formed during alting and fermentation
Weights such as stones are placed on top of the fish to keep them completely immersed in the brine
Cane baskets lined with cement are used for fermentation in Wesr Africa; they are low and buried in the sand in Senegal...
...they are high and standing on top of the sand in Ghana.
(v) Waste Disposal: At most of the processing sites in the countries of the survey, and indeed in many other African countries, there are no efficient of disposing of offals and other waste matter. These items are indiscriminately thrown away, thus polluting the environment and the available water body as well as serving as suitable breeding grounds for flies and mites which eventually infest the cured fishery product.
(vi) Salt Quality: Solar salt which is predominantly used for curing is often dirty and stored in heaps or in sacks on the bare ground without being covered. Solar salt is a major source of halophilic bacteria which causes poor quality fermented fishery products notably "pink.".
In Ghana and Côte d'Ivoire where salt is sometimes reused, particularly in the processing of triggerfish, the brine becomes a source of contamination by osmophilic moulds which are noted to cause the kind of spoilage in salted/fermented fishery products known as dun.
(vii) Containers: The fermentation tanks used for curing are not usually easy to clean due to their rough surfaces. These containers, therefore, become sites for the growth of microorganisms and sometimes blowfly maggots.
3.10 Quality evaluation of products
The quality of fermented fish is assessed subjectively by visual and/or organoleptic inspection. The main quality parameters are texture, colour, odour and fragility.
(i) Texture: Two main types of textural characteristics were identified in the study. Fermented fish intended to be used as food fish is hard dried or semi-dried but firm. This was the main type of fermented product found in many African countries (e.g. guedj, koobi, ewule). Due to the firm texture it remains whole in the sauce after cooking. In Côte d'Ivoire, the Gambia, Ghana and also in the Sudan, fermented fishery products with a soft texture are produced. These products are commonly added to soups and sauces in small quantities as a condiment. Fessiekh is used both as a food fish and condiment. It is either minced, mashed before adding to the vegetable sauce or broken up completely during cooking.
(ii) Colour: The colour of the product depends on the species of fish used as well as the processing method. For whole products such as fessiekh, a silvery appearance close to the fresh product is considered high quality. Poorly fermented products tend to be grayish or dark Fermented products which are split and dried are usually light brown in colour. Long storage and further drying darkens the product. Yeet, for instance, becomes dark brown after weeks of exposure to the sun.
(iii) Odour: The odour of fermented fishery products varies from mild to very pungent. Soft, semi-dry products usually have a strong smell but very dry fermented fishery products have a mild odour.
(iv) Fragility: When fermented fish is dried to a very low moisture content, it tends to break up during packaging and storage. Soft or semi-dry products become flaky especially if the raw fish is putrid or fermentation is unduly prolonged. Momone, for example, breaks up if poorly cured.
Drying of fish on the ground exposes by domestic animals, rodents, lizards, etc.
Drying on grass and nets
Drying on elevated rachs (Burundi - a sponsored project)
(The Gambia)
(Senegal)
Dressing small fish on the ground by holding the tail under the fot can be a health hazard to processors an to consumers.
Dressing on a platform reduces contamination and wearing gloves protects the processor against injuries.
(v) Shelf-life: The shelf-life of fermented fish is an important quality characteristic. At high moisture content or low salt levels, insects tend to lay eggs on the product which eventually develop into maggots and destroy the fish. Very dry fermented fish without salt is easily infested by dermestes species. Dry fish can be stored for nearly six months, but the soft or semi-dry ones have a shelf life of up to three months.
3.10.1 The role of fish inspectors and quality control certificates
Considering the microbiological changes which occur during fermented fish processing and the possible adverse health implications, there is a need for effective quality control of these products.
All the countries visited have government institutions responsible for inspecting fish and fishery products to certify their wholesomeness. In many of these countries, however, this role is limited to the collection of production statistics on landed catch or quantities of fishery products imported or locally produced, possibly for the purpose of computing tax to be paid. Fish inspectors are also involved in identifying the various fish species landed.
In countries where large quantities of fermented fish are produced and exported (e.g. the Gambia, Senegal and the Sudan), certain quality standards are set. Similarly, countries which import cured fish also have quality standards for fermented fish. The major quality factors are moisture content, salt level, organoleptic characteristics (colour, smell), microbiological quality, insect infestation, packaging and texture. In the Gambia, Mali, Senegal, the Sudan and Uganda, fish inspectors are stationed near processing sites or at major marketing centres to assess and certify the quality of all cured fishery products before distribution. It is almost impossible to transport cured fishery products from major processing centres in the Gambia, Senegal and the Sudan, especially if the product is intended for export.
Generally, quality standards are not clearly defined, they are difficult to assess and impossible to analyse due to a lack of relevant equipment. Official quality certificates usually report on visual characteristics and tend to be subjective.
Fish inspectors are mainly involved in the collection of production statistics, species identification and the provision of extension services to fishermen, processors and traders at the market in order to ensure the safety of fresh and cured fishery products.
Côte d'Ivoire: The Fisheries Department is empowered by government legislation to critically examine all fishery products imported into the country. Even though there is a large-scale local production of cured fishery products, fish inspectors are not actively involved in the inspection of locally produced fishery products.
The Gambia and Senegal: These countries export considerable quantities of fermented fishery products, hence there is an important role for fish inspectors. They are well trained staff who are located at the major fish processing towns. They carry out visual inspections to assess quality parameters such as texture, smell, colour, insect infestation and mould growth. Quality certificates are then issued with regard to the wholesomeness of the product.
Ghana: There is little emphasis on the inspection of locally produced fermented fishery products because production sites are scattered and virtually inaccessible by road networks. The Extension Service Department of the Ministry of Agriculture, however, provides assistance to processors on improved processing practices. For imported fishery products, officers from government agencies such as the Port Health Department, Customs, Excise and Preventive Service, Ghana Standards Board and Fisheries Research and Utilization Unit visually inspect all incoming fermented fishery products at the ports of entry to certify the quality before distribution.
Mali: The inspection of ail types of cured fishery products is handled by the officials of "Operation Pêche at Mopti. They inspect all types of dried fishery products arriving at Mopti Port which is the main commercial centre for fishery products. The examination is mainly visual and the parameters assessed are insect and mould infestation, texture, colour and visible signs of spoilage. Quality certificates are issued by the inspectors for any cured fish that arrives at Mopti. The officials are also involved in providing extension services to the fish traders to reduce post-harvest losses.
The Sudan: The Fisheries Administration of the Sudan is charged with the responsibility of inspecting and ensuring that fessiekh is produced under hygienic conditions and that the quality meets specified standards of texture, smell, colour and packaging before export. As was observed in other countries, facilities for an objective assessment of quality are lacking, the main method of quality assessment being visual inspection.
Uganda: The Fisheries Laboratory of the Ministry of Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAIF) is responsible for the inspection and certification of fresh and cured fishery products. fishery products cannot be exported to Europe, Hong Kong, Kenya and Zaire without quality certificates. The Ministry of Animal Industry and Fisheries has trained officials at the major markets to inspect all incoming cured fishery products and to advise traders on good handling, display and storage practices. They ensure that cured fishery products are well stored in warehouses provided by the government specifically for this purpose.
3.11 Spoilage and prevention of losses
It was observed in all the countries that various factors were responsible for spoilage of fermented fishery products.
3.11.1 Types of spoilage
Hard, dried fermented fishery products were found to be susceptible to common spoilage factors such as fragmentation, mould growth, insect infestation and attack from rodents.
Soft, semi-dry fermented fishery products normally suffer from maggot infestation and mould growth. These problems are especially prevalent when salt levels are low or final moisture content is high. Blowfly attack starts during drying because the fish are not covered. Eggs are rayed on the fish which later cause spoilage.
3.11.2 Causes of spoilage
The following were identified as the main causes of spoilage in fermented fishery products:
(i) Fragmentation: This is due to over-drying and poor handling practices during storage and distribution;
(ii) Mould Growth: This results from high relative humidity or high water activity of the product due to insufficient drying;
(iii) Insect and Maggot Infestation: This is often due to low salt levels in fermented products or high moisture content which enables blowflies to lay eggs or maggots on the fish. At low moisture content dermestes also attack fermented fishery products;
Dressing of fish and disposal of offals and domestic waste at the beach attracts domestic animals and flies (a)
Dressing of fish and disposal of offals and domestic waste at the beach attracts domestic animals and flies (b)
(iv) Microbial Spoilage: Microbial deterioration was observed in fessiekh produced in the Sudan. This was attributed to the use of bruised fresh fish, insufficient salting during curing as well as improper handling. Processors therefore inspect the products during packaging and sort out the deteriorated ones.
3.11.3 Preventive Methods
The commonest method of preventing spoilage in fermented fishery products in many African countries is periodic redrying. In Mali, the wet fish is immersed in K-Orthrine or Gardona for a few minutes before drying to prevent blowfly attack. Some processors also apply various types of insecticides to fermented fishery products during sale and distribution. Mats used for packaging fish and warehouses are fumigated with malathion. To prevent rodent attack, raised platforms are frequently used for the storage of cured fish and the product is covered with mats. it has also been reported that the finished product is heaped onto a mat on the ground inside a room and surrounded with dry powdered pepper which is believed to ward off insect attack.
In Chad there is a prevalence of indiscriminate use of insecticides such as Lindane, Gammalin 20, Shelltox, DOT as well as Gardona. Some processors in Ghana have also reported the application of camphor (napthalene granules) as an insecticide to fermented sun-dried anchovies in storage.
3.12 Packaging
Packaging forms an important part of food processing because it facilitates handling during storage and distribution within the marketing chain. To achieve the expected results from a packaging material, it must possess certain characteristics such as adequate strength to protect the packaged product from damage at economic cost, it must be readily available and easy to use, and should be clean to prevent contamination with undesirable substances.
Table 6 shows that baskets, old jute bags and polysacks form the most widely used containers for packaging fermented and sun-dried fishery products either for storage or during distribution.
In Mali, straw mats and ropes are used to wrap and tie fermented dried tilapia. It is only in the Sudan that empty vegetable oil cans or kerosine cans and polythene bags are used for the packaging of wet fermented fish (fessiekh) for export and local retail trade respectively. In Uganda, grass is used in addition to baskets to package cured fish.
The preference for simple artisanal packaging materials in all the countries surveyed is attributed to their low cost, convenience of handling and ready availability in the locality.
Most of these packaging materials are reused a number of times before they are discarded. It was observed that packaging materials such as baskets, ropes and mats have a life-span of 612 months. The oil cans, jute bags and polysacks can last for two to three years.
The major disadvantage of these packaging materials include the fragility of baskets, and the inability of cleaning them easily after use to prevent recontamination of the products. Baskets and sacks do not offer any barrier to insect infestation and rodent attack, nor are they impervious to water or other fluids. As a result of the above, products stored in baskets, mats or sacks are susceptible to rapid deterioration if exposed to rain.
Figure 9 Fumigation of Storage Mat with Malathion (Mali)
Figure 10 A Typical Storage Platform for Dry Fermented Fish (Mali)
Figure 11 Dipping Fermented Fish in a Solution of K-Orthrine prior to Drying (Mali)
Table 6. Packaging Materials of Storage and Distribution
Country Type of Packaging Advantages of Packaging Disadvantages of Packaging Lifespan of Packaging Material
Burundi Jute bags, polysacks Cheap, easy ventilation and convenient for handling Possible insect infestation; fragmentation due to improper handling Up to 3 years, but greatly influenced by level of usage
Chad Jute bags, polysacks As above As above 2-3 years
Côte d'Ivoire, Baskets, jute bags, polysacks As above As above and fragile for baskets 6-12 months (baskets); 2-3 years (others)
The Gambia As above As above As above As above
Ghana As above As above As above As above
Mali Ropes, mats, jute bags, polysacks As above As above Up to 12 months (ropes and mats); 2-3 years (others)
Senegal Baskets, jute bags, polysacks As above As above 6-12 months (baskets); 2-3 years (others)
The Sudan Old oil cans, polythene bags, jute bags, polysacks As above Exclusion of air may lead to growth of pathogens (cans) 6 months (oil cans); disposable polythene bags; 2-3 years (others)
Uganda Baskets, grass, jute bags, polysacks As above Poor hygiene and same as Burundi 1 month (baskets and grass); 2-3 years (others)
Fermented dried fish may be packaged in baskets...
...or tied with ropes and wrapped with straw mats for distribution.
In Sudan fessiekh is packed either in kerosine tins...
...or in labelled polythene bags.
Jute sacks are commonly used to package dry fermented fish for export in the region
Old cardboard boxes are used to package cured fish for domestic distribution.
<section>7</section>
4. Socio-economic evaluation of fermented fish
4.1 Volume
4.2 Price structure
4.3 Prevention of losses
4.4 Value
4.5 Generation of employment
4.6 Capital investment
4.7 Use of technology
4.8 Role in domestic and international trade
4.1 Volume
The quantity of fish that is processed into fermented products in any particular country is influenced by the following factors:
(i) the food habits of the people;
(ii) market demand (national and international).
In certain countries, a large number of people are engaged in cured fish production mainly because of a ready domestic market or high demand for the product outside the country and, therefore, a flourishing export potential. Table 7 shows domestic fish supply and prices.
(a) Burundi: It was observed that the annual fish production is about 17,000 t of which ndagala constitutes nearly 80 percent. Less than 30 percent is eaten fresh especially in Bujumbura and major landing towns.
About 70 percent (12,000 t) of the annual landed catch is converted into sun-dried products. Due to the high demand for fish and low domestic production, nearly 200 t of fish consisting mainly of dried salted fish are imported annually to meet the shortfall.
(b) Chad: The total annual fish production in Chad is estimated at 110,000 I. As much as 52,000 t (47 percent) is processed into partially fermented, sun-dried fish.
About 60 percent of the product is exported to Nigeria where there is a ready market. Some quantities are also exported to Cameroon. As a result of the civil strife and poor road transport network, distribution of fishery products within the country is very difficult.
(c) Côte d'Ivoire: The annual production of fresh or frozen fish is about 170,000 t of which 35 percent is consumed fresh while 50 percent is smoked. Only about 10 percent of the total fish supply is eaten as salted, dried and fermented products. The low level of fermented fish consumption is due to its usage as a condiment. Most of the fermented fishery products are consumed locally especially in the rural communities. However, small quantities are exported to Burkina Faso.
(d) The Gambia: About 50 percent of the annual fish production in the Gambia is processed into salted, partially fermented and dried products mainly for export to Cole d'Ivoire, Ghana and Mali. Gambians, however, prefer guedj, a fermented semi-dry product. Due to the large external market available to processors of dry fermented fish, the price of the product on the local market is high compared to other cured fishery products.
(e) Ghana: About 15 percent of the total annual fish production of 350,000 t is fully or partially fermented into either dried or salted dried products for the local market. The product is used as food fish and as condiment in local dishes particularly in the rural communities where there are no cold storage facilities. Fermented fishery products are a delicacy among the Akans of southern Ghana. Salted and fermented dried fishery products are imported from the Gambia, Norway and Senegal to meet shortfalls in local supply.
Table 7. Domestic Fish Supply and Prices
Country Total Domestic Quantity of Fresh Price of Fresh Fish Price of Fermented Fish
Burundi 17,000 11,900* 0.53 1.05
Chad 80,000 38,000 1.17 4.33
Côte d'Ivoire, 169,000 17,000 0.56 1.11
The Gambia 14,000 7,000 0.38 0.63
Ghana 350,000 54,000 0.51 1.79 (tilapia)
1.28-2.31 (momone)
2.31 (stockfish)
Mali 60,000 18,000 0.83 2.53
Senegal 160,000 15,000 0.17-0.33 1.50-1.67 (guedj)
1.00-1.25 (yeet)
1.25 (tambadiang)
The Sudan 26,000 8,000 0.51 2.03 (fessiekh)
Uganda 200,000 26,000 0.30 1.43
* Sun-dried, slightly fermented
(f) Mali: Of the total annual fish production of about 60,000t as much as 30 percent (18,000 t) is processed into dried fermented fish. Fresh fish consumption in Mali is merely 10 percent compared to 60 percent for smoked fish which constitutes the largest share of the domestic fish supply.
(g) Senegal: About 15,000 t of the annual domestic supply of 150,000 t are processed into various dried and fermented fishery products. A large proportion of these is distributed locally but significant quantities representing 2-5 percent of the total volume of fish exports go to countries such as Burkina Faso, Congo, Ghana, Mali, Togo and Zaire.
(h) The Sudan: The average annual fish production in the Sudan is about 26,000 t of which nearly 8,000 t is processed into fessiekh and kejeick. Most of the fessiekh, representing about 70 percent of total output, is exported to Egypt but kejeick is consumed locally especially in the southern region.
Fessiekh production has been on the increase since 1980 (from 748 t in 1980 to 1,279 t in 1989), whereas kejeick production has been decreasing drastically (from 3,800 t in 1980 to 560 t in 1989). The decrease in production of kejeick could be attributed to the civil war in the south where the product is mainly consumed and the increase in fessiekh production could be attributed to the viable export market in Egypt.
(i) Uganda: Annual fish production is about 200,000 t but only 26,000 t are processed into dried fish. Dried fish consists mainly of dagaa and Haplochromis spp. which together supply about 10 percent of the fish in the Ugandan diet. Salted, dried and fermented fish consisting mainly of Alestes spp. and tilapia are processed in the northern and north western districts where the product is popular. Considerable quantities of this product are also exported to Kenya and Zaire.
4.2 Price structure
The marketing of fish and fishery products in many African countries is in the hands of the informal and private sectors of the economy. Fish is usually sold by auction or bargaining at the various landing centres. The pricing process can sometimes last for several hours, a situation which often leads to long delays in the sale of fish. In the absence of chilling, freezing and cold storage facilities, fresh fish prices fluctuate freely even within a day and from one fishing centre to another depending on the volume of landings. It was noted that prices are not controlled by any official agency but are influenced by supply and demand as well as the species and quality of the catch.
Fish prices are very low during the major fishing season. In Ghana, for example, processors tend to delay buying fresh fish soon after landing until late in the evening when fishermen are desperate to dispose of their catch and prices fall. The quality of such fish is often poor but it is bought and processed into smoked or fermented products.
In view of the fact that fermented fish processing and marketing are entirely artisanal activities, there is no official price control of the product. Prices are largely determined by the cost of raw fish, salt (if used), the cost of distribution, the popularity of the product in a locality and the profits of processors. Many middlemen are involved in the distribution and marketing of fermented fishery products, hence there is a profit margin added to the cost of the product at each point in the distribution chain leading to an increase in the final market price of the product. When highly-valued species of fish such as croaker, dentex, octopus, snapper, sole, Nile perch, tilapia and Alestes spp. are cured into fermented fish they are more expensive than low-value species such as anchovies, Limnothrissa spp., shark, sea snail, bonito, triggerfish and unpopular species found in trawl by-catch.
Another determinant of fermented fish prices is the reduction in weight which is brought about by moisture loss during salting and/or drying. Curing results in about a 50-60 percent reduction in weight and processors adjust the price of the final product accordingly. A common practice observed in all markets was that fermented fish (and other cured) products are sold by pieces or sizes based on visual assessment. In Senegal, however, some traders sell fermented fish by weight. In countries where large quantities of fermented fishery products are exported (e.g. the Gambia, Senegal, the Sudan) the local price tends to be higher.
Other economic factors that have been associated with fermented fish processing are employment generation, capital investment, use of technology and its role in domestic and international trade.
4.3 Prevention of losses
In the coastal countries of the West African sub-region, underutilized or unpopular species of fish as well as trawl by-catch which would normally have been thrown away are utilized in fermented fish production (e.g. triggerfish, rays, puffers, squid, etc.). Similarly, excess fish that cannot be stored during the bumper season due to inadequate freezing and storage facilities and fish that cannot be sold fresh at the auction by the close of the day are fermented.
It is often reported that post-harvest fish losses in Africa are about 25-30 percent, but in view of the substantial quantities of poor quality and underutilized species which are salted and fermented, it can be reasonably deduced that the reported post-harvest losses may be grossly overestimated.
4.4 Value
The processes of fermentation and drying preserve and add value to the fish giving a product which has a characteristic odour and aroma. This is preferred by consumers for the preparation of traditional soups and stews. Notably, more income is derived by fish processors from fish fermentation than from smoking or drying in all the countries included in this survey.
4.5 Generation of employment
Fish fermentation provides direct employment for processors and supports others who provide indirect services to the industry in the areas of packaging, distribution, marketing, etc. In Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana and Senegal, for instance, over 300,000 people in each country are involved in the processing, distribution and marketing of fish.
4.6 Capital investment
Fermentation is a low cost method of fish preservation using artisanal equipment which is readily available, easy to fabricate and repair. Therefore, one does not need a large capital outlay to start operations. In most cases, equipment such as old barrels, earthenware pots, old nets, locally-made drying racks, mats, used jute/poly sacks and cans which are the major items used, are locally available and affordable. Processors can, therefore, commence business with little capital.
4.7 Use of technology
Most processors use simple artisanal technologies for fermentation, packaging and storage. These methods usually date back in history or were introduced into the country by settler communities. The methods are easily transferred either by tradition within a family or through non-formal training. As a result of the mode of technology transfer in all the countries, there is a lack of standardization in production processes and product quality differs from batch to batch or from one locality to another in all the countries mentioned.
4.8 Role in domestic and international trade
4.8.1 Domestic trade
The bulk of fermented fish produced in Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana and Mali is marketed locally, thereby enhancing the supply of animal protein to the rural communities in these countries. The product lends itself to easy packaging, transportation, distribution and marketing without chilling or any other expensive method of storage.
4.8.2 Factors affecting intra-regional trade
Trade in fish and fishery products among African countries is low. FAO estimates that intra-regional trade in traditional fishery products in Africa below the Sahara (excluding South Africa) is about 15 percent of fish production or 150,000 t product weight with some US$ 200 million. Most of this trade is informal. Smoked and dried fish form the bulk of the trade. Both may be slightly fermented. A rough estimate of the trade in truly fermented products in this part of Africa is 10,000 t per annum.
Constraints to an increase in the trade of fishery products among African countries include the following:
(i) trade and tariff barriers;
(ii) increasing demand within countries due to high population growth;
(iii) decline in the economies of various African countries resulting in foreign exchange constraints;
(iv) differences and fluctuations in the value of local currencies and exchange rates;
(v) differences in establishing uniform quality standards and acceptable packaging;
(vi) official action to curtail imports;
(vii) poor road infrastructure which hinders easy flow of products across countries.
In spite of these constraints, the export of cured, including fermented, fishery products, mainly on an informal basis, is still quite important for certain countries. For instance, Uganda and Tanzania export salted dried fish (slightly fermented) to Zaire where there is a big market for this product.
Congo and Zaire import significant quantities of salted fish from the Gambia and Senegal. Egypt imports nearly 70 percent of fessiekh produced in the Sudan. The bulk of the dried fish produced in the Lake Chad Basin is marketed in Nigeria and Cameroon, while Cameroon exports considerable amounts of cured fish from Lake Chad and the coast to Nigeria.
In the West African sub-region, the flow of fermented dried fish is mainly from the Gambia, Mali and Senegal to Burkina Faso, Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana, Nigeria and Togo. Currently, Mali is exploring the trade opportunities for exportation of its cured fishery products to Ghana.
Senegal exports fermented fish to various West African countries. Recent reports indicate that small quantities of salted/fermented dried fishery products are exported from the Gambia and Senegal to France where they are patronized by the resident West African communities.
In Ghana retail trading of fermented fish is exclusively a female activity.
In some African countries men are engaged in retail of fermented fish (Senegal)
Dried fermented fish are arranged on elevated rachs to build up stock before distribution (Gambia)
(Senegal)
4.8.3 External trade (imports)
Very little cured fish is currently imported into Africa. The main products imported are the inexpensive, popular frozen fish such as scomber, mackerel, horse mackerel and sardinella.
Stockfish kako which has the characteristic fermented fish flavour similar to locally produced ones were imported on a large scale from Iceland and Norway into Ghana and Nigeria in the 1960s. Stockfish imports were, however, stopped in Ghana in the early 1970s. Nigeria also banned stockfish imports in the early 1980s. As a result of trade liberalization in recent years, small quantities of this product are imported by the private sector in Ghana. Salted, partially fermented dried fish are also imported by nongovernmental agencies as food for work packages for community projects.
<section>8</section>
5. Distribution and marketing
5.1 Fermented fish marketing
5.2 Mode of distribution
5.1 Fermented fish marketing
(a) In the West African countries of Côte the Gambia, Ghana and Senegal, and the Central African country of Chad, women dominate the processing and marketing sectors of the cured fish industry. The bulk of the fermented fish is processed and distributed by women at both wholesale and retail levels. In Mali, however, the bulk distribution and wholesale of all forms of cured fish is solely handled by men whilst the women dominate the retail trade. Men are also involved in the retail marketing of fermented fish in Senegal.
In East-Central Africa men dominate both wholesaling and retailing of cured fishery products. In Uganda, for instance, a survey of one district revealed that out of 11,216 people involved in fish trading in the markets, 76.6% were male and 23.4% were female. In . (Burundi) men are involved in fresh fish trading rather than cured fish trading. In the hinterland, however, men are the main cured fish traders and distributors. In Ghana, especially in the southern regions where fish consumption is very high, men are completely absent from the distributive and retail trade of cured fish.
(b) Organization
The private sector dominates the distributive trade in Africa and there are no organized groups. State-owned enterprises are not actively involved in the processing and marketing of cured, including fermented, fishery products. However, in some countries the government provides facilities such as warehouses for the storage of cured fishery products and quality inspection services. Notwithstanding the lack of formal trade associations/organizations, it was observed in Senegal for example that women processors formed cooperatives to secure credit for their individual operations.
In Ghana, cured fish marketing and distribution is an informal activity which operates through the Fish mummy. system. This is a system in which individual female traders enter into contractual agreements with the fishermen and processors in order to gain control over what is produced.
Although formal trade groupings among fish traders are generally absent in many African countries, fish traders form social or welfare societies. By virtue of these associations, traders are able to form some sort of cartel to informally protect their common interest.
5.2 Mode of distribution
The major mode of fish distribution in the countries visited is by bicycle, pick-up/van, truck (5-10 t) and train. In Chad, Ghana, Mali and Uganda, cured and fermented fish are also distributed by means of boats and canoes, while in Mali and Senegal, horse-drawn carts are widely used for the distribution of fermented fish.
5.2.1 Retail packaging
Apart from the Sudan (Table 6), where old petrol or oil cans with capacities of 10-20 kg are used, all the other countries listed package cured fish in polyethylene bags, old papers or leaves for retail trade distribution.
5.2.2 Mode of sale
Throughout Africa, fish sold at the markets is generally displayed on table-tops. The Sudan is the only country where fermented fish is sold in shops. In Côte d'Ivoire, the Gambia, Ghana, Mali and Senegal, the products are not sold in shops or supermarkets but are exclusively sold in popular markets where they are openly displayed either on tables or mats spread on the ground. This condition attracts flies which settle profusely on fermented fish. Traders frequently drive away the flies by swatting them with leaves or papers. Cured fish traders usually sell all types of smoked, fermented salted or dried fishery products.
In coastal countries where significant quantities of freshwater fish are sold, the traders often deal in only one type, either freshwater cured fish or marine fishery products.
<section>9</section>
6. Consumer attitudes to fishery products
6.1 Fish consumption patterns
6.2 Substitutes for fermented fish
6.3 Nutritional evaluation of fermented fishery products
All types of fermented fish together with other ingredients are boiled or stir-fried and eaten with the starchy staple food. The fermented fish imparts flavour to the dish. Truly fermented products are therefore used as a condiment. Other non-fermented fish or meat may be added. Slightly fermented cured products are used without addition of a condiment.
6.1 Fish consumption patterns
Fish consumption patterns in many African countries show relatively higher levels in the coastal countries than in the hinterland. The average annual fish consumption in the West African coastal region for example is approximately 20 kg per capita. In the Sahel countries of Chad, Mali and the Sudan, per capita fish consumption is low, ranging from 2 to 9 kg per annum (Table 8). Here; the main source of animal protein is meat due to the large number of herds of cattle in these countries.
In eastern and central Africa, per capita fish consumption varies within each country depending on proximity to the source of fish. In Burundi for instance, the per capita fish consumption is about 17 kg in the capital city and in the villages along the Lake Tanganyika. However, in the hinterland per capita fish consumption is below 4 kg.
In Uganda, fish is consumed on a large scale in the cities (e.g. Kampala), the northern and northwestern districts, especially among people residing in districts bordering Lakes Victoria, Kyoga, Edward, George and Albert. In the north-eastern districts where the people are traditionally cattle herdsman, fish consumption is very low. Indeed, there are people who are complete non-fish eaters by custom and so avoid fish. Ugandans also consume milk on a large scale throughout the country.
Table 8. Fish Consumption Patterns
Country Fresh/Frozen % Smoked % Fried % 
Fermented Dried
Per Capita Consumption kg/annum
Salted % Unsalted %
Burundi 25 5 negligible negligible 70 6.0
Chad 10 45 negligible 0 45 8.5
Côte d'Ivoire 35 50 5 10 0 17.7
The Gambia 30 55 5 10 0 16.4
Ghana 20 60 5 10 5 20.0
Mali 10 60 negligible 0 30 7.1
Senegal 70 20 negligible 10 0 20.7
The Sudan 70 5 negligible 10 15 2.0
Uganda 45 40 2 3 10 13.0
It is therefore clear that ecological factors, animal husbandry practices and traditional beliefs as well as urbanization, income levels and the type of animal protein available in a community are the major factors which influence fish consumption patterns in many African countries. In the Savanna and the semiarid regions of West Africa, Chad and the Sudan where fishery resources are low or underdeveloped, and also among the pastoral communities in East and Central Africa, preference for fish is low and the people are meat consumers by habit.
6.1.1 Pattern of fresh fish consumption
Many Africans have a strong preference for fresh fish when it is available. Fresh fish consumption in Senegal has increased in the last few years as a result of the establishment of cold stores and the availability of distribution vans which have facilitated the marketing of frozen fish throughout the country. For these reasons, nearly 70 percent of the local fish supply is distributed in the fresh/frozen form.
Fish consumption is generally low in the Sudan. However, consumers have a high preference for fresh fish especially in the cities and urban areas which are accessible to fresh fish supply. About 70 percent of the total fish supply is consumed in the fresh or frozen form. Fresh fish consumption in Uganda has been estimated at 46 percent of total fish supply. This level may be even higher in the cities and the urban centres which are located near the major fish landing centres along Lake Victoria. The establishment of filleting plants in Uganda has resulted in a significant improvement in the quality of fresh fish supply and a resultant increase in the volume of fish distributed in the fresh state, even though the bulk of the fillets from the processing plants are exported to Europe.
In Burundi, Chad, the Gambia and Ghana, fresh fish constitutes 20-30 percent of the total annual fish supply. In Mali, only 10 percent of domestic fish supply is consumed fresh. The main reason for this low level of fresh fish consumption is lack of ice and inadequate freezing and cold storage facilities. Poor road networks in these countries hamper efficient storage and distribution of fresh or frozen fish from the main landing centres to the consuming markets farther away.
6.1.2 Pattern of cured fish consumption
Cured fishery products are widely used in Africa in the preparation of traditional staple foods as a source of animal protein and also as an essential ingredient which enhances the flavour of the meal. The predominant and popular cured fishery products are smoked, salted dried, wet-salted, sundried and fermented.
Burundi: Sun-dried Limnothrissa spp. and Stolothrissa spp. (ndagala) is the most important cured fishery product consumed in Burundi. Fresh ndagala is preserved mainly by sun-drying. Fermentation is not an intended step in the processing of dried ndagala. However, in the course of sun-drying partial fermentation occurs because of the degradation of organic compounds and this gives the product a mild fermented flavour. This is particularly evident from the odour of the fish during drying. Nearly 70 percent of the landed catch is consumed as sun-dried fish especially in the rural areas and among the low-income sectors of the population. In recent years, the consumption of fried ndagala has increased, particularly in Bujumbura where it is sold in restaurants as a snack food and it is well patronized by middle-income earners. Some ndagala is smoked but due to the scarcity of fuelwood this is not an important product. Salted and fermented fishery products are not popular among
the indigenous people of Burundi, although small quantities may be found on sale at the market in the Bujumbura. Burundi actually imports salted dried fish from Tanzania and re-exports to Zaire; some of this is patronized locally by foreigners from Zaire and West Africa (e.g. Mali).
Chad: Fish consumption in Chad is relatively low because of the availability and high preference for beef. The main product is smoked dried fish which constitutes about 25 percent of total fish supply.
The main type of cured fish consumed locally is fermented sun-dried fish which constitutes nearly 50 percent of total fish consumption.
Nearly 60 percent of all cured fish in Chad, smoked or sun-dried, is exported to Nigeria.
Sun-dried fermented fish is used in the preparation of local stews both as food fish and as condiment. N'Djamena is a major market for fish in Chad, hence large quantities of fresh and cured fish from Lake Chad and Rivers Shari and Logone arrive at the market every day. In the rural areas, fermented dried fish is consumed on a large scale.
The availability of fermented dried fish depends on the season. When fish is in abundance, large quantities are processed into fermented dried fish for local consumption or for export, but during the lean periods cured fish is scarce and expensive.
Côte d'Ivoire: The main cured fishery product widely consumed in Côte d'Ivoire is smoked fish. About 50 percent of the total fish supply is consumed in the smoked form. This product is dried to a low moisture level in order to preserve the fish and facilitate distribution to markets in the hinterland without spoilage. The high preference for smoked fish is due to its long shelf-life, low price and availability throughout the country.
Salted, dried and fermented fish constitute approximately 10 percent of the total volume of fish distributed locally and are preferred among the low-income subsistence farmers of the rural areas in the interior. Fermented dried fish are used by these consumers as food fish and also as a condiment in traditional soups. The total volume of fresh fish which is fried before consumption is only about 5 percent.
The Gambia: Smoked fish is the most widely consumed fishery product in the Gambia, constituting about 60 percent of total fish distribution. The most abundant and cheapest smoked fish in the Gambia is bonga (shad).
Various types of salted, fermented and sun-dried fishery products are used to prepare traditional sauces in the Gambia. These products include fermented and dried shark, ray, catfish, sea snails and other demersal species such as croakers, snappers and threadfins. Hard dried fermented fishery products are often used in large pieces as food fish, but the most widely consumed product is the semi-dried, fermented fishery product known locally as guedj which is added to stews and soups in small amounts as a condiment. Fermented dried fish in the Gambia represents about 10 percent of total fish consumption.
Ghana: About 80 percent of the total fish supply in Ghana is cured in various ways before consumption. The main cured fishery product is smoked fish and this is the most popular fishery product used in the preparation of traditional soups and stews. More than 60 percent of fish consumers rank smoked fish as the most preferred cured fishery product. Consequently, smoking is the main method of preserving fish and the product is therefore readily available in many markets throughout the country.
Low-value pelagic species, such as sardines, anchovies, bonga, bonito, etc., which constitute about 60 percent of Ghana's total fish production are usually smoked before distribution.
Smoked fish is mainly used to prepare "soups" (sauces eaten together with the starchy staple food) but small quantities are also used for stews. Reasons for the preference for smoked fish include flavour, availability and the possibility of storing it for a few days. Some consumers claim that smoked fish, unlike fresh fish, remains whole when used to prepare traditional soups and this is important because most Ghanaians prefer the piece of fish to remain intact. Freshwater fish such as tilapia, catfish, Nile perch, etc., are usually smoked to a very low moisture content. These are highly valued especially by the middle and upper-income groups and in the urban centres. They are relatively more expensive than smoked marine fish. The high preference for freshwater smoked fish is due to the characteristic flavour it imparts to soups. Some marine species are also highly valued when smoked and these include seabream, snappers, barracuda, cassava fish, grouper, mullet, etc. which
are usually preferred as a soft or semi-dry smoked product. Smoked tuna which was not a popular product in the late 1960s and early 1970s is currently well-liked. The main reason for its relatively low popularity, especially in rural areas, is its high salt content. Due to the periodic scarcity of other fish species, there has been an increase in the preference for smoked tuna.
Fried fish is an important fishery product especially in southern Ghana. Nearly 5 percent of the total annual fish supply is fried before consumption.
Salted, fermented and sun-dried fish constitute another important fishery product widely consumed in southern Ghana. Semi-dried fermented fish, known locally as momone, which is processed from highvalue fish species is normally used in small quantities as a condiment. This product has a characteristic strong pungent odour, but the flavour it imparts to the meal is relished by consumers. Momone means stinking fish, hence the term "stinkfish" used earlier in publications on Ghanaian fishery products.
Partially fermented salted and hard dried fish such as kako are usually processed from larger demersal species such as sharks, skates, rays and squids. These products are used both as food and as a condiment in the preparation of traditional soups, stews and vegetable sauces. They constitute the second most important cured fishery product.
All types of fermented fishery products are either boiled in the soup or stew, or grilled and mashed with the starchy staple (cassava, yam, plantain, cocoyam, etc.). During cooking, the fermented fish imparts a desirable flavour to the meal. Although fermented fishery products are used by a broad section of the Ghanaian population, it has been observed that people with a high level of formal education tend to substitute fermented fish with manufactured flavour enhancers to achieve the desired taste.
The consumption of fermented fish is relatively high in southern Ghana especially among the Akan tribe which uses it as a delicacy and flavouring agent in traditional vegetable sauces. On the other hand, consumption is low in northern Ghana among the indigenous tribes. As a result of the popularity of this product in Ghana, considerable quantities of fermented fish are imported from Côte d'Ivoire, the Gambia and Senegal to supplement local production. It is interesting to note that the bulk of fermented fish exported to Ghana from Côte d'Ivoire and the Gambia are processed by Ghanaian settlers living in those countries.
During periods of fish scarcity, salted dried and fermented fish, such as koobi, kako, ewule, etc., constitute the main source of food fish used in the preparation of traditional soups in rural communities. Over the past two decades when the importation of kako - salted dried cod (stock fish) - from Norway declined, koobi (wet salted fermented tilapia) became a more acceptable substitute and a delicacy in many Ghanaian homes.
Salted, fermented and dried triggerfish (ewule) is another cheap cured fishery product that has been on the Ghanaian market since the early 1970s. It is widely patronized by the subsistence farmers living in the rural communities of the forest regions. Although annual catches have declined since the late 1980s, ewule is still an important fishery product especially in the hinterland. This product is not popular among urban dwellers or middle and upper-income earners who consider ewule an inferior fishery product.
Mali: Smoked dried fish forms nearly 60 percent of the total volume of fish distributed and consumed in Mali. Fermented, sun-dried fish is also consumed by many people and constitutes about 30 percent of the total fish supply. These cured fishery products are usually dried to a very low moisture content so that the product can be stored for a long period since cold storage facilities are limited.
The consumption of smoked fish in Mali has increased in recent years because it provides an alternative source of cheap animal protein for the preparation of traditional stews and soups. Fermented sun-dried fish is also consumed as food fish but it is valued more for the characteristic flavour it imparts to soups as a condiment.
Fried fish consumption is generally low in Mali and it is limited to cities and urban centres. The limited consumption of fried fish may be partly due to scarcity and the high cost of cooking oil which is normally imported. Fried fish is usually sold with fried yam, plantain or potatoes as a ready-to-eat food in the capital city and other big towns.
Senegal: The Senegalese consume a lot of fresh fish, but the most important grilled and dried fish cured product is locally called kethiakh. Various forms of salted fermented or sun-dried fishery products are also widely consumed in Senegal.
Kethiakh is consumed mostly by subsistence farmers and low-income earners especially in the rural communities. About 15 percent of the total fish supply is consumed as fully or partially fermented products including guedj, tambadiang and yeet. Kethiakh is used as a food fish but the various types of fermented fishery products may be used either as food fish or added to stews and soups in very small quantities as a condiment to enhance flavour.
Fried fish is not consumed at any appreciable level except in the cities where it is readily available. It is used to prepare stews or is eaten with other staples.
The Sudan: Fish is not consumed on any large scale in the Sudan except in the southern region and in the major towns and cities along the River Nile and Lake Nubia. Only about 5 percent is eaten in the smoked form.
The predominant cured fishery product widely produced and consumed in northern Sudan is fessiekh, a fermented fishery product. It is used as both a staple food and a condiment in food preparation. About 5 percent of the total fresh fish supply in the Sudan is processed into fessiekh but only 30 percent of this is consumed locally. Nearly 70 percent is exported to Egypt where there is a ready market. It has been reported that fessiekh originated from Egypt where it is used in the preparation of a special meal during Easter. Fessiekh is minced and boiled with vegetables (e.g. tomatoes and spices) to prepare a sauce that is eaten with bread. Fessiekh may also be eaten raw after the addition of vinegar and spices.
Terkeen is a fermented fish paste which is a delicacy among the people of northern Sudan around Lake Nubia. It is mainly used as a condiment in traditional vegetable sauces. Mindeshi is another paste-like fermented fishery product relished by the people of south-western Sudan.
Hard dried fermented fish (kejeick) is popular as food fish for Sudanese farmworkers involved in agricultural projects or working on farm plantations especially in southern Sudan.
Uganda: The popular cured fish in Uganda is smoked fish which constitutes about 40 percent of total fish supply. Demand for fermented and dried fish is low in southern Uganda. In northwestern Uganda, however, a lot of fermented fish is produced and consumed.
Total fermented fish consumption in Uganda is estimated at about 15 percent of the total national fish supply. A greater proportion of the fermented fish produced is exported to Zaire and southern Sudan where there are ready markets for the product.
The most popular sun-dried partially fermented fish which is always available at the major markets is dagaa. Small quantities of salted dried fermented fish found at the markets are patronized by foreigners especially from Zaire.
6.2 Substitutes for fermented fish
There is a growing trend in the usage of artificial food flavours in the preparation of traditional sauces and stews particularly in the West African sub-region. Some of these additives or condiments simulate the flavour characteristics normally associated with fermented fishery products. The commonest brands of these artificial flavour enhancers found in Côte d'Ivoire, the Gambia, Ghana, Mali and Senegal were maggie cubes, jumbo cubes, coumba, A1 and ajinomoto. The active compound in all of these products is monosodium glutamate (MSG). They are currently used on a large scale as flavour boosters or flavour enhancers in food preparation. The use of these products is widespread in both the urban and rural communities, notably among the middle and high-income sectors of the populations but also among people with a high level of formal education. Artificial flavours are used on a large scale for food preparation in restaurants and local public eating places (chop bars). Until
the introduction of artificial food flavours, fermented fishery products were the most common traditional condiments used in these chop bars.
The industrial preparation of Southeast Asian style liquid fish sauce "Nuoc Mam". was attempted in Côte d'Ivoire in the 1970s. It is said that when consumers heard that the product was produced from rotten fish, the project had to be quickly abandoned. Interestingly, fermented fish is not considered as rotten fish by local consumers except some "foreign" experts.
In Chad, northern Ghana, Mali and Senegal, the fermented seeds of the parkia plant are also used in food preparation by some sectors of the population as an alternative condiment to fermented fish. In Ghana, for instance, dawadawa (fermented parkia seeds) is the popular condiment used by the indigenous people of the northern Savanna regions where consumption of fermented fish is limited. A similar product which is popular in Mali is called soumbala, while in Senegal it is known as nyateku. These fermented products have a characteristic strong odour and impart a desirable taste and aroma to soups and stews.
A very special fermented food used to be prepared in Benin City (Nigeria): lion's meat was mixed with honey and left to ferment. It was only to be eaten by the Oba (king) of the Edo.
6.3 Nutritional evaluation of fermented fishery products
The primary objectives of curing fish in many African countries are to preserve the fish and develop a desirable flavour. However, processing sometimes tends to affect the nutritional value of food products. Table 9 shows the proximate analysis of different types of fresh and cured fishery products.
Considering fish as a major source of protein, a general observation of Table 9 shows that curing (smoking, fermentation and salting) does not adversely affect the crude protein content of fishery products.
The moisture content of fermented fish varies from about 12 percent in smoked dried anchovies to 65 percent in wet salted cured fish (momone). The wide variation is an indication of the lack of quality standards for artisanal cured fishery products. Products with high moisture content tend to deteriorate faster than drier products especially if the salt level is low.
The protein content of fermented fish ranges from about 20 percent to nearly 50 percent depending on the water content. This makes the product a good source of animal protein. Thus, if fermented products are consumed on a large scale as food fish in the diet, they make a substantial contribution to the total protein intake. However, where only small quantities are used as a condiment to prepare sauces etc., their contribution is of minor importance.
Table 9 shows high levels of ash in all of the salted fermented products compared to other unsalted cured products. This is a reflection of the level of salt uptake during fermentation (610 percent). When salted products are to be used in relatively large quantities in food preparation, the common practice is to steep the fish in water for a short period (one to three hours) to leach out some salt. Information obtained from people in Mali and parts of northern Ghana suggests a high incidence of goitre which could be partly attributed to low levels of fish and salt consumption and therefore low iodine intake.
Table 9. Proximate Composition of Raw and Cured Fish
Type of Fish Energy in Calories Moisture % Protein % Fat % Ash %
Anchovy
Fresh 92 73.8 18.4 1.5 7.3
Dry smoked 380 11.9 68.6 3.5 16.0
Sun-dried 308 16.2 58.4 4.0 18.5
Cassava Croaker (Pseudotolithus senegalensis)
Fresh 104 78.6 18.4 2.8 1.0
Dried, salted (kako) 161 43.9 34.9 1.3 20.8
Fermented (momone) 134 57.6 26.2 2.4 14.6
Grey Snapper (Lutjanus agennes)
Fresh 101 76.4 14.4 1.5 1.1
Fermented (momone) - 64.9 18.2 1.4 -
Scad (Decapterus rhonchus)
Fresh 125 72.5 22.6 2.8 1.3
Hot smoked 212 56.9 33.9 7.4 2.4
Fermented - 54.5 18.9 - 1.3
Seabream (Pagrus spp., Dentex spp.)
Fresh 104 77.3 18.3 2.7 1.2
Smoked 179 61.7 29.1 4.7 1.3
Salted, fermented, dried 168 62.5 27.6 4.1 2.5
Threadfin (Galeoides decadactylus)
Fresh 113 73.9 18.9 2.0 1.5
Fermented 149 55.9 28.7 2.9 16.8
Triggerfish (Balistes spp.)
Salted, fermented, dried 196 40.1 40.7 2.5 22.5
Raw - 79.1 19.4 0.3 1.4
Squid (Sepia spp.)
Salted, dried 182 42.1 38.1 2.1 16.5
Tiger Fish (Hydrocynus spp.)
Smoked 369 15.4 73.3 6.2 5.1
Salted, fermented, sun-dried 157 43.1 32.6 2.0 22.3
Tilapia
Fresh 123 73.4 16.6 5.8 6.8
Salted, fermented, sun-dried (koobi) 189 39.9 38.1 0.6 16.1
Smoked 368 20.9 67.5 8.8 2.7
Unsalted, fermented, sun-dried 357 12.6 71.9 3.1 6.8
Source: Eyeson et al., 1975
<section>a</section>
7. Research activities on fermented fish processing
There are some research activities under way in various aspects of artisanal fermented fish processing in a number of African countries.
Areas that have received the most attention include:
(i) improved drying racks;
(ii) solar driers;
(iii) salting/fermentation tanks;
(iv) application of insecticides for preservation;
(v) replacement of dry salting with brine.
(i) Drying of Cured Fish
The introduction of raised drying racks to artisanal fish curing communities is one of the most widespread research projects in traditional fish processing. In Burundi, for instance, a project which was funded with foreign assistance from the late 1970s to the early 1980s resulted in the construction of several elevated sloping wire-mesh drying racks at the major fish landing centres. These improved drying racks are still being used to dry ndagala.
Similarly, the introduction of raised drying platforms through extension work conducted by the national and international institutions has been successful in the Gambia and Senegal. Currently, almost all processors in these countries dry fermented fish on raised racks constructed with cheap, locally available materials. In Mali, the Project "Operation Pêche" in Mopti is also actively involved in educating processors on the merits of drying cured fish above the ground.
In Ghana, in 1975-76 the International Development Research Council of Canada (IDRC), in collaboration with the Food Research Institute, sponsored a project at Elmina and introduced raised drying racks/platforms to dry fermented fish. The project was successful initially but the use of raised drying platforms has declined in recent years. There is considerable awareness among Ghanaian fish processors of the advantages of drying fish on raised racks but, contrary to Senegal, the concept is not widely practiced.
(ii) Solar Driers
A lot of research has been carried out on the development of solar driers for fermented fish, but none of the designs has proved commercially viable. In 1984, for instance, the Tropical Development and Research Institute (TDRI) and FAO sponsored a solar drier project in the Gambia. The quality of the product was not acceptable to consumers. The Food Research Institute in Ghana has also developed various types of solar driers which are still at the pilot stage.
(iii) Fermentation Tanks
Various governmental and non-governmental agencies have been involved in the design and introduction of concrete salting and fermentation tanks to artisanal fish processors in Ghana, Senegal, the Gambia, the Sudan and Uganda. In West Africa and the Sudan, where fermented fish is produced on a large scale, these tanks are widely used to salt and ferment fish. Often the concrete tanks are made by plastering woven cane baskets making them relatively light and strong.
(iv) Use of Insecticides
In an effort to reduce the post-harvest losses of dried fish, there have been attempts in some countries to introduce insecticides for the protection of stored fish. Between 1981 and 1983 several trials were conducted by the Tropical Development and Research Institute (TDRI) using synergized pyrethrum, pirimiphos methyl (actellic) and tetradichlormophos (gardona) to control blowfly attacks on drying fish in Malawi. Field experiments were also carried out in Kenya, 1983, and Mali, 1984, to determine the effectiveness of various types of insecticides to protect dried fish from attack by beetles.
On the basis of these trials, gardona is now widely applied as a dip to control blowfly attacks on fermented fish in Mali and actellic is used in Malawi. Other types of insecticides such as phostoxin and malathion are also used to fumigate warehouses for fermented dried fish.
(v) Salting
In the late 1970s to the early 1980s, trials were conducted in the Gambia and Ghana to replace dry salting with brine or fermentation using sea water. In the Lake Chad Basin and Mali where fish is fermented without salting, unsuccessful attempts were made to introduce salt curing. The trials were not adopted because of unfamiliarity with salted fermented fishery products in the area.
The FAO/UNDP Regional Project for Inland Fisheries Development and Management in eastern, central and southern Africa (IFIP) is currently involved in providing extension services and improved methods of handling, salting, drying and storage of cured fish in the sub-region.
<section>b</section>
8. Conclusion
This report has covered the following aspects of fermented fish processing and consumption in Burundi, Chad, Côte d'Ivoire, the Gambia, Ghana, Mali, Senegal, the Sudan and Uganda:
- literature review of microbiological and biochemical changes;
- sources and types of fish used; processing characteristics;
- storage and post-harvest losses;
- marketing and distribution;
- consumption patterns.
Fermentation is brought about by micro-organisms and enzymes present on the surface of the fish and in the guts before and after capture. Fermentative organisms may be introduced through the salt used or recycled brine. Salt is frequently used during curing to select desirable organisms in order to ensure that protein degradation is controlled without the production of toxic substances. Typical micro-organisms that have been identified are gram-positive halotolerant cocci, gram-negative halophilic rods and yeasts.
Fermentation results in chemical changes due to the breakdown of protein in fish muscle which produces trimethylamine, dimethylamine, ammonia, etc. In addition, fat oxidation takes place and other organic compounds are formed, including acetic acid and lactic acid. All these reactions result in changes in the texture, odour and taste of the final product. A peculiar characteristic of fermentation is a strong, sometimes offensive smell.
A wide variety of fish species from marine and freshwater sources was identified as raw material for fermentation. High-value dispersal are processed when quality deteriorates or they remain unsold and there are no ice or chilling facilities available. Pelagic species and clupeids which constitute the largest proportion of fresh fish supply to many people are also fermented. Underutilized species and by-catch from industrial trawling constitute another important source of raw material for processing.
In landlocked countries as well as regions with undeveloped marine fisheries, rivers and lakes provide the main source of domestic fish supply. The major freshwater species commonly fermented are tilapia, Alestes spp., Hydrocynus spp. and Nile perch.
The study revealed a wide range in the proportion of total domestic fresh fish supply processed into cured products. In West Africa and Uganda, for instance, more than 50 percent of the fish supply is smoked into various dried products. On average, about 10-20 percent of total domestic fish supply is processed into fully or partially fermented products by salting and/or sun drying.
A detailed observation of fish processing methods in many African countries reveals that many cured fishery products actually undergo some level of microbiological or biochemical degradation during curing or drying. These products possess a characteristic fermented flavour. Literature often only refers to Southeast Asian fish pastes and sauces as fermented products. However, various types of fermented fishery products are now known to be processed and consumed in many African countries. Indeed, curing by salting, fermentation and drying constitute the second most important method of preserving fish in Africa after smoking.
Three methods of fermented fish processing were identified, namely salting and drying, salting without drying and drying without salting. The resultant product may be firm and semi-dry, wet and soft or hard and dry respectively. The predominant processing method in a country depends upon socio-cultural factors, food habits and the availability of salt. In coastal countries with readily available or cheaper sources of salt, fermented products are usually heavily salted.
Unlike Southeast Asian products, fermented fishery products in Africa usually remain whole and firm after processing. The fermentation period is comparatively short, hence the fish muscle does not break down. In some cases whole species are cured and the product retains most, if not all, of its original features so that the species can be easily identified. Fermentation is sometimes unintentional and an incidental process, especially during sun-drying.
Fish processing in Africa is largely an artisanal activity involving individuals or family units. Consequently, documented or formal quality standards and controls are absent. All kinds of raw fish, irrespective of quality, are processed into fermented fish. Hygienic standards are generally poor but there are very few reports of food poisoning due to fermented fish consumption.
Processing equipment such as fermentation tanks, drying racks and packaging containers are locally available, cheap, easy to construct or repair and reusable.
Fermented fishery products are susceptible to spoilage through mould or bacterial decay, insect infestation or fragmentation. Their shelf-life depends on salt and moisture contents. A well dried product with a high salt level can be stored for 6-12 months. Semi-dry or wet products keep for one to three months. The most widespread method of preventing deterioration is redrying or storing in dry salt. The use of organic insecticides for preservation is not a common practice, except in Mali and Malawi where some chemicals are officially permitted. However, there are some reports of uncontrolled application of insecticides to fermented dried fish to control insect infestation in some countries.
Trade is mainly informal and is important for some countries. The major obstacles to (formal) fish trade include an increase in domestic demand for fish, poor road infrastructure, tariff barriers, lack of quality standards and, in recent years, foreign exchange constraints. No significant quantities of fermented fishery products are exported outside Africa but there is a high demand for the products from African residents abroad.
Post-harvest handling, processing and marketing of fish are divided along gender lines but the roles change from one region to another. In the coastal countries of West Africa, women dominate the processing and marketing of fishery products. Ghanaian fishermen and women are actively engaged in the industry along the shores of West Africa. They operate in Côte d'Ivoire, the Gambia, Liberia and Sierra Leone from where they export fermented fish to Ghana. In the Sahelian zone and parts of East and Central Africa, men are also involved and, in some countries, even dominate fish processing and marketing. Fish processors and traders are not organized into formal associations or cooperatives. They operate as individual or family units and occasionally hire labour to assist in the operations.
Fermented fish is a value-added product. However, since the raw fish is derived from poor quality or underutilized species which are cheap, product prices are affordable to many low income consumers. Some types of fermented fish, processed from high-value species and considered a delicacy (e.g. guedj, koobi, fessiekh), are however expensive.
Fish consumption patterns in general and a preference for fermented products in particular depend on the prevailing food habits as well as social, cultural and economic factors in the country.
Per capita fish consumption is relatively high in the coastal countries of West Africa. Fish constitutes the main source of animal protein. In the Sahel region, meat (beef or mutton) is consumed on a large scale. However, it was noted that fish is becoming popular in these areas due to the increasing price of meat products as a result of severe droughts. The coastal countries of West Africa, Egypt, southern Sudan, Zaire and the north-western districts of Uganda are the main centres of fermented fish consumption. Depending on the degree of fermentation, fermented fishery products are used either as a condiment to enhance flavour or as food fish and a source of protein. Cured, including fermented, products contribute significantly to dietary protein requirements.
Finally, the study has revealed that fermentation is combined with salting and/or drying to salvage large quantities of fish which would otherwise have been discarded due to poor quality or as unpopular species. It can, therefore, be inferred that the physical loss of raw fish through spoilage may consequently be lower than often estimated: 20-30 percent.
<section>c</section>
9. Recommendations
Drying on raised platforms is only practiced in a few African countries. In places where raised platforms were introduced through sponsored projects most have been abandoned. There is an urgent need to intensify the education of processors on the advantages of drying fish on raised platforms. Governmental and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) should assist processors to construct and use these platforms.
There is a need for a detailed study of the fermentation process in order to identify the specific species of micro-organisms involved in the different stages. It is also necessary to analyse the biochemical pathways of fermentation and determine the nature of the chemical compounds produced, and their role, as well as textural changes.
The processing methods of fessiekh could create avenues for microbial infection and risks of botulium, hence very regular microbiological tests need to be conducted on the finished products.
There is a need for intensive research on the use of insecticides for the preservation of dried fish so that residual levels can be assessed and hence the safety of the fish determined. The establishment of measures to control the usage of insecticides is also needed.
In view of the strong competition between fermented fishery products and artificial flavour enhancers, steps should be taken to improve the quality, packaging and presentation for more competitive retailing of fermented fishery products. The aim should be to get some of the traditional products on the supermarket shelves, similar to the way fermented anchovies have become a delicatessen product in the Mediterranean region.
If offals were disposed of properly, spoilage from blowfly infestation could be reduced considerably.
Countries should establish formal quality standards for fermented fishery products and this could enhance intraregional trade.
Studies should be carried out in the Savannah and Sahel regions to assess the extent of goitre in the region and its relationship with salt consumption. Salted fishery products could be a vehicle to boost iodine intake and reduce goitre among afflicted populations.
<section>d</section>
10. References
Ababouch, L. et al., 1991a. Identification of histamine-producing bacteria isolated from sardine (Sardina pilchardus) stored in ice and at ambient temperature (25°C). Food Microbiology, 8(2): 127-36
______, 1991b. Quantitative changes in bacteria, amino-acids and biogenic amines in sardine (Sardina pilchardus) stored at ambient temperature (25-28°C) and in ice. Int.J.Food Sci.Tech., 26(3):297-306
Abdalla, M.T., 1989. Microbiology and biochemistry of fessiekh fermentation. A thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of requirements for the degree of M.Sc. in Food Microbiology. Faculty of Agriculture, University of Khartoum
Adams, M.R., 1986. Fermented flesh foods [sausages, fish products]. In Progress in industrial microbiology. London and New York, Elsevier, 23: 159-98
Amano, K., 1962. The influence of fermentation on the nutritive value of fish with special reference to fermented fish products of Southeast Asia. In Fish in nutrition. E. Heen and R. Kreuzer (eds). London, Fishing News (Books) Ltd., pp. 180-200
Arnold, S.H. and W.D. Brown, 1978. Histamine (?) toxicity from fish products. In Advances in food research, 24:113-54
Azeza, N.I., 1986. The problem of choice and safer methods of reducing post-harvest losses in Lake Chad processed fish. Proceedings of the FAO expert consultation on fish technology in Africa, Lusaka, Zambia, 21-25 January 1985. FAO Fish.Rep., (329) Suppl.:340-8
Bal, V.V. and S.R. Dominova, 1967. Changes of fish fat during curing. II. Interaction of fish lipids and protein decomposition products. Isv.Vyssh Uched.Zaved Pishch.Tekhnol., (2):36
Beatty, D.M.F., 1969. Results of a fish market survey in Zambia in 1964-65. Chilanga, Zambia, Ministry of Rural Development, Department of Wildlife, Fisheries and National Parks
Beddows, C.G., 1985. Fermented fish and fish products. In Microbiology of fermented foods. Vol.2., B.J.B. Wood (ed). London and New York, Elsevier
Breslin, P.R. and J.A. Hoffman, 1975. The market for fish in Pakistan. Rep.Trop.Prod.Inst., (R492)
Christensen, C.M. and H.H. Kaufmann, 1974. Micro-flora. In Storage of cereal grains and their products. C.M. Christensen (ed.). Monograph Series Am.Assoc.Cereal Chem., 5 rev. edition, pp. 158-92
Disney, J.D., 1974. Fish handling and preservation in Uganda. London, Tropical Products Institute (unpublished)
EEC, 1990. Proposal for a council regulation laying down the health conditions for the production and the placing on the market of fishery products. Official Journal, EEC, C84, (33):58-70
Eyeson, K.K. et al., 1975. Composition of foods commonly used in Ghana. Accra, Ghana, Food Research Institute (CSIR)
Eyo, A.A., 1991. Studies on the preparation of fermented fish products from Alestes nurse. In Proceedings of FAO expert consultation on fish technology in Africa, Accra, Ghana, 2125 October 1991 (in press)
FAO, 1971. Fermented fish products. Prepared by I.M. Mackie, R. Hardy and G. Hobbs. FAO Fish.Rep., (100):54
Frank, H.A., 1985. Histamine-forming bacteria in tuna and other marine fish. In Histamine in marine products: production by bacteria, measurement and prediction of formation. B.S. Pan and D. James (eds). FAO Fish.Tech.Pap., (252):2-3
Geiger, E.C., G. Courtney and G. Schanakenberg, 1944. The content and formation of histamine in fish muscle. Arch.Biochem.Biophys., 3:311-9
Hara, M. and B.J. Mkoko, 1990. Case for improving marketing of fish in Malawi. In Proceedings of the symposium on post-harvest fish technology, Cairo, Egypt, 2122 October 1990. F. Teutscher (ed.). CIFA Tech.Pap., (19):35-9
Hiltz, D.F. et al., 1976. Deteriorative changes during frozen storage in fillets and minced flesh of silver hake (Merluccius bilinearis) processed from round fish held in ice and refrigerated seawater. J.Fish.Res.Board Can., 33:256
Huss, H.H. and E. Rye-Petersen, 1980. The stability of Clostridium botulinum type E toxin in salty and/or acid environment. J.Fd Technol., 15(6):619-27
Huss, H.H. and G. Valdimarson, 1990. Microbiology of salted fish. FAO Food Tech.News, 10(1):190
ICMSF, 1980. Microbial ecology of foods, Vol.2: Food Commodities. New York and London, Academic Press
Ito, K. and S. Sato, 1963. Chemical studies on fish solubles 1. Vitamin contents and amino-acid composition of commercial fish solubles. J.Fac.Fish.Anim.Husb., Hiroshima University, 5:185
Jones, N.R., 1966. Fish flavours. In Chemistry and physiology of flavours. H.W. Schultz, E.A. Day and L.M. Libbey (eds). Connecticut, USA, Avi Publishing Co., p. 267
Karnop, G., 1988. Verderb von Salzsardellen durch histaminbildende Pediokokken. (Spoilage of salted sardine products by histamine forming pediococci.) Inf. fur die Fischwirtschaft, 1 :28-31
Knochel, S. and H.H. Huss, 1984. Ripening and spoilage of sugar-salted herring with and without nitrate. I. Microbiological and related chemical changes. J.Fd Technol., 19(2):203-13
Krieg, N.R. and J.G. Holt (eds), 1984. Bergey's Manual of Systematic Bacteriology. Vol.1. Baltimore, Williams and Wilkins Co.
Lovern, J.L., 1962. The lipids of fish and changes occurring in them during processing and storage. In Fish in nutrition. E. Heen and R. Kreuzer (eds). London, Fishing News (Books) Ltd.
Mills, A., 1979. Handling and processing fish on Lake Chad. 55 p. (Unpublished project report, Project NIR/741/001 "Improvement of Fish Processing and Transport on Lake Chad.)
Nerquaye-Tetteh, G., K.K. Eyeson and Tette-Marmon, 1978. Studies on "Bomone" - A Ghanaian fermented fish product. Accra, Ghana, Food Research Institute (CSIR)
Okonkwo, P.O. and C. Nwokolo, 1977. Aflatoxin B.: Procedures to reduce levels in tropical foods. Nutrition Reports International, 17(3):587-95
Parry, T.J. and R.K. Pawsey, 1973. Principles of microbiology for students of food technology. London, Hutchinson Educational, 153 p.
Reay, G.A. and J.M. Shewan, 1949. The spoilage of fish and its preservation by chilling. Adv.Fd.Res., 2:343-89
Saisithi, P., 1967. Studies on the origin and development of the typical flavour and aroma of Thai fish sauce. Ph.D. thesis. University of Washington, Department of Food Technology
Shewan, J.M., 1970. Bacteriological standards for fish and fishery products. Chem.and Ind., 193 p.
Simidu, W. and S. Hibiki, 1955. Studies on putrefaction of aquatic products. 23. On the critical concentration of poisoning for histamine. Bull.Jap.Soc.Sci.Fish., 21:365-71
Taylor, S.L., 1983. Monograph on histamine poisoning. Paper presented at the Codex Committee on Food Hygiene. 19th Session. Washington D.C., 26-30 September 1983
______, 1986. Histamine food poisoning: toxicology and clinical aspects. CRC Critical Reviews in Toxicology, 17(2):91 - 117
Taylor, S.L. et al., 1978. Histamine production by food-borne bacterial species. J.Food Safety, 1:173-8
Tomiyasu, Y. and W.B. Zenitani, 1957. Spoilage of fish and its preservation by chemical agents. Adv.Fd.Res., 7:41-82
Townsend, J.F. et al., 1971. Fungal flora of South Vietnamese fish and rice. J.Trop.Med.Hyg., 74(4):98100
Vernon, E., 1967. Food poisoning in England and Wales 1966. Mon.Bull.Min.of Health, 26:235
Villar, M. et al., 1985. Isolation and characterization of Pediococcus halophilus from salted anchovies (Engraulis anchoita). Appl.Environ.Microbiol., 49(3):664-6
Watanabe, K., 1982. Fish handling and processing in tropical Africa. In Proceedings of the FAO expert consultation on fish technology in Africa, Casablanca, Morocco, 7-11 June 1982. FAO Fish.Rep., (268) Suppl.: 1-5
Watanabe, K. and E.M. Mensah, 1976. Retail prices and market quality of unsalted grilled and salted dried tilapia from Lake Volta, Ghana. Bull.Jap.Soc.Sci.Fish., 42(1):109-21
Watts, J.C.D., 1965. Some observations on the preservation of fish in Sierra Leone. Bulletin de MPANT XXVII Sci. of No.1
Youssif, O.M., 1988. Wet salted freshwater fish (fessiekh) production in the Sudan. In Proceedings of the FAO expert consultation on fish technology in Africa, Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire, 2528 April 1988. FAO Fish.Rep., (400): 176-81
Zakhia, N. and J.L. Cuq, 1991. Aperçu sur la qualité du tilapia séché et commercialisé au Mali. In Proceedings of the FAO expert consultation on fish technology in Africa, Accra, Ghana, 2225 October 1991 (in press)
<section>e</section>
11. Acknowledgements
The author is grateful to the persons listed below for their assistance in the collection of data during the field mission. He would also like to acknowledge the assistance received from the FAO Representations in the countries visited, in particular in arranging field visits.
The author especially wishes to acknowledge the contribution of Mr Charles Gunu (Fish Technologist) who helped with data analysis and the editing of this report.
Burundi
Dr D. Gréboval Project Coordinator, FAO/UNDP Project Inland Fisheries Planning, Development and Management in East (central southern) Africa, Bujumbura
Mr Nfamara J. Dampha Fish Processing Technologist, FAO/UNDP Project Inland Fisheries Planning, Development and Management in East(central-southern) Africa, Bujumbura
Chad
Mr N. Baisalam Technical Officer, Direction de Pêche N'Djamena
Mr Ali Garam Directeur, Direction des Eaux, Pêches et Animaux (DEPA), N'Djamena
Mr Baba Diguera Directeur, Division Pêches et Forêts Lake Chad Basin Commission, N'Djamena
Mr M'Barro Le-Naimian Technical Officer, DEPA, N'Djamena
Côte d'Ivoire
Dr Amadou Tall INFOPECHE, Abidjan
The Gambia
Nana Kofi Abum Chief and Elders of Fishing Community, Ghanatown Brufut
Mr Kofi Bentum 
Mr I.K. Mensah 
Mr Kobina Assan 
Mr Kobina Ekwan 
Ghana
Madam Grace Anderson Queen Mother - Senya Bereku
Mr K. Envraim Technical Officer, Fisheries Department, Apam
Mali
Mr Lounkoro Vinama Chef, Section Conditionnement, Operation Pêche, Mopti
Mr Moussa Nientao Chef, Division Exploitation, Operation Pêche, Mopti
Mr Lewa Thera Section Animatron et Formation, Operation Pêche, Mopti
Senegal
Mr Boubacar Diakité Chef, Division Produits Halieutiques, Institut de Technologie Alimentaire, Dakar
Mr Mamadou Goudiaby Secteur des Pêches Maritimes, Mbour
The Sudan
Dr R.B. Babiker Food Research Centre, Khartoum
Prof. Dr Hamid Dirar Faculty of Agriculture, Department of Microbiology, University of Khartoum, Khartoum
Mr Abdel Wahab Beheiri Fisheries Consultant, Animal Production Public Corporation, Khartoum
Dr Osman Mohamed Saeed Director, Fisheries Research Centre, Khartoum
Dr Basma Mahgoub Karrar Fisheries Training Institute, El Shaggara, Khartoum
Mr Ismael Ali Saeed Fisheries Officer, Fisheries Administration, Jebel Aulia, Khartoum
Mr Abdalla Mohammed El Tom Fisheries Officer, Fisheries Administration, Khartoum
Mr Abd el Mageed Zaidan Head of Statistics Department, Fisheries Administration Khartoum
Mr Mohamed Kheir Hassan Director, Fisheries Administration, Khartoum
The Director and Staff Al Huda Fishing Establishment, Khartoum
Uganda
Mr Chris M. Dhatemwa Assistant Commissioner for Fisheries, Ministry of Animal Industry and Fisheries, Entebbe
Miss Margaret Massete Fisheries Officer-in-Charge, Fish Technology Laboratory, Entebbe
Mr Shadrach Angopa Victoria Fresh Food Industries, Kampala
