<title>A decade of wood energy activities within the Nairobi Programme of Action</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
The United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy which met in Nairobi Kenya in August 1981, adopted the "Nairobi Programme of Action". The Programme provided a framework for concerted action in the development and utilization of new and renewable sources of energy to meet future overall requirements, particularly those of the developing countries. The Conference identified five broad policy areas for action: energy assessment and planning; research, development and demonstration; transfer, adaptation and application of mature technologies; information flows; and education and training.
In August 1991, almost exactly ten years after the Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy, an Intergovernmental Expert Group Meeting was convened in New York to assess the results of the initiatives undertaken in pursuit of the objectives of the Nairobi Programme of Action (by national, regional and international organizations) and to recommend priorities for future actions.
The Expert Group Meeting was organized by the Committee for the Development and Utilization of New and Renewable Sources of Energy, created by the 1981 Nairobi Conference to guide and monitor the implementation of the Nairobi Programme of Action. The Committee entrusted FAO with preparation of a review of the activities carried out on fuelwood and charcoal during the past decade. This publication is the output of the FAO review.
Prepared by a team of international experts (H. Stassen, P.J. Svenningsson and M.J. Demante), coordinated by FAO Senior Forestry Officer M A. Trossero, the paper affirms that the policy areas identified by the Nairobi Plan of Action were and continue to be valid; but despite the fact that activities aimed at increased production and improved efficiency in use of wood fuels have received a great deal of support, the results achieved have not met expectations. Many of the activities undertaken in the early 1980s in the context of high international fossil fuel prices proved economically untenable and were abandoned when oil prices started to fall in the second half of the decade. Inadequate institutional structures were also a major constraint to the realization of many wood energy activities at the national level.
The review confirms that fuelwood and charcoal will continue to be the main source of energy for most developing countries during the current decade, and therefore merit renewed attention. Moreover, the report emphasizes the potential of forest biomass as an environmentally sound source of energy in the developed countries. Perhaps most importantly, the report stresses that wood energy challenges cannot be resolved from an energy or forestry point-of-view alone. They require a holistic approach in which activities are tailored to the specific and multi-faceted needs of the region, country or community involved, including socio-economic and environmental aspects.
This paper is recommended to all those involved in activities concerned with wood-based energy as a valuable contribution to the more effective development of the sector.
C.H. Murray
Assistant Director-General
FAO Forestry Department
<section>2</section>
A decade of wood energy activities within the Nairobi programme of action
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Forest biomass still remains the main source of energy for the poorest sectors of developing countries despite all the efforts of the international community within the framework of the Nairobi Programme of Action (NPA).
The wood energy situation is now better understood after a decade of quite intensive work in this field. However, the political scenario in which the life of the world and the energy situation in particular are evolving looks very different for the decade to come from what it was in the 80's.
The first part of the 80's was characterized by the Iran-Iraq war. At the same time, the "cold war" was the dominant factor of the political scene. Oil prices were high, and there were uncertainties in oil resources and supply, whereas the 90's are starting with relatively low oil prices and abundant oil resources. At the political level, the "cold war" is over and the world is seeking more global cooperation to alleviate the needs and problems of the human beings on the planet.
The NPA has proved to be an excellent framework for the development of activities aimed at tackling the major wood energy problems identified. Most of the problems mentioned in the programme have actually been addressed, and some activities have been undertaken in every one of its specific objectives.
Today, there is no abundance of flourishing energy plantations, nor are there millions of improved cooking stoves, or thousands of gasifiers generating electricity under decentralized units in rural communities; but considerable national and international capabilities have been created and a critical mass of experts have been trained since the NPA.
This situation is in part due to the fact that many of the activities undertaken during the first part of the decade were seriously affected by the reduction of international fossil fuel prices which occurred in the second half of the 80's. Thus, when oil prices started to fall, many of the new and improved fuelwood and charcoal technologies which had been developed became less competitive and were abandoned.
The impact of the wide variety of actions, projects and activities undertaken to improve the wood energy situation in developing countries has been insufficient for the magnitude and the importance of the problems to be solved.
Fuelwood and charcoal are and will remain for the decade to come a major source of energy for developing countries. It is a delicate, complicated and important subject which is part and parcel of the problem of poverty and underdevelopment affecting third world countries.
Wood energy can therefore not be analyzed from an energy or forestry point of view alone. It requires a wider approach in which the solutions should be tailored to cope with the specific needs of the region, country or community involved.
The main achievements within the NPA can be summarized following the main specific areas of action adopted by the programme:
Assessment and planning
The wood energy situation is now better understood thanks to the amount of information and statistics gathered in the last 10 years of continuous operational work. The main protagonists of the wood energy systems, both on the side of supply and demand, are clearly identified and their roles are now better defined than in the past. In addition, forest resources are beginning to be assessed and evaluated in a more systematic way, as prescribed by the NPA.
At the beginning of the 80's, during the "oil crisis", the use of wood fuels by poor people was seen as the cause of deforestation and desertification. It is now recognized that factors other than the fuelwood and charcoal are the chief causes of the deforestation process such as farming, forest fires and industrial use of forests for which it is not always poor people who are responsible. It is also recognized that very often woodfuels are only a by-product, to pay, at least partially, for land clearance operations. Isolated wood energy activities without the proper adjustment of energy or forestry institutions may not therefore be sufficient to tackle the problem of forest destruction.
Unfortunately, the quality of figures and data available for woodfuel production/consumption is too inadequate for the preparation of a detailed sectoral review. The lack of accurate information leads to controversial interpretation of the energy situation in developing countries and hampers the correct identification of solutions to be undertaken. This situation has to be changed in the future.
Considerable progress has been achieved in creating national capabilities. Most of the activities undertaken were focused on strengthening particular areas of work on research, training, education and wood fuel surveys. However, additional efforts are required to create multidisciplinary groups capable of mastering the subject and to incorporate the active participation of NGO's in the planning and implementation of wood energy projects.
Unfortunately, energy policies and planning have not taken due consideration of fuelwood and charcoal aspects and in the cases where they have been incorporated, the actions undertaken and priorities received have not been given the importance they deserve.
Gender analysis and women's participation are other types of subject that have not received the attention required.
Research, development and demonstration
Research on high-yield species and more productive wood energy plantations using indigenous and exotic species is one of the areas which has received a great amount of attention for energy and forest plantations. Today, there is a considerable amount of experience and information in this area of work.
The development of efficient cooking stoves for household use, as well as improved techniques for charcoal making, have also been given considerable attention in the first part of the decade.
Technologies for the use of producer gas as engine fuel for power and electricity generation in rural communities, for the use of ligno-cellulose residues, and for briquette and pellet production, are now, from a technical point of view, well developed. However, the wide dissemination of these technologies is considerably affected by the present low price of fossil fuels.
Transfer, adaptation and application of mature technologies
Activities in tree plantation using extension, agroforestry and community forestry schemes have received great support during the decade. On the contrary, the management of existing forests, as suggested in the NPA, has not received all the assistance required. The experience gained in this field, particularly with agroforestry and community forestry, is relevant and very important for the implementation of future activities.
The dissemination of improved cooking stoves and charcoal production techniques received a great deal of support. Unfortunately, the results achieved have not met expectations and new approaches for the work in this field have to be developed. Activities on health and environmental aspects of using woodfuel in households should be given more attention.
Very little has been done on the utilization of woodfuels for thermal energy in cottage, medium and large-scale industries and enterprises which constitute one of the major sectors for fuelwood and charcoal consumption. It has been realized that the use of wood fuels in these industrial, commercial and public sectors of developing countries is an important area to be stressed in further activities due to the implications for economic (income generation) and social (job creation) aspects of rural areas.
The substitution of fuelwood and charcoal by alternative fuels using New and Renewable Sources of Energy (NRSE) and fossil fuels, which has in the past been promoted in the poorest sectors of urban areas, does not appear to have had any great impact on the solution of fuelwood and charcoal shortages.
Information flows
This area received considerable support in the first part of the 80's but less in the second half. Even where a good number of bulletins and newsletters as well as various cooperative networks, have been established since NPA, it is still an area which offers great potential for development within the framework of TCDC, North-South and South-South cooperation.
Education and training
Many people from developed and developing countries have taken part in a wide variety of meetings and training activities, not all of which have received the required follow up, but enough to create a critical mass of experts able to deal with wood energy matters. Of course, it is an area which still deserves more attention and efforts for its further development.
Areas for special consideration
Adequate institutional mechanisms at national and international levels were highly recommended in the NPA for the mobilization and coordination of all the resources required for the adoption of sound wood energy policies and their implementation. Unfortunately, the inadequacy of existing institutions has been one of the main constraints in the realization of many wood energy activities. It is now clear that no single institution can cope with wood energy aspects. Considerable work therefore remains to be done in this field.
The Tropical Forests Action Programme (TFAP) constitutes an excellent tool for the sectoral review, assessment and monitoring of wood energy activities. Therefore, a more active participation in TFAP exercises for the identification of wood energy problems and the involvement of different public and private sectors is envisaged to improve the awareness of national and international authorities on fuelwood and charcoal and to develop more coordinated action.
The Committee for the Development and Utilization of NRSE which was created to guide and monitor the implementation of the NPA, even though it has had an active role during the decade, has proved to be insufficient to achieve the goals set by the Nairobi Conference. Therefore, an ad hoc "Working Group" on Wood Energy is essential within the Committee for the Development and Utilization of NRSE to provide inter-agency coordination, interdisciplinary and cross sectoral programmes and to monitor progress on wood energy matters.
PRIORITY AREAS FOR FUTURE ACTION
Wood fuels will remain the main source of energy for most developing countries for the coming decade. Furthermore, taking into consideration the environmental concern raised by the international community on unbalanced CO[2] emission from the massive combustion of fossil fuels, forest biomass is again called upon to play an important role in reducing the greenhouse effect and acid rain for developed countries.
It is under these two aspects: as an energy source in the poorest sectors of developing countries and as a sound environmental source of energy to fight against greenhouse and acid rain effects in developed countries that forest biomass has to be developed in the future.
Consequently, the MAIN OBJECTIVES of the NEW PROGRAMME OF ACTION FOR WOOD ENERGY to be initiated are:
a) to promote concerted action by the international community to assist developing countries in their energy transition, in which their forest biomass plays a key role in fostering their economic development and improving the welfare of their populations.
b) to develop sustainable wood energy systems for developed and developing countries to meet the energy needs of the communities as a way of reducing the unbalanced emission of CO[2] and so fight greenhouse and acid rain effects.
The POLICY AREAS for concerted action in the future can be categorized according to the NPA scheme which is still valid.
<section>3</section>
1. Nairobi Programme of Action for woodfuels
1.1 Background
1.2 Objectives of the Nairobi Programme of Action
1.1 Background
The progressively widening gap between the consumption and the supply of energy, as well as the severe economic changes created by large oil price increases, caused serious concern to most countries of the world in the 1970's. The developing countries were particularly hard hit by the high oil prices, and faced great difficulties in obtaining enough energy for their needs. This concern, and the recognition of the finite nature of conventional energy sources, induced many countries to place more emphasis on the utilization of new and renewable sources of energy (NRSE). In view of these conditions and of the prospects that were thought to be made possible by technological advancements, the United Nations convened the Conference on NRSE in Nairobi, from 10 to 21 August 1981. The programme of action adopted by the Conference came to be known as the "Nairobi Programme of Action (NPA) for the development and utilization of NRSE.
Almost ten years have passed since the NPA was adopted. The Committee on the Development and Utilization of NRSE, the most important UN organ established as a result of the Nairobi Conference, decided at its fifth session in March-April 1990 to convene an Intergovernmental Expert Group Meeting, scheduled for August 1991, to assess and review the process of implementation of the NPA, and to make concrete recommendations on future actions in the field of NRSE.
1.2 Objectives of the Nairobi Programme of Action
1.2.1 General objectives
A discussion of the implementation of the NPA has to be based on what was actually decided at the time of the Nairobi Conference as summarized in the NPA, and various technical papers presented at the conference. A general outline of the NPA is given below, using the words of the NPA itself.
The fundamental objective of the NPA is to promote concerted action in the context of the energy transition, the development and utilization of NRSE with a view to help meet future overall requirements, particularly those of developing countries.
The specific objectives are as follows:
(a) To strengthen international cooperation for the promotion and intensification of research and development of technologies related to NRSE: to facilitate the transfer and adaptation of technology from developed to developing countries, and the exchange of technology among developing countries;
(b) to stimulate the mobilization of additional and adequate financial resources from developed countries, international financial institutions and other international organizations, the private sector, etc.;
(c) to provide, through international cooperative efforts, for the exchange of information and manpower training, particularly in the developing countries;
(d) to provide and give support to:
- the attainment of national objectives and priorities established by developing countries in the field of NRSE, related to the strengthening of their national capabilities and institutional infrastructures, for the effective incorporation of NRSE into national policy and planning processes;
- the drawing up and implementation of NRSE programmes and projects in the context of overall energy plans by all countries, particularly by developing countries;
(e) to provide, as requested and as appropriate, assistance and support for cooperative efforts among developing countries;
(f) to specify measures to increase international awareness of the advantages, potential and economic viability of NRSE.
In order to achieve the above listed objectives, the conference identified five broad policy areas for concerted action with the support of the international community according to national plans and priorities. The policy areas are as follows:
(a) energy assessment and planning;
(b) research, development and demonstration;
(c) transfer, adaptation and application of mature technologies;
(d) information flows;
(e) education and training.
1.2.2 Specific actions on fuelwood and charcoal
With reference to fuelwood and charcoal, the following specific actions were identified:
(a) Assessment and planning:
Assess and evaluate forest resources in order to estimate their present and future sustainable yield of fuelwood to identify deficit areas and areas in which reafforestation is both urgent and practicable.
(b) Research, development and demonstration:
Intensify and/or establish basic and applied research on more productive species;
Support and promote work aimed at improving the efficiency of stoves and cooking utensils, develop low-cost stoves and promote their widespread use, taking into account social and cultural acceptability;
Improve the preprocessing of fuels, including those presently wasted such as twigs, branches and dry leaves, for use in direct combustion and other processes and improve the conversion efficiency of charcoal making;
Develop promising fuelwood and charcoal substitutes or supplements utilizing other NRSE.
(c) Transfer, adaptation and application of mature technologies:
Improve and/or establish forest management practices;
Increase and/or establish reforestation and afforestation programmes with selected and tested species;
Promote and support programmes, projects and activities to establish large-scale plantations, including afforestation in deficit areas and wood lots, establish distribution, control and pricing policies and improve conversion and utilization technologies (charcoal production, gasification, kilns, ovens, etc.).
<section>4</section>
2. Wood energy situation
2.1 The general energy situation
2.2 Regional and national fuelwood situation
2.3 Rural/urban fuelwood and charcoal supply/demand
2.4 The environmental aspects
2.5 Social, economic and cultural considerations
The oil crisis in the seventies awakened interest in NRSE globally. The Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries were more concerned initially about energy security, but recently more about environmental considerations, whereas energy shortage and its socio-economic and environmental repercussions were the issues of prime concern for the developing countries. This interest has continued over the years, marked by various activities to develop and apply NRSE. In this chapter, the energy situation in general, and in particular, regarding fuelwood and charcoal in the developing countries in the last decade, 1980-1990, is described.
Then the environmental, socio-economic and cultural aspects of the situation are discussed. These discussions are aimed at following the changes that have occurred in the situation and the way they are perceived, and thereby setting the stage for the review of the activities of donor organizations in the next chapter.
2.1 The general energy situation
By the beginning of the decade, during the second energy crisis, the total energy consumption of the developing countries (including China) was about 1 740 million tonnes of oil equivalent (MTOE), which was 24% of the total world consumption (Figure 1). The growth rate of the commercial energy consumption decreased sharply from 7.8% between 1965-1980 to 4.6% between 1980-1988 for the low-and middle-income countries (WB, 1990). Thus by the end of the last decade, the energy consumption of the developing countries showed only a marginal increase to 2 560 MTOE - 29% of world total - as against the dramatic increases projected in 1981. The growth rate in the energy consumption of the OECD countries also decreased: from 3.0% between 1965-1980 to 1.0 % between 1980-1988. The per capita energy consumption of the developing countries was generally low compared to that of the OECD countries. This can of course be explained by the low GNP per capita of the former countries; in
general, the energy consumption of countries is linearly correlated with their per capita GNP. Figure 1 also shows another distinguishing feature of energy consumption in developing countries: only these regions of the world show considerable reliance on forms of energy other than conventional (commercial) energy; 20% of the energy needs of the developing countries in 1990 were met by traditional, erroneously called noncommercial energy sources, mostly woodfuels.
The energy consumption of developing countries in 1988 is shown in Figure 2 by region and energy type. Sub-Saharan Africa consumed the least total energy, 120 MTOE, whereas Asia consumed the most, 1 350 MTOE. Europe, the Middle-East and North Africa (EMENA) consumed 650 MTOE and Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) consumed 700 MTOE. The available estimates on consumption of traditional fuels, such as fuelwood and charcoal, crop residues and animal waste indicate that they constitute 60% of the total energy consumption in Africa (WB, 1989), 40% in Asia (ADB, 1989),10% in EMENA and 30% in LAC (PFE, 1989) (Figure 2). In many of the individual countries, the proportion of traditional energy consumption is much higher.
Figure 1. World Energy Consumption in 1980 and 1990. Source: Data from CEC, 1990
The drop in energy consumption growth rate of the developing countries is due to a combination of factors, the most important being the increase in oil prices. Oil prices increased nearly 10 times in the period 1970 to 1981. This presented different kinds of problems to individual developing countries. The oil exporting countries were faced with the problem of managing their huge additional resources well enough to stimulate desired growth which many of them failed to achieve. The oil importing countries on the other hand faced acute financial difficulties with increased import bills for oil, a situation that caused considerable deterioration in their balance of payments situation and contributed to heavy debt burdens in subsequent years. The economic situation of most of the developing countries greatly worsened in the last decade with many of them plunging into recession. This recession is marked by weak growth in the productive sector, poor export performance, mounting
debt, deteriorating social conditions, environmental degradation and the increasing decline in institutional capacity (WB, 1989), all of which contribute to decreased energy consumption growth rates. The energy problems of these countries must therefore always be seen against this socio-economic background.
Nonetheless, some of the developing countries fared better, and some much better, than the grim picture painted so far. Notable among these are some of the Asian countries that have achieved considerable economic growth. This is reflected in their energy consumption patterns (see next section for information on individual countries) by the doubling of per capita energy consumption for the Asian region as a whole from 0.225 TOE in 1973 to 0.408 TOE in 1987. In the 1970s the region experienced high energy costs with high energy consumption (annual growth rate: 7.3 %) against a moderate economic growth of 5.3 % on the average. The region performed differently during the second oil shock period since 1979/80, experiencing low energy consumption growth (5.0%) against high economic growth of 6.7%. However, with lower energy costs after 1985, the region has again been experiencing increased energy consumption (6.2%) with a high economic growth of 7.5% (ADB, 1989).
Figure 2. Regional Energy Consumption in Developing Countries in 1988. Source: Data on commercial energy (excluding woodfuels), World Bank 1990; traditional energy (woodfuel and biomass) data are from various sources.
2.2 Regional and national fuelwood situation
The fuelwood situation regarding supply and demand at the beginning of the 1980s decade was comprehensively reviewed by FAO which presented the results in a map (FAO, 1981), as a contribution to the UN Conference on NRSE, Nairobi, 1981. A more detailed report was later prepared on the subject (FAO, 1983).
The FAO report described the fuelwood situation in the developing countries. In 1980, of the 2 000 million people, (75% of the population of the developing countries) who depended on fuelwood, 100 million (5%3 were living in a situation of acute shortage and were unable to obtain the adequate fuelwood to meet their minimum energy requirements. More than half of these people - 1 050 million were in a deficit situation and could provide for their minimum energy requirements only by over-cutting of the wood resources which was to lead to their depletion with disastrous ecological, environmental and socioeconomic consequences. Sixty-three out of 95 developing countries were faced with inadequate supplies of fuelwood (WRI, 1985).
Another major study that dealt with the fuelwood situation around 1980/81 period was the energy assessment carried out by the World Bank and UNDP for sixty developing countries. The results of the study for thirty countries were summarized in a report (ESMAP, 1984) and the supply/demand data for fuelwood and charcoal and their proportion in total energy mix are presented in Table 1.
The data demonstrate the enormous importance of fuelwood on a regional and country basis, of the 30 countries listed, 28 relied heavily on fuelwood. In 19 countries, fuelwood contributed 50 to 95 % of the total energy, and in 9 of the countries between 20 and 50% of the total used. In many other countries not included in the survey, fuelwood also made up a high proportion of total energy used; for example, 32% in India, 30% in Thailand, and 40% in the Philippines. Even in countries that were net exporters of fossil fuel, fuelwood still made up a significant proportion of the total energy used: in Bolivia, 42 %; Indonesia, 34 %; Nigeria, 59 % and Peru, 26 %. (Gregersen et al., 1989). Again, with this body of information, deficit situations were predicted for a number of countries.
It was quickly perceived by the international aid community that this was another energy crisis: the fuelwood crisis. There was response to the urgent needs in the way of aid activities to address the problems. The individual developing countries were initially sluggish in responding to the problem because, unlike the oil crisis, the problem did not immediately ring warning bells in the form of balance of payment deficits and fuel shortages affecting the vital arteries of transport and industry (Munslow, 1988). The rural people themselves did not perceive the problem then and have not done so to date.
The FAO analysis is regarded to have underestimated the woody biomass material obtainable around the villages. It was demonstrated that if the wood obtainable from fallow land and other factors were considered, a wood fuel deficit would not be deduced for most rural areas (Foley, 1987). It is now realized that there was in fact no woodfuel crisis, although there are clear problems of deforestation and desertification caused chiefly by other activities such as farming, grazing, forest fires, industries, etc. of which woodfuels are a by-product used to pay, at least partially, for land clearance operations.
The FAO survey was a good starting point but more studies need to be carried out to really determine the fuelwood position in various localities. This is why no effort is made in this document to conduct a woodfuel balance survey, in order to see the changes that have occurred over the years in the deficit situation pointed out earlier. Instead, it has been decided to merely look at the way in which regions and individual developing countries have progressed with respect to woodfuel resources, supply and demand.
The FAO woodfuel supply statistics (FAO, 1991) over the years have suffered from a number of drawbacks. Nonetheless, they should give an idea, or at least an order of magnitude, of the minimum available woodfuel supply potentials. The data for the different regions are given in Figure 3. Fuelwood production by developing countries was over 80 % of the total world supply throughout the decade. Both developing country and world production decreased only slightly during the middle of the decade, but are now rising at a low growth rate.
Fuelwood and charcoal demand and consumption data are scanty. The few scattered data available have been obtained from different types of studies: national energy balances, national household expenditure surveys, national household energy surveys and local micro surveys (Leach and Gowen, 1987). The data are of varying reliability and leave scope for improvement. The readily available data are tabulated in Table 1 for the thirty countries studied by World Bank/UNDP around 1979 to 1980. More recent data are also included in the table.
There is diversity in the energy consumption patterns of the countries. Therefore, for a meaningful analysis, it is useful to classify the countries on the basis of relevant energy and energy mix indicators. The indicators selected are the per capita energy consumption, and the percentage of biomass consumption in the energy mix. In Table 1 the countries have been arranged according to increasing per capita total energy consumption and four main categories may be discerned. These are the low and high energy consumers which consume less and more than 600 kgoe per capita respectively, and under these categories are the high and low biomass consumers which consume more and less than 50% biomass respectively. The countries in the various categories are listed in Table 2 according to region and for 1979-1982 and 1987.
Most of the biomass requirements of all the countries were met by fuelwood and charcoal except a few countries, notably Ethiopia, which depended more on other forms of biomass such as dung. The majority of the countries (21) are low energy consumers which are generally (17 countries) associated with high dependence on biomass and most of them are in Africa. The four low energy, low biomass-consuming countries are all oil exporting countries except Papua New Guinea, which explains their reliance on commercial fuels, but even then, they all required more than 34% biomass. Of the four oil exporting countries, Nigeria depended most heavily on biomass (59 %). On the other hand, commercial fuels are preferred in the high energy-consuming countries.
The changes that have occurred in the energy situation, including the fuelwood and charcoal contribution, are difficult to assess because of lack of data on consumption. The energy indicators for 1987 of some selected countries (Lesotho, Sudan, Malawi, Zimbabwe and Zambia), for which data were available, are given in Table 1. The energy mix of traditional and conventional fuels of countries for around 1980 and 1987 are given in Figure 4 for comparison. In general, there was no major change in the energy consumption patterns of the countries. The marginal energy consumption growth caused no changes in the consumption category classification (Table 1). The changes in the proportion of traditional biomass and commercial energy were also only minor, except for Lesotho (Table 4).
Table 1. Energy Consumption for Various Developing Countries in 1979 to 82 and 1986-88
Figure 3. World Fuelwood and Charcoal Production for Various Years
Table 2. Classification of energy consumption patterns of 30 developing countries
Number of countries in category
Region
Africa
Asia/PAC
EMENA
LAC
Total
Category
Low consumer
High biomass
Low biomass
High consumer
High biomass
Low biomass
Figure 4. Energy Consumption of Some Developing Countries around 1980 and in 1987
2.3 Rural/urban fuelwood and charcoal supply/demand
It would be useful to gather, for various years, information for all the developing countries and to prepare a fuelwood and charcoal consumption energy chart showing what might be regarded as key indicators, such as population, per capita total energy consumption, percentage commercial, percentage fuelwood and charcoal, percentage rural and percentage household consumption. This could convey a graphic idea of the situation and changes that occurred in the energy consumption pattern of the countries concerned. However, only a preliminary sketch of such a chart is possible, as given in Table 1, for 30 developing countries for 1979-1982 and 1987. There are a lot of gaps in the table because of a lack of data. The problem of data on fuelwood and charcoal activities in developing countries has been long known and stressed by the international community, but it is only recently that a few developing countries have responded and have begun to compile the data.
The unavailability and variability of data are only parts of the problem; another important difficulty is that the consumption patterns are usually location specific and national generalizations cannot help in designing appropriate interventions for specific locations. Tables 3 and 4, which give the annual per capita consumption of rural household energy and woodfuels (or biomass) between 1979 and 1984 for various parts of regions and countries respectively, and a similar table for urban consumption (Table 5), illustrate these points.
It is obvious that fuelwood consumption depends on many factors such as geography, rural/urban location and use of other biomass fuels. Cold areas usually have a higher consumption than warmer areas' because of additional space heating requirements. In Africa, there is almost total dependence on fuelwood for the rural households, but in other regions other biomass resources contribute substantially.
Demand for fuelwood in the urban areas of developing countries is usually lower than in rural areas. One of the main reasons for this is the prominence of other fuels such as charcoal and fossil fuels in the energy mix of the urban areas. There is a kind of ladder of energy sources in the urban areas: from fuelwood at the bottom, through charcoal, kerosene and gas, to electricity at the top. People generally climb this ladder as their income increases. Therefore charcoal, which is hardly used in the rural areas because of availability of free fuelwood, is quite popular in urban areas because of higher income and other factors such as its lightness and non-smoking nature.
Table 3. Annual per capita consumption of rural household energy and woodfuels: Country and regional averages and ranges.
Region/Fuel Type
Per capita biomass consumpn. m^3 wood equiv.
Total (GJ)
Percentage as biomass
Africa: South of Sahara
Lowlands: dry
Lowlands: humid
Upland: (1500 cm)
North Africa & Middle East
Large consumers a)
Small consumers b)
Mountain areas c)
up to 1.5
up to 15
Asia. including Far East
Desert and sub-desert
Agricultural regions, dry tropics:
wood fuels
crop residues
animal waste
total
Agricultural regions, moist tropics:
wood fuels
crop residues
animal wastes
total
Shifting agriculture, moist tropics
mountain areas:
wood fuels
other
total
Latin America
hot areas
temperate areas
cold areas
a) Tunisia, Iraq, Morocco, Algeria, Turkey.
b) Lebanon, Egypt, Jordan, Syria, S. & N. Yemen.
c) North Africa, Iraq, Turkey.
Source: Leach and Gowen, 1987.
Table 4. Per capita consumption of household energy and biomass (GJ): Local averages and ranges.
Country/survey
Average (GJ)
Range (GJ)
% Biomass
Source
Bangladesh:
Ulipur village
Briscoe 1979
Sakoa village
Quader & Omar 1982
4 villages
Quader & Omar 1982
large survey
Mahmud & Islam, 1982
Large survey
Douglas 1981
Budget survey (occupatn.)
Parikh 1982
Chile:
8 villages
Diaz & del Valle 1984
India:
Large survey (income)
Natarajan 1985
Tamil Nadu, 4 villages
Aiyasamy 1982
Tamil Nadu, 17 villages
SFMAB 1982
Pondicherry (income)
Gupta & Rao 1980
Karnataka, 6 villages
Reddy, et al, 1980
3 villages
Bowonder & Ravishankar 1984
Indonesia:
3 villages (and income)
Weatherly 1980
Mexico:
3 zones (and income)
Guzman 1982
Nepal:
Pangma village
Bajracharya 1981
Pakistan:
budget survey (income)
FBS 1983
Papua New Guinea:
highland village: Jan,
Newcombe 1984a
highland village: May
Newcombe 1984a
South Africa:
7 villages
Furness 1981
Sri lanka:
6 regional zones
Wijesinghe 1984
budges survey (income)
DCS 1983
Tanzania:
18 villages
Skutsch 1984
Note: Ranges are not for individual households: ranges for them are much greater. These ranges apply to averages at one level of disaggregation below the average shown in the table: e.g. income or caste groups in a one-village survey.
Source: Leach and Gowen, 1987
Table 5. Per capita urban consumption of household energy and biomass (GJ): Local averages and ranges
Country/survey
Average (GJ)
Range (GJ)
% Biomass
Source
Bangladesh:
budget survey (occupatn.)
Parikh 1982
India:
Hyderabad (income) a)
Alam et al. 1983
large survey (income)
Natarajan 1985
Pondicherry (income)
Gupta & Rao 1980
Pakistan:
budget survey (income)
FBS 1983
Papua New Guinea:
Newcombe 1980
squatters settlements
government housing settlements
high-income housing
Sri Lanka:
budget survey (income)
DCS 1983
Togo:
Lome (income) b)
Grut 1971
a) Excludes electricity use.
b) Wood fuels only.
Note: Ranges are not for individual households; those ranges are much greater. These ranges apply to the averages at one level of disaggregation below the average shown in the table: e.g. income or caste groups in a one-city survey, cities or towns in a multi-city survey, and income groups in a national urban survey.
Source: Leach and Gowen, 1987.
2.4 The environmental aspects
At the beginning of the 1980s decade during the oil crisis, the main worry that spurred development in fuelwood intervention activities was to address the financial burden and supply insecurities of fossil fuel. There was also some concern for the perceived problems of the spread of deforestation and desertification in the developing world. Shortage of wood fuel and pressures on scarce fuelwood resources were initially largely held responsible for this situation, but the position on environmental considerations has changed over the years. It is now recognized that factors other than fuelwood pressure may be the chief cause in the deforestation process. The main factors are:
1) Land clearing for agricultural purposes (this is the principal cause, contributing to up to 70% of the permanent forest destruction in Africa between 1950 and 1983) (Munslow et al., 1988);
2) Over-grazing;
3) Changes in cropping practices, such as reduction of fallow period due to population pressures;
4) Erosion and impaired soil structure;
5) Fuelwood consumption
6) Pressures from other uses of wood: timber, pulpwood, forest fires, public works, etc.;
7) Lack of reforestation.
Deforestation combined with soil erosion and loss of soil fertility then lead to desertification which has far reaching adverse ecological, climatological, agricultural, socio-economic and environmental consequences. Although the existence of a fuelwood crisis might be questionable, especially in the rural areas, there is overwhelming evidence to show that deforestation and desertification are prevalent in the developing countries and that there is an environmental crisis.
Recently, environmental problems have taken a new shape that is generating a lot of interest in the industrial countries. There is concern about emissions from industrial activities, including energy activities.
The combustion of fuelwood and biomass in general produces pollutants quite similar to those produced by the combustion of coal and other fossil fuels. The major pollutants are sulphur dioxide (SO[2]), nitrogen oxides (NO[x]), carbon dioxide (CO[2]), carbon monoxide (CO), polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) and fly ash particulates. The effects of these pollutants have been well documented (Sax, 1974; Hutzinger, 1989); they are only briefly summarized here.
Sulphur dioxide and NO[x] are responsible for acid deposition (acid rain) and urban smog is caused by the action of sunlight on NO[x], carbon monoxide and certain organic compounds.
The accumulation of greenhouse gases, principally carbon dioxide but also carbon monoxide, methane, nitrous oxide, nitrogen dioxide, volatile organic compounds and fluorocarbons, in the atmosphere is leading to global warming. The gases trap the heat radiated from the earth and retain it near the surface thus leading to increasing global temperatures. Carbon monoxide is toxic, many of the PAHs are known carcinogens and particulates introduce trace elements into the ecosystem that may be harmful.
In industrial countries biomass is being encouraged as renewable energy source for the future, particularly because of the much lower emission of pollutants from such materials relative to fossil fuels. Biomass materials contain little sulphur and so cause little sulphur emission. They emit CO[2] when combusted, but renewable biomass recaptures an equal quantity of CO[2] during its growing period, resulting in a net CO[2] emission of zero; the carbon cycle (Figure 5) illustrates this. This environmental advantage is quite significant because the energy sector contributes most of the global CO[2].
The new environmental considerations have three implications. One relates to the highly polluting habit of cooking in enclosed kitchens in developing countries. Women are those most exposed and are thus highly susceptible to toxic effects of the pollution. This is an area that could benefit from intervention in the form of improved stoves, education on proper cooking practices and the importance of chimneys. The second is that further impetus is provided for developing countries to develop wood energy. However, in view of the increased pressure on fuelwood resources that this would create, it has to be done in a sustainable manner, that is, along with woodfuel development programmes.
Figure 5. The Carbon Cycle Source. UNIDO, 1990
Finally, developing countries are caught up in a dilemma regarding the choice of technology. They have the chance to start their energy technologies on a sound footing regarding pollution by implementing the advanced least polluting technologies, so that they do not have to change their systems in the future to reduce pollution as the industrial nations are now having to do. However, this option will be constrained by the higher investment required and the need to use cheaper technology to realize some economic progress. The choice will depend on the situation of individual countries. The higher income developing countries certainly have more flexibility, and for these countries, the new technologies being considered in the industrial countries may be quite attractive (BTG, 1991a). It is therefore essential that developing countries start a wood energy transition from present wood energy systems operated in informal markets to better structured, organized and planned ones.
There is some latitude for these countries however.
Their present contribution to the global pollution is only 25 %, with the industrial countries contributing the balance.
2.5 Social, economic and cultural considerations
Socio-economic issues are many, encompassing issues that are affected by and/or play a role in the energy and environmental crises and intervention programmes. Sometimes, they have a combined cause/effect role. In this section the main contributors to the various crisis are presented, while the other factors are discussed with the interventions.
It should be recognized that wood-based energy for thermal energy and power is for most of developing countries economically feasible, technically viable and socially acceptable.
It should also be pointed out that wood energy involves a chain of activities which provide jobs and income to a large number of men, women and young people.
2.5.1 The linked forces
There is a strong link between the population growth, agricultural and environmental problems in the developing countries (WB, 1990a). A high population growth rate starts it all, which then puts pressure on fragile land and natural resources, leading to damaging agricultural practices that ultimately produce environmental degradation. It has therefore been suggested that the three problems should be tackled together.
While individual governments in the developing world should be encouraged to approach problems in such an integrated manner, it would be better for outside intervention to clearly identify and focus on the most crucial points that can serve the interest of the greatest majority. The two roles played in a complementary manner can yield the most benefit.
Fragile land and low productivity technology are the main problems that have allowed the situation to deteriorate, and it would appear that emphasis should be placed on introducing and diffusing technology, more or less for its own sake, and then the people can be expected to use it to tackle the problems themselves. Hence, the focus on energy technology is a good beginning but is sub-optimal. Different countries and even localities will have different technology needs to help address their socioeconomic and environmental problems and, therefore, the scope of diffusion programmes needs to be expanded to cover areas including materials technology which is usually a constraint to all others.
There are constraints and barriers to the implementation of long-term solutions such as poverty, low education, external debts, etc. which should be removed or taken into consideration for the solution of wood energy problems in developing countries.
2.5.2 Land tenure system
Traditional land tenure arrangements, which provide security of tenure through customary rules of community land ownership and distribution of land to individuals within the community, break down as new settlers arrive and customary law is less recognized. In many cases, governments acquire all land rights de jure, resulting in open access to land. The result is diminishing land tenure security. The incentive for individuals to protect the land from soil erosion and to protect trees from excessive cutting is reduced as their traditional tenure security is eroded and is not replaced by alternative arrangements to guarantee security. This negatively affects agricultural development and contributes to the lack of response by farmers to soil degradation (WB, 1990b).
2.5.3 Other socio-economic factors
The gathering of wood in rural areas throughout the developing world is performed almost exclusively by women, sometimes assisted by children. As fuelwood becomes scarce, which is the case in many parts, the collection time has increased and, although it is not perceived by the men, this has many undesirable consequences. The women have less time for their other important functions such as agriculture, cooking and child caring, which may affect the nutrition and health of the entire family.
Scarcity of fuelwood minimizes the cooking of high quality foods such as beans, with nutritional and health implications. It also leads to substitution by other biomass like crop residues and animal waste for fuel which may endanger farming systems. The purchase of woodfuel, especially in the urban areas, puts greater economic burdens on their meagre incomes.
Wood fuel production, harvesting, transportation, sale and use, constitute income generating activities for a great number of people of rural and urban areas from which they obtain some income to cover their basic needs. Unfortunately, so far only a few activities have been developed to assess the socioeconomic importance of wood energy systems.
<section>5</section>
3. Strategies and activities of organizations
3.1 Strategies and activities on fuelwood/charcoal
3.2 Comments on strategies and activities
3.3 Problems and constraints in project implementation
In this chapter the activities undertaken by international and national organizations are highlighted in order to give an idea of how the international community behaves when faced with a subject of common concern.
With general awareness greatly increased during the preparation period and by the conference itself, and encouraged by the rapid increase of fossil fuel prices after the NPA, there was a sharp increase in activities aimed at improving the fuelwood/charcoal situation in the developing and developed countries.
The justification for this renewed interest in wood energy in the case of developed countries can be found in the need to find alternative sources of energy to reduce the heavy dependence on fossil fuels. In the case of developing countries, the reasons were in some cases completely different. For instance, in the cases of countries situated in arid and semi-arid areas, the justification was the fight against desertification and the alleviation of fuelwood/charcoal needs of poor people living in rural and urban areas.
Nevertheless, apart from any justifications used to launch the activities, the seriousness and gravity of the energy situation faced by the world at that time were more than enough reason to justify all the activities on NRSE in general, and on fuelwood/charcoal in particular.
In this initial enthusiasm, there were a great number of organizations at national and international levels. In this chapter, activities undertaken by the following agencies are summarized: FAO, UNDP/World Bank/ESMAP, EEC and government cooperative programmes of DGIS, USAID and France.
The objectives and strategies established were not always well defined, and if well defined were not always fully respected, due to the innumerable situations involved in the definition of activities to be funded, particularly in executing agencies. In addition, the activities supported did not always follow the interests and needs of recipient countries.
3.1 Strategies and activities on fuelwood/charcoal
The main actions and activities developed within the NPA by the above mentioned donor and executing agencies can be categorized as follows:
a. forest resources assessment;
b. wood production and supply for fuelwood and charcoal;
 Research & Development (R&D) on more productive species;
 increased productivity of existing forests;
 creating new forest resources;
c. reduction of fuelwood/charcoal demand;
 improved stoves for households;
 improved charcoal and charcoal briquette production;
 more efficient use of fuelwood/charcoal in rural industries;
d. wood-based power plants;
e. woodfuel markets;
f. finding substitutes for woodfuels.
3.1.1 Forest resources assessment
Actions:
Assessment of forest resources, in order to estimate sustainable yield and identify deficit areas and areas where forest management and reforestation are urgent and practicable.
Quite a lot has been done in this field. Forest resources, and other woodfuel sources, have been evaluated, including wood from agricultural lands. Comparisons have been made with known and forecast woodfuel demand data, in order to identify deficits, or "woodfuel gaps". There are still many unknowns, however, as well as a need for more accurate data.
Based upon these evaluations, there has been a clear change in the views on the woodfuel crisis over the decade. In the early years, it was frequently claimed that a very severe deficit was developing. For some countries, it was said that because of excessive woodfuel use, the forest stock would disappear completely before the turn of the century, or even earlier. This is no longer the accepted truth, and has definitely not happened as a result of woodfuel use. Even in severely deforested parts of the world, such as the Sahel, woodfuel is still available at reasonable prices not much higher than those of a decade ago.
What has happened is that a better insight has been gained as to where the woodfuel comes from and more realistic assumptions of how the specific woodfuel demand develops, as it becomes more difficult or more expensive to get the fuel.
Five different categories of woodfuel sources are frequently used to classify where the woodfuel comes from:
Cutting of "natural" trees specifically for fuelwood and charcoal;
Woodfuel plantations;
By-product woodfuel from forestry or agriculture;
Woodfuel from dead trees or branches;
Woodfuel from clearing of new agricultural land.
There are large variations between regions, countries and even within countries, as regards the distribution of woodfuel among the five categories. It is, however, now generally believed that in most developing countries the latter three categories by far represent the bulk of the woodfuel supply, with land clearance as the most important single woodfuel source.
This does not mean that there is no link at all between woodfuel and deforestation - certainly some trees are cut down for energy, especially around big cities - but that other human activities, mainly the expansion of agricultural land, are the main causes of the problem. The large scale cutting of forest trees for energy, which would result in the nightmare scenarios of the early 80's, represents only a minor part of the deforestation.
The woodfuel situation is now in general terms seen as less distressing than it appeared to be some five years ago. Having said that, it is nevertheless very important to point out that in areas where a severe shortage has already occurred, whether caused by woodfuel use or agricultural clearance, the physical supply situation can be very difficult for the people concerned. Add poverty, which does not allow any switch to other fuels such as LPG or kerosene, and the results of the market mechanisms may not be acceptable from a humanitarian point of view.
It is also important to keep in mind that the situation is not stable in a longer perspective. With population growth, and the increasing demand for agricultural land, the currently very important supply of woodfuel from agricultural clearance will sooner or later start to decrease substantially, as there will be less and less land left to clear.
The main lesson learnt in this field is that, unless enough woodfuel is produced from other sources, preferably sustainable, either as a forest product or from small woodlots in agricultural areas, or people switch to other fuels, the woodfuel supply will simply not be able to meet demand.
For this reason, among others, it is important to keep collecting data and to carry out assessments and overviews. The competence for doing this has increased quite a lot in the last decade, in developing and developed countries alike.
In conclusion:
More information and data on forest resources for fuelwood/charcoal are now available. A better understanding of the wood energy systems in both rural areas and urban sectors have been obtained. However, considering that woodfuel will remain an important source of energy, activities to assess forest resources for woodfuel have to be continued and information improved.
3.1.2 Wood production and supply for fuelwood/charcoal
In the NPA, woodfuel supply matters are mentioned under several headings and constitute one of the areas of main political concern to donor countries and development agencies. Therefore, this area of work is one which has received more support so far in terms of funds and technical assistance.
At a more specific level, the proposed actions can be divided into the following main areas:
a. Research, Development and & Demonstration (R. D&D) on more productive species;
b. increased productivity of existing forests;
c. creating new forest resources.
Research, Development & Demonstration on more productive species
Action:
Research on and identification of more productive species for woodfuel production, reforestation and afforestation, particularly in arid, semi-arid and deficit regions.
Information is now available on the productivity of a wide range of tree species, for application in most climatic zones. During the 80's many of these species were tested, on a laboratory scale as well as in full-sized projects. New biological tools are available for plant improvement, but there is also more care in introducing new species.
The general experience has been that farmers in developing countries have been positive towards trying new species, or methods. Too far-reaching changes in traditional ways of working have, however, frequently been rejected. It has also been noted that, for obvious reasons, farmers in dryland areas are more reluctant to plant trees than farmers in more productive areas.
In many cases, the new species have turned out to be less (30-50%) productive than was anticipated from laboratory test results. This has often been related to water availability, but also reflects that what can be achieved in ideal surroundings cannot necessarily be reproduced in real life.
An important lesson from the tests has been that woodfuel is rarely the decisive factor for the farmers when selecting species. Other benefits from the trees, e.g. construction timber or fruit, are much more important. The woodfuel can rarely compete economically with such products.
Another important experience has been that people have definite preferences regarding what kind of wood they want to use for cooking or charcoal making. These preferences can often be linked to the combustion or carbonization characteristics, or the smell of the wood, but are sometimes merely a reflection of traditional values. Whatever the underlying reason, it is very important to take such preferences seriously. Otherwise new species, no matter how productive they are, may prove to be useless in real life.
In conclusion:
Considerable work has been done on high-yield species. Productivity has proved to be just one among several factors influencing species selection.
Increased productivity of existing forests
Action:
Promote and support forest management, and improved practices and technologies for the conservation and more efficient use of natural forests.
Very little has been done on improved forest management in developing countries. Much could be achieved by fire control, regulated cattle grazing, regulated exploitation etc. It is not quite clear why this area has been neglected, but the reason is probably the heavy emphasis placed on plantations and tree planting during the 80's. Managing an existing forest does not have the same political visibility as planting a new tree.
Only 5% of the world's closed forests are under intensive management and the management of open and closed savanna-type woodland are even lower. Often the use of non-commercial products is based on local people's users rights. Governments did not consider the control of flow of non-commercial products necessary, but with increasing pressure on now scarce resources this is required to ensure sustainable production. Governments should introduce protection measures to avoid indiscriminate exploitation, grazing and fire, and establish optimum rotation for the rational utilization of resources. Governments need to plan well for the allocation of funds and to involve local people to undertake these activities. Replacing existing sources of wood fuel with plantations may not always be the most cost effective approach.
The management of existing forests, particularly of arid and semi-arid areas, has not received the attention of national and international organizations that the subject deserves. It also helps to protect natural ecosystems which, if not conveniently protected, are condemned to disappear.
In conclusion:
Improved forest management and conservation have been overlooked. Action is urgently required.
Creating new forest resources
Action:
Reforestation, afforestation and energy plantations with tested species, aimed at increasing woodfuel supply and achieving sustainable biomass fuel supply.
Increased fuelwood/charcoal supply through the establishment of new tree plantations using local and high-yield species is the area in developing countries which has received by far the majority of the support originating from donor agencies.
In the first years, specifically allotted large-scale fuelwood plantations, as in the case of Brazil for the steel industry, dominated the scene. Trees planted for fuelwood production would not only be useful to the people, but also be sold at a high enough cost to basically recover the cost for industries.
At the same time, research work was being carried out on species selection, with the objective of finding more productive species for different soils and climatic zones. To some degree, newly selected species were used in full scale plantations.
After some years of experience, it was found that specifically allotted large-scale energy plantations for fuelwood/charcoal were expensive when compared to new fossil fuel prices.
It was also found that new species did not behave quite as well as had been hoped when tested in real life, and also that it was difficult to organize and harmonize woodfuel systems concerning: production, harvesting and use on a large scale.
Thus, the strategy gradually changed. Smaller plantations, with a broader market for the wood produced, became much more popular. Agroforestry, social forestry and community forestry supported by intensive extension activities, were developed for a much wider purpose than woodfuel alone so as to solve the problem.
With the problems originating in the organization of massive plantations and the lack of financial and economic incentives for the establishment of large plantations, improved forest management using community forestry approach has become more attractive.
In conclusion:
Many efforts have been concentrated on reforestation and fuelwood plantation, which have not met all the expected objectives at present energy prices. The establishment of forests for wood fuels and other products through community forestry with adequate extension support activities is working well and involves the people in their development.
3.1.3 Reduction of fuelwood and charcoal demand
Action:
Research, Development & Demonstration (R, D&D) on improved stoves and their diffusion in households and rural industries/village applications. Improved charcoal making techniques.
There are only a few ways of reducing the demand for fuelwood/charcoal and they are basically: (i) increasing the efficiency with which woodfuel is converted into useful energy, (ii) improving the efficiency of charcoal production, (iii) by using improved wood energy conversion devices (at household and industrial level) and introducing more efficient procedures during the use of energy itself (i.e.: cooking) and (iv) switching to other fuels.
Improved stoves for households
Woodstove projects were thought to be suitable for rural areas where there is almost total dependence on fuelwood and the possibilities of a switch to other fuels are limited. However, experience with many woodstove projects has not borne this out. People prefer the free three stone open fire, a traditional method that is quite convenient and has other advantages such as lighting, heating, etc that were generally neglected in the past.
Wood and charcoal stove projects are therefore more appropriate for urban and pert-urban areas where considerable savings in fuelwood and charcoal can be made by extensive dissemination. The stove types favoured are mud, metal or ceramic. While some successes have been reported in the dissemination of these stoves, there are a number of problems and it is doubtful whether the diffusion can be sustained following the approaches developed so far.
One problem has been the tendency to rate and compare stoves to traditional methods in terms of efficiency, neglecting other equally important technical aspects, especially maximum and minimum power output, i.e., output range and turn-down ratio. A proper reassessment of the many stove types disseminated so far would indicate that the advantages over the traditional methods, if any, are marginal. The constraints of cheap, light, insulating and durable locally-produced ceramic linings continue to be a problem.
Aspects on health/environment resulting from the use of fuelwood/charcoal have not yet received the attention that they deserve. They are important in improving living conditions, health and welfare of poor people.
Improved charcoal and charcoal briquette production
Improvement in charcoal making techniques is a viable option for reducing fuel consumption in urban areas. Lump charcoal production from wood does not need further elaboration as it is well covered elsewhere. Charcoal briquettes made from charcoal fines and biomass, such as wood wastes and crop residues (such as cotton stalk), are currently gaining interest and can make a substantial contribution to the fuelwood balance. By this means, materials that are otherwise wastes, often an environmental nuisance and difficult to handle, are converted into a form suitable for the large urban market. The residues are either briquetted before carbonizing or are carbonized before briquetting. The production of the briquettes needs to be combined with stove development and market activities to ensure acceptability and penetration of the briquettes in the traditional charcoal market.
More efficient use of fuelwood/charcoal in rural industries
Woodfuels in particular, and also charcoal, have traditionally been used in rural industries throughout the developing world, an application that has been well described in an FAO document (FAO, 1988). The industries were classified into the following categories:
- Cottage industry;
- Village industry;
- Rural industry.
They process a wide range of materials usually derived locally, such as food (bread, cakes, sugar, cassava, cooking fats etc.), herbs and spices, drinks and beverages, tobacco, wood, metal, bricks, tiles, pottery, lime, soap and dyes. Fuelwood and charcoal are also used for various services in hotels and restaurants, such as cooking and heating. The characteristics of these industries are described in the FAO report. For industries largely depending on fuelwood, energy costs form a considerable proportion of production costs (typically over 50%). In those, costs or shortages of energy are becoming constraints to economic production.
Rural industries can contribute greatly to rural employment, income, quality of life and other socioeconomic benefits. Unfortunately, appropriate interventions to cater to energy needs of these industries have not yet been properly developed.
The lack of a developed market for rural woodfuel has been a major disincentive. A well-developed rural industry based largely on fuelwood may very well break that bottleneck. For most of the countries that lack fossil fuel resources that option could also be very attractive from the national economic point of view, particularly because of an improvement in the balance of payments. Even countries that have fossil fuel resources usually lack the appropriate efficient distribution systems to provide a regular fuel supply in the rural areas, and thus the use of nearby fuelwood resources can be a viable alternative. In addition, the use of residues has environmental benefits.
Compared to fuelwood, the use of charcoal in industry is relatively limited, though there are examples of large-scale use in the metallurgical (Brazil) and cement industry. Also, the use of activated charcoal is becoming of increased importance in industrial water and air cleaning operations.
3.1.4 Wood-based power plants
Action:
Develop and promote fuelwood/charcoal gasifiers for electricity generation, pumping water, etc..
Fuelwood/charcoal gasification was another priority item during the 80's, as popular as items on briquetting or charcoal conversion efficiency. There has been technical progress on gasifiers; it is now reasonably well known how different types of fuels can be gasified and how a gasification system should be designed to minimize operational difficulties.
There are still some difficulties in making gasification systems that can really be said to be appropriate for rural applications in developing countries. The technology is not quite as simple as was thought in the early 80's. In contrast to diesel generators, it is quite easy for the operator to make errors that will disrupt the operation. With the spare part supply problems, that are frequent in many developing countries, it is no wonder that so many of the gasification demonstration projects of the 80's have come to a halt.
The main problem is, however, the economy. Gasification-based power generation is, as a general rule, not economically competitive at the present oil prices with conventional alternatives, both in decentralized and grid-connected systems. The same is mainly true for steam based power generation, the other alternative for making electricity out of fuelwood/charcoal. There are, of course, specific locations, with either very cheap fuelwood/charcoal or very expensive petroleum fuels, where steam or gasification can already compete, but in most places an oil price increase of at least 50% at the international level is necessary to achieve equilibrium.
The reason for this low economic performance is mainly the high capital cost for biomass-based power generating equipment, in comparison with the cheap gensets that can be used to convert diesel oil into electricity. Add the low load factors that are typical of small scale, decentralized systems, and the diesel comes out much better from an economic point of view.
As oil prices increase, it is quite likely that woodfuel-based electricity generation will first become competitive on a fairly large scale, with grid connection. The load factor is much better for bigger base load plants, and the specific cost, in USD/kW, goes down with size.
It is also possible that wood-fuelled power stations will become competitive in developed countries, with good woodfuel resources and high fossil fuel taxes, before they are attractive in developing countries. If CO[2], or other environmental taxes, are implemented at a high level in the developed countries, a situation could even arise that makes woodfuel, produced in a sustainable way in developing countries, an interesting commodity for export to large, coastal-based power stations in developed countries.
The NPA says nothing about the use of woodfuel for electricity generation on a large scale. This aspect seems to have been completely overlooked in 1981.
In conclusion:
The technology for turning fuelwood/charcoal into electricity does exist, but is not economically competitive at present oil prices.
3.1.5 Woodfuel markets
Action:
Woodfuel surveys to establish distribution, control and pricing policies.
It is now clear that woodfuel for rural industries, village applications and household in urban areas are a monetized commodity in a rather informal market.
A sectoral review undertaken by ESMAP and TFAP shows that it is difficult to find accurate information and data concerning the use of fuelwood/charcoal in different sectors of the economy of developing countries.
There have been some studies on woodfuel distribution, sales and prices, but the information, when available, is scattered in different institutions and does not always reflect the actual conditions of the market.
Charcoal markets have been more analyzed than those for fuelwood. There are quite a few examples of charcoal price control and banning of production and sales. Analysis and studies of potential markets for charcoal exports from areas with forest surpluses to countries with woodfuel shortages have been carried out, but the results have not yet become available.
Also a few studies were found concerning the socio-economic aspects of wood energy systems (fuelwood/charcoal production, transportation, distribution, sales and users) which are important to show the role of forest biomass not only as a source of energy, but also as a way to generate employment and income for a large number of people of rural and urban areas.
In conclusion:
Insufficient and inadequate activities have been carried out to assess actual demand for woodfuel by different economic sectors. Very few market interventions are recorded.
3.1.6 Finding substitutes for woodfuels
Action:
Develop, promote and introduce alternative fuels (NRSE and fossil fuels) for the substitution of fuelwood/charcoal including use of residues: twigs, branches and dry leaves, for use in direct combustion and other processes. Improve preprocessing of fuels.
The substitution of fossil fuels for fuelwood has market attractions and will help to reduce the pressure on fuelwood. The perception of both people and the governments still remains that progress in development goes with climbing the energy ladder. It has also been shown that substitution will in fact put marginal pressure on world fossil fuel resources and the balance of payment position of individual countries. However, such a development will be constrained if regular supply of the fossil fuels is not guaranteed. It is also at variance with environmental considerations that would suggest biomass as the preferred fuel for the future.
There are limited possibilities for substituting these woodfuels by NRSE. Most NRSE are still in an experimental stage and thus their widespread application is still premature.
Agricultural residues accompanied by appropriate energy conversion technology provide only limited possibilities for fuelwood/charcoal substitution and this is not always possible without affecting their alternative use to maintain agricultural productivity.
The use of fossil fuels, such as gas and kerosene, is more feasible, particularly for household use in urban areas. However, for different technical, economic and cultural reasons, their use has not been easy to implement despite heavy subsidies being introduced.
The introduction of subsidized gas or kerosene has led to considerable reduction of fuelwood/charcoal prices, which has helped to demonstrate that there are no fixed prices for fuelwood/charcoal when they originate from forest land clearance operations for agricultural use in which fuelwood/charcoal become a by-product to pay, at least partially, for the cost of land clearance. This is a subject where land use planning and joint efforts between the agricultural and forestry sectors have to be established to stop the destruction of areas which could be used for forest production.
No action has been recorded aimed at promoting the use of fuelwood/charcoal for industrial use with higher efficiency and reducing fuelwood/charcoal use at household level.
On the contrary, great efforts in this area have been made in briquetting of various types of wastes, including forestry and agricultural residues. Briquette projects have been initiated in developing, as well as industrialized countries, with or without government subsidies. Compared to the situation before the Nairobi Conference, much more is now known about the pros and cons of this particular energy conversion technology.
In general, briquetting has worked reasonably well in several of the projects in industrialized countries. In some cases, tax incentives or high cost of petroleum fuels have made the briquettes not only technically but also economically feasible. However, there has not been a real widespread expansion of briquetting due to the limited number of locations where briquettes can be profitable, and the limited availability of suitable raw materials.
In developing countries, the results have been somewhat different. It has clearly been proven that the technology is technically feasible and that briquettes can be made from a wide range of raw materials, but it has not been proven that this can be done economically on a large scale. The end-use, mainly as a substitute cooking fuel for wood stoves, has also been proven, but not as easily as the production feasibility.
Biogas also was considered as another good substitute for fuelwood. Important efforts in research have permitted significant advances in the efficiency and reliability of both small and large-scale biogas systems. There is a large number of biogas projects in many countries; time will tell if its wide diffusion as a substitute to fuelwood/charcoal will be successful.
In conclusion:
Activities have been carried out in this area with relatively little impact on the global fuelwood/charcoal situation. Results depend on the economic situation in the country or area involved, as well as on fossil fuel prices. Careful analysis of fuelwood/charcoal substitution by fossil fuels is required to avoid undesirable environmental and economic consequences.
3.2 Comments on strategies and activities
It is clear that many approaches have been attempted by various organizations. The fields of activities were varied: forestry, agroforestry, improved stoves, efficient charcoal production, etc.. For each category various types of activities, using different methods were conducted, ranging from preinvestment studies through research, pilot plant/demonstration studies, to actual project implementation, market studies, dissemination, training and education. Forestry/agroforestry, stoves and charcoal production have received the greatest attention.
Rural industries have yet to receive the desired recognition. The results of the few activities undertaken indicate that some successes have been achieved in woodfuel supply, but few evaluations are available from which to draw concrete conclusions. There has been little implementation and dissemination of technologies and it is doubtful whether much has been achieved through those efforts. Nevertheless, there were some successes in a few areas, such as the dissemination of stoves.
One important weakness has not sufficiently been recognized: the lack of adequate involvement of local institutions in research and development activities and in the implementation of projects. Thus, there was total failure to transfer technology in a sustainable manner.
3.3 Problems and constraints in project implementation
The constraints to implementation of projects are varied. Some are specific to the type of intervention and these have already been discussed in the appropriate sections. However, there are others that are more general in nature which are discussed in this section.
A major constraint to the implementation of new technologies in the industrial countries is the low oil prices which have tended to make the use of wood energy uneconomic compared to the use of fossil fuels. In view of the environmental, energy security and other advantages of wood energy, subsidiary and tax levying measures with regard to CO[2] emissions are being suggested to encourage the use of biomass. Such measures have been found to make wood energy applications economic in countries such as Denmark and Sweden.
Several additional impediments to the use of biomass energy are to be found in the developing countries; the principal ones being:
1) The lack of market or monetary incentives, due in general to economic recession;
2) The lack of information and knowledge on the woodfuel resources, possibilities and net benefits of the technologies;
3) The lack of trained manpower (technical, managerial, marketing, etc.).
4) The lack of involvement of the people in the intervention programmes;
5) The multidisciplinary nature of woodfuel systems and problems requiring participation and cooperation among various types of experts like foresters, engineers, economists and sociologists;
6) The lack of proper appreciation of the true needs of the people and thus often inappropriate formulation of problems, approaches and methods;
7) The lack of finding appropriate financing;
8) Political and other considerations that hamper decisions on well- established required market interventions;
9) Unfavourable policy and legislative measures: market interventions such as subsidies on alternative fuels, official prices and banning of some bio-fuels, and taxation;
10) Inadequate institutional infrastructures: Although most developing countries have established various agencies that are either directly responsible or can be responsible for various NRSE, there are still some that have not taken this important initial step.
11) Poor institutional arrangements: poor coordination among agencies responsible for various aspects of wood energy implementation is a common problem;
12) The lack of involvement of institutions in the developing countries in donor activities: meaningful technology transfer cannot be attained without developing an in-house capability to implement technologies right from design through construction and operation of the plant to teaching, research and development, marketing and sales. Such in-house capability can only be developed in a sustainable manner if appropriate local institutions, research and teaching institutions and industries, are involved in all phases of projects. Cooperative research projects, preferably based in the developing countries, should be encouraged. This will have many benefits. It will provide adequate funds for the research, lead to faster adaptation to local conditions, provide mutual exchange of ideas, and provide more income to the research and teaching institutions. It should be a requirement for research and implementation projects supported by the international aid community that they be
carried out jointly with suitable local institutions on an equal footing. Only in this way can the true ability of the local experts be properly drawn out and utilized.
13) Socio-economic and cultural factors: These have already been discussed in Section 2.5.
<section>6</section>
4. Results and experiences from the Nairobi decade
4.1 Energy assessment and planning
4.2 Research, development and demonstration
4.3 Transfer, adaptation and application of mature technologies
4.4 Information flows
4.5 Education and training
In the previous sections, the general development of the fuelwood/charcoal situation, and the strategies to improve it, have been briefly summarized. In the present section, the results and experiences from studies, Research and Development (R&D) and also implementation projects will be discussed. The time frame is the ten years since the Nairobi Conference. The objectives, and particularly the specific actions on fuelwood/charcoal, as presented in the NPA, will govern the discussion. Due to this, the main emphasis will be on fuelwood/charcoal in developing countries, but where appropriate some comments will also be given on the achievements in the industrialized world.
To facilitate the analysis, the same structure is used under the following headings:
- energy assessment and planning
- research, development and demonstration
- transfer, adaptation and application of mature technologies
- information flows
- education and training
4.1 Energy assessment and planning
NPA Task:
Determine the physical NRSE resources and the present and future energy supply/demand balances. Identify, monitor and assess promising NRSE technologies. Strengthen institutional infrastructures for planning and research, as well as legislative and financial matters pertinent to the development and promotion of NRSE.
In general terms, but limiting the discussion to fuelwood/charcoal, the resource assessment capability was considerably improved during the 80's, and much more is known about fuelwood/charcoal supply and demand than was the case before the Nairobi Conference. There is still, however, a lack of information in many parts of the world on basic data including the sustainable woodfuel resource base.
Fuelwood/charcoal has become more visible in energy balances and energy planning in most developing countries. This was definitely not the case before the NPA. However, energy planners still generally pay much less attention to fuelwood/charcoal than to electricity and fossil fuels, even though fuelwood/charcoal takes the lion's share of the energy balance in the majority of developing countries. Specific wood energy planning has not become common.
There has not been any substantial monitoring or assessment of promising fuelwood/charcoal technologies for general energy planning purposes. The technology assessment that has taken place has been triggered by and addressed to the technology R&D community rather than the energy planners.
The institutional infrastructures have not been strengthened a great deal, at least not for the purpose of improved planning, legislation or finance related to fuelwood/charcoal.
NPA Task fulfilment:
The resource is better known than before, and fuelwood/charcoal has become an item in energy planning, but a lot remains to be done before fuelwood/charcoal receives the attention it deserves in comparison with its relative importance in the energy balances of developing countries.
4.2 Research, development and demonstration
NPA Task:
Accelerate development of selected promising technologies. Strengthen institutional machinery for undertaking research, development and demonstration, as well as for links between research and development (R & D) and the production sector. Establish criteria for technical and economic evaluation. Implement demonstration projects related to NRSE.
The research, development and demonstration (R, D & D) in the fuelwood/charcoal area increased considerably in the first years of the NPA decade in almost all the areas of fuelwood/charcoal production and use, but has since dropped to levels that are becoming close to what they were before 1981. There are two main reasons for this trend-reversal. First of all, the oil price reductions during the 80's not only made certain woodfuel applications less attractive from an economic point of view, but also led to a much lower general priority for energy R&D in most countries' budgets. Secondly, several of the fuelwood/charcoal technologies or applications (for example, the case of gasifiers for power generation), that have been investigated and tested, have been more complicated to develop than was expected. These two reasons energy prices and technical problems - have led to a reduction of the budgets allocated to the promotion and dissemination of certain technical solutions.
The institutions selected to undertake research, development and demonstration activities on fuelwood/charcoal have developed slightly differently than the research, development and demonstration itself. After a period of expansion in the first half of the 80's, the institutions have remained more or less at the same level in terms of human resources. However, the amount of funds allocated for the development of research, development and demonstration was considerably reduced.
The links between research and development and the production sector, particularly in developing countries, have been extremely weak even when a clear improvement has taken place in the 80's in the involvement of farmers, foresters and the general public in fuelwood/charcoal projects. Relations between research, development and demonstration centres and industry or utilities are less visible.
It is not really clear what was meant by "establish criteria for technical and economic evaluation". Not much has been done in this area, probably because to a large degree this depends on the country and/or case-specific nature of such criteria.
Finally, demonstration projects have been carried out in most fuelwood/charcoal technical areas, as well as in most regions of the world, with great support from donor agencies from developed countries.
NPA Task fulfilment:
Research, development and demonstration projects as well as institutional capacity in the fuelwood/charcoal area increased substantially in the years following the adoption of the NPA. The pace of technology development has slowed down considerably during the last few years, mainly because of the decreased energy prices.
4.3 Transfer, adaptation and application of mature technologies
NPA Task:
Accelerate transfer of NRSE technologies from developed to developing countries, and increase cooperation among developing countries. Strengthen national capabilities for assessment and evaluation of technology, as well as adaptation, manufacture and maintenance of NRSE equipment.
A differentiation has to be made between actions undertaken in different technology areas. In the case of stoves, which do not require any sophisticated equipment or technology, transfer of knowledge and build-up of national manufacturing capacity have been very important elements from the beginning.
In the case of gasifiers for power generation, at the other extreme, technology transfer and national manufacturing have only been tried in a few countries. The same applies to other advanced equipment such as wood-fuelled industrial boilers, or high-capacity briquette presses.
The use of steam engines for power generation in decentralized systems for rural communities or industrial users has received less attention than it deserves. However, the few cases implemented by the public or private sector have been quite successful.
Also waste wood based technology for heat and power generation in forest industries, (sawmills, particle board mills, etc.) has achieved widespread application in developed countries with excellent results.
Nevertheless, there are very few examples of successful fuelwood/charcoal technology transfer to developing countries (including manufacturing capacity build-up) outside stoves and a few other low-tech, low-investment technologies. In most cases this may be explained either by the lack of economic incentives, e.g. the fuelwood/charcoal technologies have not been sufficiently competitive compared to other fuels and other needs have been seen as more urgent in the general poverty situation of developing countries; or by the lack of technical success, i.e. the fuelwood/charcoal technologies have not performed well enough to convince potential investors of their technical feasibility.
Cooperation among developing countries has not increased as much as expected. There are some cases, such as the FAO networks in Asia and Latin America, that try to assist countries in the exchange of information and experience, but there is not much in terms of hard-core technology transfer and cooperation. A limiting factor may well be that donors tend to prefer bilateral aid.
Technology transfer between developed countries has been fair. New boiler or gasifier types, briquetting or pelletizing systems and several other technologies, as well as manufacturing capability, relevant to woodfuel use have been introduced in a variety of woodfuel using countries. The common denominator in these cases has been a larger scale of applications than in developing country, as well as the direct involvement of industries with a commercial interest in either the manufacture or the utilization of the equipment.
Most of the technical solutions required for the use of fuelwood/charcoal as a sustainable source of energy are available and mastered. However, lack of adequate funds and economic incentives in developing countries are the main reasons for the poor results achieved in the area of fuelwood/charcoal conversion into energy and are the main reasons for the limited impact achieved in this field.
NPA Task fulfilment:
This is an area of work in which there are mature technologies ready for dissemination and use and in which developing countries have to a certain extent possibilities for participation in manufacturing them. Lack of financial and economic support is the main constraint on its development even at present energy prices. Commercial technology transfer among developed countries has been more successful.
4.4 Information flows
NPA Task:
Assess existing information systems and strengthen international and national information centres, integrating them into a regional and later, if deemed feasible, a global information network. Develop standardized terminologies and procedures for collection and dissemination of information, and support maximum availability of patent information.
The information flow on the development and implementation fuelwood/charcoal technology has increased considerably since the Nairobi Conference. There are numerous bulletins and newsletters, as well as various networks and informal groups for information exchange. Information is relatively easy to find and accessible.
In the developing countries, activities carried out by FAO through the Regional Wood Energy Development Programme for Asia and the Pacific and the Latin America Dendroenergy Network, may be mentioned as examples. The situation has improved considerably in the last six/seven years. However, the situation depends very much on the contacts and projects established in specific countries. The reason for this is mainly lack of the national financial and personnel resources that are necessary to maintain libraries or systematic information centres.
In developed countries, the Producer Gas Round Table Meeting and the Consultative Network on Rural Energy are good examples of coordination of activities in the field of gasification and wood energy, as well as information flow among institutions involved in rural energy in Europe. Lack of continuing support is leading to a reduction in the actions and activities in developed countries. In addition, good exchange of information and experts was initiated between developing and developed countries. Unfortunately the lack of funds has led to a reduction in these activities.
Where some isolated actions were initiated under TCDC, they have been discontinued, again due to the lack of funds.
Little has been done on standardization of terminologies and information methodologies, and the same goes for patent information.
NPA Task fulfilment:
The availability of information has improved greatly since 1981. To some degree this may be credited to actions initiated by the NPA.
4.5 Education and training
NPA Task:
Assess the needs for trained personnel, as well as the capability of existing institutions, to provide training and strengthen institutions accordingly. Establish training programmes for decision-makers, planners and technical experts, as well as educational programmes for the general public on the opportunities for NRSE.
International courses and scholarships have been made available for fuelwood/charcoal, as well as for other NRSE. Many individuals at all levels from developed and developing countries have participated in such activities, often, but not always, carried out in a developed country. Examples of these activities are: wood-based energy seminars in Sweden, wood energy courses in the Netherlands and charcoal workshops organized by FAO, ESMAP, the Canadian Agency for Development and France.
Following the political decline of fuelwood/charcoal, the amount of training opportunities has decreased in recent years.
Less has been done on education and training within the national educational systems in developing countries where it is still uncommon to find courses on fuelwood/charcoal-related technologies. The same holds for national training programmes for decision-makers and planners.
Educational programmes for the general public have been tried, mainly as part of extension activities, e.g. improved stove dissemination or tree planting campaigns. There are few cases where fuelwood/charcoal has become a permanent subject in propaganda or in the school curriculum.
NPA Task fulfilment:
More education and training programmes at the international level exist than before the NPA. Not so much has been done at the national level and fuelwood/charcoal is not yet a common subject in compulsory education.
<section>7</section>
5. Conclusions and recommendations
The alarming increase in energy consumption, particularly in developing countries, predicted at the beginning of the last decade, did not occur. Instead, the energy consumption growth rate of the developing countries fell by approximately 50% during the decade. The rate of destruction of forests, however, is continuing.
The alarming woodfuel deficit situation predicted for many developing countries in 1981 did not occur either. Available data for a woodfuel balance are totally inadequate to work out useful balances. However, some properly calculated woodfuel balances, taking into account other sources of fuelwood, may in fact suggest the absence of a deficit situation, at least for most rural household needs. There is a need for further studies to determine the true fuelwood situation. In general, the problems of fuelwood deficit are location specific and some areas, for instance, densely populated and arid areas, are particularly susceptible to a fuelwood deficit and require more attention. Although a widespread fuelwood crisis may be questionable, especially in the rural areas, there is overwhelming evidence to show that deforestation and desertification are prevalent in the developing countries and that there actually is an environmental crisis.
Woodfuel production and consumption statistics indicate that woodfuel supplies have essentially remained constant in order of magnitude over the years; not only in developing countries, but throughout the world.
The lack of reliable woodfuel consumption data makes it difficult to assess the changes that have occurred in consumption. Nevertheless, the data available suggest that there has been little change in the consumption patterns of the developing countries in terms of per capita consumption and the proportion of woodfuel contribution.
The new considerations about the environmental consequences of wood energy raise three concerns. One is the exposure, particularly of women, to the toxic smoke emissions from cookstoves. Intervention here can take the form of improved stoves, education on proper cooking practice and the importance of chimneys. Secondly, reduction of carbon dioxide emissions provides further impetus for the developing countries to develop wood energy. However, it has to be done in a sustainable manner. Finally, higher investments required for advanced, less-polluting wood energy technologies may be a constraint to their implementation in the developing countries.
While there are many socio-economic factors that constrain progress in implementation of various technologies in the developing countries, the most significant is the devastating linkage between poverty, poor economic and technological performance, borrowing, social decay and environmental deterioration. There is a need for international actions aiming at alleviating the problems of poverty and underdevelopment suffered by developing countries.
There are many other general constraints to the implementation of wood energy technologies in developing countries. The most significant may very well be the lack of transfer of technologies in a sustainable manner, due to the lack of adequate involvement of local industries, and of research and teaching institutions. Cooperative research projects, preferably based in the developing countries, should be encouraged. Internationally supported research and implementation projects should only be carried out jointly with suitable local institutions on equal footing.
The activities of the donor organizations have been varied and in general extensive, covering most possible interventions, and have been using a wide range of methods, strategies and approaches, most of which were in line with new thinking. Of the categories of interventions, forestry/agroforestry, stoves and charcoal production have received the greatest attention to date. Rural industries have yet to receive the desired recognition.
The NPA has proved to be an excellent framework for the development of activities aimed at tackling the major wood energy problems identified. The specialized organizations of the United Nations system, as well as international agencies of donor countries and NGOs, have played an active role in achieving the NPA objectives. Most of the problems mentioned in the NPA have been addressed, and some activities have been undertaken in every specific objective adopted by the NPA.
Still, today there is no abundance of flourishing energy plantations, nor are there millions of improved cooking stoves, or thousands of gasifiers generating electricity under decentralized units in rural communities. But, considerable national and international capabilities have been created and a critical mass of experts has been trained since the NPA.
This situation is in part due to the fact that many of the activities undertaken during the first part of the 1980s decade were seriously affected by the reduction of international fossil fuel prices which occurred in the second half of the 80's. Thus, when oil prices started to fall, many of the new and improved fuelwood and charcoal technologies which had been developed became less competitive and were abandoned.
Besides, the impact of the wide variety of actions, projects and activities undertaken to improve the wood energy situation in developing countries has been insufficient for the magnitude and the importance of the problems to be solved.
Fuelwood and charcoal are and will remain for the decade to come a major source of energy for developing countries. It is a delicate, complicated and important subject which is part of the problem of poverty and underdevelopment affecting third world countries.
Wood energy problems should be overcome following a more holistic approach and not looked upon from an energy or forestry point of view alone. They require a wider approach in which the solutions should be tailored to cope with the specific needs of the region, country or community involved; an approach where all the aspects from wood supply and fuelwood/charcoal use are considered, including socio-economic and environmental aspects.
Priority areas for future action
Wood fuels will remain the main source of energy for most developing countries for the coming decade. Furthermore, taking into consideration the environmental concern raised by the international community on unbalanced CO[2] emission from the massive combustion of fossil fuels, forest biomass is again called upon to play an important role in reducing the greenhouse effect and acid rain for developed countries.
It is under these two aspects: as an energy source in the poorest sectors of developing countries and as a sound environmental source of energy to fight against greenhouse and acid rain effects in developed countries that forest biomass has to be developed in the future.
Consequently, the MAIN OBJECTIVES of the NEW PROGRAMME OF ACTION FOR WOOD ENERGY to be initiated are:
a) to promote concerted action by the international community to assist developing countries in their energy transition where their forest biomass plays a key role in fostering their economic development and improving the welfare of their populations.
b) to develop sustainable wood energy systems for developed and developing countries to meet the energy needs of the communities as a way of reducing the unbalanced emission of CO2 and so fight greenhouse and acid rain effects.
The POLICY AREAS for concerted action in the future can be categorized according to the NPA scheme which is still valid.
Assessment and planning:
- maintain monitoring and assessment of forest resources for woodfuel production;
- carry out wood fuel surveys at local, regional and national level to assess wood energy situation;
- undertake market studies of supply and demand of fuelwood/charcoal;
- introduce wood energy in the national energy programmes and balances;
- incorporate wood energy aspects into national statistics;
- assess environmental and socio-economic aspects;
- implement wood energy planning exercises at decentralized and national level;
- establish national wood energy policies and programmes;
- create adequate multidisciplinary institutions or working groups needed to manage wood energy matters;
- support the development of decentralized and integrated wood energy systems using rural communities as a center of development to ensure sustainable production, supply and use of fuelwood/charcoal;
- involve local institutions and NGO's and ensure people's participation in wood energy projects;
- introduce more activities for gender analysis and women's participation;
- adjust legislative and financial aspects to promote and encourage the rational and efficient use of wood energy.
Research, development and demonstration:
- undertake research activities on suitable local and high yield species for fuelwood/charcoal production and use;
- implement demonstration units of decentralized wood energy systems;
- continue the research and development (R & D) activities on improved wood energy conversion devices for households, but particularly for rural industries and village applications;
- assess and monitor health and environmental aspects of use of wood fuels;
- develop suitable fuelwood/charcoal substitutes.
Transfer, adaptation and application of mature technologies:
- improve and increase activities for management of existing forest plantations, particularly for arid and semi-arid areas;
- continue with the development and dissemination of community forestry projects, taking a more holistic approach, not only for tree plantations but also for its utilization;
- disseminate improved wood energy conversion devices for household, rural industries and village applications and for small enterprises;
- promote and establish large multipurpose plantations;
- promote improved charcoal production systems;
- encourage the use of forest residues for power and heat production in forest industries and remote rural communities with steam engines and/or gasifiers;
- promote the substitution of fuelwood/charcoal by alternative fuels, particularly for households in urban areas;
- promote in certain industries the substitution of fossil fuels by fuelwood/charcoal;
- carry out and implement wood energy conservation audits.
Education and training:
- carry out training activities for policy makers and technicians on wood and rural energy planning, and execution of wood energy surveys;
- continue with training activities for the implementation of improved wood energy and charcoal systems;
- incorporate subjects on wood energy at university level;
- train people, especially operators, in wood energy aspects of production, marketing and use;
- instruct fuelwood/charcoal users on more efficient and improved practices of wood energy conversion;
- organize information campaigns on different aspects of wood energy for interested people and the public in general.
Information flows:
- strengthen existing cooperative networks and increase activities in exchange of information, data and experiences within the framework of TCDC;
- encourage North-South and South-South dialogue on wood energy matters;
- improve statistics and data bases at national and regional levels.
Areas for special consideration:
Adequate institutional mechanisms at national and international level were highly recommended in the NPA for the mobilization and coordination of all the resources required for the adoption of sound wood energy policies and their implementation. Unfortunately, the inadequacy of existing institutions has been one of the main constraints in the realization of many wood energy activities. It is now clear that no single institution is capable enough to cope with wood energy aspects. Considerable work therefore remains to be done in this field.
The TFAP constitutes an excellent tool for the sectoral review, assessment and monitoring of wood energy activities. Therefore, a more active participation in TFAP exercises for the identification of wood energy problems, and the involvement of different public and private sectors, is envisaged to improve the awareness of national and international authorities on fuelwood/charcoal and to develop more coordinated action.
The Committee for the Development and Utilization of NRSE which was created to guide and monitor the implementation of the NPA, even though it has had an active role during the decade, has proved to be insufficient to achieve the goals set by the Nairobi Conference.
Therefore, an ad hoc "Working Group" on Wood Energy is essential within the Committee for the Development and Utilization of NRSE to provide interagency coordination and interdisciplinary and cross sectoral programmes, and to monitor progress on wood energy matters.
<section>8</section>
References
ADB, 1989, Energy indicators of Developing Member Countries of ADB, ADB, Manila.
Beenackers A. A. C. M. and Bridgwater A. V., 1989, "Gasification and Pyrolysis of Biomass in Europe", in Ferrero G. L., Maniatis K., Beukens A. and Bridgwater A. V., (Eds.), Pyrolysis and Gasification, Elsevier Applied Science, London.
BTG, 1987, Feasibility Study on Semi-Centralized Charcoal Briquette Production from Cotton Stalk in the Republic of Sudan, FOS: SD/87/023, Biomass Technology Group, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands
BTG, 1990, Evaluation of REPCO's Briquetting Activities: Cotton Stalk Carbonization and Briquetting Project, No. SD/89/048, Biomass Technology Group, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands.
BTG, 1991a, Marketing of Cotton Stalk Charcoal Briquettes in Sudan, UNIDO XA/SUD/90/624, Biomass Technology Group, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands.
BTG, 1991b, Biomass: Progress on Implementation of Nairobi Program of Action, Report prepared for UNDIESA, Biomass Technology Group, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands.
DGIS, 1987, Renewable Energy for Developing Countries: 10 Years of Dutch Experience, DGIS and Technology and Development Group, of University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands.
Emrich W., 1985, Handbook of Charcoal Making, Reidel Publishing Co., Boston.
Eriksson S. and Prior M., 1990, The Briquetting of Agricultural Wastes for Fuel, FAO Energy and Environment Paper 11, FAO, Rome.
ESMAP, 1984, Energy Issues and Options in 30 Developing Countries, ESMAP, Washington D.C.
ESMAP, 1987, Information and Status Report, ESMAP, World Bank/UNDP, December 20.
ESMAP, 1988, Information and Status Report, ESMAP, World Bank/UNDP, April.
ESMAP, 1989, Household/Rural Energy and the Environment: Recent Experience and Prospects, A Background Paper for Discussion at ESMAP's Annual Meeting, Paris
ESMAP, 1990, Information and Status Report, ESMAP, World Bank/UNDP, September.
FAO, 1981, Map of the Fuelwood Situation in the Developing Countries, FAO, Rome.
FAO, 1983, Fuelwood Supplies in Developing Countries, Forestry Paper 42, FAO, Rome.
FAO, 1983, Simple Technologies for Charcoal Making, Forestry Paper 41, FAO, Rome.
FAO, 1987, Technical and Economic Aspects of Using Woodfuels in Rural Industries, Working Document, FAO Forestry Dept., Rome
FAO, 1988, The Use of Wood Fuels in Rural Industries in Asia and Pacific Region, FAO, Bangkok.
FAO, 1991, FAO Yearbook. Forest Products, FAO, Rome.
Foley G., 1985, "Wood Fuel and Conventional Fuel Demands in the Developing World-, Ambio, Vol. 14, No: 4-5.
Foley G., 1986, Charcoal Making in Developing Countries, Earthscan, IIED.
Foley G., 1987, "Exaggerating the Sahelian Woodfuel Problem" Ambio Vol. 16, No. 6.
Gregersen H., Draper S. and Elz D., 1989, People and Trees, EDI seminar series, World Bank, Washington D.C.
Hutzinger O. (Ed.), 1989, Handbook of Environmental Chemistry: Air Pollution, Vol. 4, Parts A and B. Springer, Verlag, New York.
Leach G. and Gowen M., 1987, Household Energy Handbook, World Bank Technical Paper No. 67, World Bank, Washington D.C.
Manibog F., 1984, Improved Cooking Stoves in Developing Countries: Problems and Opportunities", Energy 9, 197-227.
Munslow B., Katerere Y., Ferf A. and O'Keefe P., 1988, The Fuelwood Trap, Earthscan Publications, London.
PFE, 1989, Renewable Energy Sources in Developing Countries: Success and Failures in Technology Transfer and Diffusion, Progetto Finalizzato Energetica, Rome.
Prasad K. and Sangren E., 1983, Technical Aspects of Woodburning Cookstoves, Woodburning Stove Group, Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands.
SADCC, 1989a, SADCC Energy Statistics 1987, SADCC Energy Sector, TAU, Luanda.
SADCC, 1989b, SADCC Energy Sector, Proceedings of a Workshop on New and Renewable Sources of Energy in the SADCC Region, SADCC, Zimbabwe.
SADCC, 1989c, SADCC Energy Sector, Proceedings of a Workshop on National Biomass Resources in the SADCC Region, SADCC, Zimbabwe.
Sax N. I. (Ed.), 1974, Industrial Pollution, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York.
UNIDO, 1990, Proceedings UNIDO/Institute of Energy Workshop on Biomass Thermal Processing Projects, UNIDO.
USAID, 1988, New Direction for A.I.D. Renewable Energy Activities, USAID.
World Bank, 1989, Sub-Saharan Africa, from Crisis to Sustainable Growth, World Bank, Washington D.C.
World Bank, 1990a, The Population, Agriculture and Environmental Nexus in Sub-Saharan Africa, World Bank, Africa Region.
World Bank, 1990b, World Development Report 1990, World Bank, Washington D.C.
World Resources Institute, 1985, Tropical Forests: A Call for Action, Vols. I, II, III, World Resources Inst., Washington D.C.
<section>9</section>
Appendix: acronyms and abbreviations
ADB
Asian Development Bank
AIT
Asian Institute of Technology
BST
Bioenergy Systems and Technology
BTG
Biomass Technology Group
DC
Developing Country
DGIS
Netherlands Directorate for International Cooperation
DTP
Dendrothermal Power
EMENA
Europe, Middle East and North Africa
ESMAP
Energy Sector Management Assistance Programme
FAO
Food and Agricultural Organization
GNP
Gross National Product
ITB
Institute of Technology, Bandung
LAC
Latin America and the Caribbean
NPA
Nairobi Programme of Action
NRSE
New and Renewable Sources of Energy
OECD
Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development
PAH
Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbon
PFE
Progetto Finalizzato Energetico
R, D & D
Research, Development and Demonstration
SADCC
Southern Africa Development Coordination Conference
SRF
Short Rotation Forestry
TCDC
Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries
TFAP
Tropical Forests Action Programme
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
UNIDO
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
USAID
US Agency for International Development
WB
World Bank
WRI
World Resources Institute
GJ
Gigajoule
ha
Hectare
J
Joule
kgOE
Kilogram Oil Equivalent
MJ
Megajoule
MTOE
Million Tonnes of Oil Equivalent
TOE
Tonnes of Oil Equivalent
yr
Year
CONVERSION FACTORS
1 TOE = 41.868 GJ
<section>a</section>
FAO technical papers
FAO FORESTRY PAPERS
Forest utilization contracts on public land, 1977 (E F S)
Planning forest roads and harvesting systems, 1977 (E F S)
World list of forestry schools, 1977 (E/F/S)
3 Rev.
1. World list of forestry schools, 1981 (E/F/S)
3 Rev.
2. World list of forestry schools, 1986 (E/F/S)
World pulp and paper demand, supply and trade - Vol. 1, 1977 (E F S)
World pulp and paper demand, supply and trade - Vol. 2, 1977 (E F S)
The marketing of tropical wood, 1976 (E S)
National parks planning, 1976 (E F S**)
Forestry for local community development, 1978 (Ar E F S)
Establishment techniques for forest plantations, 1978 (Ar C E* F S)
Wood chips - production, handling, transport, 1976 (C E S)
Assessment of logging costs from forest inventories in the tropics
- 1. Principles and methodology, 1978 (E F S)
Assessment of logging costs from forest inventories in the tropics
- 2. Data collection and calculations, 1978 (E F S)
Savanna afforestation in Africa, 1977 (E F)
China: forestry support for agriculture, 1978 (E)
Forest products prices 1960-1977, 1979 (E/F/S)
Mountain forest roads and harvesting, 1979 (E)
14 Rev.
1. Logging and transport in steep terrain, 1985 (E)
AGRIS forestry - world catalogue of information and documentation services, 1979 (E/F/S)
China: integrated wood processing industries, 1979 (E F S)
Economic analysis of forestry projects, 1979 (E F S)
17 Sup.
1. Economic analysis of forestry projects: case studies, 1979 (E S)
17 Sup.
2. Economic analysis of forestry projects: readings, 1980 (C E)
Forest products prices 1960-1978, 1980 (E/F/S)
Pulping and paper-making properties of fast-growing plantation wood species - Vol. 1, 1980 (E)
Pulping and paper-making properties of fast-growing plantation wood species - Vol. 2, 1980 (E)
Forest tree improvement, 1985 (C E F S)
A guide to forest seed handling, 1985 (E S)
Impact on soils of fast-growing species in lowland humid tropics, 1980 (E F S)
Forest volume estimation and yield prediction - Vol. 1. Volume estimation, 1980 (C E F S)
Forest volume estimation and yield prediction - Vol. 2. Yield prediction, 1980 (C E F S)
Forest products prices 1961-1980, 1981 (E/F/S)
Cable logging systems, 1981 (C E)
Public forestry administrations in Latin America, 1981 (E)
Forestry and rural development, 1981 (E F S)
Manual of forest inventory, 1981 (E F)
Small and medium sawmills in developing countries, 1981 (E S)
World forest products, demand and supply 1990 and 2000, 1982 (E F S)
Tropical forest resources, 1982 (E F S)
Appropriate technology in forestry, 1982 (E)
Classification end definitions of forest products, 1982 (Ar/E/F/S)
Logging of mountain forests, 1982 (E F S)
Fruit-bearing forest trees, 1982 (E F S)
Forestry in China, 1982 (C E)
Basic technology in forest operations, 1982 (E F S)
Conservation and development of tropical forest resources, 1982 (E F S)
Forest products prices 1962-1981, 1982 (E/F/S)
Frame saw manual, 1982 (E)
Circular saw manual, 1983 (E)
Simple technologies for charcoal making, 1983 (E F S)
Fuelwood supplies in the developing countries, 1983 (Ar E F S)
Forest revenue systems in developing countries, 1983 (E F S)
Food and fruit-bearing forest species - 1. Examples from eastern Africa, 1983 (E F S)
Food and fruit-bearing forest species - 2. Examples from southeastern Asia, 1984 (E F S)
Food and fruit-bearing forest species - 3. Examples from Latin America, 1986 (E S)
Establishing pulp and paper mills, 1983 (E)
Forest products prices 1963-1982, 1983 (E/F/S)
Technical forestry education - design and implementation, 1984 (E F S)
Land evaluation for forestry, 1984 (C E F S)
Wood extraction with oxen and agricultural tractors, 1986 (E F S)
Changes in shifting cultivation in Africa, 1984 (E F)
Changes in shifting cultivation in Africa - seven case-studies, 1985 (E)
Studies on the volume and yield of tropical forest stands - 1. Dry forest formations, 1989 (E F)
Cost estimating in sawmilling industries: guidelines, 1984 (E)
Field manual on cost estimation in sawmilling industries, 1985 (E)
Intensive multiple-use forest management in Kerala, 1984 (E F S)
Planificacin del desarrollo forestal, 1984 (S)
Intensive multiple-use forest management in the tropics, 1985 (E F S)
Breeding poplars for disease resistance, 1985 (E)
Coconut wood - processing and use, 1985 (E S)
Sawdoctoring manual, 1985 (E S)
The ecological effects of eucalyptus, 1985 (C E F S)
Monitoring and evaluation of participatory forestry projects, 1985 (E F S)
Forest products prices 1965-1984, 1985 (E/F/S)
World list of institutions engaged in forestry and forest products research, 1985 (E/F/S)
Industrial charcoal making, 1985 (E)
Tree growing by rural people, 1985 (Ar E F S)
Forest legislation in selected African countries, 1986 (E F)
Forestry extension organization, 1986 (C E S)
Some medicinal forest plants of Africa and Latin America, 1986 (E)
Appropriate forest industries, 1986 (E)
Management of forest industries, 1986 (E)
Wildland fire management terminology, 1986 (E/F/S)
World compendium of forestry and forest products research institutions, 1986 (E/F/S)
Wood gas as engine fuel, 1986 (E S)
Forest products: world outlook projections 1985-2000, 1986 (E/F/S)
Guidelines for forestry information processing, 1986 (E)
An operational guide to the monitoring and evaluation of social forestry in India, 1986 (E)
Wood preservation manual, 1986 (E)
Databook on endangered tree and shrub species and provenances, 1986 (E)
Appropriate wood harvesting in plantation forests, 1987 (E)
Small-scale forest-based processing enterprises, 1987 (E F S)
Forestry extension methods, 1987 (E)
Guidelines for forest policy formulation, 1987 (C E)
Forest products prices 1967-1986, 1988 (E/F/S)
Trade in forest products: a study of the barriers faced by the developing countries, 1988 (E)
Forest products: world outlook projections 1987-2000 - product and country tables, 1988 (E/F/S)
Forestry extension curricula, 1988 (E/F/S)
Forestry policies in Europe, 1988 (E)
Small-scale harvesting operations of wood and non-wood forest products involving rural people, 1988 (E F S)
Management of tropical moist forests in Africa, 1989 (E F P)
Review of forest management systems of tropical Asia, 1989 (E)
Forestry and food security, 1989 (Ar E S)
Design manual on basic wood harvesting technology, 1989 (E F S) (Published only as FAO Training Series, No. 18)
Forestry policies in Europe - an analysis, 1989 (E)
Energy conservation in the mechanical forest industries, 1990 (E S)
Manual on sawmill operational maintenance, 1990 (E)
Forest products prices 1969-1988, 1990 (E/F/S)
Planning and managing forestry research: guidelines for managers, 1990 (E)
Non-wood forest products: the way ahead, 1991 (E S)
Les plantations b vocation de bois d'oeuvre en Afrique intertropicale humide, 1991 (F)
Cost control in forest harvesting and road construction, 1992 (E)
Introduction to ergonomics in forestry in developing countries, 1992 (E)
Amnagement et conservation des forts denses en Amrique tropicale, 1992 (F)
Research management in forestry, 1991 (E)
Mixed and pure forest plantations in the tropics and subtropics, 1992 (E)
Forest products prices 1971-1990, 1992 (E)
Compendium of pulp and paper training and research institutions, 1992 (E)
Economic assessment of forestry project impacts, 1992 (E)
Conservation of genetic resources in tropical forest management: principles and concepts, 1993 (E)
A decade of wood energy activities within the Nairobi Programme of Action, 1993 (E)
Availability: February 1993
Ar
Arabic
C
Chinese
E
English
F
French
P
Portuguese
S
Spanish
Multil
Multilingual
Out of print
In preparation
The FAO Technical Papers are available through the authorized FAO Sales Agents or directly from Distribution and Sales Section, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
