<section>a</section>
contents next
Preface
Nutrition education is an essential factor for the improvement of the nutritional status and people's wellbeing. The International Conference on Nutrition (ICN), jointly organized by FAO and WHO in December 1992 with the participation of 159 countries has again recommended nutrition education as a priority. This Guide is written as a methodological and practical tool for the promotion and development of nutrition education particularly in developing countries.
The Guide was prepared by Michel Andrien, a nutrition education specialist, jointly with two FAO divisions, the Food Policy and Nutrition Division, Nutrition Programmes Service, and the Information Division, Development Support Communication Branch. This collaboration has proved to be invaluable for the development of this Guide and enunciated the fact that in the field of nutrition education the role of nutritionists and communicators are not only complimentary but cannot be separated.
The contribution of many researchers and field workers in nutrition education in developing countries has been valuable in building the methodology suggested in the book. We would particularly like to mention the Nutrition Education Network in Africa for their contribution and the meeting of experts on nutrition education held in FAO in 1991 for their recommendations. Also a number of practical experiences in nutrition education carried out throughout the world have allowed us to illustrate the guide with concrete examples.
The Guide is aimed at all those involved in planning and implementation of activities of nutrition education and communication. They are the nutritionists, the communicators, the technicians of health, agriculture and education, all concerned with the subject and often working in teams to develop programmes in nutrition education at local and national level.
A systematic description of planning an intervention programme in social communication in nutrition is provided in the Guide.
In each chapter, a theoretical component is presented along with many examples of field activities. Technical files detailing a know how for implementing a method is given. The idea is to provide the users with the technical skills and practical examples so that all of them will find some useful information for their work according to their responsibility. A selected bibliography is also provided.
Nutrition education is currently the matter of an intense methodological debate and is in a state of perpetual evolution and all the keys for a successful programme have not yet found. This is the first edition of this guide. We plan to revise it after a period of its use in the light of experience gained. We would appreciate your comments and suggestions on the usefulness of the guide and your concrete proposals for its improvement.
contents next
<title>Social communication in nutrition: A methodology for intervention</title>
<section>1</section>
contents next
Part I: Overview
Chapter 1: Introduction
1.1 A global approach to nutrition education
There has been a complete revision of the concepts, strategies and methods of nutrition education in the 1 980's.
Typically, nutrition education consisted of little more than "talks" given at health centers. Today, this approach is considered largely ineffective unless it is fully integrated into a broader program of nutrition education with well-defined strategies for communication.
The reasons for failure of "conventional" nutrition education have been the subject of numerous in-depth analyses. The "conventional" approach is limited because it excludes analysis of the causes of malnutrition, it makes use of only one isolated channel of communication (an interpersonal channel between the health worker and the population) and ineffective educational methods. It is based on weak unsupported theories of "behavioural psychology".
During the last two decades, interdisciplinary teams in collaboration with persons involved in nutrition education field activities have developed new approaches to nutrition education. The approach presented in this manual is based on work carried out by RENA, a network for nutrition education in Africa. The approach makes use of certain elements of a theoretical framework from the literature.
First, it is necessary to clarify the frame of reference for the approach to be presented.
In nutrition education, there are two distinct situations, namely, patient education and public education.
Patient education occurs during personal contact between the health worker and his patient. This is person-to-person communication during which the health worker communicates with an individual in order to improve the parents' or their child's nutritional status. This approach fails outside the domain of this guide.
Public education consists of interventions for improving the health of the general public. Nutrition education is concerned with modifying social communication to bring about middle or long-term changes in the common behaviour of the population. When interpersonal communication forms part of the proposed strategy, it has a complementary role, reinforcing other activities aimed at changing the behaviour of an entire social group.
A global approach to nutrition education
What is social communication?
It is defined here as that set of norms which determines how individuals of the same culture interact.
The modification of these norms is the ultimate aim of nutrition education directed at the general public. Nutrition education consists of interventions into the realm of social communication with the aim of changing undesirable nutrition-related habits.
Family practices at mealtime are determined by tacit rules which vary from culture to culture. In one culture, we will find that children normally eat at the same table with their parents; in another, they do not. In one culture, the best portion of meat is given instinctively to the child, while in others it is given to the grown men. These are examples of implicit norms for behaviour. The sum of these norms constitutes "social communication".
To achieve this goal, a project must be based on a thorough study of behaviour, attitudes and the practices of the social groups concerned. A considerable effort must also be made in the field of communication. Only multimedia strategies, utilizing several chapels of communication, can meet such a formidable challenge. Nutrition education can, thus, be defined as follows: it is that group of communication activities aimed at achieving a voluntary change in nutrition-related behaviour to improve the nutritional status of the population.
1.2 Characteristics of the proposed approach
Community participation
The participation of the population in the effort to resolve problems concerning them, is today recognized as a necessity by most development specialists. This is particularly important in nutrition education, because it aims at modification of behaviours which are deeply entrenched in the fabric of socio-cultural life.
Participation can be obtained by involving representatives of the target population in the planning committees, by their systematic involvement at all stages of planning and in surveys as well as programme evaluation before all interventions.
A programme to prevent Vit A deficiency in Thailand was recently inaugurated. The program organizers decided to promote the production and consumption of squash which is particularly rich in Vitamin A. This decision was made only after discussions with the representatives of the communities concerned. In-depth interviews were held with mothers, leaders of the community and health officers. The implementation of these communication activities was left to well-recognized groups and institutions in the community. For evaluation of this programme, volunteers working on this project as well as members of the local communities were called upon (1).
Global action for development
Nutrition education interventions should not be developed in a vacuum, but should form part of a wider program aimed at improving health and 10,5 nutritional status, within the context of socioeconomic development. Nutrition education should be part of a strategy for development and not an end in itself.
In the Iringa project in Tanzania, communication was the needed catalyst in projects developed by community members. The nutrition promoters made important contributions not only because of their work in nutrition but also very crucial was the social communication on nutritional themes which resulted in a tremendously successful project. This aspect of nutrition communication lead to successful realization of the local projects - an improvement in health conditions, access to potable water, agricultural production, etc - all of which contributed to a sharp decrease in the prevalence of malnutrition in the Province of Iringa (2).
Intersectoral and interdisciplinary considerations
Nutrition education is an activity which requires the involvement of specialists from different areas: Education, Communication, Agriculture, Horticulture, Public Health and Nutrition. The analysis of the causes of malnutrition reveals that a multiplicity of factors conditions malnutrition. Even at the levels of the village community, an interdisciplinary effort is needed (for example, collaboration between the teacher, agricultural and the health worker).
Interdisciplinary work requires intersectoral collaboration because it is rare to find specialists in all the disciplines needed in any one ministry. The multimedia approach in itself requires intersectoral action as the use of several channels of communication generally implies the participation of several ministerial departments.
Intersectoral and interdisciplinary considerations
The adoption of a rational course of planning
Many interventions in the fields of agriculture, health or nutrition aimed at changing habits, have failed because of inappropriate planning. More development agents now insist on planning by objectives for their projects. Nutrition education is effective only when it is based on an in-depth analysis of nutritional problems and a clear concise definition of objectives and the methods of communication. Continuous evaluation is necessary and beneficial as a basis for redefining strategies and actions during the course of the project.
Chapter 2: Planning an intervention in social communication in nutrition
2.1 The logic of planning
The scheme for planning nutrition education is based on a theoretical framework (3), and consists of four phases: conceptualization, formulation, implementation and evaluation.
The logic of planning
Conceptualization
The first phase of the process of planning is analysis. The problem to be addressed must be analyzed in order to identify the determining factors to be dealt with during the intervention. Indeed, this is a commonly-held view among promoters of nutrition, and health education projects. It is based on a method called causal analysis which has proven useful in nutritional diagnosis (4). It involves drawing up a network of factors affecting nutritional status in a given context. This is a hypothetical model on which the team responsible for the implementation of the project will rely, in selecting the objectives for the intervention.
In this model invariably, there are human behaviours, on which nutrition interventions can be focused. The intervention is thus considered educational. It will therefore be necessary to study carefully the factors which influence these behaviours and the habits one wishes to modify. This is the stage identified by Green et al. (5) as the educational diagnosis. It reveals clearly the factors on which actions must be taken, in order to modify the behaviours in question.
Finally, at the end of this phase of conceptualization, it will be necessary to identify the channels and media for communication, the reference and support groups and the social networks through which the messages for nutrition education will be disseminated.
Formulation
To plan a strategy, it is necessary first and foremost to define clear objectives: general, specific and operational objectives. This is a fundamental step.
These objectives must be defined for each target group and even for the target segments within the target group.
The conceptualization phase and the determination of the factors affecting the behaviours to be modified, greatly facilitates the design of messages and materials. The messages and the materials have to be field tested using methods that require community participation.
Support materials cannot be designed until the various media have been selected. Selection of the media is another crucial step in the planning process. It is based on the results of the analysis of potential channels for communication carried out during the conceptualization phase in order to develop optimum synergy between the channels.
A multimedia plan is then carefully formulated. In such a plan, all communication activities are integrated with each other.
Implementation
The support materials designed during the formulation phase are now commercially produced. Difficulties lie in obtaining the optimum balance between quality and price. It is always necessary to use support materials, whatever the scope of the project, as they serve to reinforce person-to-person communication.
Training the "change agents" is yet another vital stage. To ensure that all persons involved in the various communication activities carry out adequately their roles in their respective sectors, training and retraining is necessary. These agents, whether they are health workers, teachers, agriculture promoters or other persons from a diversity of sectors, must be very familiar with the message content as well as the techniques to effectively communicate these messages. They must also be well informed of their individual roles in the entire strategy.
Communication with the population can then begin, strictly adhering to the modalities defined in the preceding stages.
Implementation
Evaluation
Evaluation must be considered as a necessary support activity, an instrument for refining or restructuring communication activities.
To this end evaluation must be participatory. It will bring together the principal players in the intervention: the promoters of the intervention (meeting through a planning committee), the communicators, the sponsors and the population itself (through community representatives).
The evaluation must respond to two fundamental questions:
Have the objectives been met?
Has the implementation process satisfied the various persons involved in the intervention and, above all, the population concerned?
2.2 Scheme for planning
2.3 How do we manage the planning?
The first activity would be concerned with establishing a planning committee to bring together the representatives of all the parties concerned.
What will be the role of this planning committee?
 To attend to all the stages of planning of the program.
 To ensure the translation into action of all operations from the conceptualization to the evaluation of the intervention.
 To recruit technicians to carry out the operations.
 To ensure that the communication intervention is well integrated into development programs in the country, the region, and the district.
Who should be on this planning committee?
The composition of the committee will vary with professional level of members depending on whether the intervention is being implemented at the national, regional or local level. Whatever the level, however, the sectoral composition remains the same.
* At the national level, one can think of a committee composed of a representative from the Ministry of Planning, of technicians representing the Ministries already active in nutritional education, NGOs working in the country, certain private companies (e.g. the companies concerned with production and/or the marketing of food stuffs) the sponsors, as well as recognised representatives of the population. The selection of committee members must result in a multidisciplinary team: it must include at least a nutritionist and a specialist in communication. It is also necessary that at least one participant is trained in social communication in nutrition who can act as the principal resource person throughout the planning process (this participant may be an international expert from another country).
* At the local level, intersectorial and interdisciplinary representation will be assured by the presence of the teacher, the health officer, the agricultural promoter, representatives from local womens' groups and NGOs. The presence of recognised representatives from the population will guarantee a mechanism for participation, in the decision making process. It is also necessary to have at least one person trained in social communication in nutrition to facilitate the process.
* The regional level is an intermediary level. There is the possibility of forming a planning committee based on the same model described above.
An intervention can take place at several levels at the same time. It will, therefore, be advantageous to have the planning committees functioning at these different levels, thus ensuring coordination between them.
contents next
<section>2</section>
back contents next
Part II: Conceptualization
Chapter 3: Defining the nutrition problems (Phase 1 - Conceptualization)
Any nutritional intervention must begin with the clear identification of the nutrition problem which is to be addressed.
What is this problem? How is it manifested?
What population is affected?
What is its impact on the social, economic and cultural life of the population concerned?
Is it a priority public health problem?
The extent and the magnitude of a nutritional problem, groups affected, its socio-economic importance and prioritization as public health problems is determined by nutrition workers on the basis of assessment of nutritional status of the population.
The assessment of nutritional status usually involves a single or a combination of direct and/or indirect methods depending on the objective of the assessment.
Direct methods are:
Dietary survey
Clinical signs
Laboratory tests
Biophysical methods
Anthropometric measurements
Indirect methods are:
Assessment of health statistics
age specific mortality rates cause specific mortality rates nutritionally relevant infections
Assessment of the ecological factors socio-economic factors sanitation and water supply coverage of health services geography and climate cultural factors
People dealing with the design and the implementation of the nutrition communication intervention are generally not required to be involved in this exercise and, therefore, not discussed in this book. Only an outline is provided. Interested readers will find detailed discussion in (6).
To recall the principal nutritional problems in developing countries: these are protein-energy deficiency, disorders linked to iodine deficiency, vitamin A deficiency and iron deficiency anaemia. A growing number of countries are confronted with new health risks linked to diet. These were until recently the diseases of affluence, namely cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, obesity and cancers (7). Evidently, the causes of these different nutrition-related problems are not identical in all countries. Consequently, the possible solutions vary especially in that of giving advice to the population. Beyond the universal messages ("Eat, balanced diets! Exercise"), there are characteristics unique to each theme of nutrition education. It is therefore important to define very precisely the nutritional problem at which the intervention is to be directed.
The next step involves an analyses of the causes of the nutritional problem, which should be carried out in an intersectional group setting.
Conceptualization
Chapter 4: The causes of the nutritional problems
4.1 How is causal analysis carried out?
Since some time, it is known that causal analysis is absolutely necessary for the successful design and implementation of nutrition education. Why is this so? It is because nutritional problems are the results of an interaction between complex and multiple socioeconomic, biological and environmental factors.
In all nutritional interventions, educational or otherwise, the promoters must first determine the causes of the problem which have been identified.
Beghin et al. (4) have redefined a procedure for the analysis of the factors influencing nutritional status (relative to the specific problem identified). The product of this analysis is a network revealing the most direct and even the indirect factors that affects nutritional status of the population.
How is causal analysis carried out?
The steps in the procedure are as follows:
1. Establish an interdisciplinary and intersectorial group including representatives of the population. This group can be the same as the Planning Committee for the project. It can also be larger, but it should then include all the members of the Planning Committee.
2. Once assembled, the members of the group establish a list of the factors known or presumed to affect nutritional status in the population (examples: the factors affecting general nutritional status of children from 6 to 36 months, the factors contributing to anaemia in pregnant women).
3. The group proceeds to construct a chain of causality with linkages formed progressively, and organised into a hierarchy- the result- a network of factors affecting nutritional status. This network is a hypothetical model which will evolve during the preparation and implementation of the programme.
4. The group identifies, on this model, the factors which need to be acted upon. This choice is made, in relation to criteria defined by the group (for example, the feasibility, the acceptability, the presumed efficiency, the cost, the sponsor's specifications, etc.).
5. Among these factors, the group identifies those which seem to be amenable to education: the factors linked even partially to human behaviour. A more detailed discussion is provided in Beghin et al (4) and Andrien and Beghin (3).
An example of causal analysis:
In 1990, the Department for prevention of malnutrition in Ministry of Public Health in Morocco, carried out a causal analysis prior to the implementation of a nutrition communication program (6).
This analysis was carried out to determine the intervention which the Department ought to undertake for promotion of breast-feeding and growth monitoring. A three day seminar gathered about twenty participants. The composition of the group was intersectoral although the Ministry of Health was better represented than the other departments.
In the first phase of the analysis, the participants agreed to consider factors which directly influence the nutritional status of children from 0 to 5 years; the food consumption of the child and the biological utilization of foods. Following this decision, the participants proceeded to an analysis of these two factors at the first level.
Figure I shows the branches which influence food consumption.
The group then chose to act on the breast-feeding which intervenes on both branches of the tree. The result of causal analysis on initiation and duration of breastfeeding are given in Figures 2 and 3.
Figure 1: Causal analysis of nutritional status
To facilitate group-work, a few rules for construction of the causal model are given as follows:
1. The construction of the model progresses from top to bottom, from the effect to the most immediate cause.
2. Each element is broken down into at least two others at the next lowest level.
3. The elements in the model expend on the factors; for the majority of these, indicators can be generated (e.g., family income); for others, it is impossible or difficult to provide indicators (e.g., family support).
4. No effort must be spared in identifying every intermediary factor between two elements in the same causal chain.
5. The interaction between two factors situated on the same horizontal line is not represented.
6. When a factor occurs in several areas of the model, one repeats the factor rather than drawing in the lateral links.
7. The circles of retroaction (the cause becoming an effect and vice-versa) can not be shown in this model.
8. The participants in this analysis decide in advance the level at which they are going to work; that is whether to consider the problem on an individual or collective level.
9. The participants must reach a com promise between rigour and the inclusion of all possible factors in the model on one hand, and simplicity end economy on the other.
10. The participants should agree on when work on the model is to stop.
4.2 How to identify the behaviour in question?
The stage which is of most interest to communicators is the identification of the behaviour in question. Green et al. (5) call this stage "behavioural diagnosis".
All group members assembled to carry out the causal analysis must pay particular attention to the causes linked to behaviour. Only those factors will be amenable to an educational approach.
Whatever the type of intervention decided on, it is unlikely that the group would have included an educational component. This is because human behaviour is often implied in nutrition, whether the behaviour is linked to production, conservation, food consumption or even individual health. The communication thus serves as a basic strategy for integrated programmes (e.g., Joint Program for Applied Nutrition in Iringa, Tanzania).
In certain cases, however, only behavioural factors will be the subject of the nutrition intervention. Certain projects carried out in accordance with the principles of social marketing, as in the Indonesian Programme for Improvement of Nutrition (8), have shown that it is possible to influence favourably the nutritional status of children via educational programs directed at their parents.
In all cases, the group responsible for causal analysis must try to identify the behaviour linked to the factors which form the object of the intervention. In the work carried out in Morocco, the practice of breast-feeding was the object of a complementary analysis carried out by the same working group. As we will see below, this second phase of the analysis allows for the identification of factors which influence breast-feedding in Morocco.
How to identify the behaviour in question?
Breast-feeding consists of two elements: initiation of breast-feeding (indicators: whether breast-feeding has been initiated or not and the time interval between birth and initiation of breast-feeding) and duration of breast-feeding (indicators: duration of exclusive breast-feeding, duration of supplemented breast-feeding).
An example is provided in Figures 2 and 3
Figure 2: Causal analysis of breastfeeding different causes that influence initiation
Figure 3: Causal analysis of breastfeeding different causes that influence duration
Chapter 5: Establishing the educational framework
5.1 What are the issues?
Factors determining behaviour
Once the various behaviours to be changed have been revealed, it is necessary to analyse a little deeper in order to identify the determining factors. External factors may be economic (e.g. revenue), social (e.g. legislation), climatic (e.g. rainy season) or geographic (e. g. the nature of the soil).
Internal factors have been analysed by different authors. According to Leclercq (9) human behaviour is determined by five factors: motivation, knowledge, self confidence, decision and skill (knowledge of what to do and how to do).
The first factor is motivation. It is the motivated individual who considers modifying his usual conduct.
This motivation arises out of a person's perception of the gravity of the problem and the perceived consequences of maintaining or altering his behaviour. (Example: a mother becomes aware of her child's poor health because he is undernourished; she becomes cognizant of the importance of modifying the child's diet).
The second factor is knowledge. When the problem is perceived and there is enough motivation to make a change, it is even more important to know what change is to be made. (Example: a mother convinced of the need to modify her child's diet, knows what to do to improve food intake by ensuring that the child consumes from the correct food groups and increasing the number of meals per day).
The third factor is self-confidence. This factor is now of primary importance to health educators. They now realize that it is very difficult for people lacking self-confidence to make a change in health-related behaviour (example: although a mother might know the correct meals to give to her child, she should also feel that she is capable of preparing them).
The fourth factor is decision, a function of a person's system of values. The person must, choose from among several possibilities, what suits him best (example: a mother who is quite confident in herself might not change her behaviour simply because of other priorities. She may decide not to devote the time needed for preparation of meals for her youngest child. This may not be a priority. Out of the many situations proposed to her, she will select those which are most in keeping with her system of beliefs and values and that of her reference group.
The fifth factor is skill (faculty of knowing what to do and how to do it). When a person decides to make a change, he tries it out first, but its adoption will depend on try a new recipe to prepare her child's meal will judge from the result of the meal when it is cooked. If the result is positive, she will continue using the recipe but if it's negative, she may become doubtful and abandon the new idea the success or failure he meets. Skill is needed here (example: a mother who decides to try a new recipe to prepare her child's meal will judge from the result of the meal when it is cooked. If the result is positive, she will continue using the recipe but if it's negative, she may become doubtful and abandon the new idea.)
Leclercq's (9) model does not really take external factors into account. It is evident that these external factors do influence behaviour patterns.
In nutrition, external factors are of primary importance: food availability, access to health services, and family income are only examples which may prevent or encourage adoption of a behaviour.
Among the factors influencing a course of action, those which depend on the people concerned and those which are, unfortunately, out of their control. must be underlined. The latter may be such that any attempts to alter a course of action without taking them into consideration would certainly fail (example: In the case of a famine due to drought, it would be rather difficult for the people to maintain a balanced diet since the food required would not be available).
In any event, it is crucial to understand why people behave the way they do. In general, people have valid reasons (in their opinion) for behaving in a certain way. It is important to discover what these reasons are before trying to make any changes in their habits.
Channels of Communication
The second issue to be addressed in an educational diagnosis concerns the channels of communication. In nutrition, communication occurs through a multitude of channels, be they interpersonal or mass-media based.
The questions to be raised are as follows:
In the community concerned (which may be very large - the entire country, perhaps or very limited a village) what are the networks of communication? What are the relays, the influential people and institutions? There will be general answers to these questions but those specific to the field of nutrition are particularly important. Various people or institutions may, in fact, play a greater role in communication for nutrition than in other areas (e.g. a mother-in-law often has great influence on infant feeding, but less on food purchase).
5.2 How to conduct an educational diagnosis
There are several methods that can be used to obtain a rapid appreciation of a existing situation. Among those available are rapid participatory rural appraisal or the Rapid Assessment Procedure and the Rapid Ethnographic Assessment. It is a matter of selecting the method most appropriate to the situation being dealt with.
The methods proposed may be used in a variety of situations regardless of the programme. When used together as part of an overall assessment for an educational diagnosis for the population at risk, they can provide a very clear picture of the reality of life of the people.
5.3 Five methods for gathering useful data
How can the factors influencing nutritional habits be analysed? How can the active channels of communication in a given community be identified?
Technical files 1-5 provide a number of approaches which will enable the planning committee to obtain a realistic view of the population group under consideration.
In addition to the methods of data collection described above, important data can be collected during implementation of the intervention. The method involves integrating the opinions and suggestions gathered during group discussion in order of perceived importance. This method will be examined later in discussion of slides, videos and rural radio. The data collected then takes on an educative role because it is used to stimulate discussion on the subject.
It is possible and, indeed, strongly advisable, to establish two-way communication in any group discussion. It is even more crucial to try to understand the system of communication used in the target population even before studying nutritional habits.
TECHNICAL FILE N1: A literature review
What is its purpose?
Issues related to communication in the community, individual health, production and food consumption have already been addressed in the literature. Before embarking on any new, costly studies, is advisable to review the literature or unpublished reports and accessible files.
How to do it?
First, it is necessary to define the subject area for review. The subject area must not be too broad (e.g. "The development of agriculture in the country" is a subject on which there is already a vast amount of material, much of which may be quite useless to the particular study on communication). The area of study should focus on three main points: the field of study, the social and/or the geographic context, and the period of interest (e.g. "Family production of food rich in Vitamin A in the region of Maradi, Niger since 1980").
How to do it?
Second, decide from where the information can be obtained. Libraries and documentation centres have a two-fold advantage in that the material is already classified and there is usually one, or sometimes even several, specialists who can assist in getting the required documentation.
The documentation centres in international organizations are a valuable resource that should not be forgotten. Although much of the material typically available has not been officially published, it is nevertheless a very useful source of information. Technical sections of institutes and ministries have often valuable information.
How should the research be carried out?
There are basically two ways of conducting the review. One method includes searching the bibliographic indexes for recent articles and studies on the particular subject and noting the appropriate sections. The other involves going through the library files in a systematic way (author, title, subject area, key words). This is easier if the system is computerized.
Some data bases are accessible through modem. They allow the user quick access to references which are not available in the country. Other documentation centres will, on request, provide information by the mail. Examples include Centre International de l'Enfance in France (Chateau de Longchamp, Bois de Boulogne (75016 Paris) and the documentation unit A.P.H.A. in the United States (APHA, 101515th Street NW, Washington D.C. 20005, USA)
How should the research be carried out?
TECHNICAL FILE N2: Interviews in a central location
What purpose is served?
These improvised interviews permit rapid collection of information among a significant number of people gathered in a specific place for any reason other than that of the survey.
How to carry it out?
A location must first be selected where one is likely to meet members of the target group (e.g. patients in an hospital, mothers of young children at MCH Centres, housewives in the supermarket, etc).
A questionnaire is then formulated and pre-tested. It should not be too long because people would not have been notified in advance and thus do not like to spend much time in answering.
How to carry it out?
The interviewers should go to the place identified and carry out the investigation with people meeting the required profile. As there are usually many people present, a large number of persons can be contacted in a short space of time. This is, above all, the primary advantage of this method.
Some people will be willing to answer questions while others may refuse to do so. Therein lies a sample bias. In any case, the people interviewed in a central meeting place are not truly representative of the target population. This sample type is never representative whatever the number of people interviewed. However, this kind of survey provides some indication of the people who will be studied.
How to use the findings?
The findings of the survey may be presented in a table as follows.
Example 1: The description of the sample
No.
e.g. women 20 to 40 years 
women 40 years and over
TOTAL 
Example 2: The responses
There are differences between closed questions (the person interviewed must choose one of several responses proposed by the interviewer) and open questions (the interviewee responds freely). It is very easy to present responses to closed questions in a table since all that is required is a listing of the proposed responses and the frequency for each of these.
e.g. Did you buy avocados at the market today?
yes: 
no: 
Total:
Answers to open questions are analyzed in a different fashion Here all the responses given by people interviewed must be taken into account
e.g. What foods did you buy at the market today?
Tomatoes:
Avocados:
e.g. Why do you eat avocados? (Several answers possible)
Because I like it
Because it's good for my health
Because it's cheap
Because it's easy to prepare
etc...
How to draw conclusions?
As the sample of people interviewed is not representative of the target audience, all generalisations must be avoided However, the result of the survey can enable formulation of hypotheses about certain behaviour and their causes These hypotheses can be tested by carrying out a KAP survey (Knowledge, Attitude and Practices,) using a sample which is representative of the population studied.
TECHNICAL FILE N3: In-depth individual interviews
Purpose
Certain persons, by virtue of their professional activities or their position in society, may possess a wealth of knowledge on a particular subject. In-depth interviews are held with one or more of these resource persons for about one to two hours.
How to conduct the interview?
Individual interviews must be conducted by well-trained persons and if possible by members of
the planning committee. This is to eliminate the risk of losing important information.
The interviewer must be capable of gaining the confidence and trust of the person being interviewed so that the latter will feel free to answer questions asked. The place where the interview is to be conducted should be quite comfortable and private and allow for frank continuous dialogue without disturbance.
These interviews may be recorded if the respondent agrees. In this way, the interviewer can concentrate on the interview rather than on note-taking.
How to draw up the interview guide
The interviewer uses an interview guide to keep the session focussed. The guide incorporates mainly those issues facing the planning committee and makes use of open ended questions. However, consideration should also be given to the respondent's competency in the subject.
Some examples:
What have been your experiences with programs or activities for preventing malnutrition in this region?
In your opinion, what are the main causes of malnutrition in children under five years old in this region (or whatever the specific problems are)?
Are there any habits or practices which you believe contribute to malnutrition in this region?
Can we change any of these? Why do you say so?
The information gathered is qualitative in nature. The opinions expressed by the people interviewed are generally subjective. As such, the committee will give credence to the findings depending on their assessment regarding the credibility of the particular resource person.
How to conduct the interview?
How to draw up the interview guide
TECHNICAL FILE N4: Focus groups
Purpose served
Focus groups are used to obtain qualitative data on the opinions, beliefs, attitudes and values regarding a specific subject.
How to conduct the sessions?
Under the guidance of a well trained facilitator, groups of 8 to 12 persons are convened for discussion of a specific theme: food consumption, feeding of infants 6 to 12 months, etc..
For focus groups to be productive, a homogeneous group is needed. To determine what important characteristics have to be taken into account to ensure that the group is homogeneous, it is necessary to consider the particular subject to be discussed. Also, it is crucial that focus groups do not include persons with widely varying social status, educational levels, age or gender. Issues concerning maternity should be discussed in different groups of women: those who have children and those who do not have children. The same applies for issues concerning farmers: it is necessary to differentiate between small farmers and large farm proprietors.
How to conduct the sessions?
The groups should reflect the diversity of the society being studied but does not constitute a representative sample. As many focus groups are convened as can provide new information on the subject being studied.
Example:
In a study of the reluctance of women to use contraceptive methods in rural Rwanda, 8 focus groups were formed as indicated in the table below:
Using Contraceptives
Not Using Contraceptives
1. Literate women without children
2. Illiterate women without children
3. Literate women without children
4. Illiterate women without children
5. Literate women with children
6. Illiterate women with children
For criteria relevant to the use of contraceptives whether or not women have children and whether or not they are literate were considered. On this basis, eight types of focus groups were convened. All the possible combinations do not necessarily have be formed. If there are only a few illiterate women with no children, this group does not have to be formed. During the course of the investigation one may decide to form three groups of the same type in view of the liveliness of the discussion. Similarly a group not indicated in the table may be formed, for example a group of men, or a group of pregnant teenagers.
How to formulate the guide?
There are three steps involved. First, clearly define the aim of the investigation. Then, make a list of the subject areas to increase the likelihood of collecting the important data required. Finally, design the guide itemizing the subjects to be studied.
The guide should be pretested and modified, if needed, before using it in the focus group sessions. The interview is semi-directive and typically lasts for one to one and a half hours. The facilitator should be flexible adapting quickly to the flow of the discussion and altering the content or sequence of questions originally planned, if it becomes necessary. The facilitator must lead the group into in-depth discussion of the subject, listen carefully and try to determine reasons for the ideas expressed.
The facilitator is assisted by a person acting as a recorder. The recorder is concerned with taking note of ideas and opinions voiced and the manner in which they are expressed. The use of a tape-recorder will greatly facilitate the analyses of information collected.
How to analyse the information?
It must be recalled that the data collected is qualitative. A common error is the generalization of information in such statements as "the majority of persons think that..." or even "X percent of people think that...". The information collected from focus group sessions are only opinions, useful in understanding the behaviour of the population concerned or for designing effective messages addressing these behaviours. The data can certainly not be used to generalize on the characteristics of the population being studied.
In some cases, one opinion voiced by only one individual in the group becomes the most useful bit of information for the program. In other groups, the comments (whether verbal or non-verbal) on an opinion expressed by a group member may become the most pertinent.
The report following a focus group session need not necessarily be very long. It should help those concerned with communication to understand why people behave in a certain way and what are the underlying reasons for the behaviour. It should add a new dimension to the understanding of these phenomena.
TECHNICAL FILE N5 - Observation techniques
It has been said that during the course of an interview conducted with a questionnaire, the interviewees give the responses which they believe the investigator expects to hear. This phenomenon which is related to "desired social prestige" is not a major one in in-depth individual interviews or focus groups. Nevertheless when people speak about their practices, beliefs and values they inevitably distort the truth a little so as to present themselves in a favourable light.
This limitation of interviews is partially overcome by observing people in their normal environments. This method claims greater objectivity in describing and understanding human behaviour.
Observation techniques
Methods
Two methods of observation must be clearly distinguished:
Observation through participation and systematic observation of certain practices. Observation through participation is used in anthropology. The technique was first presented by MALINOWSKI in 1922. Since then, there have been many followers. Among them are several noted anthropologists. It is impossible to describe in a few lines a technique which requires extensive theoretical and practical training. The investigator becomes a part of the life of the community members whose practices he intends to study. While living in the community he observes daily life and makes notes in private. He continuously interprets the findings of his observations which serve as a guide for future investigations.
The success of this anthropological approach is explained by its ethnographical aspect entailing a complete description of the community, its social systems, its beliefs and ways of life. To develop this profile anthropologists base their study not only on observation but also on in-depth interviews with 'informants' from the community being studied.
Systematic observation of practices is more of an ethnological and anthropological technique. It involves making a detailed report of specific behaviours. As an example: for oral rehydration detailed description were made comparing the different aggregate behaviours (36). Observation techniques are very objective; one has to count recurring behaviour, note the order in which it appears, the duration of each behaviour, etc.
In both techniques, the investigators must remember that their presence may affect the behaviour of the people being observed. However, by using some discretion, the investigators can be successful in obtaining a more or less realistic description of daily life.
The picture of reality revealed by these techniques is as true as can be expected, more so than with any interview conducted with a questionnaire.
How to analyse the results
Both methods can furnish information useful in the preparation of an educational intervention in nutrition. Observation through participation helps to place the practices in their cultural context and so obtain a better understanding of their underlying causes. It also enables the planners to better predict the effects of changing these practices. Systematic observation will help to provide a detailed explanation of behaviours. It will reveal the advantages and disadvantages of each behaviour. The analysis of even the most insignificant behaviour facilitates the definition of the appropriate message to encourage a specific behaviour.
5.4 KAP studies
A KAP survey seeks to determine the knowledge, (K) attitudes (A) and practices (P) of a population. It is based on a questionnaire used in a sample that is representative of the population being studied.
The KAP survey can also be used in the evaluation of a programme. In this case, a survey is conducted before and after the intervention.
In order to distinguish effects of the intervention, it is often necessary to carry out the same survey in a control group, that is, in a community not exposed to the intervention.
There have been several criticisms levelled at KAP studies:
- information collected in this manner is not always valid, as persons may not have been truthfully answering questions.
- it has also been said that the data gathered is usually superficial as the use of a questionnaire does not allow for in-depth discussion.
- the third criticism is that the organization and analysis of the data often poses a problem for those lacking computer-based information systems.
Nevertheless, it is relevant to recall the essential elements of a KAP survey.
1. The questionnaire must be carefully formulated. The questionnaire is comprised of mainly closed questions to facilitate analysis of the data. It involves extensive preparation. Pertinent questions need to be identified. The findings of qualitative methods of investigation described above can prove useful here. Questions need to be formulated, translated and pretested before the final questionnaire is ready. The length of the questionnaire must be adapted to the time respondents can devote to the investigation. The questionnaire must be based on the objectives of the study. Questions unrelated to the objective of the study should be scrupulously avoided.
2. The sample must be representative of the population under study. To extrapolate conclusions to the entire population, the margin of error used in determining the sample must be small. The sample size must be sufficiently large and the sample must be random. Some statistical training is needed or advice should be obtained in order to observe these two conditions.
3. Rigorous organization is vital. Interviewers must be well trained and the interview standardized otherwise sources of interviewer bias will significantly affect the results of the study.
4. An efficient and rapid treatment of data collected is required. Computer based data management and analysis is preferred over manual treatment. The former is generally more efficient. Consider for example the months of hard work required to analyze 20,000 questions (40 questions x 500 persons) manually!
5.5 Selection of a method
There is no single method that is best for data collection. Each method has its advantages and limitations. Most often it is a combination of several methods which provides the best results. Table 2 is a comparison of seven methods of data collection. The selection of a particular combination of methods depends on the objectives of the study and the resources available.
Selection of a method
Table 1: A comparison of six methods of data collection for educational diagnosis
Type of data collected
Level or competence required
Time necessary
1. Literature review
Data available in the literature varies from country to country but can generally yield much more information than expected.
Good knowledge of the subject area in which the review is being conducted
A few days or weeks depending on the subject area.
2. Interviews carried out in a central location
Data can be collected from a significant number of persons in a location very heavily frequented by the target population
Interviewers must have received some basic training. Supervisors capable of advising them and analysing the data collected interviewers must be very knowledgeable
A few days on a full-time basis
3. In-depth individual interviews
Data collected from a limited number of resource persons
on the subject area and capable of conducting in-depth interviews, and analysing the data collected.
A few days or weeks depending on the number of persons to be interviewed.
4. Focus groups
Data collected from groups of people from the target population.
Facilitators and recorders trained in moderating the discussion and in observation and note taking as well as analyzing the information obtained.
A few weeks
5. Observation techniques
Data obtained from observation of the community health resources or selected households will and interpreted together with information obtained during interviews
Researchers must be well trained; social anthropologists be needed if an ethnographic profile is required
Several weeks, even months
6. Field survey
Data obtained from a statistically representative sample of the target population
Skills required for formulation of questionnaires, deriving the sample size and composition, conducting the survey and for organization and statistical analyses of data
Several months
Cost
Possible difficulties
Limitations
1. Literature review
Inexpensive
Information is sometimes not readily accessible especially in areas outside of the capital city
Reliability and validity of data obtained cannot always be determined
2. Interviews in a central location
Inexpensive
Unwillingness of the people to participate in the interview
Not statistically representative of the population in spite of the valuable information that can be obtained. Data can be superficial
3. In-depth individual interviews
Quite expensive
Identifying "good" interviewers
Subjective views on the situation
4 Focus groups
Economical if one does not convene too many group sessions
Determining the number and composition of the groups Recruiting the participants. Striking a balance between free open expression and focused discussion. Interpretation of data.
Not statistically representative
5. Observation techniques
Very expensive because of the level of researcher required and the duration of their work
Focusing on the necessary observation elements of the observation grid
Perception bias on the part of the "observer on the observed"
6. Field survey
Very expensive
Terminating the process without omission of necessary steps
Bias due to desirability for social prestige. Information
back contents next
<section>3</section>
back contents next
Part III: Formulation
Chapter 6: Setting objectives
6.1 How to identify the target audience?
The target population for an educational intervention is made up of several groups. In order to adapt the approaches to each group, it is necessary to differentiate between these groups.
Vulnerable Groups and Target Groups
It is important to differentiate between the vulnerable and target groups for intervention. The vulnerable group may in fact be the same as a target group of a communication program, but this is rarely the ease. For example a vulnerable group at risk for protein-energy malnutrition consists of children under five years. The nutrition intervention for reducing this risk will not be directed at the young children but rather at all those involved in the care of children under five years.
An effective communication strategy takes into account activities at all these levels. Each target group, especially the primary one must then be divided into its "segments" a term often used in marketing.
Target Groups
Within the target audience there are primary, secondary and tertiary target groups.
The primary target group is composed of persons whose behaviour is to be modified. In the example given above, these persons could well be the mothers of children under five years. In that case the aim would be to modify the manner in which they prepare their children's meals or care for them.
The secondary target group is comprised of people who will be used as intermediaries to get the message across to the first target group. In the same example, this could be health workers, teachers, agricultural promoters or journalists. It all depends on what the communication networks are in the community.
The tertiary target group is made up of people who can facilitate the communication process and behaviour change. There include administrators and politicians but also those persons close to the mother - the father of the child and the extended family.
This implies that the approach will vary for segments differing in terms of educational level, socio-economic status, etc. In the last example, we need to differentiate between the mothers who constitute the target group and between the various segments of the target group mothers, which will each benefit from a specific strategy.
The media and support materials used to reach mothers who are functionally illiterate and living in rural areas will differ from those directed at more educated mothers living in urban areas.
Example:
The prevention of protein-energy malnutrition, the target groups may be defined as follows:
VULNERABLE GROUP: children under five years.
TARGET POPULATION: persons caring for these children.
Primary target group: mothers of the children.
Segment A: illiterate mothers living in rural areas.
Segment B: illiterate mothers living in urban areas.
Segment C: literate mothers. Etc.
Secondary target group: health workers, social workers, teachers in secondary school, journalists from the local radio station.
Tertiary target group: administrative and technical officers from the various sectors concerned, fathers of the children.
We must not forget that target groups should be participants in the process of social communication and not mere receivers of information. A one-way communication system for nutrition education would defeat our aim for an effective global approach. Also, the target groups must themselves play a role in transmission of messages to other groups and to the "promoters" of the intervention.
Influential people in the community should also play an important part within the secondary and tertiary target groups. This group is a catalyst in social communication.
To identify influential people in the community informations of the following type should be included in the questionnaire or question guide described above:
Who is the most trustworthy person you would go to for advice on feeding your child?
Who in the village would you visit first?
Who told you to prepare this cooked meal for your child?
Direct observation can also help identify these influential people (also called opinion leaders)
It is important to identify influential persons in the relevant sector. These may be different for other areas of social life.
6.2 At what levels are the objectives to be defined?
Nutritional objectives
The primary objective of a nutrition intervention programme is the nutritional improvement of the target group. This may be measured by dietary, biochemical, clinical, anthropometric and biophysical indicators. These indicators indicate different stages of nutritional status of a population.
Nutritional status is a complex phenomenon which is influenced by many factors external to an educational intervention. The time frame within which different indicators are affected by interventions differ. The nutritional objectives should, therefore, be defined with shorterm and long-term objectives. An educational programme is basically designed to change behaviour within the long-term objective of improving nutritional status provided the other external factors that influence nutritional status are favourable; for example, improved food production, availability of food and improved health facilities. All these are conditions external to and outside the control of communication intervention.
The immediate outcome is the direct result of intervention independent of external factors. The improvement of mother's knowledge concerning the nutritional needs of their children is a perfect example.
It is important to set nutritional objectives in measurable terms, but understand that these objectives will be achieved only when factors external to communication interventions are conducive to their achievement.
Educational Objectives
The specific objective of a nutrition education program is to obtain lasting changes in the behaviours affecting nutritional status. Adoption of new behaviour depends on many factors external to the communication program.
Intermediate objectives are those concerned with changes in motivation, knowledge, self efficacy, preferences for a particular behaviour and in the "savoir faire" -the skills required. These objectives are the independent outcomes - the promoters of the intervention must attend to these, in spite of external factors.
Educational objectives must be operationalized. This is described in a later section.
Communication objectives
For the communication program to be effective and bring about lasting change, it must focus on exposing the target population to the messages, and on the retention of the messages on their part.
In the field of communication, the methods are as important as the apparent results. This is because they forge lasting attitudes among the population.
For example, two communication programs can achieve the same objective of message retention. The first program because of its top-down authoritarian approach results in a relationship of dependence while the second which is participatory, encourages the population itself, to make informed decisions to resolve their problems. The second option is to be preferred.
Summary
A hierarchy of objectives can be formed.
General objective: improvement of nutritional status.
Specific educational objective: Change in behaviour Intermediate educational objectives: Change in motivation, knowledge, self efficacy, preferences, decision
Communication objectives:
Exposure to messages
Retention of messages
At what levels are the objectives to be defined?
6.3 How to define educational objectives?
Educational objectives should be operationalized as far as possible. These provide the basis for preparation of an objective evaluation of the intervention.
To be operational, an educational objective should state clearly:
* what observable behaviours will indicate that the objective has been achieved,
* who will show the various behaviours,
* what will be the results of the new behaviour,
* under what conditions will the behaviour be shown,
* what criteria determine whether the desired result has been achieved or not.
Following are several illustrative examples.
How to define educational objectives?
Specific objective: The mother will introduce between the 6th and 9th month of the child's life, a cooked meal of maize legumes and oil, these being foods which are available and affordable to her. Criteria: This meal is to be consumed by children of that age group at least three times a week and not more than once a day
Intermediate objectives also can be operationalized, as shown in the following examples
Motivation: The mother will express her desire to improve the traditional diet of her child from the age of six months.
Criteria: her desire is expressed in response to an open ended question about the diet of her next child.
Knowledge: The mother will be able to give examples of how to enrich cooked maize with other foods rich in proteins and fats. Criteria: three qualitative examples deemed acceptable.
Self efficacy: The mother considers herself capable of preparing this meal for her child.
Criteria: this is stated during the course of an informal interview with the mother.
Preferences: The mother will select the recipe for cooked maize enriched with foods rich in proteins and fats among several recipes, and will prepare this recipe on a regular basis for her child.
Criteria: given a choice of ten recipes, the mother selects three nutritionally adequate recipes.
Skills: Using cornflour, legumes, oil and a few seasonings, the mother will be capable of preparing a cooked meal that is well-balanced.
Criteria: the necessary proportions for food groups will be observed within a level of error of 20%.
In terms of skills considerable effort must be made to define the behaviour to be adopted by the population.
In terms of skills considerable effort must be made to define the behaviour to be adopted by the population.
Cornflour, legumes, oil
The programme team for HEALTHCOM listed 38 behaviours in the curative domain and 69 in the preventive domain for diarrheal diseases.
An analysis is given below of the required practices for oral rehydration, more specifically those concerned with mixing the contents of a packet of rehydration salts with one litre of boiled water.
* Select a container which holds one litre of liquid.
* State clearly that the container must be washed and cleaned.
* Fill the container to the brim with boiled water.
* Open the packet taking care not to spill any of the contents.
* Add the contents of the packet, again being careful not to spill any liquid or salt.
* Add nothing more.
* Stir or shake the container.
* Label the container
* Emphasize that the mixture must not be boiled.
The planning team will be able to define the messages for communication on the basis of this analysis.
Chapter 7: Designing the messages
7.1 Messages, media and support materials
To distinguish between messages, media and support materials:
* "message" is the formulation of an idea or concept to be transmitted to a specific population (e.g., "fish is a healthy food for the child");
* "media" is the channel of communication through which the message is transmitted (e.g. talks at a health centre, school lessons by radio, etc.);
* "supports" are the materials on which the message is transmitted (e.g., poster, radio program, flannelgraph).
In developing the message the first questions to be asked are: What words should be used and in what order?. In the choice of media: What type of media? What is the optimal media-mix, for this situation?. In the development of support material: Which material? What images to use? Which colours? Which type of sound systems?).
These questions are closely linked. The contents of the messages influence the choice of media and support materials. These, in turn, influence how the message is formulated. The results of the pretest, however, may indicate that another choice of media has to be made. This is significant as the selection of support material is dependent on the choice of media.
Messages, media and support materials
7.2 How to ensure that messages are coherent?
Coherence with objectives
First, all the messages should be consistent with the objectives for behaviour change. In practice, the specific objective of a communication intervention should determine the messages to be developed.
Example:
Specific objective: The mother will introduce, between the 6th and 9th month of the child's life, a cooked meal of maize, legumes and oils which are available and affordable to her.
Criteria: the said meal should be consumed by children in that age group at least three times a week.
The messages to help achieve this new behaviour must be oriented towards the use of these products (maize, legumes and oil) in the preparation of the meals once the child has reached sixth month of life. Although seemingly trivial, this effort is very important.
The message must also be in keeping with the intermediate objectives.
On what basis is behaviour to be modified? Should there be focus on improvement in knowledge, in motivation or self confidence, or should there be emphasis on the values of the target group?
Depending on the nature of the intermediate objective, messages will be designed accordingly. These differences may be reflected in the message content. For example, a message for giving information will vary from one designed to raise self confidence.
An example frequently used to illustrate this diversity of messages can be found in the promotion of breast feeding.
The motivation to breast-feed is often present. In many countries it is no longer necessary to disseminate the message, "Breast milk is the best food for your baby," because mothers and mothers-to-be already know this.
In industrialized and in the third world countries young mothers often lack basic knowledge-and skills: How to hold the baby? How long should breastfeeding last? What to do in the event that her breast stops producing milk? Precise messages responding to questions asked by mothers will often be more useful than messages aimed at motivation.
Another type of message is considered increasingly indispensable to the promotion of breast-feeding. This is the message that aims at reinforcing self confidence in mothers. These mothers suffer more and more from a sense of inadequacy in nourishing their child because only breast milk is provided. Here again the messages will be different: they will aim at reinforcing the idea of breast-feeding as a natural healthy practice, which every normal women can carry out well.
This example illustrates that messages have to be designed in accordance with objectives set during the conceptualization phase of the strategy.
The results of the surveys which were carried out in that phase will also be useful in designing the message. The following example of an experience in Nigeria illustrates this point (25, p. 32).
The nutritional problem identified by the planning committee is a deficiency in Vitamin A, which may lead to night blindness. Eating liver has been recommended as a possible means of ensuring a better supply of Vitamin A. The message must motivate the mothers to prepare meals containing liver.
Qualitative research carried out in the field shows that:
1. One of the health problems identified by the population is related to the quantity and the quality of blood in the body.
2. Liver is considered as a blood-enriching food.
The messages will be designed to keep local beliefs in mind. For example, a likely message is "Mothers prepare liver more often because it enriches the blood."
The messages should be coherent. Quite often, it is not the only one but a number of messages are conveyed to the audience at the same time. Several messages which mutually reinforce each other may be used to achieve a common objective.
Here is an example of three complementary messages:
* "Measles kills,"
* "When your child is eight months old, have him vaccinated against measles,"
* "Protect your child from measles with the ROUVAX vaccine."
Coherence with of her interventions:
All nutrition education interventions in the same community must be coherent. This is often difficult because many institutions are involved, including those at the national level (school, health services, social services, agricultural extension, non-governmental organizations), and at the international level (United Nation Agencies,
These three messages are coherent. They aim to achieve one objective: the immunization of children eight months and older against measles, organizations for bilateral cooperation, (non-governmental organizations). How can coherence of efforts be ensured? One way of doing this is to associate all concern in the planning committee during the planning phase. Representatives from all development sectors actively involved in nutrition education in the area should meet for this purpose.
If there is no unity of effort between institutions the public may be confronted with contradictory messages. They will not know which message should be followed. If this situation does not change, there can be no expectations for any behaviour changes.
7.3 How to design persuasive messages
Well-designed messages reach their target audience. Although there is no one formula for message design, there are several useful guidelines. A selected guideline is given below.
How to design persuasive messages
In designing a message, the following points should be kept in mind:
1. Keep it short and simple; include only a few key ideas.
2. Give reliable' complete information.
3. Repeat the idea many times.
4. Recommend precise, behaviour change.
5. Show the relation between the nutritional problem and the recommended behaviour.
6. Make use of a slogan or theme.
7. Ensure that the message is presented by a credible source (as perceived by the target group).
8. Present the facts in a direct manner.
9. Make use of positive expressions, not negative ones.
10. Use humour without being offensive to anyone.
7.4 How to maximize the potential for effective messages
The potential effectiveness of a message is certainly enhanced by format. This concept has been widely used by commercial advertisers so much so that advertisements today are rarely a mere description of the qualities of the product.
How can we increase the persuasiveness of a message transmitted through images (symbolic message). Various procedures have been used in commercial advertising and to a lesser extent in public service communication. The reader may consult relevant manuals on communication, marketing and advertising for more information on the subject (10).
Some well known suggestions regarding style which can be helpful in designing more attractive messages are presented in Technical Files 6 and 7.
How to maximize the potential for effective messages
TECHNICAL FILE N6: Seven elements of style for symbolic messages
Key Visuals
This technique makes use of a dominant visual around which the message is planned. The key visual can almost carry the entire message and so the text needed is just a very simple phrase. e.g., The picture or drawing of a packet of rehydration salts with text "For your child's diarrhoea..."
When the key visual does not carry fully the essence of the message, more explanation is provided in the text.
e.g., A smiling child holding fish in his right hand.
Text: "Fish is good food"
Key Visuals
Plurality
An abundance of the proposed product or the beneficiaries using it, is used in this technique. It conveys the idea that everybody is using the product.
e.g., A heap of cubes to be used in a sauce.
A crowd of children and their parents at the immunization centre.
Plurality
Symbolisation
The message can be represented by a symbol. The public is expected to make the necessary association. For example, W.H.O. uses the umbrella to represent immunization. It is expected that the reader will understand that in much the same way that an umbrella serves as protection against rain, immunization protects children against disease.
Exchange
In this method one situation is paralleled with another. One of these should be well appreciated by the public. The situations will be mutually reinforcing.
Example: Preparing a palm sauce with grains in the village (we see a lady extracting the oil) is paralleled with the preparation of the same traditional dish, this time with a tin of preserved grain sauce (prepared by a woman who is clearly from an urban area).
Succession - Before and After
This technique makes reference to a positive change attributed to the use of a proposed new product.
Visuals consist of different pictures placed side-by-side or one above the other.
Example: the-picture of a man lying in a bed (the text says clearly that he is suffering from malaria). In the next picture he is standing up, smiling and active. The text between the two pictures states that he takes chloroquine tablets.,
Social Modelling
A well-recognized person when seen practicing a certain behaviour, using a specific product or revealing a particular attitude, can incite the same reactions in an admirer. This phenomenon is used very often in commercial advertising, but not sufficiently in nutrition education.
Social Modelling
A well-recognized person when seen practicing a certain behaviour, using a specific product or revealing a particular attitude. can incite the same
For example: A famous actress breastfeeding her child can be a way of persuading her female fans to do the same.
It should be noted that if the "reader" does not identify with the famous personality, it is not likely that he will imitate the behaviour. Later in the technical file on television, the criteria for identification are discussed in more details.
Series of images
A visual can be composed of several images in series. The arrangement may be simultaneous or chronological.
A series of simultaneous images can be used to illustrate the many benefits of eating a particular food. Images conveying the following ideas can be placed side-by-side: (first picture) Boiled food gives your child more energy, (second picture): elements of food necessary for growth of the child, (third picture): those elements in the food which provide protection.
The pretesting of messages focuses on five characteristics:
* attention (does the message have stopping power?)
* comprehension (is it clearly understood?)
* relevance (is the public concerne by the message, is it relevant to them?)
* credibility (is the message or the source credible?)
* acceptability (is the message acceptable to the target group, or offensive in any way?)
There are different methods for pretesting messages, some of which are similar to those presented earlier for use in surveys.
Focus groups (Technical File N4) can be convened for pretesting messages to be used in that community. Also, in-depth face-to-face interviews with resource persons are also useful. These persons do not necessarily have to be from the community for which the message is intended.
A very appropriate method involves testing within a family.
TECHNICAL FILE N7: Family trials
This method can be used in diagnostic research as well as in pretesting of message. It is concerned with testing the first draft of the message in a target community. This methodology is justified by the fact that nutrition related messages concern the family first and foremost. It is wise to ask persons from the target population to make suggestions for improvement of messages.
This method, together with observation techniques, personal and group interviews were the reason for the successful nutrition program in Indonesia (31).
What does it involve?
Well trained investigators recommend certain eating "health-enhancing habits" to improve the health of the family (especially the health of their children) to a sample of families from the target population. Through observation and survey the investigators make a note of difficulties encountered when recommending the changes. The product of this activity will be a list of appropriate modifications and a list of the factors which could influence mothers to adopt or to reject the ideas proposed.
This procedure enables the selection of appropriate content for the message.
Example: In promoting boiled food for weaning, the trials will help to determine what are the best ingredients for the meal (bearing in mind certain factors like the mother's occupation, availability of the products, how easy it is to prepare, attitudes of the members of the family, etc...)
These trials will also reveal what utensils are available in the family for preparation of various dishes. Spoons, for example, cannot be mentioned in the message if they are not normally used by the family. Family trials are also helpful in determining the most persuasive way of stating the message.
Chapter 8: Choice of media and multimedia combination
8.1 What are the media?
The media are the channels of communication through which messages are transmitted. It is necessary to distinguish between two channels of communication, namely, the face-to-face and the mass media.
Face to face communication
Oral communication in the form of a face-to-face encounter may take place in two kinds of circumstances. The interpersonal face-to-face situation (e.g., an agricultural extension worker speaking to a farmer) and the "face-to-face in a group" situation (e.g., a health officer leading a discussion with a group of mothers).
The voice is the main organ of face-to-face communication but the use of other support materials is highly recommended. These support materials can be printed, visual, and audio-visual. They reinforce the oral communication between the "educator" and his target audience.
Interpersonal Communication, in which two people are brought together in a face-to-face situation, is of considerable importance in any strategy for public education. In fact, the most successful attempts to change nutritional habits have been based mainly on interpersonal communication used in conjunction with other methods.
Face to face communication
It was stated earlier that the aim of the intervention is to modify social communication with regard to nutrition in order to change what people say about nutrition. The result of an intervention in nutrition education must therefore encourage interpersonal communication. For the most part this effort has to be voluntary. There is no real compensation for the mother who speaks to her neighbour about the necessity of vaccinating her child. However, professionals who are trained and paid for their interventions (health officers, agricultural adviser, social assistants, teachers, etc...) must support these efforts.
Interpersonal Communication
In what context can such an intervention take place?
The most obvious time is during consultation in a health centre. The Health Officer takes time out to speak to his patient (or the parent of the patient if the latter is a child), listen and help him to find a solution to his problem. This message must complement those transmitted via other channels of communication. Most people working in development programs are involved in interpersonal communication. They can reinforce the messages relevant to the public. The planning committee for the nutrition intervention has to identify these channels and include them in their multimedia strategy.
Communication in a group situation has been the principal means of nutrition education for a long time. It was referred to as "discussion" but was often the monologue of a Health Officer before a group of mothers of young children. Since that time, other means of education have evolved. In particular, communication in a group situation has improved as a result of field experience and scientific research.
Communication in a group situation
There is a significant amount of material available on training for group discussion which deals with methods, group participation and material, and visual or audio-visual supports.
The emergence of special supports has led to the development of innovative training methods. This will be described in Chapter 11. Technical files will be presented for slide-language, Video-animation and Popular theatre.
The mass media
With mass-media communication, the transmitter and receiver are never in direct contact. The interaction is mediated through the visual image, print, or by a combination of these elements.
Radio diffusions use sound (music and words). The programmes come in many formats, talks, debates, soap operas, advertisements. Regretably, for a long time health education programmes were limited to debates between journalists and medical experts. Since then a more effective advertising campaign has been developed which makes use of other formats. Radio is a very popular media throughout the world. All countries listed in the "Report on Communication in the World" (38) have at least one public or private radio station. In some of the poorest countries access to radio is estimated at between 2 and 4% of the population, but in most of the developing countries, including Africa, the proportion of radios in use exceeds one in ten. If the population pyramid, as well as collective listening, is considered, it may be inferred that in almost every country, the majority of adults have direct access to this medium. However, there is a need to determine the expected media coverage of
the population in the country or region chosen for a nutrition education intervention.
Radio diffusions
The radio may be looked at from two different perspectives: interactive and non-interactive. The more common way of using radio is non-interactive. Messages are transmitted in one direction, from the transmitter to the audience. Here the transmitter has no direct feedback on the impact of his programmes except through opinion polls.
The radio
Conversely, experiences with rural radio have demonstrated the possibility of having lively interactions with the people in these communities. With this medium, there is a combination of radio diffusion and direct oral communication with a group.
Television uses sound, moving images and sometimes the written text. Therein lies its strength. However, it is less accessible than radio. In 1990, 38 countries or territories did not have a television service (38). In many countries no televised programmes could be received in any parts of the country. Moreover the number of receptors per 1000 people remains quite low in most developing countries.
The television
While television is still not easily accessible to most people in rural areas, it continues to exert enormous influence in urban areas, as was the case in the Ivory Coast program "Tl pour Tous."
The printed press has its shortcomings. These are linked to illiteracy on one hand and limited circulation on the other.
The printed press
The circulation of newspapers is quite low in most developing countries. The fact remains that the printed press cannot be seen as a popular media but rather as an elitist one. Newspapers can be used in communication projects if the aim is to mobilize a social class comprising opinion leaders and their social networks.
Posters can serve as a means of communication. It is advisable, however, to use them in conjunction with other media. This channel associates fixed images with written text, and thus limits the target audience to the literate population. Posters can be used without any text. The procedure is complex and demands a particular kind of literacy skill which most people do not have.
Posters
The support material for a poster is the poster itself, but may also be in the form of a T shirt.
8.2 How to select media and support materials
The selection of media and support is done through diagnostic research undertaken in the phase of conceptualization of the programme, where the channels and the active communication networks in the community are identified.
The planning committee should draw up a table with two axes, one for the different media, the other for supports in accordance with the criteria given below.
What are the criteria for the choice of media and supports?
1. Cost: Can the use of this media be accommodated financially? (cost of using the media, training people for the relay, buying and producing the support).
2. Accessibility: to what extent does the target audience have access to the media?
3. "Ease of Use" of media (taking into account the competence already acquired by the people responsible for the intervention) Is this media easy to use?
4. Credibility of each media type: Is this media credible?
5. Community participation: Does this media encourage participation?
6. Dissemination of the message with time: Does this media allow for extended, long-term dissemination of the message?
7. Relation to objectives of the intervention: Can this media tee used to achieve the objectives?
For each criterion, each type of media is graded (good, satisfactory, bad). Once complete, the table helps the reader to consider the best choice depending on the importance attributed to each criterion.
In each situation, the criteria must be set in order of importance. The choice is then made with regard to the most important criteria.
For example, in a situation where finance is limited, the criterion for cost appears at the top of the table.
In another situation where the problem of financial means is less acute, but where more importance is given to the long-term effects of the programme, the duration for diffusion of the method would be one of the main criteria.
The planning committee has to consider which media are best suited for achieving the intermediary objectives of the intervention.
The Table 2 summarizes the relative strengths and weaknesses of the various media in relation to changing improving the various parameters of nutrition education and Table 3 provides a list of media and their effectiveness in reaching the various target groups. Both of these tables will help in the selection of a suitable media for reaching a target group.
Table No. 2 - Relative strength of the media in changing various parameters of nutrition education
Acquisition of
Knowledge of fact
Mental image
Concepts Principles Rules
Procedures
Verbal skills
Psycho motive or skills
Attitudes
Only verbal communication 
Verbal communication + fixed image 
Verbal communication + moving image 
Verbal communication + 3 dimensions object
Verbal communication + printed material 
Verbal communication +demonstration 
Radio (non interactive) 
Television 
Written press 
Poster 
0 = little effect * = moderate effect ** = good effect
Below is a list of target publics that you may wish to reach and the different means of communication.
Lets take the example of rural women. In order to reach them one can make personal contacts, use radio, organize cooking demonstrations, show flipcharts in the market, health centres and in other meeting places.
Lets now take another example of the Government authorities. The best way to raise their interest are circulation of information notes, meetings and debates, television, written publications and may be also through radio programmes.
Table 3 - Comparative effectiveness of means of communication in reaching various target groups
Means of communication of groups
Rural women
Rural men
Urban population
Field workers
Village leaders
Government authorities
School children
General public
Television 
Radio 
Written press 
Posters 
Popular theatre 
Video 
Means of communication interpersonal
Rural women
Rural men
Urban population
Field workers
Village leaders
Government authorities
School children
General public
Practical demonstration
Fix film 
Audio casette 
Personal contact 
Flanellographie 
Flip chart 
Brochures 
Means of communication of groups
Rural women
Rural men
Urban population
Field workers
Village leaders
Government authorities
School children
General public
Meetings 
Information notes 
Inter-village visit 
+ = less effective
++ = very effective
8.3 How to determine the best multimedia combination
An essential element of many successful public education program has been to use of a multimedia combination.
This media mix involves an organized concomitant use of several channels of communication. One may speak of synergy if the overall impact of the intervention is increased through the use of several types of media, each reinforcing the other, so that their collective impact is greater than the sum of their influences taken separately. The basis of a media mix is the association of interpersonal communication with mass-media communication.
Each channel of communication is specific in its own way. The challenge is to find the best combination which can result in the realization of the objectives for each target group.
To achieve this, the credibility of the message must be assured. In this regard, health workers are often the first choice because nutrition is considered a priority in their field. All the same, if nutrition education aims at promoting food production, other categories of worker may better suited to the task (e.g., agricultural extension officers). It is often through communication on a person-to-person level with members from the target community that the best source for the message can be determined. These sources should be identified during the diagnostic research phase.
The other channels of communication can play an additional role in the communication strategy. Radio, for example, can spread the message to a much larger audience than that could be covered by the development agents. Posters can ensure long-term exposure to the message. Today, in many countries, T-shirts are still being worn years after they were distributed to advertise the merits of oral rehydration.
It can therefore be seen that the ideal approach is to select not one, but several complementary media to maximize the potential for a successful intervention.
This also explains why intersectoral collaboration is necessary. No one sector can control all the media-related elements of the intervention.
back contents next
<section>4</section>
back contents next
Part IV: Implementation
Chapter 9: Producing the communication support materials
9.1 Need for a multidisciplinary team
The development of materials for communication usually calls for close collaboration between people who are not used to working together. Each person involved in the task must recognise the limits of his field of competence and be willing to consider another person's point of view.
For a long time, people continued to make the mistake of placing those responsible for development of the message also in charge of the development of support materials. Unfortunately, there are few nutritionists who are also creative graphic artists. One can also make the mistake of leaving too much of the design to the graphic or other artist. Professionals and technical personnel concerned with this phase must accept the notion of a team effort where each person's contribution is subject to constructive criticism for the overall good and success of the material.
This is why it is important to define clearly the role of each team member.
* The "nutritionist" is responsible for message content. Nutritionists should make changes in the message if they think that it no longer corresponds to the original idea.
* The "creative" personnel are concerned with design, formulation of the messages and their translation into appropriate materials. They are responsible for the appeal, tone and format of the message and should consider research findings and results of pretests.
* "Technicians" are sometimes responsible for creativity, particularly when it involves an audio-visual material. The producer works with a team of technicians concerned with sound, editing, etc.
* One person should be responsible for coordinating all the efforts. This role is usually assigned to the health education specialist.
* Finally, it is the planning committee who has the power to accept or reject proposed support material after studying the pretest results.
Need for a multidisciplinary team
9.2 Pretesting materials
The procedures for pretesting materials and messages are similar. Pretesting the message "One drink is sufficient, three means disaster" before placing it in support material is of fundamental importance. It is equally important to pretest the support material before large scale production for use in the field. Pretesting of materials can lead to redefinition of the message.
As described in Chapter 7, pretesting materials also calls for focus on the five characteristics of attention, comprehension, personal relevance, credibility and acceptability.
The methodology for pretesting is similar to that used in collecting data in the diagnostic phase. It should be recalled that focus groups (T.F. N4) and in-depth personal interviews (T.F. N3) can be used in pretesting messages and support materials.
Interviewing in a central location (T.F. N2) can also prove useful for pretesting. The investigators go to a location frequented by the target audience and asks question about the relevant materials.
The self-administered questionnaire and the legibility test are two other methods often used in pretesting of materials.
Pretesting materials
TECHNICAL FILE No. 8: Writing/rewriting materials
The following guidelines will assist you in writing or rewriting materials for low-literate adults:
Words...
1. Write simply, using familiar, commonly used words
2. Write personally, using "you" rather than "they"
3. Use words of two syllables or less whever possible
4. Use active verbs
Sentences...
5. Use simple sentence structure when possible
6. Avoid introductory and embedded phrases and clauses. Limit compound and complex sentences. Do not break down sentences, unless the connecting word (for example, "because") clearly shows the relationship between clauses.
7. Vary sentence length but avoid sentences over 15 words long
Paragraphs...
8. Vary paragraph length but avoid paragraphs over 5 sentences long
9. Use short headings to introduce paragraphs
Style...
10. Write in the active rather than the passive voice
11. Use graphics that are logically linked to the text
12. Use upper and lower case letters rather than all capitals
13. Use white or off-white paper and dark (blue, black) ink
14. Balance the use of text with white space
15. Use an unjustified right margin
Ideas...
16. Avoid excessive information
17. Use concrete rather than abstract words or give concrete examples of abstract ideas
18. Apply the content being presented to the reader's personal/cultural experiences
Source:
Institute for the Study of Adult Literacy, College of Education,
The Pennsylvania State University, 1991
It is not possible to overstate the need to pretest all support materials rigorously with a sample of the target population and resource persons. Pretesting is usually undertaken before production of school books and, of course, in commercial advertising, but all too often neglected in public campaigns.
9.3 Large-scale production
Only when the draft model of the support material has been finalized, should large-scale production begin (posters, brochures, T-Shirts, video-clips, flannel boards are all examples of large-scale production).
The selection of a production unit depends on the availability of resources in the country, district or village concerned. Sometimes, a private company may be selected while in other cases work is left to the production unit of the particular ministry.
Large-scale production
In a study of the costs of producing materials, the following should serve as guide-lines:
* Development related costs: Fees for the producer (in an audiovisual production) or the graphic artist (for a graphic production).
* Cost of producing the draft model: technician's expenses and costs of materials bought or rented.
* Cost of pretesting: depending on the methods chosen, one should budget for mailing expenses, travelling expenses, investigator's fees and compensation for persons interviewed, processing of data and writing up reports.
* Costs of revising the model: expenses for technicians and use of materials bought or rented.
* Administrative costs: costs related to direction of the program and activities of the planning committee.
* Costs of producing the supports: the market must be scanned to identify the best offer for quality/price.
* Dissemination costs: to be determined when working with the audio-visual media, radio and especially television.
Chapter 10: Training the change agents
10.1 What are the needs?
First, there is an important need for organization. How can nutrition-related activities be integrated into the daily routine of participants who already have heavy work loads within their departments? How can the activities of the participants from different sectors be co-ordinated? These are questions which the planning team and the people from the different departments concerned must answer.
Most professionals other than health staff and nutritionists lack even basic knowledge in food and nutrition. As their participation in nutrition education activities is important they will require some training. Often agricultural extension workers, health officers, journalists, teachers, and other participants usually express a need for new training once they have begun work in a nutrition communication effort.
All this makes it necessary to program for organizational meetings and training. The programmes must be intrasectoral (teachers will provide help in planning the activities in this area) and intersectoral (representatives from the different sectors will be assembled for the coordination of these activities).
What are the needs?
10.2 How should the training and retraining of participants be organized?
The training of participants is an important activity which must not be under-estimated. For each category of participants, the following steps are necessary:
* Assessment of training needs;
* Translation of needs into training objectives;
* Finalization of programmes: training sessions, didactic methods, materials, and procedures of evaluation.
TECHNICAL FILE N9: Definition of training objectives
The definition of training objectives should be based on a rigorous analysis of tasks. In the following example, each function is broken down into activities, which are themselves broken down into tasks. Functions, activities and tasks correspond to different levels of training objectives.
FUNCTION (of an agricultural extension officer):
Promote the cultivation of a vegetable rich in Vitamin A.
ACTIVITIES (examples):
A. Demonstration of ways of cultivating the particular vegetable.
B. Discussions on the nutritional qualities of this vegetable so as to promote the consumption and production.
C. Reference to other communication activities used in other geographical areas to encourage production and consumption of this vegetable.
TASKS (examples, in relation to Activity B):
B1. To explain the nutritional value of this vegetable. Corresponding specific objectives:
To be capable of ...
B1.1 Stating the various nutritive elements found in this vegetable,
B1.2 Describing their role in providing nutritional balance and improving health status
B1.3 Indicating the consequences of deficiency in these elements.
B2. To promote use of this vegetable using the relevant transparencies as visual aids.
Corresponding specific objectives: To be capable of...
B2.1 Describing what they have seen,
B2.2 Making comments on the transparencies according to the brochure.
B2.3 Answering questions on the purpose of the transparencies.
This analysis of tasks corresponds in fact to an analysis of the training objectives. It guides the entire training process. The training is considered successful when the participants have achieved all these objectives.
Chapter 11: Executing the communication intervention
11.1 The principle of synergy
On several occasions, it was stated that no one medium can, by itself, significantly alter social communication and consequently nutrition-related habits. Interventions should make use of different media which will mutually reinforce each other. To this end, the planning committee is faced with a formidable task of coordination. This is absolutely essential for the success of the programme.
Programmes that have been successful in bringing about change in nutrition-related habits have demonstrated the need to complement the interpersonal channel with other methods.
Two successful projects. The Indonesian Program for Improvement of Nutrition and the Integrated Nutrition Project in Tamil Nadu.
In both cases a strong team of volunteers were responsible for interpersonal communication in the target population. The Kaders in Indonesia were trained in Nutrition Education and Nutrition Surveillance. In Tamil Nadu selected groups of women led sessions on nutrition education.
These change agents played a direct role in mobilizing the public for the program and in introducing new eating practices into the family. They also reinforced the credibility of mass media messages.
In Indonesia, the radio was used, while in Tamil Nadu the cinema was favoured because of its popularity among the local public.
The people in charge of the Tamil Nadu project made short films which were shown in popular cinemas before the main film.
11.2 The importance of interpersonal communication
Interpersonal communication is a very efficient way of studying the nutrition problem and for adapting the necessary messages. When the development officer has not been trained in active listening, role playing is a good method for developing these skills.
In addition to these very personalized interventions, it is desirable to work with groups of people not only to save time and money but also to benefit from group dynamics.
The traditional talks before a passive group should be avoided. These are largely ineffective in bringing about changes in attitude or habits. The psychologist Leivin demonstrated half a century ago the futility of this method in influencing what he referred to as "group decisions."
Active listening implies a capacity for restating the client's point of view so that he discovers the causes of the problem and possible solutions.
This is different from a dogmatic, authoritarian approach of imposing ready-made solutions on the client.
The change agent in nutrition must be well informed of the message content to be communicated. He must also be capable of assisting the client in obtaining the solution to his problems. The message must therefore be adapted to the client's way of life.
The group decision is one taken by the group in order to change something in its own manner. It involves group discussion which is described below (T.F. N13).
The section will also deal with the use of communication supports and slides (T.F. N14 and 15). Popular theatre is also discussed (T.F. N16).
The importance of interpersonal communication
TECHNICAL FILE N10: The Lecture-Discussion-Presentation
The subject
The subject must be clearly defined. One of the reasons for failure of many traditional "talks" is that the scope has not been adequately defined. In preliminary research for a communication intervention, the messages to be transmitted would have already been determined. It should then be easier to focus on the relevant themes for discussion.
The audience
The audience guides the course of communication and provides direction for the speaker in the lecture-discussion. The speaker must know his audience. During the lecture, he must be pay attention to the reactions of the audience to adapt his address whenever necessary.
The goal
The person responsible for the lecture must be fully aware of its goal. To some extent, the goal is already clarified by the planning committee, since this committee sets the objectives of the intervention. The goal of the lecture will differ according to the objectives: whether they are to modify attitudes, or to improve knowledge, or to motivate, etc.
The plan
The plan must be prepared in advance. In the introduction, the speaker welcomes the audience and presents the topic. Speakers must try to encourage audience interest.
The body of the talk consists of elaborating on the main points systematically and expressing the main ideas so that the audience can grasp easily what the speaker is trying to say. A speaker must make reference to the other channels that are being used in the intervention for transmission of messages. Speakers may, for example, invite the public to listen to radio programs on the subject.
The conclusion must be long enough to allow for recapitulation of the main points. The conclusion must be structured to capture the attention and interest of the audience in the hope of later mobilizing them.
The discussion
The discussion which follows the lecture evolves in three stages.
In the first stage; there is audience debate on issues concerning specific problem analysis and possible solutions. The speakers can assist the audience population in deriving their own solutions to their problems. The second stage is for decision making. The group tries to find new ways of doing things. They must reach agreement on the innovations to be tried. For example, they may decide to try a new recipe at home. At the next meeting, they would discuss the relative successes or failures of the innovation.
Other considerations
The following are some ways for enlivening the lecture-discussion.
Auditory or audio-visual communication supports can improve the lecture. Slides and video can also encourage audience interest. Other supports such as charts, flannel board, and projection-screens can also be put to use.
Communication supports
Demonstrations provide a practical way of explaining to the audience how to carry out a particular task. They are very appropriate for recipes.
Storytelling is a manner of expression particularly suited to a traditional situation. It adds a new dimension to the imagination and can as a result greatly enliven a speech which would otherwise be perceived as technical or boring. It also gives some entertainment value to the lecture, making it more interesting to the listener.
Singing adds a note of gaiety, encourages audience participation and ensures memorability of the message.
Dull traditional talks can be replaced by lively and entertaining audience participation. Positive action for solving community problems is more likely to result from this approach.
TECHNICAL FILE N11: Video - animation
Use
Television is an excellent medium for modifying attitudes and bringing about improvement in knowledge and skill. It can also be put into good use for enabling the audience to acquire new skills.
When video is used directly in animation for the public, its potential effectiveness is even greater than that of television.
Why is this so?
This is because in addition to sound and moving images, there is the added dimension of interaction between the presenter and his public. It allows for feedback, and consequent adaptation of the message.
There are cost limitations. Video production is very expensive, more so than any other communication support. The producers therefore have to ensure that the videotapes are used for as many groups as possible. The nutrition education on his part has to make the maximum use of available video materials.
In this technical file, we encourage use of programs which have already been produced are encouraged. Readers can refer to the excellent text by Von Stedinck (14).
The selection of video-programmes
There are numerous existing video programmes available. In the field of health and nutrition education, international organisations and health education units bear the responsibility for video production. National television services often have their own resources which they can place at the disposal of development workers. In some countries, specialized centres for video production have been created. These centres can produce material for video animation and even undertake training of video producers from other countries. An example is the case of CESPA (Centre de Services de Production Audiovisuelles) in Bamako, Mali serving francophone African countries. The list of video programs at the centre can be made available to development workers.
To decide on the appropriate video program, the educator should consider the following questions:
1. Who is the speaker? It is not only useful to identify the producer but also those who are used as speakers (doctors, nutritionists, young mothers, etc).
2. Who is being spoken to? Who is the target audience of the video program? What are the required educational and literacy levels? What is the age group of the target audience? Does the target audience of the video program correspond to that of the intervention?
3. What is being spoken about? What is the main theme? Are there other themes? What is the main message? Is the subject content technically correct? Are there any biases or sources of error? Is the information current? Is the subject content appropriate for the educational intervention?
4. What is the educational objective? Is the program concerned with change in knowledge, attitudes or behaviour? Do the objectives correspond to that of the educational intervention?
5. What are the pedagogical methods used? What methods are used to encourage interest or favour learning? Can they be used in video-animation for this program?
6. What are the necessary pre-requisites? Is a certain level of knowledge or maturity required in order to understand the material? Does the target group possess these? Is the technical vocabulary appropriate?
7. What are the conditions of use? Does this support require special conditions of use? Are the conditions linked to the place, length, size of the group, and to competence of the presenter? Can the conditions be respected in the educational situations in which the support will be used?
8. What is the audio-visual value of the document? Cartoon' interview, documentary, fiction, eye witness report, debate or talk? What is the technical quality of the image and sound? Do the scenes reflect the talent of the production team?
The selection of video-programmes
Video-Animation
A video cassette recorder and a monitor are required for video animation.
The video cassette recorder should use VHS cassettes. Video systems (PAL SECAM or NTSC) differ from one country to the next. The ideal solution would be to acquire a triple-system recorder, which would allow the use of cassettes recorded on any of the systems. However, central units have sometimes facilities to transcribe from the original to the required system.
Video-Animation
Video-animation generally involves the following steps:
1. Introduction of the topic by the presenter: this draws the public's attention to the programme which is going to be presented.
2. Projection of the video.
3. A debate moderated by the presenter: What does the producer want to say? What messages did he want to transmit? What do we think about them? How do they concern us? What sections would we want to view again?
4. Repeated showings of sections that interest the public: Freezing of a particular image (to examine, in more detail, audience facial expressions, attitudes, etc). Rewinding of the cassette as requested by the presenter or audience; discussion.
5. Conclusion: what are the lessons learns from this video-animation? What is to be modified in relation to know-how? When is the group to meet again to evaluate any changes in the daily lives of the members?
Source
VON STEDINCK, M., Applied Video, Guide for using video in the Field, Rome, FAO, 1990 (14).
TECHNICAL FILE N 12: Slides presentation
Use
Many development workers have used slides for a long time both for animation or health education. The slide is often used as a visual aid in a lecture. There are, however, other uses. Slides can be a tool for mobilizing trainees. It enables each person to go through the process of behaviour change. The trainee becomes aware of the nutrition-related problem, gains interest in the problem and weighs the consequences of relevant behaviours. He can then try the behaviour, make an evaluation and decide whether or not to adopt the behaviour. He also decides on the most convenient way of doing this.
Use
Role and profile of the facilitator
The facilitater is not the "giver of knowledge". His role is to enable the group to make use of their own resources for solving their problems. The facilitor's task varies depending on the objectives to be achieved.
Progression towards change
Slides can be used in all the phases of the process of change.
Sensitization
The facilitator seeks to create conditions for increasing awareness of the problem. He also encourages group discussion to obtain solutions. In this stage, the slides first provide a broad view of the subject prior to a more focused discussion of the problem. This technique is called active listening which affords the participants an opportunity to express themselves freely and fully.
The facilitator invites the group to observe his practices, and note the consequences, both positive and negative. The underlying reasons for traditional practices are also revealed. The slides used in this stage are more focused on the subject. They portray local ways of doing things within the context of community life. The method seeks to find out the "why" and "how" of traditional practices.
Formulation
The group tries to justify other more appropriate practices. They agree on the principles which will allow them to put the new idea into practice This is a decisive stage. Resistance must be overcome for change to take place. Slides used here show why the new practices should be adopted and the conditions necessary to put them into practice. The facilitator should encourage discussion on the pros and cons of the new practice. The group can then reach a decision on the practices to be adopted and the manner in which they are to be carried out.
Implementation
In promoting a new practice, the slides can be used to show the technical and organizational aspects of change. A recipe, for example, can be described step-by-step. The facilitator should organize his presentation carefully allowing for group discussion on each essential point. In the final analyses, it is the target group itself which will decide whether or not to adopt a specific nutrition-related behavior or to take collective action to promote a specific idea, product or practice.
Evaluation phase
Evaluation is carried out with the group concerned. The slides shown during the implementation phase will enable the participants to analyse any obstacles faced during the process and to find ways of overcoming these.
The use of slides is not limited to implementation of a strategy. It is a technique which encourgages community participation in obtaining solutions to the problems facing them. Nevertheless, for effective use of this technique, some preliminary training is needed.
The key elements in a session
These main elements are observations, feeling, reflection and the decision to act.
Observation
The facilitators allow the participants to describe what they see. He emphasises that they should listen to each other and state their thoughts and feelings.
Sentiment
The facilitator must ensure that participants realise that they can speak freely and fully and that the others will listen to them and respect their opinion.
Decision to act
The facilitator encourages each person to consider the possible solutions. he then asks the group to reflect on and discuss the various solutions proposed.
Source:
Clavreul J.Y. Le diapo-language, Nouveau regard sur la diapositive, Rome, FAO-Collection, "La communication pour le dveloppement, Etude de cas" 1939
TECHNICAL FILE N 13: Popular theatre
Use
Theatre tells a story. It presents and dramatizes the way of life of the people. It adds entertainment value to an inspiring message and so maintains the attention of the audience.
This media is particularly suited to the village setting. In most cultures, theatre is traditional. Popular theatre interpretes and discribes the reality of contempory life while using traditional forms of expression. It is a media which permits people to interact on matters concerning the community.
Theatre encourages the audience to reflect on behavior while identifying with specific characters who find themselves in a well known, difficult situation. In this way, the audience can find a model to adopt new behavious and integrate into their daily life. It is important to note that identification with the performers is made easier if there is some physical and psychological similarity. Yet, in several cases clowns and comical traditional well known figures can also change behaviour.
Popular theatre
The scenario
The planners of intervention in social communication would do well to recruit professional actors or at least very good amateurs to transmit the messages. It is not an easy task to conceptualize health messages in the spirit of community theatre. The message must be incorporated into an interesting story with credible characters.
The play can be written so that either the audience becomes totally absorbed in the events on stage, or that it maintains a certain emotional distance from what is being presented on stage. The audience can also be invited to participate in a narration. Therefore theatres designed for public forums and those designed to encourage community action can be distinguished.
The scenario must be elaborated by the director or a group of actors and nutrition officers. The persons concerned must guard against the production of plays that are either too didactive and boring or so amusing, that the nutrition message is lost to the audience.
Costumes and sets
Actors should to be dressed in clothes normally worn in the community. They should provide the clothing and accessoires required for their character. Sets must not be expensive, rather they should reflect normal scenes of daily life. All costume and sets must be carefully planned in advance.
Advertising
The play must be advertised so that many people come to see it. The title must be catchy to attract a crowd.
Rehearsal
The actors must be ready to perform on the day planned. A rehearsal on the eve of the first performance is advised. This is important, not only for the actors but also for the nutrition planners who need to ensure adherence to the nutrition messages in the script.
Audience Participation
The audience will be invited to participate either during or after the performance. Participation increases the likelihood that learning will take place as a result of the play.
Extracts of an experience in Togo
"Save the chief's son!"
This piece performed in the village contains tragedy and humour. The tragedy is the illness of the chief's son who is the next-in-line to govern the community. Humour is introduced by fictional characters with whom the audience has no difficulty identifying. These are health workers... the children in the village.
(...) The quiz master called "President" has called all the influential people together to find a way to fight the disease which threatens the life of their loved one.
Mr. Medicine: Fear nothing. I am going to call my entire family to the task. Even my cousins sold on the market will help. We are going to eradicate this diarrhoea!
All the other nobles: No! Sit down! Remain calm Mr. Medicine!
President: Mr. Medicine, your family is strong, but for the moment, we do not need competition on your part. We appreciate your help but we must use you with care. Wait! Give us a chance! If we fail, the nurse will call on you! You must always obtain permission from the nurse before you act. The President turns towards Mrs Salty Sweet Solution.
The President: We have a new member on our team. Allow me to introduce her. This is Mrs Salty Sweet Solution who has just arrived in the village. She is interested in helping in this struggle.
Mrs Salty Sweet: Thank-you. What the President says is true. You will always be able to find me in the village. I am very efficient in fighting dehydration. I can go into each family and bring help to cases of diarrhea. I also have a big brother, Mr. Sachet, who you will always find at the dispensary. He can also help you.
The President: Thank you Mrs Salty Sweet Solution, we are very happy with what you can do to help fight against dehydration. We have 48 hours to do our best. But if the diarrhea continues after 48 hours, you must send the child to the dispensary. The nurse will take care of him (...).
The play provides an opportunity for learning. Modern day issues are presented using a traditional form of communication. It is in fact the contrast between the ancient and the modern aspects of community life, which is the source of humour. This kind of comedy usually makes an impact on the audience.
11.3 Communication via the mass media
Importance of Mass media
Mass media are important means of reaching largest number of audience at least cost. They are the modem means of communication, which can transmit educational messages in a very effective way. Television is probably the most persuasive mass media and radio is the media which cover largest number of audience. Their effective use is, therefore. very vital when they are used in a programme.
TECHNICAL FILE NO 14: Rural radio
What does it involve?
Rural radio is the use of local radio in an interactive manner. It uses preexisting social communication networks for an educational intervention. It therefore employs traditions of the rural environment.
The peasant can have a say through rural radio. It gives him an opportunity to describe his problems in his own terms. It provides a forum for debate. At first, the debate is confined to the local village. Later after the debate has been broadcast, the forum is extended to the entire region.
What does it involve?
The role of the "nutritionist" is that of facilitator. He intervenes to help bring out the nutrition-enhancing themes.
Through rural radio, the worlds of the village and the development agent come together. It is the occasion for debate between persons of different value systems, one founded on tradition, the other influenced by scientific and technological developments.
Nutrition intervention is at the heart of the debate. The nutritionist presents food as a factor affecting an individual's state of health. The villager views food within the traditional socio-cultural context. These are a source of much controversy in nutrition programs. Rural radio provides an opportunity for useful discussion of these issues.
When should it be used?
Rural radio allows for reflection and discussion of nutrition-related issues affecting the community. It can therefore be used in several phases of the intervention.
During conceptualization, rural radio can be used to determine the opinions of the community regarding a particular issue. It is simply a matter of recording the debates on cassettes. These tapes can be used later in radio programs to encourage social communication.
During the formulation phase, the recordings can be used to develop messages adapted to traditional forms of communication. But it is necessary to check the meaning of used symbols in each different community before using them in messages. Rural radio can be put to use for this very purpose.
During the implementation phase rural radio can serve to build on those beliefs, attitudes and practices which enhance nutrition. The nutrition messages will be more forceful if they are formulated by people from the target population and make use of everyday expressions.
For evaluation purposes, rural radio can be used to determine if there has been any change in social communication. It can be used to find out whether people speak differently about nutrition, if they have paid heed to the key messages broadcast, and whether any nutrition-related habits have changed.
Rural radio can therefore be used on a regular basis to generate ideas on issues related to nutrition, for example during:
Public variety shows
There are several types of variety shows.
In one village, the public was invited to a grand festival. First, the presenter spoke to the villagers. He then asked an elder to present the village and its origins. The program was recorded. A riddle was used to introduce the topic.
Mini-programs with simple nutrition messages can be broadcast regularly. Their strength lies in that they contain comments made spontaneously by members of the community.
The following case in the Sahel region is an example of another kind of public show. There, a traditional remedy for night-blindness consists of throwing away small pieces of cooked liver and asking the patient to look for them. Once the person finds the liver, he is supposed to eat it. This is an efficient method of treatment because of the vitamin-A content of liver. A witness describing these traditional habits can introduce short messages on the importance of liver consumption in the prevention and treatment of night blindness.
The riddle
The riddle
The presenter: "This is the riddle: in the field I creep. As an adult, I wear horns on my arms, he who eats me can travel through a moonless night. Who am 1? Answer: A string-bean (its leaves, rich in provitamin A, fight against night-blindness).
The answers given by about twenty participants in front of an interested crowd reveals a village mentality to entertain individual or group views on a particular subject.
Drama
The second game takes the form of a drama. Eight men and women are selected to take part.
The presenter: "You are the bean. Try to convince the crowd to consume your growth, meaning your leaves regularly."
The game results in spontaneous discussion.
Competition
The third game is for the four best candidates. They are asked to compose, and then sing a song.
The presenter: "You the finalists in the competition..., I will ask each of you to compose a song on the glory of the string-bean, and then sing it to the public. "
This last test allows the winners to be selected, and compensated accordingly.
A group from the village plays music, popular rhythms and songs throughout the programme. The singers can be encouraged to improvise and introduce nutrition lyrics.
Competition
Recorded Interviews
Following the variety show, the villagers are ready to welcome the members of the radio team for individual or group interviews. All interviews are recorded.
Certain rules must be respected:
* a single idea is dealt with extensively in each interview;
* a recorded account is presented in a personal and not a general manner;
* the account is precise;
* the perspective is dynamic: the researcher asks his speaker about the origin of the phenomena, or habit.
A round table debate can also be organized between the villagers. This will enable different points of views to be shared.
Ail these recordings are a treasure house of information which the radio team can use in future programmes.
Preparation for broadcast
To facilitate its use, all recordings including the public programme are transcribed and eventually translated. The radio team can assist the "Nutritionists" in visualizing the information by cutting and assembling it on paper before editing.
Public programmes will be broadcast according to the programming plan.
The importance of intersectoral efforts The development of rural radio-nutrition programs require intersectorial collaboration between "nutritionists", villagers, specialists in education and radio announcers. Intersectoral efforts should not be limited to the duration of the specific intervention, rather mechanisms should be established for intersectorial endeavours on a long term basis. In this respect, rural radio is an invaluable tool in nutrition communication. Detailed information can be found in (15).
TECHNICAL FILE NO 15: Television
Use
Television can be used to create social models of behavior.
Format
This refers to the specific way of presenting the messages. Possible formats include: a debate, documentary, soap opera, quiz, spot, etc. The script and language expressions vary with the different formats. "Health educators" tend to overuse one particular format without considering the potential of the others. The typical health program is a report on the issue followed by a discussion between the presenter and one or several experts. Two other formats need to be given special consideration. The soap opera whose characters most persons can identify with, and the spot which can be broadcast repeatedly. The slogan used can be an everyday expression in social communication.
The classic health education program appeals to the intellect. Soap operas and films play on the emotions. Short messages like the spots appeal to the instinct. In seeking to change behaviour, various appeals must be made. It is not enough to address the logical side of a person's intellect.
Television
The soap opera
According to modern theories of behaviour, the soap opera has great potential, provided certain conditions are respected.
1. The audience maybe led to imitate the behaviour presented by a model if they can see the rewards of the behaviour.
2. The audience may be led to avoid the behaviour presented by a model if they see the negative consequences of the behaviour.
3. The model should be presented in a real situation so that the audience can relate the behaviour to everyday life.
4. When the model adopts a behaviour, the consequences must be clearly seen; if the behaviour is nutrition-enhancing, it should have positive consequences; if it is reprehensible the consequences should be negative.
5. If the audience is to identify with the models, the latter must have characteristics approaching those of the target.
6. These models, however, should be a little superior to the target population (in beauty, intelligence, wealth) so that the target will want to strive to identify with them.
7. If a verbal description of what is happening is added to the presentation (for example, a conclusion) the effect on the target audience will be magnified.
Television can lead the audience to modify its behaviour for reasons other than logic, provided some basic rules of psychology are respected. One must guard against forms of manipulation which are not in keeping with the original concept of nutrition education. The change sought is a voluntary one by the people concerned.
11.4 The role of the school
The school lesson is a special form of media. There is the potential in schools of transmitting knowledge, skills attitudes and values to all future generations of children.
In countries where the level of school education is high, the school environment enables one to reach a higher proportion of the population than any other media. Its limitations are with regard to the age of the target population. Children, however, can prove to be effective intermediaries for messages directed at their own parents, or even at the entire community. The programme "Child to Child'' is founded on this belief.
The programme "Child to Child" was launched in London in 1979, the International Year of the Child, under the initiation of Dr. David Morley. It spread rapidly in the English-speaking world, then to French and Spanish speaking countries.
The Programme is based on one observation - everywhere in the world, but especially in developing countries, older children, especially daughters, look after their younger brothers and sisters. The Programme's first aim was to educate these older children to provide better care for the younger ones.
Subsequently, programmes for these children highlighted the role that intermediaries could play in transmitting positive knowledge, attitudes and practices to each other, their parents and eventually to the community in which they live.
The Programme "Child to Child"' grew in many child-care institutions, especially in schools. Participatory educational methods were proposed, based on the analysis of health problems. Direct Interventions were planned in their surroundings. This methodology revolutionized the
traditional academic approach; it made the child the main "player" in his own education.
There are at least two ways of working with schools. The first is to intervene from the outside to educate the children on health or nutrition. The second is to modify the curriculum to include the study of health and nutrition.
Systematic Intervention
The systematic approach consists of using the school as a channel for occasional diffusion of positive messages on health or nutrition. Throughout a promotional campaign on immunization, for example, health workers can explain the program and its benefits to the children (to encourage them to get immunized or to use them to inform others).
The procedure is quite simple. Those in charge of the intervention begin by contacting school principals (if need be, those on the national level should obtain the necessary authorization). Together, they decide on a programme for visiting schools. During these visits, the teachers allow the specialists in the field to speak to the students. The school resumes its normal programme once the campaign comes to an end.
This is one way of integrating school activities in the campaigns. The procedure is simple. It is, however, justified only within the context of a short-term campaign.
The revision of school curricula
The curriculum can be defined as a group of planned activities for education. It consists of definitions of the learning objectives, the content, the methods (including evaluation), the materials (including school manuals) and those aspects related to the training of teachers.
If one wants to modify teaching methods on a continuous basis, all these elements in the curriculum must be reviewed and the new objectives and content adapted to new methods of teaching and retraining of teachers.
It is also important to create a positive nutrition environment in the school. Today, it is known that for nutrition and health, the student learns as much, if not more, through what he experiences, than through what he learns. What purpose do lessons on balanced diets serve if fatty and starchy foods are served for school lunch? Why teach hygiene if the children live in an untidy school environment? Principles learnt must be translated into practice.
"Nutrition Education" is gradually being replaced by the "promotion of nutritional environment," which involves everyone from the educational community. It is not only about teaching, but also about improving conditions of school life. It is useless to teach the qualities of a balanced diet if the meals served at the canteen are not balanced.
The school provides a long-term perspective with respect to change in social communication in nutrition. The messages disseminated at the social centre, the dispensary and elsewhere will find a fertile ground with the future adults of the society, if the school undertakes their training in nutrition from today.
Example:
In Nepal, a FAO oriented multisectoral training programme in nutrition, successfully revised the curriculum of the different training institutions including schools and adult education programmes, taking following steps systematically.
1. A team of experts reviewed the curriculum of each training institution both formal and non formal in all sectors;
2. The topics related to nutrition were identified;
3. The topics needed to be added or integrated were listed;
4. The curricula were revised in a workshop of curriculum development experts including nutritionists;
5. Prototype teaching-reading materials and audio-visual aids were developed on the basis of revised curricula and field tested in real learning situations by trainers/teachers;
6. The teaching materials and aids were finalized in a workshop incorporating modifications based on the result of testing.
back contents next
<section>5</section>
back contents next
Part V: Evaluation
Chapter 12: Evaluation
12.1 Why and with whom?
The goal of the evaluation must be clear to those involved. Evaluation of an intervention is carried out from two perspectives:
* to see if the objectives have been achieved,
* to determine whether the procedures were carried out according to expectations.
Change agents in nutrition education must not be defensive where evaluation is concerned. Whatever the qualifications of the members of the planning team, it must be competent enough to answer the questions related to the two issues mentioned above.
With whom?
The persons concerned with evaluation may be divided into four categories:
The population itself: it must be invited to participate in the evaluation process, since the actions to be evaluated, concern them directly.
The change agents in the communication process. They will play an important role in the evaluation process. Moreover, this evaluation will help them improve their performance.
The evaluation specialists internal or external to the planning team, provide technical expertise for the evaluation.
Participation of sponsors and government representatives will allow them to see the impact of the activities they have promoted to consider further expansion of the programme.
12.2 At what point should an evaluation be conducted?
The ideal is to plan for the evaluation of an intervention in social communication from the phase of conceptualization. Causal analysis and preliminary research are part of evaluation. Therefore, evaluation provides a strong foundation for the project. Evaluation can also be undertaken during the phase of formulation of a communication intervention. At that moment, there is still time to reflect, not only on the relevance of the intervention, but also on the order in which the activities should develop, on the expected results, and on the actions that need to be taken before any communication activity. The knowledge, attitudes and practices of the target population have to be measured before the intervention to provide a basis for comparison afterwards. It is never too late to think of evaluation; even during the implementation phase, lessons can be learnt from experience.
At what point should an evaluation be conducted?
12.3 How to carry out dynamic and participatory evaluation
Lefevre and Beghin (17), among other, propose an approach which ensures the participation of all in the evaluation of nutrition interventions. Three types of tools will be used: the causal analysis, the Hippopoc table and the dynamic model of intervention.
1. Causal analysis can help determine the relevance of the intervention. Causal analysis, as presented before, consists of creating in an intersectoral setting, a network of factors which affect the nutritional status of the population. The result is a tool for the selection of the appropriate intervention, for communication between the members of the planning team and for evaluating the relevance of the intervention. Causal analysis also enables the team to identify confounding factors which can influence the success or failure of the intervention.
2. In the Hippopoc table, inputs, procedures, outputs and outcomes of the intervention are place in cells.
The inputs are the elements which are going to be transformed into outputs by the intervention. Example: for nutritional education in the school, they are namely the teachers, pupils, and money invested in the production of the programme.
The processes are the activities undertaken in order to transform inputs into outputs. For example: teaching training, the teaching programme produced together with the pupils, the conceptualization and production of school manuals, etc.
The outputs are the results of activities carried out in the intervention. They correspond to specific objectives of the intervention. They are direct effects of it. Example: better trained teachers; better educated students, whose behaviour is different; school manuals of improved quality. All these should contribute to the long-term objectives of any nutrition project that is improvement of nutritional status of the target population.
3. The dynamic model is the graphic presentation of the interactions between inputs, processes, outputs and outcomes of an intervention. Like the two other tools mentioned above, it is elaborated by the team. This table presents the expected links between the inputs and the processes, between the processes and the outputs, and between the outputs and the outcomes. It uses arrows to illustrate linkages. In this way all participants of an intervention (the population, the change agents, the "experts") can understand the internal and external links.
How to carry out dynamic and participatory evaluation
12.4 How?
Causal analysis
The people in charge of the evaluation are the "specialists" and the other participants, namely the target population, the sponsors and/or government representatives and the communication agents.
If the causal analysis has not yet been done, the group must make it a priority. This involves a few days work at most. If the analysis has already been done, the group convenes to improve on the "causal network". Little time is needed to complete this activity.
The Hippopoc Table
Once the analysis of causes is completed, the group reassembles to develop the Hippopoc table of inputs, processes, and outcomes. The evaluators will be particularly attentive to this table. They will seek answer to the following questions:
* Has the nutritional problem to be solved been clearly identified?
* Has the causal analysis been carried out?
* Has the preliminary research to understand the behaviour and the system of communication of the target population been carried out?
* Have the objectives been defined clearly in terms of the modification of the nutrition-related behaviours and in terms of acquisition of attitudes, knowledge and skills development?
* Have the messages been carefully developed?
* Has the multi-media plan taken into account the results of the preliminary research and the specificity of the various media in relation to the objectives to be achieved.
* Have the communication supports been pretested before producing them on a large scale?
* Have the participants been trained and retrained before start of the communication activities?
* Where the activities carried out in accordance with original plans?
* The outcome of the analysis will be matched with programme objectives to determine the success.
What are the expected outputs of an intervention in social communication?
1. Accessibility of the target population to the message. e.g. women 15 to 45 years have been exposed to the message by one of the channels of communication (or by several)?
2. Retention of the message. e.g. X percentage of the target group have retained the message: "the child from 6 to 12 months must have at least four meals a day, in addition to the mother's milk".
3. Modification of knowledge, attitudes, values of the target-population. e.g. X percentage of this target group was able to explain the reasons for a minimum of four meals per day, and have shown the intention of following this advice.
4. Trial of proposed behavior. e.g.: this target-population has tried to give at least four meals per day to their breast-fed children aged six to twelve months.
5. The adoption of these habits. e.g.: X percent of this target group has adopted these food habits and integrated them into their daily life.
Note that the examples contain measures for comparison of results after the intervention.
What are the possible long-term outcomes of such an intervention?
6. Improvement of nutritional status. e.g.,: There has been an improvement in the nutritional status of X percent of children (as compared to a control group).
7. Improvement of health status. e.g., X percentage of children have suffered from the childhood diseases of compared to a higher percentage in the control group.
These long-term outcomes appear to be the effects of the educational intervention and other factors in the physical social, economic, and family environment.
The final results of the intervention could be considered not only as outputs but also as intermediary results. In our example, these are the number of officers trained or retrained in the programme, and the number of posters produced to ensure the transmission of the messages.
The dynamic model
It would be essential to illustrate graphically the relations between the inputs, processes, outcomes of the intervention.
This graph could be used by all those involved in the intervention to provide basic information on the project, to determine its success and failures and to plan for improvement.
Evaluation is like an energy source that can be drawn upon, for development of participatory communication activities. Evaluation is not simply an activity external to the intervention. It is therefore a crucial component of nutrition education.
back contents next
<section>6</section>
back contents next
Bibliography
1. SMITARISI S., ITTIKOM K., ATTIG G.A., DHANAMITTA S., Participatory Social Marketing of Home Gardens; Promoting Vitamin A-Rich Foods in Northeast Thailand, version rvoise de la communication prsente  l'atelier suivant: Asian Vegetable Research Development Center/UNPWARD International Workshop on Household Garden Projects, Bangkok, 13-15 May 1991, Rome, FAO, Division of Food Policy and Nutrition.
2. MONETTI F., YEE V., Mobilisation en faveur de la nutrition, Rsultats de l'exprience d'lringa, in Mres et Enfants, Vol. 8, N2, 1989: 1-3.
3. ANDRIEN M., BEGHIN I., De l'education nutritionnelle conventionnelle a la communication sociale en nutrition, Liege, CERES, 1991, version provisoire.
4. BEGHIN I., CAP M., DUJARDIN B., A Guide to Nutritional Assessment, Geneva, WHO, 1988.
5. GREEN L.W., KREUTER M.W., DEEDS S.G., PARTRIDGE K.B., Health Eduction Planning: A Diagnostic Approach, Palo Alto, Mayfield Publishing Company, 1980.
6. ANDRIEN M., HAJJI N., Analyse causale relative  l'allaitement maternel et a la surveillance de la croissance et plan d'action de la promotion de l'allaitement maternel au Maroc, Liege, CERES, Raport de Mission, 1990.
7. JELLIFFE D.B., JELLIFFE E.F.P., Community nutritional assessment, Oxford Medical Publication, Oxford University Press, 1989.
8. WHO Diet, Nutrition and Prevention of Chronic Diseases, Geneva, WHO, Report of a WHO Study Group N 797, 1990.
9. MANTRA J.B., MANOFF R.K., GRIFFITHS M., Indonsie: un programme efficace d'information sur la nutrition avec le concours actif de la collectivit, dans l'ducation pour la sant, N1, 1985: 11-29.
10. LECLERCQ D., La conception des questions  choix multiples, Bruxelles, Labor, 1986.
11. RASMUSON M.R., SEIDEL R.E., SMITH W.A., MILLS BOOTH E., Communication pour la survie de l'enfant, Washington, D.C., Academy for Educational Development,
12. KEITH N., Rsum des conclusions ayant trait  la consommation des aliments riches en vitamine A et suggestions pour l'laboration d'une stratgie de communication (au Niger), Washington, D.C., Academy for Educational Development, 1990.
13. BOURRON Y., CHAPUIS J.P., CANONVILLE C., COLIN P., Audiovisuel, mode d'emploi, langage et pratique, Paris, Les Editions d'Organisation, 1988.
14. UNESCO, World Communication Report, Paris, UNESCO, 1989.
15. VON STEDINCK M., Applied Video Guide for Using Video in the Field, Rome, FAO, 1990.
16. QUERRE F., One thousand and One Words, Rural Radio Manual, Rome, FAO, 1991.
17. LEFEVRE P., BEGHIN I., Guide to comprehensive evaluation of the nutritional aspects of projects and programmes, Antwerpen, Institut de Mdecine Tropicale, 1991.
back contents next
<section>7</section>
back contents
Glossary
ATTITUDE: affective, motivational, perceptive and cognitive, lasting set of beliefs related to a reference group which predisposes an individual to react positively or negatively to these references (16).
BEHAVIOUR: manner of acting or being.
COMMUNICATION SUPPORT: concrete, element, material on which a message is transmitted.
CURRICULUM: group of planned activities to bring about learning: it includes the definition of learning objectives the content, the methods (including evaluation) the materials (including academic manuals) and those aspects related to teacher-training.
EDUCATION: the implementation of appropriate methods for ensuring the training and development of a human-being.
INPUTS: these are the elements which are going to be transformed into outputs through the implementation procedures in the programme.
KNOWLEDGE: set of experiences and intellectual capacities of an individual.
MARKETING: techniques and methods for a commercial strategy and the study of the commercial markets.
MEDIA: channel of communication.
MOTIVATION: phenomena providing the stimulus to act to achieve objective.
NUTRITION EDUCATION: group of communication activities to bring about a voluntary change in practices, which have affect the nutritional status of a population. The ultimate goal of nutrition education is to improve nutritional status.
OUTCOMES: in the evaluation of a programme. Results of interventions.
SAVOIR-FAIRE: skill in solving a practical problem.
VALUES: set of beliefs and opinions related to abstract references or principles, and to behavioural norms. Values are held for a lifetime.
SELF-EFFICACITY: persons beliefs about how capable they are of executing or carrying out specific behaviours.
SOCIAL COMMUNICATION: the set of norms which dictate the interactions between individuals of the same culture. According to this definition, nutrition education can be considered as an intervention aimed at changing social communication in nutrition.
back contents
